4. Consortium ..................................................................................................................................................................... 56 
5. Ethics and Security ........................................................................................................................................................ 84
5.1 Ethics ............................................................................................................................................................................. 84 
5.1.1 Ethical self-assessment for humans ....................................................................................................................... 84 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 4 of 96 
5.1.1.1 General aspects .................................................................................................................................................. 84 
5.1.1.2 EU Directives and International Organization for Standardization (ISO) for Human subjects .......... 85 
5.1.1.3 Humans subjects ............................................................................................................................................... 86 
5.1.1.4 Human cells/tissues .......................................................................................................................................... 87 
5.1.2.1 General aspects .............................................................................................................................................. 88 
5.1.2.1  Relevant national and EU regulations relating to the use of animals .................................................... 88 
5.1.2.2 Measures to minimise pain, distress and other suffering ........................................................................ 89 
5.1.2.3 Measures to minimise the number of animals used in experiments (reduce) ...................................... 89 
5.1.2.4 Identification of ethical committees and regulatory organisations involved in the animal 
experiments ..................................................................................................................................................................... 89 
5.1.3 Ethical Advisors ....................................................................................................................................................... 90 
5.1.4 Validation in clinical settings overview plan ......................................................................................................... 90 
5.1.5 Ethics Approval ........................................................................................................................................................ 90 
5.1.6 Ethics self-assessment: other issues ....................................................................................................................... 90
5.2 Security: N/A ................................................................................................................................................................... 90 
Annex I External Expert Advisory Board – Letter of Support ...................................................................................... 91 
Annex II Response to the Ethical Summary Report ........................................................................................................ 94 
 
  
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 5 of 96 
Terminology and Abbreviations 
This page is provided as a reference source, to help the reader in the event those terms or abbreviations are encountered that 
are unfamiliar, or are used in a specific sense in the document.  
AgX Silver halide 
ATR Attenuated Total Reflection 
CA Consortium Agreement 
CAGR Compound Annual Growth Rate 
CT Computed Tomography 
DFB Distributed Feedback 
EC QCL External Cavity Quantum Cascade Laser 
EC European Commission 
EEAB External Expert Advisory Board 
EMSC Extended Multiplicative Signal Correction 
FTIR Fourier Transform Infrared 
FTIRI Fourier Transform Infrared Imaging 
FTIR-MS Fourier Transform Infrared Microspectroscopy 
GA General Assembly 
GCS Global Control System 
GCSS Global Control System Software 
HWG Hollow Waveguides 
iBEAM on-chip beam combiner 
ICL interband cascade laser 
IPR Intellectual Property Rights 
MIR Mid-infrared 
MRI Magnetic Resosnance Imaging 
MSC Multiplicative Signal Correction 
NIR Near-infrared Spectroscopy 
OA Osteoarthitis 
OARSI Histopathological Grade of OA  
OCT Optical Coherence Tomography 
OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer 
PG Proteoglycan 
PIC Photonic Integrated Circuitry 
PLM Polarized Light Microscopy 
PLS Partial Least-Squares 
PLS-DA Partial Least-Squares Discriminant Analysis 
PM Person-Month 
PMP Project Management Plan 
QCL Quantum Cascade Laser 
RTD Research and Technology Development 
SME Small and Medium-size Enterprises 
SNV Standard Normal Variate 
TRL Technical Readiness Level  
U.S. United States 
YLD Years Lived with Disability 
  
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 6 of 96 
1. Excellence
1.1 Objectives  
1.1.1 Overall objective 
MIRACLE will implement  and demonstrate  an innovative and easy -to-operate mid -infrared (MIR) 
imaging-probe to be used during minimally invasive arthroscopic surgery enabling in-depth diagnosis of 
articular cartilage. In current clinical practice , the articular cartilage  assessment during arthro scopic surgery is 
solely based by visual inspection (camera video) and manual probing of the stiffness (Figure 1). Therefore, intra-
operative decision making how to deal with lesions and which strategy to apply is very difficult due to its 
subjectivity. The consortium partner University of Oulu has demo nstrated in laboratory the feasibility of 
MIR-based method for monitoring compositional changes on articular cartilage.  These results are 
outcome achievements from the ERC Starting Grantee Simo Saarakkala. In addition, the consortium 
beneficiary art photonics has prototyped a MIR-based probe for future in vivo applications. Based on these 
demonstrated results (details in section 1.3) , MIRACLE will enable the in vivo accurate evaluation of the 
biochemical status and composition of articular cartilage, thus assisting the orthopaedic surgeon in more 
objective decision making during the arthroscopic surgery (Figure 1).   
 
Figure 1. MIRACLE innovation towards diagnosis approach during minimally invasive arthroscopic surgery  
Early diagnosis of cartilage injuries is essential for the patient future quality of life . Untreated or not -
correctly treated joint inj ury will most likely progress towards degenerative joint diseases such as osteoarthritis 
(OA). Early diagnosis will enable the surgeons to prevent the initiation and progression of early OA. Undiagnosed 
and therefore untreated injuries  will lead to progres sive damage of the cartilage due to the minimal natural 
regenerative ability of cartilage, which will lead to  joint pain, movement limitation , joint failure,  and 
ultimately disability and joint replacement. Currently, X-ray, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed 
tomography (CT) provide information on the joint health (i.e., cartilage, bone, meniscus, ligaments, tendons, etc.), 
and may suggest the existence of OA or  other injuries. However, when there are only very early articular 
cartilage compositional changes, neither of these techniques provides adequate sensitivity. Consequently, 
the average delay in OA diagnosis is long and has been estimated at 8.9 years1. By enabling accurate evaluation 
of articular cartilage during arthroscopy, MIRACLE will impact on the intra operative decision making 
promoting patient well-being i.e. keeping the individual as mobile as possible for longer periods of time.   
 
1 Feldtkeller E et al. (2000), Scientific contributions of ankylosing spondylitis patient advocacy groups. Curr Opin Rheumatol 12: 239-247. 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 7 of 96 
OA is associated with a  large societal and economic impact, as well as physical and psychological 
consequences for the affected individual. According to recent report 2, the global impact of OA constitutes a 
major challenge for the health systems in the twenty-first century, including the coming years. The most recent 
report of the Global Burden of Diseased figures (GBD 2013) estimated that OA affects 242 million people 
globally. Furthermore, the numbers of OA years lived with disability (YLD) increased 75% from 1990 to 2013; 
this number represents the third most rapidly rising condition associated to disability, just behind diabetes (135%) 
and dementia (84%). These figures include only hip and knee OA, and therefore, the real burden of OA is likely 
to be considerably higher.3    
In 2013, the total costs att ributable to arthritis in the U nited States (U.S.) was approximately $128 billion (direct 
costs $ 80.8 billion and indirect costs $47 billion)2. In Europe, it has been reported that the average total 
annual costs of OA per patient ranges from €1,330 to €10,452 4. In addition, a European literature review 
on the topic points out that the indirect costs are comparable with the direct costs. Literature has reported 
that 50% of the world’s population > 65 years suffer from OA. The EU project EPOSA had provided an in-depth 
study of the association between OA across Europe and the elderly population5. Their results revealed that OA is 
highly prevalent in Europe  with an estimated 19.7-42.3% in the elderly population . To some extent, studies 
have predicted that OA patients are likely to be more disabled by the disease in future. In addition to physical 
assistance, further physiological factors as self-efficacy and social support will affect the healthcare system6.  
The facts and numbers described above clearly support efforts taking on the challenge of accurate diagnosis tools 
for in-depth evaluation of the articular cartilage. The MIRACLE consortium members have promising results 
pointing at the great potential of a MIR-based system as a diagnostic tool . The University of Oulu has 
demonstrated in laboratory th at MIR spectra extracted from the superficial layer of articular human 
cartilage can be used to assess the OA status of the joint, giving proof of the diagnostics approach.  In 
addition, the published study correlate the MIR spectra with the histopathologic al grading of OA (OARSI 
grade)7,8,9,10. From the technology aspect, art photonics has developed and demonstrated in laboratory a MIR-
based probe capable to evaluate the biochemical composition of tissues with potential use for future in 
vivo diagnostic applications 11.  
In addition to the consortium beneficiary UOULU, other researchers12,13 have introduced more direct approaches 
that are applicable during arthroscopy examination including optical coherence tomography (OCT), ultrasound 
(US) 14 imaging, and near infrared (NIR) spectroscopy Although the capabilities of MIR method as diagnostic tool 
for cartilage disease have been demonstrated in laboratory by UOULU 7,8,9,10 and also other researchers12,13, 15,16, the 
transfer from the laboratory bench to clinical use implies several technical challenges involving tailored laser light 
 
2 https://www.oarsi.org/research/oa-serious-disease 
3 Vos T, et al. (2015) Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 301 acute and chronic diseases and injuries 
in 188 countries, 1990–2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. Lancet 386: 743–800. 
4 Brown TD (2006) Post-traumatic osteoarthritis: a first estimate of incidence, prevalence, and burden of disease, J Orthop Trauma 20: 739-744. 
5 Castell MV et al. (2015) Osteoarthritis a nd frailty in elderly individuals across six European countries: results from the European Project on 
OsteoArthritis (EPOSA), BMC Musculoskelet Disord 16: 359. 
6 Litwic A et al. (2013) Epidemiology and Burden of Osteoarthritis, Br Med Bull 105: 185–199. 
7 Oinas J et al.  (2016) Imaging of osteoarthritic human articular cartilage using fourier transform infrared microspectroscopy combined with multivariate 
and univariate analysis, Scientific Reports 6:30008.  
8 Saarakkala S et al. (2010) Depth -wise progressi on of osteoaethrisitis in human articular cartilage: investigation of composition, structure and 
biomechanics. Osteoarthristis and Cartilahe 18, 73-81.  
9 Rieppo L et al. (2014) Optimal variable selection for Fourier transform infrared spectroscopic analys is of articular cartilage composition. Journal of 
biomedical Optics, 19, 027003. 
10 Rieppo L et al. (2013). Prediction of compressive stiffness of articular cartilage using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. Journal of Biomechanics, 
46(7):1269-75. 
11 Artyushenko V et al., (2015) Spectral fiber sensors for cancer diagnostics in vitro, Proc. SPIE 9537: 953720. 
12 Hanifi A et al. (2013) Fourier Transform Infrared Imaging and Infrared Fiber Opric Probe Spectroscopy Identify Collagen Type Connective Tissues, 
PLOS One 8 e64822. 
13 Afara IO et al. (2015) Optical absorption spectra of human articular cartilage correlate with biomechanical properties, histological score and biochemical 
composition, Physiol Meas 36: 1913-1928. 
14 Liukkonen J et al. (2014) Ultrasound Arthroscopy of Human Knee Cartilage and Subchondral Bone in vivo, Ultrasound Med Biol 40: 2039-2047. 
15 West PA et al. (2004) Fourier transform infrared spectral analysis of degenerative cartilage: an infrared fiber optic probe a nd imaging study, Appl 
Spectrosc 58: 376-381. 
16 Bi X et al.(2007) Fourier transform infrared imaging and MR microscopy studies detect compositional and structural changes in  cartilage in a rabbit 
model of osteoarthritis, Anal Bioanal Chem 387: 1601-1612 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 8 of 96 
sources, beam combiners, waveguides  (for spatial resolution) , and integration of each optical component. The 
MIRACLE project will be the first to overcome the se technical challenges , hence  achieving a major 
breakthrough and bringing a MIR attenuated total reflection (ATR)  arthroscopic probe to the market.  
The current technical challenges will be addressed by MIRACLE as follow:  
Tailored laser light source:  
The success of the MIR-based diagno stic approach will require  a tuneable device featuring a very specific 
wavelengths spectral window which is not available in the market. MIRACLE will modify the current 
quantum cascade lasers (QCL) light source enabling broad wavelength coverage tailored to articular 
cartilage analysis. This innovative QCL -based light source will also open new possibilities for other 
medical applications with similar wavelength coverage (e.g. cancer diagnostics).  
 Beam combiners:  
The QCL-based light source will comprise in an array of individual QCL elements which will be co nnected to 
the waveguide.  Since the QCL-based light source is an outcome innovation by MIRACLE, it will require specific 
component to construct the optical interface between the light source and waveguide. MIRACLE will develop 
an on -chip beam combiner (iBEAM) to  ensure the system integration and performance . To our 
knowledge, this concept has not been realized yet and represents therefore an addi tional MIRACLE 
innovation in the field of photonics to be placed in the market.  
Waveguides (aiming spatial resolution):  
One ambition goal in MIRACLE is to enable the probe to acquire spatially resolved MIR spectra allowing for 
mapping (i.e. imaging) of the area under investigation. This will be achieved by integrating the commercially 
available silver halide (AgX) bundle (manufactured by the consortium beneficiary AP) to the iBEAM, 
line array detector and ATR diamond probe.  
System integration into medical equipment:   
In order to achieve the final device, all the above components to be integrated within an efficient optical interface 
for data collection. Considering the clinical application, the final probe needs to be designed with adiammeter of 
5mm. MIRACLE will integrate the above mentioned components in existing formats for arthroscopic 
tools, aiming at the reduction of manufacturing costs and equipment efficacy. Furthermore, the MIR 
arthroscope probe will be designed and developed according to quality control for clinical and medical 
certification ISO-13482.      
Multivariate modelling 
Due to the innovation of the QCL-based light source with specific wavelength range, the spectral data processing 
need to be optimized according to the current state-of-the-art. MIRACLE will adapt the current algorithms 
creating multivariate models for articular cartilage diagnosis. Th is work will be integrated into a 
software interface providing to the surgeons with automated analysis, evaluation and classification of 
the collected information and hence facilitating the device commercialization after project completion.  
The MIR -ATR based probe prototype developed in MIRACLE will be validated and d emonstrated 
during arthroscopic surgery  by highly competent human and equine orthopaedic surgeons, thereby 
paving the way for market entry. By bringing this diagnostic tool to the market, MIRACLE will not only 
impact on surgeons ’ routines and patients’ lives , but also place Europe at the forefront of photonic 
technologies and medical equipment industry. 
Within the area of biophotonics, MIRACLE presents a highly interdisciplinary and  outcome oriented 
project, with a particularly strong and cross -disciplinary consortium , comprising a unique balance of partners 
between leading academic institutions, surgeons, and companies. Our engineers and scientists will work closely 
with orthopaedic surgeons, who will carry out the clinical studies and who will provide constant feedback on the 
system design. Industrial partners  representing expertise in QCL, MIR, waveguides, ATR probes, software 
development, system integration and prototyping integrate the consortium, focusing the expected outcomes in the 
end-user market.   
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 9 of 96 
1.1.2 Specific objectives and related key success criteria  
The main objective in MIRACLE is to realize and demonstrate in clinical settings an innovative MIR -ATR based 
device for quantitative evaluation of articular cartilage during arthroscopy. This major goal is supported by the 
specific objectives that will be tracked via specific key success criteria as described in Table 1. 
Table 1. MIRACLE project objectives and key success criteria 
Specific Objectives Objective description Key success criteria 
Start of the 
project 
Mid-project End of project 
To integrate 
innovative QCL 
sources with an on-
chip beam combiner 
(iBEAM) to enable 
broad wavelength 
coverage in the 
1800-1000 cm-1 
range. 
Quantum cascade lasers (QCL)  have 
emerged as important light sources for 
miniaturized IR analyzers and sensing 
devices. However, beam combiners have 
not been integrated yet as a commercial 
component. NP bring their strong 
expertise in QCL based devices to 
implement a QCL based MIR light 
source for OA-relevant spectra coverage. 
UULM has demonstrated the use of on-
chip waveguides technology for several 
applications17,18,19. The goal here is to 
integrate the QCL source with an on -
chip beam combiner (iBEAM) to ensure 
the wavelength coverage for OA 
diagnosis.  
QCL based MIR light source coverage 
Multi-color 
QCLs and 
QCL arrays 
demonstrated 
by NP. 
 
Limited 
wavelength 
coverage 
Full wavelength 
coverage 
On-chip beam combiner (iBEAM) 
On-chip thin-
film 
GaAs/AlGaAs 
waveguide 
technology 
demonstrated 
by UULM. 
 
iBEAM 
modelled, 
designed, and 
prototyped 
iBEAM coupling 
to QCL light 
source assembly 
and arthroscope 
input waveguide 
To miniaturize the 
MIR-ATR probe 
with tailorable 
surface for selective 
recognition.  
One important aspect of diagnostic 
device is the miniaturization of the 
components to meet the surgeon’s needs. 
Here the main goal is to miniaturize the 
MIR-ATR probe to reach the probe 
diameter requested by the surgeons 
enabling clinical use of the technology.  
MIR-ATR arthroscope probe diameter 
6-7 mm 
demonstrated 
by consortium 
beneficiaries 
AP and 
UULM. 
  
5 mm 5 mm 
To establish 
multivariate 
discriminant models 
to distinguish 
between healthy and 
unhealthy tissue 
conditions 
Focusing on the clinical needs, it is 
important to provide an automated 
analysis, evaluation and classification of 
the collected information. The NMBU 
group has developed multivariate 
discriminant models for correcting 
spectra of highly scattering samples such 
as cells and tissues 20,21. Some of these 
models ha ve been already validated by 
UOULU via experimental data fr om 
human tissue 7,8. The NMBU group will 
develop and refine the models by using 
Multivariate discriminate model for MIR-ATR 
spectral OA data 
N/A Model for 
broadband 
MIR-ATR data 
(FTIR) 
 
Model for MIR-
ATR data via 
QCL light source 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 Haas J et al. (2017) Next-Generation Mid-Infrared Chemical and Biological Sensors: Combining Quantum Cascade Lasers with Thin-Film and Hollow 
Waveguides, Spectroscopy 32, 22-30. 
18Sieger M and Mizaikoff B (2016) Toward On-Chip Mid-Infrared Sensors, Analytical Chemistry 88, 5562-5573. 
19 Ribessi RL et al. (2016) iHEART: a miniaturezed near infrared in-line gas sensor using heart-shaped substrate-integrated hollow waveguides, Analyst, 
141, 5298-5303.  
20 Kohler A et al. (2009) Reducing Inter -replicate Variation in Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy by E xtended Multiplicative Signal Correction, 
Appl Spectrosc 63: 296-305. 
21 Bassan P et al. (2010) The RMieS -EMSC correction algorithm for infrared spectra of biological cells: Extension using full Mie scattering theory and 
speed optimization using graphics processing unit (GPU) computing, Biophotonics J 3: 609-620.  
 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 10 of 96 
experimental data from human tissue via 
the developed MIR -ATR probe. A 
further aim is to implement a graphical 
user interface that meets the surgeon’s 
needs, which will be performed by IRIS. 
Validation of the multivariate discriminant 
models 
Demonstrated 
for cells and 
tissues by 
NMBU, 
UUOULU and 
UULM. 
Demonstrated 
for in vitro 
human articular 
cartilage with 
different 
OARSI grades 
Demonstrated 
for ex vivo 
(cadavers) an in 
vivo (patients) 
To prototype the 
first MIR-ATR 
arthroscopy probe 
for articular cartilage 
evaluation  
This objective focuses on the 
development of appropriate 
microcontroller-based electronics and 
software to drive multi-color-QCL light 
source, signal detection with maximized 
signal-to-noise ratio, and system 
stabilization via control loops. OP will 
integrate all the components to the 
prototype system. The main goal here is 
to prototype an easy-to-use system for 
clinical needs.  
Prototype of the MIR-ATR based arthroscopic 
system 
N/A N/A Surgeon 
friendliness of 
solution 
demonstrated in 
clinical settings. 
To validate and 
demonstrate the 
MIR-ATR 
arthroscopy system 
for OA diagnosis in 
clinical settings. 
To promote the translation from 
demonstrated-prototype to clinical trials, 
MIRACLE will validate and demonstrate 
the system by competent surgeons (UU, 
KUH, UEF) in different phases of the 
project.  
 
Validation and demonstration of the MIR -ATR 
based arthroscopic prototype 
N/A N/A in vivo (patients) 
during 
arthroscopy– real 
clinical 
environment 
To create conditions 
for a receptive 
market to the novel 
diagnostic system. 
 
Novel diagnostic approaches usually 
suffer some resistance from the medical 
community. MIRACLE will ensure that 
knowledge about the MIR arthroscopy 
probe is well disseminated during the 
project among the orthopaedic surgeons. 
Technology transfer to market 
N/A Feedback from 
the surgeons 
during different 
project phases. 
TRL6-7 reached. 
The device is 
introduced to 
end-users with 
positive 
responses. 
To reinforce the 
Europe’s leadership 
in biophotonics 
In addition to the final device, 
MIRACLE outcom es will bring to the 
market three new photonics components 
which could be explored for other 
medical diagnostic devices.  
 
Exploitation of photonic components to other 
applications 
N/A Assessment of 
the developed 
technology for 
other 
applications. 
TRL6-7 reached. 
Product available 
for the 
development of 
other medical 
devices.
1.2 Relation to the work programme  
The project addresses topic ICT -30-2017 Photonics KET 2017: ii. Application driven core photonic devices 
integrated in systems, 1. Biophotonics: imaging systems for in -depth disease diagnosis. Table 2 outlines how 
MIRACLE fits to the specific topic challenge and scope, and to other relevant parts of the ‘Towards 2020: 
Photonics Driving Economic Growth in Europe – Multiannual Strategic Roadmap 2014-2020’. 
Table 2. Contribution of MIRACLE to the ICT-30-2017 Photonics KET 2017: ii. Application driven core photonic devices integrated in 
systems, 1. Biophotonics: imaging systems for in-depth disease diagnosis. 
Challenges Contribution of MIRACLE 
Investments in R&D&I are 
essential for reinforcing 
Europe's industrial 
competitiveness and leadership 
in photonic market sectors 
MIRACLE will develop and place in the market three novel photonics components and 
one medical equipment for diagnosi s: (i) Integrated QCL-based MIR source for broad 
wavelength coverage, (ii) iBEAM, (iii) MIR-ATR arthroscope probe for imaging and, (iv) 
MIR arthroscope probe integrated system. The  developed components by MIRACLE  
will open new market opportunities as suppl ier to other potential applications . 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 11 of 96 
where Europe is strong (e.g. in 
communications, medical 
photonics, sensing) and to seize 
new opportunities. Europe also 
needs to strengthen its 
manufacturing base in 
photonics to safeguard the 
further potential for innovation 
and value creation and for job 
creation. 
MIRACLE will design the components and device focusing on compactness, 
robustness, and competitive costs. The consortium beneficiaries NP and AP are leading 
manufacturer of QCL and AgX bundles/MIR -ATR probes technology,  respectively. 
The iBEAM is a novel concept based on a commercially available waveguide and it will 
be implemented by UULM and manufactured in the future by NP. The integrated system 
prototype will be realized by the consortium beneficiary OP. Each of the four SMEs will 
manufacture and deliver the components for future commercialization. The MIRACLE 
consortium then intends to license the final system. Considering the large potential 
market and its characteristics not only geographically but also by sector ( e.g. 
veterinarian), the consortium opted to not include a commercialization partner at the 
proposal stage for negotiating the most profitable and beneficial agreement for all 
partners involved. To support this, the consortium includes four market -experienced 
SMEs and highly reputed experts with experience in global medical equipment 
manufacturing in the Advisory Board, who will ensure the project is driven towards 
commercialization. Hence, MIRACLE outcome is decidedly market oriented meeting 
the challenges stated in this call. 
We must better exploit the large 
enabling potential of photonics 
in many industrial sectors and in 
solutions addressing major 
societal challenges such as 
health and well-being, energy 
efficiency or safety. 
The developed individual photonics components by MIRACLE can be also used in 
other industrial sectors (e.g. in -water sensing), apart from being of great use to the 
medical industry. In addition to the wide exploitation possibilities of the individual 
components, the proposed diagnostic device focuses on a major societal and economic 
burden. By using the novel diagnostic approach from MIRACLE, orthopeadic surgeons 
will be able to diagnose OA much earlier and to making better intra-operative decisions. 
This will impact on the patient’s quality of life by preventing OA progression which 
means less risk of chronic pain and eventual disability.   
Europe needs to better exploit 
the innovation capacity of the 
photonics SMEs and the 
innovation leverage potential of 
the innovation clusters and 
national platforms. 
MIRACLE combines academic experts and SMEs, thereby bringing the academic 
knowledge closer to the market. MIRACLE has two SMEs in the field of optics and 
photonics (NP and AP). In addition, MIRACLE has an SM E (OP) specialized in the 
assembly and packaging of infrared laser components and electronics joining efforts with 
researchers with expertise in MIR technology . Finally, the consortium brings in 
orthopaedic surgeons (end -users) to adapt the system to their  needs. Our highly 
competitive consortium not only bridges the multidisciplinary gap in photonics, but links 
researchers, photonics SMEs and biomedical SMEs for accelerating the knowledge 
transfer from academia via innovative products into the market. Furt hermore, INEB, 
UCP and PF (photonics cluster) provides expertise on technology transfer to smoothen 
the transition to the medical industry market. 
Scope Contribution of MIRACLE 
Actions should address validation 
and demonstration of photonic 
based systems for the target 
applications. Actions should also 
include standardisation activities. 
They should demonstrate strong 
industrial commitment, be driven 
by user needs and concrete 
business cases supported by 
strong exploitation strategies, and 
cover the whole value/supply 
chain and the end-user. 
The MIR-ATR based arthroscopy system proposed in MIRACLE will be validated and 
demonstrated for OA diagnosis via  human tissue (in vitro, UOULU), equines (ex vivo 
and in vivo, UU) and human subjects (ex vivo/cadavers, UEF and patients who will go 
through arthroscopy surgery, KUH). UNE joined the consortium to carry out specific 
standardisation activities to contribute to the market acceptance of the result s of the 
project by identifying standards relevant for the different WPs, contributing to the 
dissemination of the project within the standardization system and promoting the 
integration of the results in future standardization works. Industrial partners f orm a 
majority in the consortium. NP and AP will act as photonic components suppliers. IRIS 
will exploit the software development while OP will exploit the integrated system. 
Details of the business case, exploitation strategies and value chain are describ ed in the 
Section 2.    
The objective is the 
demonstration and validation in 
real-settings of innovative, easy 
to operate, compact, and non- 
or minimally invasive imaging 
systems to support diagnosis of 
age and life-style related 
diseases. The imaging system 
The consortium beneficiary UOULU has demonstrated in laboratory the feasibility of 
MIR method as diagnostic approach for articular cartilage degenerative diseases7,8,9,10. In 
addition, the consortium beneficiary AP has prototyped a MIR -ATR probe and 
demonstrated in laboratory its capabilities to distinguish healthy from cancerous tissue11. 
These results clearly indicates the validity of the proposed diagnostic approach which is 
label-free. The challenge of MIR -based diagnostic system technology is to provide 
spectral mapping/imaging in vivo. MIRACLE will address this issue by implementing a 
silver halide fiber bundle to produce spatially distributed chemical survey information 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 12 of 96 
should either be label-free or be 
based on already/rapidly safety-
approved labels. The feasibility 
and validity of the diagnostics 
approach should already have 
been demonstrated and it 
should potentially have a 
significant advantage with 
respect to current diagnostic 
approaches. 
i.e. an imaging-map of the local area. In addition, the proposed approach is to be used 
during arthroscopy surgery which is a minimally invasive procedure. By bringing the first 
MIR arthroscope probe to the market, MIRACLE will enable surgeons to make 
decisions based on real -time quantitative information changing the current evaluation 
method which is based on visual inspection and manual probing (Figure 1).  The device 
will be designed together with the orthopaedic surgeons to address all their wishes and 
demands related to probe size and operability. The imaging probe prototype will be 
demonstrated during real arthroscopy surgery in horses and humans. Finally, MIRACLE 
brings an innovative solution to diagnosis early OA which is well known as an aging and 
life style related disease.  
The action should further 
develop, improve and assess the 
imaging system under a 
sufficient range of realistic 
conditions and disease profiles. 
The evaluation of its usability 
and applicability and its 
validation in clinical settings 
should be included. 
The validation of the diagnostic approach will be performed via a large study using in 
vitro human tissue samples and multivariate discriminate model analysis. Or thopeadic 
surgeons are involved in the consortium to ensure that the real -life clinical needs are 
addressed properly. The MIRACLE diagnostic system will be evaluated in horses (in 
vivo) and ex vivo in human cadavers. In addition, by the end of the project the MIR-
ATR based arthroscopic system will be demonstrated during arthroscopic surgery in a 
real clinical settings in equine and human subjects.   
Actions should be driven by 
medical equipment 
manufacturers that are capable 
of and committed to the 
commercialisation of the 
solutions and include teams of 
physicians/clinicians to take 
part in the development and the 
functional and quantitative 
validation. Clinical trials are not 
covered by these actions and 
will normally take place after 
these actions. 
Within the beneficiary consortium, AP is currently applying for certification under ISO 
13485, which is expected to be granted early in 2018. This will enable AP to manufacture 
medical probes and spectral sensors with CE -mark from 2018 onwards expanding their 
market share towards medical equipment manufacturing. AP will commercialize the MIR -
ATR arthroscope probe. For the integrated system, the MIRACLE consortium has identified 
a sizeable market for commercialization, which includes several end -users (e.g. hospitals, 
private orthopaedic clinics, veterinarian hospitals/clinics). The MIRACLE consortium is 
committed to license the final medical device by evaluating the most profitable and beneficial 
agreement for all partners involved in the course of this project. Our team includes surgeons 
from two partners (UU and KUH), in addition to the external advisory board. This will 
ensure the design of a medical device that meets the clinical demands. In addition, the 
validation and demonstration is led and performe d by orthopaedic surgeons (TRL7). The 
demonstration includes testing and validating the MIR arthroscopy system prototype during 
real surgery on equine and human subjects. The demonstration will be performed by 
orthopaedic surgeons from the consortium (UU a nd KUH). Since clinical trials are not 
included, the MIRACLE consortium agreed that 8 equine cases and two human patient cases 
should be enough for validation the functionality of the system and for showing its 
capabilities to fulfil the application objectives. The necessary ethical approvals will not be a 
problem since both consortium beneficiaries, UU and KUH, have obtained this kind of 
approvals before. These demonstrations will facilitate the transition to next step, which is 
going to market.
1.3 Concept and methodology 
1.3.1 Overall concept  
An easy-to-use, label free and quantitative means to examine articular cartilage biochemical composition during 
arthroscopy surgery would be of high value to assist orthopaedic surgeons in diagnosing OA facilitating the intra-
operative decision-making and improving the patients prospect (Figure 1). The MIRACLE concept is to access 
the biochemical tissue changes by multivariate modelling of the MIR spectra using regions covering the 
collagen and proteoglycan (PG) signature bands. Collagen and PGs each have signature bands in MIR-spectra 
centered at 1338 cm-1 (CH2 wagging vibration of proline side chains) and 1072 cm-1 (C-O vibration of sugar groups), 
respectively (Figure 2A). Either the degradation of the collagen network or a loss of PGs in the articular cartilage 
would signal the onset of functional degeneration of the tissue leading to OA. The consortium beneficiary  
UOULU has been demonstrating in laboratory the relation ship between MIR spectra/imaging and OA  
(Figure 2B). This work is related to an ongoing ERC Starting Grant (Prof. Simo Saarakkala, MIPT, 2013).  In 
addition, MIR spectra of superficial layer of articular cartilage, measured from histological sections using 
MIR based microscopy  coupled with multivariate modelling and spectral preprocessing developed by 
NMBU21 , reveal that MIR spectra depend strongly on histological grading of OA (OARSI grade)7 - Figure 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 13 of 96 
3. These results corroborate with work by other recognized scientist in the field12,15,16. From the technology point 
of view, the consortium beneficiary AP has successfully prototyped MIR - and NIR - probes and 
demonstrated in laboratory the potential application for diagnostic of tumors11 - Figure 4.  
The combination of research outcome at UOULU and AP has demonstrated the feasibility of MIR-based 
technology for tissue evaluation, and the validity of the diagnostic approach proposed in the MIRACLE 
project.  
 
Figure 3. (A) Partial Least-Squares (PLS) regression combined with a feature selection algorithm to find the most relevant variables of the 
spectra (marked with black circles) were applied to second derivative MIR spectra for this purpose . The average spectra of different OA 
groups (based on OARSI grade) are displayed with different colors. (B) Multivariate regression (PLS regression combined with a feature 
selection algorithm) of MIR spectra revealed a strong correlation with the histolog ical OA grade. (C) Histology (Safranin -O stained), 
cluster (i.e. multivariate analysis method) and polarized light microscopy (PLM) images from three representative samples: ea rly OA 
(OARDI grade 1.5), intermediate OA (OARSI grade 3.5) and severe OA (OARSI grade 4.5)7. The corresponding cluster images from the 
carbohydrate region are extracted from the combined hyperspectral data. Black pixels in the cluster image are due to the removal of poor 
quality spectra. 
Figure 4. (A) Schematic of the compact and easy -
to-use MIR-based arthroscopy system to be 
prototyped by MIRACLE. (B) Current MIR-ATR 
probe (3mm of diameter) demonstrated for 
diagnosis of tumors.   
 
 
 
 
 
The MIRACLE concept relies on four essential stages: (i) the further development of MIR-ATR diagnostic system 
components. (ii) Validation via in vitro and ex -vivo testing will be performed providing essential feedback for 
technological and design improvements guiding development of the sys tem prototype, and providing data for 
advanced multivariate data evaluation and classification routines. (iii) Prototype development and demonstration 
in clinical settings during in vivo studies executed by orthopaedic surgeons. (iv) Exploitation and standardization 
activities focusing on the commercialization of the final device.  The first stage will focus on the development the 
Figure 2. (A) Representative MIR 
spectrum of articular cartilage. (B) 
Parametric images of amide I and 
carbohydrate region absorption of three 
representative sam ples (health tissue, 
early OA and advanced OA) measured 
with MIR microscopy8. Spatial collagen 
and PG contents of the samples were 
estimated as the integrated absorbance 
of Amide I (1585 -1720cm-1) peak and 
Carbohydrate region (1140 -985 cm -1), 
respectively, from the MI R absorption 
spectrum. 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 14 of 96 
key photonics components. These components include the QCL based MIR light source for broad wavelength 
coverage, and the on-chip beam combiner (iBEAM) for efficiently coupling QCL radiation into the probe (WP2). 
In parallel, the design and implementation of a compact silver halide fiber bundle enabling the collection of spatially 
resolved MIR spectra will be pursued (WP3). The pre-validation of MIR-ATR arthroscope probe for the evaluation 
of articular cartilage quality and OA diagnosis will be performed during in vitro studies (WP6, task 6.1). In vitro 
studies will be performed by using human tissues. In addition to equine models (ex vivo and in vivo), ex -vivo 
studies along with in vivo clinical requirements will provide feedback from surgeons to the technology team 
regarding the specifications of the MIR-based diagnostic system required for routine clinical use (WP6). This 
interaction with the surgeons is extremely important for addressing the end user requirements early on. 
Furthermore, pre-processing and analysis of data generated during the validation tests are essential for generating, 
testing, and evolving multivariate data evaluation and classification models and routines (WP4).  
Last but not least, MIRACLE will design and implement a MIR -ATR imaging system prototype for clinical 
applications (WP5). This task requires two important developments: (i) design and manufacturing of a  suitable 
MIR-ATR arthroscope probe for in vivo OA diagnosis, and (ii) development of appropriate microcontroller-based 
electronics and software. Finally, the MIR -based imaging system prototype will be clinically tested during in vivo 
arthroscopy procedures (WP6). With respect to joint disease, the equine model is considered a suitable model for 
translation to the human orthopaedic field. The clinical demonstration during real arthroscopic surgery will be also 
performed by human orthopaedic surgeons in human patients.  
 
Figure 5. Overall concept for MIRACLE MIR-ATR arthroscope probe imaging system 
1.3.2 MIRACLE main results and technology readiness levels 
MIRACLE proposes significant advances in photonics related to QCL-based MIR source focusing on overcoming 
the drawbacks (e.g., robustness, high price, dimensions, etc.) of existing core technology in the field. These 
advances will facilitate the first prototyping and commercialization of a MIR-ATR spectroscopic/imaging system 
for in-depth arthroscopic articular cartilage analysis and imaging, and consequently, open new frontiers in joint 
injury and OA diagnosis. The technology readiness levels (TRLs) in MIR ACLE are addressed taking in account 
two different aspects: (i) the individual developed components in the field of photonics ( Table 3) and (ii) the 
integrated system as compact device (Figure 6).  
Table 3. MIRACLE individual developed components and their TRLs at the project start and after project completion   
QCL-based MIR light source for broad wavelength coverage (consortium beneficiary: NP) 
TRL 4: The general technological principle has already been investigated with regards to a related system (called Interband 
Cascade Lasers – ICL) in the MIR. The technology would need to be transferred within the project to the QCL based 
system in the wavelength range of interest to the project based on correspondi ng laser structure and device design in the 
QCL system. Devices will be based on nanoplus proprietary technology: This includes Trade Secret MIR technology as well 
as patented MIR technology based on e.g. US20040865036 or EP1766740 (“TUNEABLE UNIPOLAR LASER”). 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 15 of 96 
TRL 5-6: The technology for the QCL -based MIR light source will be developed further to be suitable for the target 
application in diagnosis of articular cartilage diseases with the corresponding wavelength coverage.  The proposed novel 
QCL-based MIR source will provide essential advantages with respect to ruggedness, compactness, speed, and 
costs compared to tunable external cavity (EC) QCLs systems currently available on the market. 
 
On-chip beam combiner (iBEAM) for efficiently coupling QCL radiation into the MIR-ATR arthroscope probe  
(consortium beneficiary: UULM) 
TRL 4: UULM has pioneered, patented (#WO 2007030737), and recently commercialized 22 the fundamental thin -film 
waveguide technology that will be used as the base substrate for the iBEAM device. The fundamental optical design and 
concept is established (simulation, modeling), but no devices have actually been microfabricated yet, as the design needs to 
be adapted to the specifics of the lights source (tunable QCL, QCL array or frequency comb). UULM has published several 
papers on the waveguide technology 18, 23-29 and also has a U.S. patent on the fundamental waveguide structure (WO 
2007030737, 2007).  
TRL 5-6: iBEAM is a key component of the system and an innovative solution for combining radiation emitted 
by several MIR light sources (i.e., array  or frequency comb) into a single output beam via on -chip integrated 
photonic circuitry. Microfabrication strategies will be developed ensuring batch production of optimized BEAM devices 
at a wafer scale including appropriate mask design, photolithography,  and etching procedures. iBEAM devices will be 
prototyped at the III-V cleanroom facility at UULM including technology transfer protocols for commercial production at 
e.g., a contract III-V foundry. 
 
MIR-ATR arthroscopy probe for imaging (consortium beneficiary AP) 
TRL4: Prototype of miniaturized MIR-ATR probe is a successful basis for further ATR probe designing to use for medical 
in vivo diagnostics. The general optic design is already established by using silver halide polycrystalline fibers to couple light 
initially from a broadband FTIR-spectrometer. art photonics published several papers on the design and parameters of ATR 
probes.30-34 Related patents: U.S. Patent No. 7,956,317 Fibre Optic Probe; U.S. Patent No. 6,564,587 B2 Method of 
producing an optical fiber by gathering material from a molten bat; U.S. Patent Application No. 09/944,825 Optical fiber 
and method of producing; European Patent Application EP  1184339 A3 Optische Faser und Herstellungsverfahren für 
eine optische Faser. 
TRL5-6: An optimized ATR crystal will be designed and manufactured for re-bouncing the IR radiation from several input 
fibers of imaging bundle into output fibers with maximal accuracy. The fiber optic bundle will be incorporated into the 
probe structure enabling spectra-imaging. The coupling optics will be developed and manufactured for the optimized 
input/output in fiber bundle from QCL -based light source and back to the detect or. ATR bundle MIR probe will be 
developed for commercial production. To reduce barriers for commercialization of system, AP will satisfy all demand of 
assemblers in accordance with ISO-13482, including sterilization method selected during the following project. 
 
22 www.mgopticalsolutions.com/mira-guide/ 
23 T. Schaedle et al. (2016), Mid-Infrared Waveguides – A Perspective, Applied Spectroscopy 70; 1625-1638. 
24 Haas J et al. (2016), Sensing Chlorinated Hydrocarbons via Miniaturized GaAs/AlGaAs Thin -Film Waveguide Flow Cells Coupled to Quantum 
Cascade Lasers, Analytical Methods 8; 6602-6606. 
25 Haas J et al. (2016), Advances in  Mid-Infrared Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis, 9;45-68 
26 Sieger et al (2016), Optimizing the Design of GaAs/AlGaAs Thin-Film Waveguides for Integrated Mid-Infrared Sensors, Photonics Research 4; 106-110. 
27 Sieger et al. (2016), A Mid-Infrared Spectroscopy Platform based on GaAs/AlGaAs Thin-film Waveguides and Quantum Cascade Lasers, Analytical 
Chemistry 88; 2558-2562. 
28 Sieger et al. (2013), On-Chip Integrated Mid-Infrared GaAs/AlGaAs Mach-Zehnder Interferometer, Analytical Chemistry 85; 3050-3052. 
29 Wang et al. (2013), Ultra -Sensitive Mid-Infrared Evanescent Field Sensors Combining Thin -Film Strip Waveguides with Quantum Cascade Lasers, 
Analyst 137; 2322-2327. 
30 Artyushenko V. et al. (2008), Mid-IR fibre optics spectroscopy in the 3300–600 cm−1 range. Vibrational Spectroscopy, 48; 168-171.  
31 Artyushenko VG et al., (2007), Mid IR-fiber spectroscopy in the 2-17µm range, Proceedings of SPIE Vol. 6739, 2007 
32 Artyushenko VG et al. (2014), Mid-infrared Fiber Optics for 1-18µm Range, Optik & Photonik, 4; 35-39 
33 Khaustova SА  et al. (2009), Assessment of biochemical characteristics of the saliva using FTIR spectroscopy. Bull Exp Biol Med. 148(5):841–4. 
34 S.Khaustova, et al. (2010) Noninvasive biochemical monitoring of physiological stress by Fourier transform infrared saliva spectroscopy; Analyst, 135; 68-73.  
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 16 of 96 
 
Figure 6. TRLs description prior, at the MIRACLE start, during the project and after project completion  
1.3.3 Projects preceding MIRACLE 
The MIRACLE project will leverage results from the national and international research projects described in Table 4. 
Table 4. List of prior projects linked with MIRACLE 
Project name, funding programme (period) Relevance for the proposed project [involved 
partners] 
Development of 3D Histopathological Grading of 
Osteoarthritis, European Research Council (ERC) Starting 
Grant project (2014-2018) 
Developing new methods for OA diagnosis, [UOULU] 
Establishment of 3D histopathological grading of 
osteoarthritis, Academy of Finland Research Fellow project 
(2013-2018). 
Developing new methods for OA diagnosis, [UOULU] 
Novel Infrared Spectroscopic Tools for Mycotoxin 
Determination in Foodstuffs for Increased Food Safety 
[MYCOSPEC], FP7 (2013-2016)  
QLCs and thin -film waveguide technology, [UULM, 
IRIS] 
Integrated In -Situ Chemical Mapping Probes [SCHEMA], 
FP7 (2013 – 2017) 
mid-infrared optical sensors for water assessment, 
[UULM] 
Development of a Non -Invasive Breath Tests for Early 
Diagnosis of Tropical Diseases [TROPSENSE], H2020 
(2015 -2019). 
Mid-Infrared Quantum Cascade Laser spectroscopy for 
chemical sensing, [UULM] 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 17 of 96 
Multimodal arthroscopic imaging of cartilage and meniscus 
injuries and degeneration, Academy of Finland (2013-2017) 
Development of multimodeal arthroscope probe, [UEF] 
Smart Arthroscope with Automated Software for 
Quantitative Diagnostics of Cartilage Injuries and 
Degeneration, The Research Committee of the Kuopio 
University Hospital Catchment Area for the State Research 
Funding, (2014-2018) 
Development of smart arthroscope probe for quantitative 
OA diagnosis, [UEF, KUH] 
Near Infrared Spectroscopy for Arthroscopic Diagnostics of 
Cartilage and Meniscus Degeneration, The Research 
Committee of the Kuopio University Hospital Catchment 
Area for the State Research Funding, (2015-2017) 
Development of arthroscope probe based on NIR 
spectroscopy, [UEF] 
Hyperspectral imaging in biophysics and energy physics, 
Norwegian Research Council at IMT/UMB, (2012-2016) 
Multivariate analysis of Biosystems, [NMBU] 
Photonic sensing of hydrocarbons based on innovative mid 
infrared lasers [SENSHY], FP7 (2008 – 2011) 
High quality ICL material for device processing, [NP] 
Note: the final product has been commercialized 
since then. NP is only commercial manufacturer 
worldwide to offer ICL based DFB lasers  
Quantum Cascade Laser based optical measurement systems 
for industrial process control [QUIP], German Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research (2009-2011) 
Tunable QCL based devices around 14 µm, [NP] 
Fiber Optic Molecular Sensor [FOMoS], European Regional 
Development Fund – ERDF (2014-2017) 
Development of fiber sensor for termination of cancer 
and non-cancer tissues, [AP] 
Multimodal Spectroscopic Investigation for inline 
determination of cell viability [Multispec], Federal Ministry of 
Education and Research, Germany; Technologie centrum, 
Germany (2013-2016) 
Development of Low Cost – High Performance sensors 
that are capable of multiplexing in reusable and single-use 
bioreactor systems, [AP] 
Miniaturized Mir Sensors for Biorefinery process [MEMS -
BIOPRO], Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy; 
ZIM program for SMEs (2014-2016) 
Developed a diamond -tipped fiber ATR probe for 
monitoring of anaerobic digestion processes in bio 
fermenters, [AP] 
Advanced Photonic Sensor Materials – Development and test 
of first demonstrators [ APOSEMA], EU M-era.Net (2012-
2017) 
Miniaturization of the sensing unit and combination with 
complementary technologies like fluorescence -based 
Oxygen detection in one single device, [OP] 
Optical inline fluid analysis, Development of gas and liquid 
sensors to measure traces of carbon monoxide and 
butylacetate [OIFA], German Federal Ministry of Education 
and Research (2012-2015) 
Trace detection in gases and liquids, expansion of the 
know-how to be able to handle (electronically drive) 
interband and quantum cascade lasers with one platform 
solution, [OP] 
Quantum-cascade laser systems for industrial gas sensing and 
process control [QUINGAP], German Federal Ministry of 
Education and Research (2006- 2010) 
Infrared laser based detection of trace gases,  
laser driver electronics and data aq. Electronics  
Ultra-high sensitive detection scheme, [OP] 
1.3.4 Methodology  
The overall work plan of MIRACLE is based in six technical/clinical WPs and it is schematically shown in Figure 
7. In the first stage of this project, the consortium will focus on the technological aspects of the MIR-ATR imaging 
arthroscope probe. For the MIR -ATR arthroscope probe imaging, the infrared c ore team will implement a new 
generation of MIR components . These will include a QCL-based MIR source  assembly providing broad 
wavelength coverage, thus addressing the most relevant spectral window for evaluation of the quality of articular 
cartilage (i.e. , 1000 – 1800 cm -1, where information on collagens and PGs are found (WP2). This particular 
component will be then coupled to an on-chip beam combiner (iBEAM) for efficiently launching QCL radiation 
into the MIR -ATR arthroscope probe. The iBEAM itself is a lso an innovative solution developed by 
MIRACLE project (WP2).  iBEAM is a key component of the system, since to date no on -chip MIR beam 
combiners tailored for QCLs have been developed for efficiently integrating several QCL elements with 
spectroscopic se nsing systems. MIRACLE also includes the development of a miniaturized diamond ATR 
probe coupled with a silver halide fiber bundle to enable in vivo acquisition of spatially resolved MIR spectra 
(WP3). This will be the first attempt towards MIR in vivo diagnostics via an imaging arthroscope probe. 
Finally, the MIR-ATR arthroscope probe development will be continuously aligned with the clinical requirements 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 18 of 96 
of arthroscopy (WP1), i.e., the arthroscope probe prototype will enable sterilization, thereby increasing the device 
lifetime and reducing cost associated with currently applied single-use probes.  
The data generated by the MIR-ATR arthroscope probe validation tests will be subjected to advanced multivariate 
data analysis routines  (WP4). Focusing on the fi nal application, it is important that orthopaedic surgeons are 
provided with (i) an easy -to-operate device, and (ii) automated analysis, evaluation, and classification  of the 
collected information for more precise decision-making based on quantifiable molecular parameters inherent to 
the collected MIR spectra . MIR-ATR spectral data analysis requires the separation of the relevant chemical 
signatures from undesired interferences, such as noise and measurement artefacts. MIRACLE will provide models 
for discriminant analysis and classification of tissue spectra specifically tailored to the spectral information provided 
by the QCL-based MIR-ATR arthroscope probe. Furthermore, these models will be implemented in the Global 
Control System (GCS) for data acquisition and analysis with user-friendly interface and clear diagnostic output, 
thus facilitating the acceptance by the medical community to the new technology (WP4, WP5).  
Finally, the consortium will integrate all developed components in a sing le compact prototype device  for 
demonstration in operational environment (i.e., surgery conditions) reaching TRL7  (WP5). The validation of 
articular cartilage injuries and OA diagnos is will be performed by including in vitro (i.e., human tissues), ex-
vivo, and in vivo tests (via the well-established equine model in which standardized lesions (repaired and not) in 8 
ponies will be followed via biomarker analysis, gait analysis and relook  arthroscopy for 6 months before final 
histological assessment) and comparing the outcomes with th e current gold standard methods (WP6). The final 
clinical validation will be performed during arthroscopy surgery in real patient (two patients since clinical 
trials are not included in this call) by highly competent orthopedic surgeons participating in this consortium 
(WP6). The MIR-ATR data generated during in vitro studies will be compared with traditional methods for OA 
diagnosis (e.g., histological stainin g). For the validation in clinical testing, knee injury is chosen as study case due 
to the knee is a joint with a high level of clinical importance in human OA. In the first instance, the clinically 
assessment will be performed by equine orthopaedic surgeo ns in a pony model before and after cartilage repair 
surgery. Immediate feedback from orthopaedic surgeons will consistently guide the technological development 
towards an easy-to-operate system ready for entering into the commercialization phase at the end of this project. 
During the entire project, the consortium will keep a continuous interaction between the technical/scientific teams 
and the orthopaedic surgeon to ensure that the medical device is implemented according to the cl inical needs. 
During the first and second year, the project will focus on the technical challenges of the photonic components 
and the data collection to develop the multivariate discriminative models. Orthopaedic surgeons will be involved 
early on by defining system specifications  and clinical requirements. In the third year, MIRACLE will focus on 
prototyping the MIR-ATR arthroscope probe system and intermediate demonstrations on animal model and ex 
vivo (cadavers). The final six months will be used to demonstrate the system during a real-time arthroscopy surgery. 
In parallel, a concreate business plan will be defined preparing the final device for commercialization. To successful 
accomplish these goals, MIRACLE implementation is planned to occur in 3.5 years: 2 years for technical 
development and implementation, 1 year for final prototyping and intermediate demonstrations and 6 months for 
demonstration during real arthroscopy.  
Finally, MIRACLE technical developments and demonstration in clinical settings will be accompanied by targeted 
dissemination and exploitation activities for preparing a sustainable follow-up of the project results, to spread the 
novel in-depth diagnosis option within the medical community and to inform the public on the European RTD 
approach and breakthrough  (WP7). Furthermore, MIRACLE will develop market analysis, marketing strategies 
and sales forecast. The MIRACLE Business Plan will focus on arthroscopy and it will also consider other medical 
sectors which could benefit from such technology.  
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 19 of 96 
 
Figure 7. MIRACLE methodology overview in relation to the project technical and clinical Work Packages  
1.3.5 Sex and Gender analysis (patients and involved personnel)  
In many cases of biomedical research, sex is a fundamental variable during development of a product or a system. 
The Gendered Innovations35 project presents study cases as evidence that lack of sex analysis in the work plan can 
drive research into wrong pathways. OA is a degenerative joint disease with increasing incidence with age, and 
women present at higher rates compared to men6. Although sex has to be considered in OA, the consortium does 
not identify any sex-related issue when developing MIRACLE, as the main emphasis is the technological 
development of biophotonics -related components and devices to be used during articular cartilage 
evaluation and OA diagnosis independent of the sex of the patient.  The device should be suitable for 
arthroscopic deployment after joint injuries and early in-depth OA diagnosis independent of sex aspects.  
Considering gender aspects, each research partner is committed to the highest standards of ethics and acts 
according to the national and European regulations (Directive 2006/54/EC). We all declare th at everybody is 
treated equally and respectfully regardless of nationality, ethnicity, sex and gender, similar to the ongoing good 
practices in our organizations. When hiring new personnel, the decisions are solely based on scientific/technical 
ground, i.e. the expertise of the person and her/his suitability for the devoted project tasks serve the only bases of 
any selections. It is also important to emphasize here, that while the corresponding field of science and technology 
is mainly dominated by male engineers and scientists, our team includes a number of female key members (see bios 
in Section 4) such as Dr. Gabriela S. Lorite (UOULU), Dr. Valeria Tafintseva (NMBU), Dr. Caroline Kistner (NP), 
Dr. Tatiana Sakharova (AP), Dr. Olga Bibikova (AP), Dr. Sofia Esteves (INEB) and MSc.  Cristina Hernán.  
Finally, norms, stereotypes, special needs, and gender dimension does NOT have any impact on 
MIRACLE as such; instead, surgeons (i.e., main end users) – male or female - are the ones to define and 
drive the device design and improve marketability.   
 
35 http://ec.europa.eu/research/swafs/gendered-innovations/index_en.cfm?pg=home 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 20 of 96
1.4 Ambition 
The MIRACLE project aims to develop and demonstrate a MIR -based system to provide accurate and 
quantitative information on the (bio)chemical compos ition of articular cartilage  during arthroscopy , 
which can be associated with degenerative joint diseases.  Arthroscopy is a minimally invasive surgical 
procedure leveraged by orthopaedic surgeons to diagnose and treat joint diseases. To conduct an arthroscopic 
examination, an orthopedic surgeon makes a small incision in the patient's skin through which they ins ert pencil-
sized instruments. The current global arthroscopy products market includes arthroscopes (i.e. video camera), 
fixation devices, hand instruments, cannulae, fluid management systems and patient positioning systems. None of 
these instruments/devices is capable of accurate and quantitative assessment of the joint.  Due to the 
available instrumentation, the articular cartilage examination during arthroscopy surgery is limited to visual 
inspection and manual probing (qualitative) as described in Figure 1. This method is qualitative, highly subjective 
and of poor repeatability. In addition, the orthopaedic surgeons are not able to detect the very early  molecular 
derangement which precedes severe degeneration of the joint such as OA. By technology development reaching 
TRL 6 and beyond, MIRACLE will bring to the arthroscope market the first MIR-based probe providing 
a unique, accurate and quantitative diagnostic tool for the orthopaedic surgeon. MIRACLE device will not 
replace any of the existing arthroscopic instruments/device, but instead the proposed solution will bring a 
nonexistent advanced diagnostic tool to the arthroscopy market.  This will have a s trong impact in the 
intra-operative decision making by the surgeon and, consequently better treatments and quality of life 
for the patients.  
From the technical point of view, near infrared (NIR) -probes have been clinically tested by the consortium 
beneficiaries KUH and UEF partners during in vivo knee arthroscopy for articular cartilage evaluation. However, 
the NIR probes do not provide sufficient durability, discriminatory power, and/or are not cost effective for OA 
during arthroscopy. Despite these appro aches towards fiber optic NIR -probes in OA diagnosis 12,13,16,36, no 
attempts on MIR in vivo diagnostic imaging have been reported to date . One of the primary benefits of 
the MIR spectral window (3-15 µm) is the substantially more pronounced sensitivity and discriminatory 
power related to the chemical composition of the examined tissue37,38. Specifically, at wavelengths >10μm—
also called the ‘fingerprint’ region —individual and combination vibrations of molecular species provide unique 
absorption patterns for each constituent, which enable direct label -free identification at a molecular 
level37. The challenge for MIR technology during in vivo studies is pronounced water absorptions prevalent in the 
3–15μm window. To mitigate this issue, MIR-ATR spectroscopy as a surface-sensitive waveguide-based analytical 
technique facilitates detecting molecular species via absorption spectroscopy within an exponentially decaying 
evanescent field generated at the surface of an appropriate ATR element (here, a miniaturized conical diamond 
ATR probe). Thereby, effects of water during in vivo diagnosis are minimized.   
In order to realize the MIR arthroscope probe as a diagnostic tool, few innovative key elements in the field of 
photonics need to be imple mented: (i) QCL-based MIR light source for broad wavelength coverage, (ii) on -chip 
beam combiner (iBEAM) and (iii) ATR-MIR arthroscope probe for imaging. These key elements will be integrated 
in a compact and easy -to-use MIR -based system to be used during arthroscopy surgery. MIRACLE will also 
implement a model for discriminant analysis which will be transferred and integrated into the diagnostic system as 
an easy -to-use software interface. Apart from the novel diagnostic approach during arthroscopy, MIRACL E 
achievements will embrace substantial potential for innovation in biophotonics-based medical equipment, opening 
new possibilities for future commercialisable in vivo, quantitative and minimally invasive tools for diagnosing of 
tissue-related disease (e.g . cancer). The innovative potential in terms of the proposed new technology concepts 
(individual technology components and entire system) and the related state -of-the-art are described in the follow 
sub-sections and schematically summarized in Figure 8.  
 
36 Spahn G et al. (2010) Near-infrared spectroscopy for arthroscopic evaluation of cartilage lesions: results of a blinded, prospective, interobserver study, 
Am J Sports Med 38: 2516-2521. 
37 Mizaikoff B (2013) Waveguide-enhanced mid-infrared chem/bio sensors, Chem Soc Rev 42: 8683-8699. 
38 Wang L et al., Classification of Atherosclerotic Rabbit Aorta Samples with an Infrared Attenuated Total Reflection Catheter a nd Multivariate Data 
AnalysisAppl. Spectrosc., 60, 1121 (2006).  
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 21 of 96 
A preliminary parent search  was carried out  on European Patent Office (EPO) and World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO), using the keywords “laser”, “diagnosis”, “osteoarthritis” an d, “arthroscope”. The analysis 
of the seach outputs highlighted two patents; CN103932673 describes an arthroscope system based on multi-mode 
spectrum technology, which makes use of Raman spectroscopy to analyze articular joint tissue. In comparison to 
MIR-based methods, Raman scattering is always very weak and similar technology as proposed by MIRACLE 
would require very long scan times. The second patent, CN102657509, describes a diagnosis-treatment integrated 
confocal arthroscope system. Although video -camera imaging may be improved comparing to conventional 
arthroscopy, this system does not allow tissue composition analysis. Therefore, this preliminary patent survey 
sustains the novelty of the proposed MIR probe based imaging/diagnostic system, and ensures freedom to operate 
within the consortium.  
 
Figure 8. Summary of MIRACLE main innovations 
1.4.1 QCL-based MIR light source for broad wavelength coverage  
State-of-the-art 
In the past two decades, QCLs39,40 and interband cascade lasers (ICLs)41,42 have emerged as important light sources 
for miniaturized IR analyzers and sensing devices (including QCL - and ICL-based devices by consortium partner 
NP) providing high output power within narrow spectral bands, small dimensions,  and long lifetime 43,44. Since 
their experimental proof of principle in 1994, rapid technological development of QCLs has nowadays resulted in 
a variety of commercially available QCLs in the MIR wavelength range of interest to the MIRACLE consortium. 
To date, single-mode distributed feedback QCLs (DFB QCLs) dominate the market with inherently very 
limited tuning range. 
One possible solution to overcome this limitation  has been proposed by Capasso and co -workers39 
demonstrating device based on an array of 32 distributed feedback (DFB) QCLs with closely spaced emission 
wavelengths spanning the gain bandwidth of the QCL material. The array was monolith ically fabricated on the 
same chip, and individually driven by a micro-controller. EOS Photonics is a U.S.-based SME; among high power 
 
39 Faist J, Capasso F, Sivco DL, Sirtori C, Hutchinson AL and Cho AY (1994) Quantum cascade laser, Science 264: 553-556. 
40 Faist J et al. (2001) Quantum-cascade lasers based on a bound-to-continuum transition, Appl Phys Lett 78: 147. 
41 Yang RQ et al. (1997) High power mid-infrared interband cascade lasers based on type-II quantum Wells, Appl Phys Lett 71: 2409. 
42 Vurgaftman I et al. (2015) Interband cascade lasers, J Phys D Appl Phys 48: 123001. 
43 Tütüncü E et al. (2016) iHWG-ICL: Methane Sensing with Substrate-Integrated Hollow Waveguides Directly Coupled to Interband Cascade Lasers, ACS Sens., 1; 847–851. 
44 Gomes da Silva IJ et al. (2016) Sensing Hydrocarbons with Interband Cascade Laser and Substrate-Integrated Hollow Waveguides, Analyst 141; 4432-7. 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 22 of 96 
QCLs, they are specialized in the production and commercialization of QCL arrays. Currently realized arrays 
include 32 QC Ls and emit continuously from 8.7 to 9.4 µm, whereas each laser is addressed individually or in 
parallel. The individual lasers are equipped with micro -lenses, which performs a rough collimation. However, 
beam combiners have not been integrated yet, and a main limitation is that separate beams emerging from the 
individual lasers of the array are not combined into a single beam, i.e., remain spatially separated. This makes their 
device not compatible with most current spectroscopic systems, and this will be specifically addressed by 
the present consortium with an innovative concept for an on-chip beam combiner (iBEAM). 
Recently, also external cavity QCLs (EC QCLs) with a wide tuning range have become commercially 
available for laboratory-based operation. In EC QCLs, the laser chip is part of an external cavity whose length 
can be mechanically tuned. EC QCL technology is currently solely in the hands of U .S. enterprises with strong 
backing from defense programs. This makes it difficult for European SMEs to inco rporate EC QCLs into their 
systems, especially custom modifications are requested. Nevertheless, for laboratory use EC QCL systems now 
start to enter competitively into the market previously dominated by FTIR systems alone. The rapid growth of the 
U.S. SME ‘Daylight Solutions’ specialized on EC QCLs shows that there is an increasing demand for tunable MIR 
sources. While these EC QCLs allow covering a spectral window of 200 wavenumbers or more, they are of limited 
applicability in a majority of industrial ap plications due to their lack in robustness, their rather large size, and 
exceptionally high cost. In addition, several inherent disadvantages include:  
- Sequential scanning a spectrum takes time (approx. 1 second) due to mechanical positioning of the internal grating 
and other components; rapid ‘jumping’ between spectral positions is hardly possible. 
- Spectral reproducibility is limited due to the mechanics; for precision wavelength determination, an additional 
device (etalon) may be necessary. 
- Residual reflectivity of the AR-coated laser chip results in a 10-2 intensity modulation, which may adversely affect 
spectral measurements. 
- Depending on the quality of the AR-coating, the intensity drops strongly at the edges of the gain region compared 
to the maximum. 
MIRACLE pushing beyond the state-of-the-art 
The EC QCLs concept as described above entails several important drawbacks especially for the 
application scenarios investigated within MIRACLE . In contrast, the novel integrated QCL-based MIR 
sources for broad wavelength coverage implemented wit hin MIRACLE will be the superior technology: 
compact, reliable (no moving mechanical parts), and significantly lower cost (approximately one fifth of 
an external cavity based system) with increasing demand once no optical components and related 
adjustments are needed. Additionally, a higher switching speed between different wavelengths can be 
achieved.  Figure 9 shows the general design of the MIR-ATR probe for single-point spectra acquisition, which is 
composed of two silver halide fibers or hollow waveguides for guiding the MIR light emitted by the QCL -based 
light source assembly into a diamond ATR tip via an iBEAM interface. 
Figure 9. Schematic view of the MIR-ATR arthroscope 
probe system comprising QCL -based light sources for 
broad wavelength coverage in the mid-infrared coupled 
via iBEAM into an AgX fiber or HWG, which 
propagates the MIR radiation into the diamond ATR 
tip. After evanescent field absorption, radiation is 
collected by a second AgX fiber/HWG and coupled 
onto an MIR detector. NOTE: The components in this 
scheme are not to scale! 
 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 23 of 96 
1.4.2 On-chip beam combiner (iBEAM)  
State-of-the-art 
A new generation of semiconductor (GaAs/AlGaAs) thin -film IR waveguides has recently been 
introduced by the group of Mizaikoff and collaborators at UULM providing a spectral window up to 13 µm, 
and excellent sensitivity for the detection of minute quantities of analytes (Figure 10). They include different optical 
configurations such as planar GaAs/Al 0.2Ga0.8As slab waveguides 28,45, and GaAs/Al 0.2Ga0.8As strip/ridge 
waveguides29. Furthermore, in 2012 the group of Mizaikoff has reported the first on -chip MIR Mach -Zehnder 
interferometer 46 taking advantage of advanced GaA s/AlGaAs microfabrication techniques. They have also 
reported HgCdTe waveguide structures47, and sensors based on thin-film diamond waveguides48. UULM has also 
pioneered, patented (#WO 2007030737), and recently commercialized 22 the fundamental thin -film 
waveguide technology that will be used as the base substrate for the iBEAM device. To date, no on-chip 
photonic integrated circuitry (PIC) for the MIR (3 -15 µm) spectral regime exists, which is attributed to 
the lack in single-mode thin-film waveguide technology, as developed by UULM . While the fundamental 
concept of on -chip PIC for beam combination has been realized and  commercialized at visible wavelengths 49, 
GaAs/AlGaAs waveguides extending these concepts into the MIR are a key innovation . The experience of the 
UULM team regarding on-chip waveguide technology will be vital to this project for developing an on -
chip beam combiner (iBEAM) facilitating a waveguide -integrated QCL based light source with broad 
wavelength coverage. iBEAM will be a key optical component optically linking MIR laser emission with 
macroscopic silver halide or hollow waveguides (HWG) waveguides comprised in the arthroscope probe. 
 
 
Figure 10. (A) Scheme of an on -chip MIR Mach-Zehnder interferometer based on GaAs/AlGaAs used for analysis of liquid samples 28. 
(B) Stainless steel based plate with direct access to GaAs/AlGaAs waveguide for analysis of solid samples.   
MIRACLE pushing beyond the state-of-the-art 
The second photonics MIRACLE innovati on, which is directly related to the integrated QCL -based MIR 
source with broad wavelength coverage, is the development of iBEAM – an on-chip beam combiner optically 
interfacing the individual QCL elements with the silver halide fibers or the hollow waveguides that guide 
 
45 Charlton C et al. (2006) Fabrication and Characterization of Molecular Beam Epitaxy Grown Thin -Film GaAs Waveguides for Mid -Infrared 
Evanescent Field Chemical Sensing, Anal Chem 78: 4224–4227. 
46 Sieger M et al. (2013) On-Chip Integrated Mid-Infrared GaAs/AlGaAs Mach–Zehnder Interferometer, Anal Chem 85:  3050–3052. 
47 Wang X et al. (2013) Mercury–Cadmium–Telluride Waveguides – A Novel Strategy for On-Chip Mid-Infrared Sensors, Anal Chem 85: 10648-10652. 
48 Wang X et al. (2014) Diamonds Are a Spectroscopist’s Best Friend: Thin-Film Diamond Mid-Infrared Waveguides for Advanced Chemical 
Sensors/Biosensors, Anal Chem 86: 8136-8141.  
49 XiO Photonics; http://www.xiophotonics.com/index.php/products 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 24 of 96 
the MIR radiation to the ATR diamond probe  (Figure 11). iBEAM will take advantage of on -chip waveguide 
technology recently pioneered at UULM, which is the state -of-the-art in miniaturized MIR sensing. To the best 
of our knowledge, iBEAM as an on -chip beam combiner for MIR wavelengths as a stand -alone 
component or tailored for QCL light sources  is a concept that has not been realized  yet and, therefore 
placing MIRACLE at the forefront of photonic technologies. 
1.4.3 ATR-MIR arthroscope probe for imaging spectroscopy 
State-of-the-art 
MIR optical fibers are defined as waveguides transmitting radiation at wavelengths >2 μm. The fabrication of 
infrared transmitting waveguides – most commonly fiberoptic structures - is usually enabled via IR -transparent 
materials which can be divided into three main categories: glass fibers (e.g., chalcogenide glasses 50, heavy metal 
fluorides51, tellurium halides52), polycrystalline fibers (e.g., polycrystalline silver halides53,54,55), crystalline fibers (e.g., 
single-crystalline sapphire56,57), and hollow waveguides (HWG) structures 58,59,60, such as hollow silica or sapphire 
tubes. Silver halide fibers are among the most promising materials for fiberoptic IR sensors providing 
access to the entire spectral range of interest61. Alternatively, structural tubes made from dielectrics, metals, or 
metal-coated materials provide hollow waveguide structures that act like an optical fiber with an air core 62, whereby 
IR radiation is guided by reflection on the inside walls. Conventional HWGs comprise a structural tube (e.g., silica, 
sapphire, etc.) coated on the inside hollow core wall with a metal (e.g., Ag), and a protective dielectric (e.g., AgI)37. 
In the arthroscope probe design proposed within MIRACLE, silver halide fiberoptics will be utilized as 
MIR radiation propagating waveguide to couple light initially from a broadband mini-FTIR, and then 
from the proposed QCL -based light source assembly to an in vivo attenuated total reflection (ATR) 
sensing tip (diamond) and back to the detector. 
Most MIR sensing schemes are based on the fundamental principle of internal reflection spectroscopy or - more 
specifically - attenuated total reflection (ATR) 63. Concerning ATR waveguides, the excellent optical properties of 
diamond (i.e., high refractive index, high thermal conductivity, high density, low thermal expansion, low absorption 
 
50 Ho H et al. (2006) Single-mode low-loss chalcogenide glass waveguides for the mid-infrared, Opt Lett 31: 1860–1862. 
51 Aggarwal D and Lu G  (1991) Fluoride glass fiber optics, Academic Press, San Diego, USA. 
52 Le Neindre et al. (1998) Tellurium halide optical fibers, J Non-Cryst Solids 242: 99–103. 
53 Lu R et al.  (2015) Probing the secondary structure of bovine serum albumin during heat -induced denaturation using mid -infrared fiberoptic 
sensors, Analyst 140: 765-770. 
54 Schädle T  et al. (2013) Mid-Infrared Planar Silver Halide Waveguides with Integrated Grating Couplers, Appl Spectrosc 67: 1057-1063. 
55 Lu R et al. (2013) IR-ATR Chemical Sensors Based on Planar Silver Halide Waveguides Coated with an Ethylene/Propylene Copolymer for Detection 
of Multiple Organic Contaminants in Water, Angew Chem Int Ed 52: 2265-2268. 
56 Götz R et al. (1998) Application of Sapphire Fibers to an IR Fiber Optic Sensor for the Investigation of Polymers at High Temperature, Appl Spectrosc 
52: 1248–1252. 
57 Mizaikoff B et al. (1995) IR fiber optic evanescent field sensors for gas monitoring, Proc SPIE 2508: 253–264. 
58 Wilk A et al. (2013) Substrate-Integrated Hollow Waveguides: A New Level of Integration in Mid-Infrared Gas Sensing, Anal Chem 85: 11205–11210.  
59 Petruci JFS et al. (2015) Online Analysis of H2S and SO2 via Advanced Mid-Infrared Gas Sensors, Anal Chem 87:  9605–9611. 
60 Petruci JFS et al.  (2014) Monitoring of hydrogen sulfide via substrate-integrated hollow waveguide mid-infrared sensors in real-time, Analyst 139: 198-203. 
61 Sa’ar A, Barkay N, Moser F, Schnitzer I, Levite A and Katzir A (1988) Proc SPIE 843: 98-104. 
62 Harrington JA (2000) A Review of IR Transmitting, Hollow Waveguides, Fiber Integr Opt 19: 211-217.  
63 Fahrenfort J (1961) Attenuated total reflection: A new principle for the production of useful infra -red reflection spectra of organic compounds, 
Spectrochim Acta 17: 698-709.  
Figure 11. Schematic view of on-chip semiconductor technology 
based beam combiner (iBEAM) for coupling IR radiation from 
each QCL element into the silver halide fiber/hollow waveguide. 
NOTE: The components in this scheme are not to scale! 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 25 of 96 
and scattering losses, transparency over a wide spectral window, and biocompatibility) have enabled the 
development of exceptional waveguide and probe materials. Furthermore, diamond features an extreme hardness 
and chemical resistance enabling h arsh operating conditions (e.g., during sterilization). Finally, diamond ATR 
biocompatibility renders diamond the most suitable material for in-vivo MIR sensing applications, such 
as the proposed MIR -based diagnostic system for in -depth analyzing articular  cartilage biochemical 
changes.  
MIRACLE pushing beyond the state-of-the-art 
To enable acquisition of spatially resolved MIR spectra (i.e. to create an imaging spectra) within the 
MIR-ATR probe for in vivo clinical use is a major innovation proposed by MIRACLE . For achieving this 
goal, the consortium beneficiary AP will use silver halide (AgX) fiber bundle coupled to a line detector array (Figure 
12). Light will be guided to the diamond ATR probe via an internal silver halide fiber, reflected light will be spatially 
resolved collected by seven fibers surrounding the central one, and propagated onto a line array detector (MCT or 
pyroelectric). Although it is not possible to assign the different spectra to a specific position within the sample at 
a micrometer scale, differences between the areas in contact with the circular symmetric probe cone will be resolved 
in an imaging mode. Advantageously, the proposed probe prototype readily enables sterilization of the entire probe, 
thereby increasing the lifetime of the device.  
1.4.4 Data pre-processing and multivariate data analysis  
State-of-the-art 
MIR spectra of multi -constituent samples are highly complex due the superposition of the spectral features in 
biological samples. Considering in vivo diagnosis, spectra complexity increases significantly, and simple 
single peak or peak ratio evaluation is inadequate for diagnostic applications.  Therefore, it is essential to 
apply multivariate data analysis techniques assisting data interpretation and classification in spectroscopic 
biomedical diagnostics.64  
A prerequisite for multivariate classification of  spectral data is a separation of the corresponding chemical 
absorbance signals from unwanted interferences due to variations in sample thickness, noise, and scattering effects. 
Multivariate spectral pre-processing tools are used to suppress interfering signals and enhance chemical absorbance 
signatures65. Data pre-processing entails several steps: (i) estimation of the baseline; (ii) signal enhancement and 
noise suppression; and (iii) normalization. For example, the results demonstrated by UOULU (Figure 3) were 
based on the preprocessing models developed by the NMBU, such as Resonant Mie Scattering 
Correction (RMieSC) algorithm, and has included all three aforementioned steps7,9,10. 
 
64 Wang L and Mizaikoff B (2008) Application of multivariate data-analysis techniques to biomedical diagnostics based on mid-infrared spectroscopy, 
Anal Bioanal Chem 391:1641–1654. 
65 Zimmermann B and Kohler A (2013) Optimizing Savitzky -Golay parameters for i mproving spectral resolution and quantification in infrared 
spectroscopy, Appl Spectrosc 67: 892-902. 
Figure 12. Schematic view of the MIR -ATR arthroscope 
probe system comprising QCL-based light sources for broad 
wavelength coverage in the mid -infrared coupled via 
iBEAM into an AgX fiber or HWG, which propagates the 
MIR radiation into the diamond ATR tip. After evanescent 
field absorption, radiation is collected by a second AgX 
fiber/HWG and coupled onto an MIR detector. NOTE: 
The components in this scheme are not to scale! 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 26 of 96 
Data pre-processing is an important aspect in data analysis for establishing stable and reliable calibration 
models. Spectral fingerprints are multivariate signals with high collinearity between variables. Multivariate 
methods based on latent variables such as partial least -squares discriminant analysis (PLS -DA) are 
powerful method s for component identification schemes. PLS -DA is directly interpretative at 
biochemical level explaining the discrimination betw een different types of tissues via their chemical 
composition. Sparse PLS-DA methods for variable selection allow clinicians to validate calibration models by the 
identification of biochemical markers 66. After biological validation, additional and potentia lly even more efficient 
tools for classification such as artificial neural network (ANN), random forests, and support vector machines will 
be tested.  Moreover, by using multi -block methods, different data blocks (referring to different measurement 
methods that were applied at the same sample) can be integrated in one data model. This permits the construction 
of discrimination models that are built on multiple classifiers.  
MIRACLE pushing beyond the state-of-the-art 
Although the consortium has validated the  preprocessing models and multivariate methods for OA diagnostic 7,8 
there are number of challenges related to development of the QCL-based MIR-ATR probe. The UOULU proof-
of-concept was  based on FTIR MIR micro -spectroscopy, a methodology that differs substantially from the 
innovative QCL-based MIR-ATR probe proposed in MIRACLE . The different experimental settings the novel 
method will result in large differences regarding chemical signal properties, unwanted interfe rents, and general 
baseline issues. Therefore, the MIR-ATR arthroscope probe will require a new set of data pre -processing 
and data analysis approaches. The consortium beneficiary NMBU will develop further and refine the 
current models focusing on the nois e reduction and signal enhancement via optimization of pre -
processing parameters for ACL-based MIR-ATR data. These new models will be implemented in an easy-
to-use interface software facilitating the surgeon clinical routine. Furthermore, the developed models can be 
exploited to future biomedical applications which may use QCL-based MIR systems.  
1.4.1 Diagnostic methods for degenerative joint diseases  
State-of-the-art 
Currently, OA is mainly diagnosed based on communicated symptoms, clinical examination, radiography, MRI, 
and arthroscopy. Blood tests and synovial fluid analysis may be used to rule out other diseases such as rheumatoid 
arthritis. However, the current dia gnostic methods are not able to detect the earliest signs of OA . In 
radiography, several attempts have been made to accurately identify and grade the severity of OA, and it is usually 
assessed using the Kellgren and Lawrence (K&L) score67. Radiographic diagnosis is based mostly on the narrowing 
of the joint space during the course of cartilage degradation. The overall grades vary from 0 to 4 in order to 
determine OA severity. In addition to the radiography, MRI is able to reveal information on structure; ho wever, 
the resolution of clinical MRI devices limits the diagnostic potential for early OA diagnosis. Finally, arthroscopy is 
typically used after joint injuries to visually investigate the condition of different articular cartilage, and to conduct 
repair surgery. Although, arthroscopy shows the major damages in tissues, it does not allow the evaluation of the 
inner structures or biochemical composition of the tissues.  
Most likely, patients with joint injuries will develop OA without proper treatment at an  early stage. OA is one of 
the commonest joint diseases among people aged 65 and older. In addition, the impact of OA is multi-factorial 
being associated with a range of levels of disability severity from mild to severe . It is a fact that OA will 
generate an increasingly adverse socioeconomic impact in Europe due to the ageing population latest by 2030. OA 
manifests first as a molecular derangement (abnormal articular cartilage metabolism) followed by anatomic and/or 
physiological derangements (e.g. cartila ge degradation). As already stated earlier in this proposal (see sub -section 
1.3.1), MIR spectroscopy method is capable to direct assessment of the articular cartilage composition. UOULU 
have investigated the correlation between MIR spectra and the histopa thological grade of OA (OARSI 
grade) via human articular cartilage samples. Briefly, the OARSI system divides the OA into seven main grades 
(0-6), where healthy cartilage is graded as 0, and denuded cartilage is graded as 5; the highest grade 6 includes bone 
 
66 Karaman I, Nørskov NP, Yde CC, Skou Hedemann M, Bach Knudsen KE and Kohler A (2015) Sparse multi -block PLSR for biomarker discovery 
when integrating data from LC-MS and NMR metabolomics,  Metabolomics 11: 367-379. 
67 Hunsche E, Chancellor JVM and Bruce N (2001) The burden of arthritis and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory treatment. A European literature review, 
Pharmacoeconomics 19: 1-15. 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 27 of 96 
remodeling. The cluster images were obtained via Fourier transform infrared microspectroscopy (FTIR-MS) in the 
MIR region (Figure 2, Figure 3 and Figure 13). The spectra is obtained with spatial resolution of 21.6µm. This study 
hypothesized that the layered structure of articular cartilage could be observed from the cluster analyses images 
and that the particular cluster will concentrate on a certain OARSI grade (Figure 3).    
 
Figure 13. (A) Cluster images obtained using the carbohydrate region for clustering. The characteristic layered structure of AC can be  
observed in the cluster images. The OARSI grade is indicated above each sample. (B) Average spectra of each cluster. (C) The second 
derivative spectra of each cluster. Major differences between the second derivative spectra can be seen around the peak at 10 60 cm−1. 
The colors of the spectra correspond to the cluster colors.7 
These in vitro studies performed by UOULU clearly demonstrated that:  
▪ Structural changes caused by OA can be observed with both the uni- and multivariate analyses of the spectral 
data; 
▪ Partial Least-Squares regression analyses provide the laboratory proof -of-concept that OARSI grade can be 
predicted from MIR spectra; 
▪ OARSI grade can be predicted more accurately from the superficial layer than the deep layer; 
▪ A correlation between the collagen integrity and OARSI grade can be establish via MIR spectra analysis.  
MIRACLE pushing beyond the state-of-the-art 
The above results provide the laboratory proof -of-concept of the use of MIR-based system for real-time 
articular cartilage evaluation during arthroscopy. Although a significant number of samples were investigated, 
a further study with much larger sample size is required, as multivariate methods benefit greatly from a larger 
sample population. A larger number of samples will allow to establish better corre lation between the current 
systems used for OA diagnosis (OARSI system) with a potential new method based on MIR spectroscopy. It is 
important to establish such correlations to facilitate the acceptance of novel diagnostic methods by the medical 
community. However, it is worth to mention that OARSI grading system does not directly take into account the 
changes in collagen and PG content in articular cartilage during OA progression. Therefore, in -depth correlation 
might not be possible and a new grading syst em might be necessary. In MIRACLE work plan a large number 
of samples and experts on multivariate analysis methods will work side -by-side with orthopaedic 
surgeons to address the barrier of novel diagnostic methods.  
From the diagnostic perspective, current methods are mostly limited to structural analysis of articular cartilage and 
not capable of in -depth articular cartilage evaluation, which could detect early OA. In addition to reveal the 
chemical composition via th e tissue characteristic spectral properties, MIRACLE device will enable to detect 
the changes of the chemical composition associated to the molecular derangement which precede the 
OA and, therefore allowing early diagnosis and better repair strategies. This will generate high impact on 
therapeutic decision -making during arthroscopy, thus reducing the probability of OA progression resulting in 
reduced healthcare system costs and promoting well-being of the ageing population.  

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 28 of 96 
2. Impact
2.1 Expected impacts  
2.1.1 Overall focus and target outcome 
The concept behind the MIRACLE project addresses four key aspects, as described in Figure 14. First, MIRACLE 
efforts are directed to secure and reinforce the industrial leadership in biophotonics by developing new markets 
for three individual components: (i) innovative waveguide-integrated QCL-based MIR source, (ii) on -chip beam 
combiner (iBEAM), and (iii) AgX bundle coupled to a line detector for MIR probe imaging. Second, the integrated 
system will bring closer to market the first ever MIR -based arthroscopy system for OA diagnosis, increasing the 
European competitiveness of the medical industry related to diagnostic imaging system. Third, the project shall 
result in a substantial clinical impact towards articular cartilage diagnosis during arthroscopy surgery. Lastly, 
MIRACLE is conceived to promote more effective treatment of joint degenerative diseases (i.e. OA), improving 
patient prospects and decreasing the economic and societal burden associated to OA. In line with the expected 
impacts set for ICT -30-2017, MIRACLE envisages to translate the demonstrated results from UOULU, 
UULM and AP to the clinics, validating the novel MIR -based arthroscopy system via in vitro, ex vivo and in 
vivo studies.  
 
Figure 14. MIRACLE key elements for achieving impact 
2.1.2 Expected impacts set out in the work programme ICT-30-2017 
Expected Impact 1: Substantially improved and wider deployed in -depth diagnosis, and more effective 
treatment of age and life-style related diseases 
Currently, no devices/solutions for quantitative diagnosis of degenerative joint disease exist; therefore, 
the MIR-based arthroscope proposed in MIRACLE represents a substantial improvement on the current 
diagnostic tools used during arthroscopy. Screening method such as X-ray and MRI cannot indicate early stages 
of articular cartilage diseases i.e. when OA is diagnosed by X -ray or MRI, the situation is irreversible. Currently, 
patients are sen t to arthroscopy surgery with clinical joint pain and, therefore suspected of early stage OA  (this 
stage is mentioned as osteoarthritis/synovitis complex) . The initi al changes of articular cartilage degeneration 
consist of ‘leakage’ of proteoglycans (PGs) out of the cartilage without (yet) damage the collage network. The MIR-
ATR probe proposed by MIRACLE will be capable to measure the PGs and collagen amount in the ar ticular 
cartilage. This will substantially impact in the current evaluation method which is based on visual 
inspection and manual probing.  
According to the Committee on Technological Innovation in Medicine, identifying the changes/impact in numbers 
relating to new devices in any given period is virtually impossible, and it would be extremely difficult to trace their 
overall impact even for previous innovations68. Thus, it is not possible to provide exact metrics and concrete targets 
regarding the impact due to MIRACLE innovative solution. As an estimate, we assume the following scenario: (i) 
4 million knee arthroscopies are performed per year globally72, (ii) OA treatments costs 1,350-10,400€ per patient, 
(iii) MIRACLE can reach 5% of the global market in 5 years after the project (i.e. 200,000 knee arthroscopies), and 
(iv) the new diagnosis approach leads to savings of up to 50% in the direc t treatment costs (estimated by our 
surgeons). Considering this scenario, MIRACLE would generate 135 to 1,040 million € of savings per year 
worldwide. The cost savings indirect costs will be significantly higher: even assuming the known proportion of 
 
68 Gelijns AC et al. (1991) The Change Economics of Medical Technology, Committee on Technology Innovation Medicine, National Academic Press.  

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 29 of 96 
1:869, the savings in indirect costs would amount to 1.08 to 8.32 billion € worldwide. In addition to the economic 
impact, by bringing to market the first quantitative diagnostic tool for early detection of degenerative joint 
disease to be used during arthroscopic surgery, MIRACLE expects to achieve the follow impacts: 
i) Improve the intra-operative decisions: by providing accurate, real-time and reliable information, the orthopaedic 
surgeon will be able to make immediate decisions and actions during surgery. This will impact in better treatments 
for the patient (i.e. better repair during surgery). Furthermore, this can reduce the need for “re-surgery”, reducing 
considerably the number of costly surgeries.  
ii) Promote new repair strategies and rehabilitation programmes : by enabling (bio)chemical composition 
assessment of the joint, surgeons will understand better the early stages of degenerative joint diseases and be able 
to develop novel rep air strategies, which could shorte n recovery times and prevent disease progression more 
efficiently.  
iii) Improve patient quality of life and dec rease the health system burden:  in addition to being more common on 
people above 65 years, degenerative joint diseases such as OA have multifactorial consequences, from disability to 
comorbidity. B y enabling more effective treatment due to the early diagnosis and better repair strategies, 
MIRACLE expects to reduce the consequences related to OA. In particular, a reduction is expected in the number 
of visits to healthcare centres after the surgery.  
Expected Impact 2: Increased market presence in the Diagnostic and Analysis Imaging Systems and 
increased European competitiveness of the medical equipment industry 
MIRACLE will enable the consortium beneficiaries to implement cutting-edge solutions that have 
potential for high success in the global market of lasers (NP), beam combiners (UULM, NP), MIR-based 
probes (AP), Original Equipment Manufacturer ( OP), I CT (IRIS ) and arthroscopic instruments. The 
impact in the arthroscopic instruments market will be reflected after the project end via licensing of the new 
arthroscopy system to global partners for further clinical validation and commercialization (see 2.2.1.5 for details). 
These solutions will result in a novel diagnostic/analytical imaging system, primarily demonstrated for knee  
arthroscopy, which  will increase the market presence and competitiveness of the participating SMEs in their 
respective sectors. In particular, AP will expand its market to the medical equipment sector. The MIRACLE 
diagnostic concept is based on outcome results from ERC Star ting Grant project (UOULU) in addition to long -
term research and development investments from the partners NP, UULM and AP. MIRACLE will fill the gap 
between photonics high tech components and the medical industry by prototyping the MIR-ATR probe for 
imaging according to the requirements of ISO 13482:2016. Furthermore, MIRACLE will plan the clinical validation 
and future commercialisation of the first quantitative diagnostic tool to be used during arthroscopic surgery, thus 
increasing the competitiveness of  the European medical diagnostic and imaging equipment industry. Moreover, 
the project is expected to generate exploitable Intellectual Property Rights (IPR), and lead to the filing of patents 
on e.g. the iBEAM as an on -chip beam combiner for mid -infrared wavelengths, or relating to specificities of the 
MIR analytical system for detection of alteration in joint tissues and related algorithms that will allow OA diagnosis. 
This IPR will be exploited primarily by the consortium companies and the technology wil l be exploited 
both within Europe, the U.S. and global markets, thus contributing to increasing European presence in 
the Diagnostic and Analysis Imaging Systems market and medical equipment industry.  
2.1.3 Industrial Impact 
The primary exploitation goal of the MIRACLE outputs will be the future commercialization of products based 
on the devices and demonstrators validated within the project, as indicated below. The active involvement of four 
SMEs provides several routes to co mmercial exploitation in the period after the conclusion of the project. In 
addition to the final MIR -based arthroscopy system for diagnosis of degenerative joint diseases,  MIRACLE will 
take closer to market at least four new products as described below. I n this respect, the project is very well 
positioned. Industrial impact will also be generated through standardisation activities, led by the European 
Standardization body UNE. Standardization activities in MIRACLE are considered as a valuable tool for the 
exploitation of the project outcomes, by facilitating future replicability and widest use in the global market, and 
reducing market acceptance risks.  
 
69 Hunter DJ et al.  (2014) The individual and socioeconomic impact of osteoarthritis. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2014;10(7):437–41.  
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 30 of 96 
2.1.3.1 MIR-ATR arthroscopy system prototype (OP) 
The consortium beneficiary OP has many years of experience in developing electronics and software for the 
implementation of the novel sensing technologies. OP will be mainly responsible for the system’s prototyping 
and for preparing future commercialization. In addition to impact in terms of industrial leadership, the new 
technology and the corresponding future original equipment manufacturer (OEM) product will strengthen the 
activities of OP concerning medical sensing solutions . This research and development area is one of the 
strategic targets defined by OP’s management to transfer and expand the in -house infrared sensing knowledge, 
which was so far successfully used for other fields of application e.g. gas sensing. This will lead to a significant 
expansion of the company in the future. OP expects the project outcomes to lead to an increase in the sales 
volume in the order of single digit million Euros per year (see Table 10). This estimate is based on the return 
from sales of the system and the assumption of tens of sold devices per year (in the first years after market entry), 
with a sales price of approximately 200k Euros per unit sold.  
2.1.3.2 Integrated QCL-based MIR source for broad wavelength coverage (NP) 
The consortium beneficiary NP’s particular area of expertise is the production of laser sources , and is 
currently one of the world leading suppliers of lasers for gas sensing  applications. NP has already acquired 
significant experience in QCL processing, which will be used and extended in the project. Continuing innovation 
in laser materials and laser sources is essential to help maintaining European competitiveness at industrial level, by 
bringing some of the most important European component manufacture companies ahead of competition in 
important emerging markets. 
The global market for MIR lasers has a volume of approx. $475 million , and is expected to grow at a CAGR 
of 8.2% between 2014 and 2019, resulting in nearly $742.6 million by 2019.70  Not surprisingly, the recently emerged 
QCL technology is likewise considered a growing market (estimated at 8% in the coming years). Distributed 
feedback (DFB) QLCs dominate the market despite a very limited tuning range. Current alternative solutions 
have not developed towards the compatibility with available spectroscopy systems yet.  EC QCLs are  
commercially available largely for laboratory-based operation and research. However, such technology is currently 
solely developed by U.S. enterprises, with strong backing by defence programs.  
Considering the aspects above, NP is currently in a highly competitive position as a developer of laser sources for 
gas sensing applications. NP expects that waveguide integrated QCL based MIR sources implemented in 
MIRACLE will permit a significant extension of the current market for sensing in the order of 30 %, mainly 
due to the great potential of targeting molecules with broad absorption features , and also liquid sensing. NP is 
firmly committed to extend its field of business towards MIR sources with extended wavelength coverage.  
2.1.3.3 On-chip beam combiner – iBEAM (UULM and NP) 
UULM has pioneered and patented (WO2007030737) the MIRa -Guide® which is a single -mode waveguide 
designed for MIR absorption spectroscopy based on tuneable IR light sources. This novel waveguide technology 
is now commercially available via a German photonic s company called MG Optical Solutions. The iBEAM will 
use the similar waveguide structure than MIRa -Guide® but tailored for the QCL array developed in MIRACLE 
(see sub -section 2.1.3.2). After simulation, design, fabrication, and optimization of the iBEAM d evice 
structure and processing, mass production of the device (i.e., at a multi-wafer scale) will be transferred to 
project partner NP for iBEAM device commercialization, eventually as on-chip integrated and packaged 
solution with the QCL array light sourc e. A packaged solution (i.e. iBEAM with QCL array) should increase 
sales of QCLs by NP for end-users preferring a ready-to-use light source solution. The project results open up new 
markets to laser-based sensing and thus will contribute to strengthen NP’s  role as a technology leader as well as 
global market leader in the field of semiconductor lasers for gas sensing applications. 
2.1.3.4 AgX fiber bundle and arthroscope probe (AP) 
Optical fibre bundles coupled to line detectors for MIR probe imaging are another product arising from 
MIRACLE, and a component of the final arthroscopy system.  The beneficiary AP is the world leader in the 
development, production and supply of MIR chalcogenide and polycrystalline (AgX) specialty optical 
 
70www.bccresearch.com/market-research/photonics/mid-infrared-lasers-technologies-applications-markets-report-pho016a.html 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 31 of 96 
fibres, spectroscopy fibre probes and fibre bundles.  AP provides the production to world leading 
manufacturers of MIR systems, which is guided by ISO 9001:2008 (a certified supplier of development and 
manufacturing of special optical fibres and various fibre systems). AP has over 30 years accumulated experience in 
technology that allows it to design, develop, and manufacture optical fibre solutions of a broad spectral range (from 
200nm to 18µm), including AgX optical fibres, AgX probes and fibre bundles for industrial and original equipment 
market (OEM) market. 
To reduce barriers for commercialization of the system, during the proj ect, AP will satisfy all demands for 
commercialisation in accordance with ISO 13482, including sterilization (by the method to be selected during the 
project). Success of commercialization will depend on preliminary trials of the arthroscope probe and the accuracy 
of the spectral information to be obtained. Coordination of efforts with the partners during initial trials will ensure 
iterative optimisation loops and achieve best readouts. AP is deeply interested in the technical development and 
production of the probe and is committed to add 2-3 working positions within 3 years after project end dedicated 
to this probe manufacturing . AP will promote the new product , participating in medical exhibitions , and will 
collaborate with key medical specialists to opti mise parameters for the future manufacturing of the system. If the 
project is funded, it is AP’s vision that Europe will be leading this technology worldwide, taking into account that 
demand for medical diagnostics will grow much faster than other segments on the market. AP will be the probe 
supplier in the MIRACLE final product, and is looking forward to expand their market share towards 
medical equipment manufacturing. 
2.1.3.5 Software interface (IRIS) 
In MIRACLE, IRIS will provide a supercomputing cloud-enabled platform to allow the digitalisation from 
the MIR-ATR arthroscopy system and to commercialize it through a Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) business model. 
This has the advantage of offering affordable, high performance computing t o end -users for high 
processing power and speeds in novel sensing technologies such as the MIRACLE OA diagnosis system. As 
we are dealing with medical inspection equipment, our software design, features and functionality are the most 
important factors. Dur ing the development of the project, IRIS will structure the value proposition of the 
developed software. In addition, IRIS will  draw up the product datasheets that will outline the key information, 
and will also create software brochures outlining applicat ions (the applications that have been validated in this 
project and additional planned applications to quickly serve in the commercialisation phase), highlighting the 
benefits, etc. The services that support the software will also be clearly defined (maintenance service, customisation 
services, upgrades to the software and models), consultancy based on system use and data understanding. The 
software interface will also be a further vehicle to build the MIRACLE brand identity: this aspect will be developed 
in collaboration with the other industrial partners . On-line monitoring of the process is expected to reduce the 
cycle time by 30-40% leading to considerable time savings and prediction accuracy.  
2.1.4 Scientific Impact  
The expected scientific impacts of MIRACLE cover three distinct areas: photonics, OA/knee injuries, and 
multivariate data analysis. Technological innovations in the field of photonics will allow the integration of the 
developed components into a diagnostic tool for joint degenerative disease enabling sensitivity, reliability, and 
reproducibility in an examination during the arthroscopy surgery. The academic beneficiaries will contribute to the 
dissemination and exploitation of the research results via high -impact sci entific publications, presentations at 
scientific conferences and education of engineers, scientists and medical students and future -to-be orthopaedic 
surgeons. The main scientific breakthroughs, the target scientific communities, and examples of journals for 
publications are listed in Table 5.  
Table 5: Scientific expected impact during MIRACLE 
Scientific breakthroughs  Target scientific 
community 
Examples of peer-reviewed journals for 
publications 
▪ QCL-based MIR light source with broad 
wavelength coverage 
▪ On-chip beam combiner (iBEAM) 
▪ Miniaturised MIR-ATR diamond probe 
▪ MIR-ATR arthroscope probe imaging 
Photonics; 
Biophotonics; 
Biomedical 
diagnostics 
ACS Photonics, Journal of Biomedical Optics, 
Optics Express, Journal of Lightwave 
Technology, Nature Photonics, Applied Physics 
Letters, Optics Express, Analytical Chemistry, 
Analyst 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 32 of 96 
▪ OA early diagnosis via MIR spectroscopy 
▪ MIR-ATR arthroscope probe for diagnosis 
Orthopaedic 
surgeons; 
Medical Physicists 
Arthritis and Rheumatism, The American Journal 
of Sports Medicine, Osteoarthritis and Cartilage, 
Journal of Orthopeadic Research 
▪ Development of a model for discriminant 
analysis on FTIR for OA diagnosis 
▪ FTIR model for QCL-based MIR-ATR data 
Chemometrics; 
Spectroscopy; 
Analytical chemistry 
Analyst, Analytical Chemistry, Chemometrics and 
Intelligent Laboratory Systems, Journal of 
Biophotonics, Applied Spectroscopy 
2.1.5 Societal and Economic Impact  
The impact of OA on patients is multifactorial, including societal and economic burden  (Figure 15). The 
global prevalence of hip and knee OA is approaching 5% and is projected to increase as the population ages. The 
most recent update of the Global Burden of Diseases figures (GBD 2013) es timated that 242 million people 
suffer from OA 3. However, this number is likely to be underestimated of the true global burden , since only hip 
and knee were considered in the study.     
From the societal point of view, OA has all the hallmarks of a serious disease. OA causes acute and chronic 
pain, disability in different levels, fatigue and premature ageing with loss of functioning in society. Hip 
and knee OA are ranked 13th globally for years of life lost due to disability (YLDs). As mentioned in the Excellence 
section above, the trends in OA YLDs increased 75% from 1990 to 2013 3. Additionally, OA was reported to be 
the 4 th fastest increasing condition, behi nd diabetes and dementia. Although OA is considered an aging -related 
disease, it is estimated that, of those with OA-attributable activity limitations, 13.8 million people are under the age 
of 65 years old 3. Furthermore, OA is associated to increased co -morbidities and other chronic diseases.  
Common comorbidities in OA include cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, obesity, lung disease, chronic pain and depression.  
Economically, OA is associated with increased health services utilization. Patients with OA have higher out of 
pocket health-related expenditure, with the average direct costs of OA per patient  estimated to be in the range 
of 1,330€ and 10,452€ per year4. A U.S. elderly population-based study demonstrated that patients with OA had 
on average 6 more annual physician visits and 3.8 more non -physician visits than patients without any form of 
OA4. The same study revealed that patients with OA had 28% more hospital stays. If OA is not correctly diagnosed 
and treated in knees or hips, the patient will need knee or hip joint replacements. Hospital expenditures regarding 
knee replacements were estimat ed to be $28.5billion/year in the U.S. alone. Additionally, job-related indirect 
costs due to loss of productivity were estimated to be $3.4 to $13.2 billion per year3.  
MIRACLE proposes a diagnostics device which will provide accurate information on the molecular 
(bio)chemical composition of articular cartilage.  Such advanced diagnostic methodology is anticipated to 
improve early OA diagnosis and post -traumatic assessment of tissues with better accuracy, reliability, and 
reproducibility compared to currently applied methods.  In addition, as stated earlier, alternative technologies for 
quantitative diagnosis during arthroscopy do not exist at the moment. The total impact of a novel technology on 
the health care costs is much broader than the price of the equipment, and may include offsetting savings as well 
as indi rect costs. At this stage, it is not possible to estimate exact figures related to the expected societal and 
economic impacts. Our surgeons expect that MIRACLE solution will reduce the recovery times (i.e. hospital stays 
and physician visits) in 50%, resulting in a significant reduction of the direct costs of OA per patient. In addition, 
by enabling more effective diagnosis and treatment, MIRACLE also expects to promote individual wellbeing and 
prevent OA consequences (i.e., chronic pain, disability, comorbidities due to OA).   
 
Figure 15. Societal and economic burden associated to OA3. * Estimates of prevalence on populations of adults with OA. **Globally. 
***Estimated in U.S. (2013). 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 33 of 96 
2.1.6 Barriers/obstacles and activities required to achieve the expected impacts 
Table 6: List of the barrier/obstacles to impact and required activities 
Barriers/obstacles  Strategy to overcome the barriers/obstacles 
New conditions by European Regulation on 
Medical Devices may affect requirements for 
the MIRACLE dev ice, in particular regarding 
definitions, scopes and additional evidence 
required  
With the expected approval in 2017 of the new European Regulation on 
Medical Devices, new regulatory requirements must be taken in 
consideration, especially on classifications rules, conformity assessment 
by third party and new requirements for performance  evaluation. 
Monitoring developments in the regulatory framework and implications 
of new regulations on MIRACLE outcomes will allow adaptation. A 
Standards body (UNE) was included in the Consortium.  
A competitor introduces similar solution before 
MIRACLE can be ready for market  
Monitoring of the developments on the market during the project  
The consortium members are not able to reach 
an agreement on the specific conditions for 
commercialising the solution. 
The consortium was designed so that there are no major overlaps leading 
to potential conflicts of interest exploitation. A Business Plan will be 
detailed and a commercialisation agreeme nt drafted between the 
partners. 
The solution does not match the needs of the 
end-users  
Orthopaedic (human and veterinarian) surgeons (end -users) were 
included in the Consortium, ensuring their perspective will be taken into 
account in the co-design of the new arthroscopy system  
Surgeons (end-users) reluctant to use the new 
diagnostic method, i.e., changing clinical 
practices related to arthroscopy surgery. 
Diagnostic value of the developed MIR -ATR probe, including 
discriminant analysis protocol, will be demonstrated in vivo; stro ng 
commitment of MIRACLE orthopaedic surgeon partners to disseminate 
the results to the target community, working as Key Opinion Leaders  
The production costs become too high and 
render the product too expensive for the buyer 
The production and component costs are taken into account already in 
the design phase during the project  
2.1.7 Contribution to European innovation capacity and integration of new knowledge 
MIRACLE will integrate new knowledge from the  RTD partners into the participating SMEs, improving their 
innovation portfolio and competitiveness in the European and global markets, by delivering innovation in the form 
of an arthroscopy probe i nto the medical industry market. IPR generated within the p roject will be integrated 
within the participating companies and the European Diagnostic and Analysis Imaging Systems industry, 
promoting European capacity and leadership in the sector. SMEs represent the industrial backbone of Europe, but 
are generally no t able to bear the significant costs of laser source and photonic system development fully. 
MIRACLE involves four SMEs, each contributing to a different aspect of the technological developments within 
the project. The direct involvement of these partners in the project enhances the consortium’s capability for rapid 
innovation and exploitation, and enables the companies to benefit from the synergies generated by the coordinated 
research approach. All industrial partners are convinced the proposed work can largely contribute to their future 
businesses and their respective management boards are firmly committed to the project.  The consortium will 
implement efforts for integration and dissemination in relevant EU networks.
2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
A key objective of research supported by public funding is that it should lead to the exploitation and valorisation 
of research results, which goes beyond the mere production and dissemination of new scientific knowledge. As 
research carried out in MIRACLE aims to develop market-oriented solutions, the Consortium will implement from 
the onset a strategy to lead to its successful commercial exploitation, with the contributions of IRIS, NP, AP, OP, 
assisted by UCP, UNE and PF. Reflecting the importance of the exploitation of results to this Consortium, a 
specific Work Package (WP7) will be dedicated to planning and executing actions for the communication , 
dissemination (Tasks 7.1, 7.2) and exploitation of the project results (Tasks 7.3, 7.4), implemented in close 
coordination with standardisation actions (Task 7.5).  Task (7.2) is dedicated to engage all stakeholders of the 
project, a crucial step to validate and maximise the future impact of MIRACLE’s outcomes. Task 7.3 will oversee 
the protection of Foreground Knowledge arising from MIRACLE and Task 7.4 will focus on defining and 
implementing strategies for its exploitation by the partners. To ensure the project reaches its maximum potential, and 
its results will be used both within and after the project, it is critical to outline and execute a lean Exploitation Plan. 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 34 of 96 
2.2.1 Dissemination and exploitation of results  
The MIRACLE Consortium will deploy an integrated plan to ensure high quality innovative research results, 
coherent and collaborative dissemination of the results, as well as focused and market -oriented valorization of 
project outcomes. The project adheres to the principles of innovative research for a cost-effective, competitive and 
innovative healthcare system by developing and providing cost-effective solutions for diagnostics of OA. 
By providing innovative photonics-based solutions through the development of an arthroscopy system based on 
an MIR-ATR catheter probe, supporting health professionals and patients with OA, MIRACLE will contribute to 
increase the competitiveness of the OA d iagnostic devices sector and beyond. After the project, the arthroscopy 
system will be adapted for use in other joints, other clinically relevant situations and in veterinarian settings. 
Innovation will also be pursued in the ICT sector to ensure a fully interactive and user-friendly device is developed 
and commercialized after project completion. MIRACLE will also demonstrate the benefits of deeply involving 
orthopaedic surgeons who, together with patients, will be involved in the co-design of this novel technology. 
The following aspects will support the Consortium to ensure the high -quality implementation and deployment of 
the integrated framework: 
• Expertise: A world-class interdisciplinary team will work to maximize the project results. The team has proven academic, 
technical, clinical, regulatory and industrial experience. Its track record of numerous valorization projects in different sectors 
will reinforce the Consortium; 
• Technology: Documentation and workflow tools will support the project implementation; 
• Process: Definition of complex cross-organizational processes to ensure that WPs are visible, documented and available. 
A framework for regulatory app roval (Task 1.4, INEB, and AP) and standardization (Task 7.5, UNE)  will guide the 
consortium from the onset; 
• Information: Expert insights into numerous projects and all phases (Research, Dissemination and Valorization) will ensure 
right decisions are being taken. The team includes clinicians and researchers with vast experience in the implementation of 
strategies and technologies for the healthcare system. 
The Consortium is committed to a coherent valorization strategy, based on technology development and  
commercialization activities that include: 
• Active and collaborative engagement of technology-based SMEs: NP, AP, OP and IRIS; 
• Collaborative R&D&I between public and private research institutions, public health system institutions and 
private industry; 
• Implementation assistance; 
• Strategic participation in IP aggregation and IP exchange platforms. 
2.2.1.1 Target stakeholders 
The Consortium will establish and foster contact with several MIRACLE stakeholder communities – the healthcare 
system, public authorities and policy makers, and also orthopaedic surgeons (equine and human) , patients, 
diagnostic device development technolog ists, ICT development specialists, providers of training on the use of 
arthroscopes  - to engage them from an initial stage of the project and ensure a n end-user focused and market 
aligned technical development of each product and the final MIR -based arthr oscopy system . The following 
stakeholders have already been identified, and a full list of relevant stakeholders will be updated during the project 
(T7.2). The stakeholders will be specifically targeted to ensure the right target groups will receive the co rrect 
information set and the consortium will receive the specific feedback/information it needs. The target sectors, 
stakeholders and potential impact of the MIRACLE system are listed in Table 7. 
Table 7. MIRACLE stakeholders and the potential impact the project beyond the consortium  
Sector Stakeholder Project Impact 
Policy 
makers  
Local, national and 
European. 
Regulatory bodies 
New diagnostic system that will facilitate the design and implementation of 
clinical decisions and medical guidelines to reduce the impact and high 
economic burden to society associated to both working disability and 
treatment costs of OA, an ageing related condition 
Public 
authorities  
Hospitals, primary care 
medical centres, health 
managers 
Improved services and decision support systems for the management of OA 
and to address the impact of joint injuries. 
Reduced costs of care and of treatment of OA or joint injuries. 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 35 of 96 
Healthcare  Orthopaedic surgeons, 
patients, patient 
organisations  
Improved OA diagnosis and clinical decision -making. Reduced adverse 
implications of OA and joint injury. Improved management and quality of life 
for patients with OA 
R&D&I Research institutes and 
R&D companies 
Improved technologies and processes that can be adapted and taken up by the 
R&D&I institutions in this sector  
Market  Medical device companies  (i) New markets; (ii) New customer base  
2.2.1.2 Dissemination Plan 
The MIRACLE Dissemination Plan will raise awareness of the project outputs to all relevant stakeholder groups 
(WP7). In order to maximise the impact of the obtained results, MIRACLE will create and foster close links with 
other groups in similar sectors, future end-users and key opinion leaders, ensuring that its outcomes are assimilated 
by the industrial and healthcare communities. The communication plan is tailored to the needs of various audiences, 
focusing on how the message is perceived by them. The project will be implemented in the scope of the public 
policy perspective of EU research and innovation funding, aiming to generate value for money from the investment 
of public funding. This strategy will ensure that the general public not only benefits from the outputs of the project, 
but also is well informed of them. Moreover, to ensure all new knowledge is integrated and contributes towards 
the increase of innovation capacity in Europe, MIRACLE will: (i) disseminate its good practices to similar project 
consortia; (ii) ensure the communication and incorporation of new knowledge within the consortium, creating a 
cross-border innovation cluster in MIR-based systems for analysis soft tissue and degenerative joint diseases. 
The dissemination strategy during and beyond the project was designed to ensure transparent information access, 
while respecting all confidentiality and IPR management issues. At project start, a calendar of events (e.g. 
conference attendance, workshops and seminars organizations and meetings) will be detailed to e nsure the 
dissemination of results via the appropriate routes. This working document will be used to implement project 
dissemination and will be updated for strategy planning in M12, M24 and M36. The dissemination plan summary 
is shown in Table 8. The H2020 guidelines for Open Access publishing will be followed and open access costs are 
budgeted for. A combination of Gold and Green Access strategies wil l be followed to maximize dissemination. 
The consortium will ensure that the publications can be read online, downloaded and printed and take every effort 
to give additional rights to copy, distribute, search, link and mine to allow a wide access to the publications. 
Table 8. MIRACLE dissemination plan summary. 
Type of 
dissemination 
Target 
Audience 
Where Desired 
outcome 
Partner(s) 
involved 
Manuscripts for 
peer reviewed 
scientific journals 
Technical 
Scientific 
community 
ACS Photonics, Journal of Biomedical 
Optics, Optics Express, Nature Photonics, 
Applied Physics Letters, Optics Express, 
Analytical Chemistry 
3-5 papers/year 
during the 
project 
UOULU,  UULM, 
UEF, NMBU  
Manuscripts for 
peer reviewed 
scientific journals  
Medical 
community 
Arthritis and Rheumatism, The American 
Journal of Sports Medicine, Osteoarthritis 
and Cartilage, Journal of Orthopeadic Res. 
1-2 papers/year 
during the 
project 
KUH, UU, INEB, 
UEF  
Presentations at 
international 
conferences  
Scientific 
community  
Conference of the International Society for 
Clinical Spectroscopy, European 
Conference on the Spectroscopy of 
Biological Molecules, Conference on 
Chemometrics in Analytical Chemistry 
Minimum of 2 
conference/ year 
UOULU,  UULM, 
UEF, NMBU 
Presentations at 
international 
conferences  
Medical 
community 
Veterinary 
community 
Annual meeting of Orthopaedic research 
society, Word congress on osteoarthritis, 
International Cartilage Research Society, 
European College of Veterinary Surgeons 
Minimum of 1 
conference/ year 
KUH, UU, INEB, 
UEF  
Presentation in 
fairs/exhibitions 
Technology 
industry 
Photonics West, Sensor & Test, TDLS, 
FLAIR, ACHEMA, Laser Photonics 
Minimum of 2 
events/year 
NP, AP, OP, IRIS 
PhD thesis  Scientific 
community 
Universities involved in the project Minimum of 2 
PhD theses  
UOULU,  UULM, 
UEF, NMBU 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 36 of 96 
2.2.1.3 Exploitation plan 
The MIRACLE exploitation plan (Table 9) will be continuously updated and will be managed in accordance to the 
IPR valorisation strategies and markets identified and detailed in the final Business Plan. For instance, 
commercialization needs will be continuously assessed to ensure that short and medium -term commercialization 
goals and requirements are met for the target application and for future applications of the technology. One 
important aspect of the exploitation plan is to be up-to-date with the new European Regulation on Medical Devices 
regarding the MIRACLE solution, in particular regarding definitions, scopes an d additional evidence required. 
With the expected approval in 2017 of the new European Regulation on Medical Devices , new regulatory 
requirements must be taken in consideration, especially on, classifications rules, conformity assessment by third 
party (involvement of a Notified Body instead of sole responsibility of the manufacturer) and new requirements 
for performance evaluation (performance evaluation plan and clinical performance studies). The developments in 
MIRACLE will occur inside the 5 years’ transitional period for the new regulation. Due to this scenario, its 
regulatory roadmap (WP1) will comprise all necessary provisions to guarantee compliance with current and future 
regulatory requisites. Currently, in Europe, arthroscopy probes are classified as a Medical Device Class I 
(sterile/measuring), and its development must be performed in compliance with the legal and regulatory framework 
set by Medical Device Directive 93/42/EEC, which sets out the rules and essential requirements to be fulfilled by 
the manufacture during its development, to place the product under Clinical Investigation and finally on the market. 
Table 9. MIRACLE exploitation activities summary. 
Partners Key activities during the project with regards to exploitation goals 
UCP  Monitor external IP and competitors (via patent survey and other relevant databases ). Detailed patent 
surveys at M3 and M27. 
INEB, AP, 
UNE 
Definition of the regulatory path for each specific technology and its target applications (as planed in 
WP1). Standardization issues (WP7) 
UCP, all Internal progress survey to assess exploitation potential (M12, M24) 
NP Business plan as supplier QCL-based MIR light source for broad wavelength coverage (WP2, M31) 
UULM, NP  Business plan for iBEAM as an on-chip beam combiner for mid-infrared wavelengths (M31) 
AP Business plan as supplier AgX fiber bundle and MIR-ATR arthroscope probe (related to WP3, M31) 
IRIS Business plan as supplier of software interface (related to WP4, M48) 
OP Business plan as supplier of the integrated MIR-ATR arthroscopy device (related to WP5, M48) 
UCP, OP Business plan for commercialisation of MIR-based arthroscopy device (M48) 
UOULU, 
UULM  
Further research of the use of the MIR-ATR miniaturized probe for other in-depth tissue evaluation, e.g. 
cancer. Potential spin-offs for exploitation of future uses of the technology.  
2.2.1.4 Valorisation chain 
The valorisation chain within the MIRACLE project is illustrated in Figure 16, involving the development steps 
planned in the lifetime of the project, resulting in prototype to be demonstrated ex vivo and in vivo in equine and 
human subjects during real arthroscopy surgery. In particular, UCP will act as enabler (WP7) to de-risk early-
stage developments, perform any necessary due diligence, and assist in advancing promising technologies towards 
the market, ensuring that not only development abide to standardisation (assisted by UNE) and regulatory 
requirements, but also that suitable commercialisation strategies are developed and the MIRACLE business plan 
finalised - including valuation, commercial & marketing analysis and planning, pricing, sales forecasting (WP7, 
UCP). 
  
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 37 of 96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16. MIRACLE valorization chain 
  

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 38 of 96 
2.2.1.5 MIRACLE Business Case Plan 
Background IPR and access rights 
Background information and knowledge (including patents, databases, etc.) held by the partners prior to their 
accession to the EC grant agreement, as well as any IPR which are needed for carrying out the project or for using 
foreground held by the consorti um, is defined in the proposal preparation phase (pre -Grant Agreement). The 
current status of the Background being brought to the project by the consortium is listed in Table 10. Access to 
Background that is, or will be found to be, necessary for the implementation of the project will be granted royalty 
free and background needed to use the results of the project wil l be provided either royalty free or under fair and 
reasonable conditions.  
Table 10. Background- information and knowledge brought into the project 
Short 
name 
Background information and knowledge brought to 
the project 
Foreground t o which the background will 
contribute (WP) 
UOULU 
 
Deep pathological understanding of tissue-level changes 
taking place in osteoarthritis and joint injuries.  
Deep knowledge of physical interactions between 
infrared light and articular cartilage. 
Demonstration and validation in clinical settings 
(WP6) 
UULM Mid-infrared sensing technology applied in biomedical 
scenarios, integration and miniaturization of optical 
systems, and thin -film waveguide technology.  iBEAM 
will be based on UULM patent WO 2007030737.  
iBEAM development, ATR arthroscope probe 
development, prototype system development, and 
support during system application in pre-clinical 
and clinical scenarios (WP2, WP3, WP6) 
UEF Vast experience (over 20 years) in cartilage and bone 
research with focus on quantitative physical measuring 
techniques, such as infrared spectroscopy, with 
applications in in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo studies. 
Lead on Demonstration and validation in clinical 
settings (WP6) and responsibility of Ethics 
concerning samples and living subjects (WP1)  
NMBU Spectral preprocessing 
Multivariate data analysis 
Data analysis, including data preprocessing and 
discrimination models (WP4). Optimization of data 
acquisition in prototype development (WP5) 
KUH Vast clinical and scientific knowledge in the treatment of 
osteoarthritis and other joint injuries. 
Clinical protocol development (WP1) and testing 
prototype applicability with human patients (WP6)   
UU Expertise in Veterinary (equine) arthroscopic surgery, 
expertise in application and validation of new 
arthroscopic tools in equine patients (arthroscope guide 
intra-articular ultrasound, optical coherence 
tomography, near infrared spectroscopy and indention 
Validation of the MIR-probe in the real (equine) 
patient before application in a live human patient. 
Data for improving routine clinical applicability of 
prototype (WP6) 
NP Devices will be based on NP proprietary technology: 
This includes Trade Secret MIR technology as well as 
patented MIR technology based on e.g. US20040865036 
or EP1766740 (“TUNEABLE UNIPOLAR LASER”) 
Integrated QCL-based MIR source for broad 
wavelength coverage (WP2) 
OP Development and manufacturing of laser-based sensing 
solutions incl. electronics, mechanics and software 
Prototype development (WP5) 
IRIS Software development capacities, decision support 
concepts, tools and integration in the user interface. 
Database driven web portals and User Interfaces. 
Knowledge in design and integrated automation 
hardware technologies (WP4) 
AP Fiber optic solutions. US7956317 Fibre Optic Probe; 
US6564587 Meth od of producing an optical fiber by 
gathering material from a molten bat; US09944825 
Optical fiber and method of producing; EP1184339 
Optische Faser und Herstellungsverfahren für eine 
optische Faser 
Development of MIR-ATR arthroscopy probe 
(WP3) 
INEB Expertise in communication and dissemination. Dissemination and exploitation activities (WP7) 
UNE Expertise in standardization and membership on 
European and International Standards Organizations. 
Standardization activities (WP7) 
FP 
 
Cluster in photonics with established dissemination 
channels for the photonics components. 
Dissemination activities (WP7) 
UCP Expertise in technology knowledge transfer. Dissemination and exploitation activities (WP7) 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 39 of 96 
Business case plan overall 
The MIRACLE exploitation plan ( Figure 17) will be continuously updated, detailed,  and will be managed in 
accordance to the IPR valorisation routes and the market analysis performed, and will result in the final Business 
Plan. Each consortium partner has distinct and complementary, non-overlapping roles in the value chain 
for the MIRACLE device (Tabela 11). The expected turnover 5 years from the project end is estimated in Tabela 
11. The MIR-based arthroscopy device is expected to be available in its final form 6 to 12 months after the project 
ends (Figure 6). Assuming that the European Union (EU) comprises approx. 15,000 hospitals 71, we estimate the 
expected turnover based on sales for 5% of the EU hospitals. This number is a very conservative estimate 
considering that it does not take into account: (i) private clinics, which in the beginning may be the first 
adopters due to usually higher budgets, (ii) veterinarian hospitals and large animals veterinarian clinics, (iii) new 
market opportunities that the novel photonics components will open, and (iv) potential for sales worldwide, e.g. 
AP is producing for export >60% of fiber products. In order to prepare for future CE Mark approval and Market 
Access, this project will entail additional product development, design and assembly of the MIR-based arthroscopy 
device and the demonstration of its clinical applicability via real arthroscopy surgery in equines (UU) and human 
subjects (KUH). 
The contribution and guidance of UCP and the input by the SMEs will ensure correct validation and commercial 
focus for future exploitation of the project outcomes. In summary, NP will be the supplier of the QCL-based MIR 
source, AP will be responsible for the production of the MIR-ATR arthroscope probe, IRIS will be responsible to 
design and develop the software for analysis and readout of the probe measurements, OP will be responsible for 
the assembly of the MIR-based arthroscopy device. The MIRACLE consortium aims at commercializing the final 
MIR-ATR based system via optimized commercialisation agreements. The MIRACLE solution can be delivered 
as a ready-to-use medical device or as a sub-OEM system, which can be additionally integrated into already existing 
proprietary housing/other devices of potential commercialization companies. The MIRACLE diagnostic device is 
expected to reach the market in different sectors including orthopaedics, trauma, sports medicine, and veterinarian. 
Due to this sizeable market potential, the consortium business strategy is not to commit the licensing to a single 
commercialization partner during the proposal phase, but to evaluate the most profitable and beneficial 
agreement(s) for all partners involved during the project during the project. In addition to four market savvy SMEs, 
MIRACLE has invited highly reputed experts with experience with global medical equipment manufacturers to 
join the Advisory Board, who will ensure that the project is driven towards commercialization. NP, AP, OP, and 
IRIS will be the suppl iers of these commercializing companies on exclusivity terms to be specified within 
Commercialization Agreements to be drawn at project end, and in parallel with the final version of the Business Plan. 
 
Figure 17. Representative scheme for MIRACLE exploitation plan.  
 
 
 
71 http://www.hope.be/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/79_2009_OTHER_Hospitals-in-27-Member-States-of-the-European-Union-eng.pdf 
Technology Production Commercialisation
Initially	Europe,	
then	US	after	FDA	
approval
Clinical	validation,	CE	Mark
SUPPLIERS
(QCL-based	MIR	source,	AgX fibre
bundles,	probe,	electronics,	software)
Marketing	and	Distribution
Development
Design	and	
prototype
Partner	distributors
as	needed
Suppliers	of	components	of	
arthroscopy	system	to
Small	series
MIRACLE	RTDs
and	SMEs Commercialisation
partner(s)

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 40 of 96 
Table 11. MIRACLE industrial partners, its key activities and role in the value chain 
Key 
partners  
Key activities  Role in the value chain after 
MIRACLE completion 
Expected turnover 5 years 
from the project end 
NP Responsible for development and 
implementation of QCL-based MIR 
source for defined-specific channels in 
the 1800-1000 cm-1 range (WP2) 
Supplier of the QCL-based MIR 
source to future 
commercialisation partners 
3.75 million € (one unit per 
system  5k€/unit  750 
hospitals only in Europe) 
AP Miniaturization of a MIR-ATR 
arthroscope probe coupled with AgX 
fiber bundle (WP3) 
Supplier of the MIR-ATR 
arthroscope probe to future 
commercialisation partners 
13.5-20.2 million € (2-3 MIR-
ATR arthroscope probe per 
hospital  9k€/unit  750 
hospitals only in Europe) 
UULM Responsible for iBEAM development 
and prototyping (WP2) 
Supplier of iBEAM via licensing 
agreements with NP 
Via licensing to NP (based on 
sales by NP) 
OP Development of the primary housing 
and interfaces of the components 
including all the electronics (WP5).  
Supplier of the OEM sub-
system to future 
commercialisation partners 
150 million € (one unit per 
system  200k€/unit  750 
hospitals only in Europe) 
IRIS Responsible for the interface software 
development based on the multivariate 
models (WP4)  
Supplier of the software system 
to future commercialisation 
partners 
18.7 million € (Software license 
costs 25k€/year  average of 
750 hospitals only in Europe) 
UOULU, 
NMBU 
Responsible for validation of the 
diagnostic method and multivariate 
models (WP4, WP6) 
Investigate the applicability of 
the models to other medical 
cases 
Not applicable. 
UU, 
KUH, 
UEF 
Responsible for demonstration in 
clinical settings via real arthroscopic 
surgery in equines and humans (WP6)  
Training orthopaedic (equine 
and human) surgeons to use the 
device   
Not applicable. 
Product description and business opportunity 
MIRACLE will de velop, validate and bring closer to market the first MIR -based arthroscopy system for OA 
diagnosis. In addition to this specific product/application, the project will develop new markets for three individual 
components of the final assembled product: (i) a  novel waveguide-integrated QCL-based MIR source, (ii) an on -
chip beam combiner (iBEAM), and (iii) an AgX bundle coupled to line detectors for MIR probe imaging. A further 
coupled product will be the software for analysis and readout of the probe measurements and respective interface 
with the user. After project end, innovation will be pursued in the ICT sector to ensure a fully interoperative system 
(data communication with healthcare systems) and user -friendly device is developed and commercialized after 
project completion. The arthroscopy probe system will be adapted for use in other joints, other clinically relevant 
settings and for veterinarian use, in particular for horses. This will expand the market share and open new market 
for all SMEs involved.  
Market opportunity 
The rising of sports and heavy exercises, high physical activities among the young generation, and rising outdoor 
activities has led to an increase in the number of cases of articular injuries, thus accelerating the arthroscopy 
market growth. Furthermore, minimally invasive surgeries such as arthroscopy became very popular due to the 
reduction of the recovery time for the patient along with small risk of infection. This popularity has had a clear 
impact on the growth of the arthroscopic d evice market globally. As a result, outpatient care covers the major 
share of the market, and is estimated to grow high CAGR of 7.5% in the forecast period.  Innovations, 
continuous growth in the corporate agreements, and the extensive use of arthroscopic d evices across various 
industries are further boosting market growth. However, the high cost of instruments and unfavorable 
reimbursement policies are restraining factors in the growth of this market.  
The overall world market for medical technologies was approximately USD 375 billion in 2015, and was expected 
to grow in 2020 up to USD 477 billion, with an annual growth rate of 4.93% and a total growth of USD 102 billion. 
Moreover, in 2014, medical imaging was among the five highest-selling segments with around USD 36 billion. In 
2020, the annual growth in the segment of devices for medical imaging is expected to be 2.3% (up to USD 40.9 
billion.). The arthroscopy devices market is an important segment in the orthopaedic devices market, and 
arthroscopes and arthroscopic hand instruments are its largest sub -segments, followed by power shaver devices. 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 41 of 96 
An estimated 4 million knee arthroscopic surgery are conducted globally72. Due to the continuous growth and aging 
of global population, there will be a steady demand for both emerging as well as established arthroscopy devices. 
The arthroscopic devices market has emerged as one of the attractive industries in the medical equipment 
sector73. Global arthroscopy market was valued at $4 billion in 2015 and is anticipated to reach $6.34 billion 
by 2024, with a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 4.9%. In 2014, North America had the largest share 
of the global market, followed by Europe . The major players in global ar throscopic products/devices market 
include ConMed (U.S.), Arthrex, Inc., (U.S.), Smith & Nephew Plc (UK), Stryker Corporation (U.S.), and Karl 
Storz (GE). None of these leading companies have in their portfolio alternative solution for the proposed MIR -
based device in MIRACLE. 
Apart from the benefits for the medical field and related commercial potential, the MIR-probe is likely to become 
a commercial success in the veterinary field as well. In the horse, arthroscopy is the standard -of-care in joint 
interventions and very widely practiced given the fact that joint disorders invariably rank first or second (dependent 
on discipline) as a reason for not being able to perform in this animal that is kept for its athletic potential. Interest 
in equestrian sports i s on the increase, as illustrated by the 2014 World Equestrian Games in which participated 
over 1,000 riders from 74 countries with 1243 horses. More than 600,000 tickets were sold and the games were 
reported by 1750 journalists from 52 countries. In a sma ll country as The Netherlands, annual turnover in the 
horse industry is over 2 billion, more than twice the turnover of the flower bulb industry, against this background, 
there is great commercial potential for a MIR -probe for equine use. Although the MIR-ATR probe proposed 
by MIRACLE is primarily intended for use in human knee joints, the device can be adapted to other 
joints and will certainly reach the veterinarian arthroscopy market, given the need for improved diagnosis. 
Competitive analysis 
The solution arising from MIRACLE is in a highly competitive position as a first in the market solution 
for in -depth diagnosis of articula r cartilage diseases. As stated previously, none of the current routine 
protocols in clinical practice are capable to asse ss the biochemical condition of the articular cartilage  and provide 
in-depth diagnosis. Thus, the MIRACLE system has no direct competitor in the market, as examination during 
arthroscopy merely allows diagnostic by visual and manual assessment. The above n umbers clear show that the 
market for a new, photonics -based diagnosis device for in -depth articular cartilage injuries is large, and there are 
currently no solutions in the market providing any kind of quantitative diagnostic method in vivo, through a 
minimally invasive system such as the proposed in MIRACLE. Thus, the MIRACLE project companies will be in 
a highly competitive position at project end.  
Commercialization strategy for the MIRACLE solutions 
The MIRACLE proposal demonstrates a strong industrial  commitment, being driven by four SMEs and by the 
needs of orthopaedic surgeons and patients, aiming to respond to an unmet clinical need: an effective arthroscopy 
device that allows the early diagnosis of OA based on in -depth evaluation of articular cartilage via an MIR -ATR 
imaging probe. To reduce time -to-market, the proje ct will run a technological validation and a market 
validation plan. The consortium will consolidate a strong business case for the arthroscopy system and for each 
exploitable component, supported by clear exploitation strategies. In order to ensure future  exploitation, the 
consortium was designed so as to gather industrial partners specialized in concrete components of the 
final system and that would cover the whole value/supply chain for the photonics -based arthroscopy 
device. The consortium also includes  several orthopaedic surgeons and veterinarian surgeons, to ensure will be 
co-developed including their perspectives and validation. 
The involved SMEs have non -conflicting and complementary roles in the value chain for the production of the 
MIRACLE arthroscopy system (Table 9). The contributions and guidance of UCP and PF will ensure an adequate 
validation and commercial focus for future exploitation of  the project outcomes. In addition, the planned 
performance study including in vivo equine studies and human subjects will lead the preparation for documentation 
for CE Mark, facilitating rapid implementation of the diagnostics device after project completion. 
 
72 http://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/arthroscopy-market 
73 http://www.futuremarketinsights.com/reports/arthroscopy-devices-market 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 42 of 96 
The primary target will be the European market for diagnostic of articular cartilage diseases and photonics 
solutions. The focus  is on  diagnosis of degenerative joint diseases, where direct and quantitative 
assessment of articular tissue alterations are important.  Markets will also include veterinarian use since 
degenerative join disease is a frequently occurring in horses. Revenues are expected to be larger where the 
complexity of decision -making is higher and where frequently early diagnosis of degenerative joint disease is 
important.  
The Consortium plan is to develop, validate and commercialize the arthroscopy device in the European m arket, 
after CE Mark, and follow shortly after by the particularly relevant U.S. market, in the context of degenerative joint 
diseases. The MIRACLE concept will consist primarily of a full arthroscopy system, coupled with a user interface 
that will allow t he easy interpretation of the quantitative data acquired by the probe. The system will be sold to 
hospitals or orthopaedic clinics, and to veterinarian clinics . In summary, three SMEs will be suppliers for the 
components of the arthroscopy system (AP, NP a nd OP) and one supplier for the software and user interface 
system (IRIS). Each provides a part of the solution (probe / laser / control system), which will be sold by medical 
equipment companies with relevant distributors channels in sectors including arthroscopy equipment, orthopaedic 
equipment, and veterinarian surgery equipment . In particular, NP will produce and supply the integrated QCL-
based MIR source for broad wavelength coverage. NP will have the commercialization rights on the  iBEAM in 
cooperation with UULM. Both project results are excellent assets to NP’s product portfolio, addressing important 
current application demands, opening up new markets to laser based sensing and thus strengthening NP’s role as 
a technology leader as well as global market leader in the field of semiconductor lasers for gas sensing applications. 
AP will supply the final sterilisable MIR -ATR arthroscope probe to the system integrator (OP). Finally, OP will 
deliver an OEM system for final commercialization.  
Furthermore, the QCL-based MIR source will also be exploited for other sensing markets after project end  (NP). 
The MIR-ATR imaging probe will be investigated as diagnostic tool for other diseases that are associated with 
biochemical changing of tissue (e.g. cancer) (AP). The data analysis software and software interface and support 
services may be commercialized in separate packages according to customer needs (IRIS). Figure 18 presents a 
preliminary overall business model canvas for MIRACLE key results; during the project, a business model will be 
structured for each key exploitable result.  
 
Figure 18. Overall Ostervalder’s business model canvas for MIRACLE results 
Exploitation strategy to achieve commercialization 
MIRACLE aims to achieve TRL 6 at project end  (Figure 6). A strategy to achieve future full -scale manufacturing 
by IRIS/NP/AP/OP and distribution/sales for the European and North American markets will be developed at 
the end of the project, defini ng the commitments and targets of these partners in the 5 post-project years. The 
strategy will include the planning of pilot lines for the production small series of the components of the device and 
of the full system  for the clinical validation , and the planned upgrade for the installation of production for the 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 43 of 96 
above markets. The plan will also include a strategy for execution of clinical validation and for obtaining CE Mark. 
The execution plan during the project and beyond includes: 
• Iterative developments in pre-clinical setting (during the project and beyond as necessary); 
• Ensure successful pilot deployment at leading research hospitals in Europe; 
• Ensure recruitment of Key Opinion Leaders with worldwide recognition; 
• Create awareness using research results in scientific publications, research reports and broad publications. 
• Plan and gather documentation necessary for obtaining CE Mark and Market Launch; 
• Retain narrow market focus on known hospitals in 3-5 countries in Europe within 2021; 
• Initial Ramp Up; 
• Select 5 countries in Europe for focused marketing and direct sales (EU5); 
• Expand marketing using research publications in direct communications; 
• European Ramp Up; 
• Broaden the market focus to all Europe; 
• Expand the market focus to the U.S. 
UCP and the participating SMEs will, within the project (WP7), perform in -depth market analysis, directing its 
efforts primarily at analyzing the European and U.S. markets , define the specific target markets (monitoring of 
degenerative joint diseases, knee and other articular injuries, analyze the veterinarian market in depth, and analyze 
additional markets for the laser components) and define marketing and commercialisation strategies, as well as 
refine sales forecasts. The MIRACLE Business Plan will be prepared including these parameters and an in -depth 
analysis of the competition, fully defining the go to market strategy and the business model to be pursued. 
Moreover, the Business Plan will include requirements for scale-up of the production of the device, requirements 
for materials supply, additional strategic partnerships that may be necessary for optimal exploitation (with e.g. 
distributors), as well as financial requirements for each SME and means to meet such requirements. Wi thin the 
project period, additional business models will be developed to expand the use of the arthroscopy probe and its 
components, directed at other relevant clinical settings in which the sensor may fulfil an unmet need in the market. 
Moreover, the depl oyment of ICT solutions to facilitate the acquisition and management of data electronically 
within a hospital setting, ensuring full interoperability with existing ICT systems, will be a focus of attention for 
IRIS. Additionally, business models will be fo recast for the expansion of the current MIR-based probe for other 
clinically relevant target tissues.  
2.2.1.6 Management of Intellectual Property 
The IPR management will be set primarily by the Consortium Agreement (CA) to be signed by all Partners before 
project start, drawn on the basis of the DESCA 2020 model agreement. In summary, all Background Knowledge 
necessary to execute the MIRACLE work plan will be detailed in the Consortium Agreement, and the use of 
Background Knowledge will be provided to the consortium partners on a royalty free basis, on a need-to basis for 
the execution of the project tasks. Foreground Knowledge will be owned by the partners who developed it. Each 
partner is responsible for taking the appropriate steps for sec uring IP of the knowledge or results created during 
the project. Project IPR management and market intelligence will be executed in Task 7.3. The participating SMEs 
will have the right to explore commercially the arthroscopy system components and any new technology developed 
within the MIRACLE project on the basis of a license agreement to be agreed between the partners prior to project 
start. All non-commercial results will be widely disseminated via open access peer-reviewed scientific publications 
after the prior permission to publish by the partners involved in the knowledge. 
2.2.2 Communications activities 
The communication and outreach activities of the project and its results and achievements will be carried out in a 
dedicated task (T7.1). These activities will be implemented through a Communication Plan (D7.1), making use of 
a set of communication tools, support material and scientific publications that will be used to promote the 
MIRACLE and its outcomes, the ambition of the Consortium and the potent ial of the technologies to be 
demonstrated. The communication activities will target the general public. Given the TRL maturity of the 
technology (Figure 6), some outreach activities will also target the general public and the target communities listed 
in Table 8, with the goal of raising awareness of the project results, and the benefits of new photonics -based 
arthroscopy probes for diagnosis of OA in healthcare for the European society. Communication activities will be 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 44 of 96 
coordinated between Consortium members to ensure the project outcomes achieve maximum impact, in a manner 
to not interfere with exploitation activities. In addition to the communication activities (Table 12), MIRACLE will 
ensure the production of visually attractive material to disseminate the project such as: 
• A dynamic and interactive website including a public and a private section. The latter will be restricted to the 
Consortium members and th e EC representatives, and used for sharing information between partners and for 
archiving project documents; 
• Flyers with general information on MIRACLE and its results, to be handed out to stakeholders. 
One important side of communicating the project results and achievements is that of regulatory bodies. Although 
clinical trials are not included in the project, the evaluation and demonstration of the MIRACLE device involves 
complex legal and ethical aspec ts and this topic will be considered throughout the execution of the project. 
UOULU, UEF, KUH, UU and INEB will monitor all ethical and regulatory framework, being responsible for 
communication with the relevant national bodies and EMA. Moreover, WP1 will deal with establishing and 
implementing such regulatory and ethics aspects in the execution of a pilot to demonstrate the applicability of the 
MIR-based arthroscopy system during real surgery.  
MIRACLE includes a communication strategy with the national re gulators of the countries represented in the 
Consortium from the onset of the project. Also, the inclusion of the members of the Ethics Committees of the 
participating Hospitals (WP1) will enable them to assess first -hand the project progress and to provid e valuable 
feedback for the technical research under progress. The research carried out in MIRACLE and the results achieved 
will have a strong impact in the photonics field from the individual components and as well in clinical practice 
(human and equine). As such, the Consortium will take actions to ensure that the project is promoted in all the 
sectors. This will be facilitated by the Consortium partners and in particular by the partner hospitals. 
Table 12. MIRACLE communication plan summary 
Communication goal Communication 
channel 
Communication 
information 
Target 
number 
Timing 
(project 
months) 
Partner(s) 
responsible 
To boost information 
flow to all entities with 
an interest in the project 
Website General information on 
the project, its objectives, 
challenges and main 
results and achievements 
500 
/year 
Regularly 
updated 
INEB 
Raising awareness of the 
project within all target 
groups and citizens 
Press Releases, partner 
websites 
Timely Information 
about the project 
4 M1, M12, 
M24, M34 
All 
Raising awareness to the 
project results to all 
stakeholders 
MIRACLE 
Demonstration event 
General information on 
the project 
3 M36 INEB, 
clinical 
partners 
Promoting MIRACLE 
device and ensure high 
impact 
Public event in Brussels 
open to stakeholders, 
media, policy makers 
Information targeted at 
people with professional 
interests towards the 
MIRACLE outcomes 
1 M40 INEB 
2.2.3 Communications Requirements 
This project is funded by one of the calls under the Photonics Public Private Partnership (PPP). All communication 
activities related to the project will acknowledge the context of the Photonics PPP, for example by stating that the 
project is an initiative of the Photonics Public Private Partnership. 
Specifically, for workshops, press releases, presentations etc, the "EU emblem and Photonics21" logo ( Figure 19) 
will be displayed prominently together with the text "Photonics Public Private Partnership". The link 
www.photonics21.org will also be included. When communicating on Twitter or other social media about project 
activities, #Photonics will be included together with @Photonics21 and @PhotonicsEU. 
The project will make a press release when the project launches and also when the project has reached a significant 
milestone. 
 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 45 of 96 
The project will also provide a communicati on kit about the project (narrative text, photographs, slides and any 
other suitable communication material, complemented with copyright licences for the European Commission and 
for Photonics21). The narrative text will target a general audience and focus on the technical achievements as well 
as on the economical and societal benefits for the EU. This communication kit will be provided to the Commission 
at the beginning of the project with updates at mid-term and at the end. 
Project communications such as p roject press releases, workshops announcements, websites, and brochures will 
respect the principle of fair visibility. If the logo of any individual beneficiary is included, then the logos of 
all beneficiaries will be included.  
 
Figure 19. "EU emblem and Photonics21" logo 
 
2.2.4 Standardization activities 
Taking into account existing standards within the project will help to guarantee that the results will respect existing 
practices, enhance interoperability and reach a better market application. Moreover, promoting the research results 
to be included into future standards can provide market validation and facilitate the market uptake of the 
innovations. Standardization activities in MIRACLE (task 7.5) are considered as a valuable tool for the exploitation 
of the project outcomes, by facilitating future replicability and widest use and reducing market acceptance risks. 
Furthermore, Standardization system constitutes itself an efficient and fast information and knowledge tr ansfer 
structure. The bidirectional implication of correspondent technical committees at international, European and 
national levels allows any information provided to reach an immediate widespread dissemination, focused to the 
interested stakeholders in e very country, providing a mean visibility to the project itself and its outcomes.  The 
participation of UNE, a European Standardization Body, will facilitate this approach.  

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 46 of 96 
3. Implementation
3.1 Workplan – Work packages, deliverables, milestones  
3.1.1 Overall work plan structure 
The work plan will be implemented by a multidisciplinary team of scientists, orthopaedic surgeons and SMEs from 
13 organizations spread across Europe. The project is divided into 8 work packages (WPs; Figure 20) forming 3 
main WP groups (described below). Technical and clinical WPs will interact in a variety of project phases while 
WP7 and WP8 provide the associated dissemination, exploitation and management support. 
▪ Support work packages: WP1 Clinical applicability seeks to define end-user and market specifications regarding 
the MIR-based arthroscopy device. In addition, WP1 will ensure the pathway for regulatory approval and ethical 
issues are properly followed. WP7 Dissemination, exploita tion and standardization  will be responsible for 
dissemination, communication and exploitation issues. In addition, WP7 will include standardization activities. 
WP8 Coordination and management covers the project management and coordination.   
▪ Technical work packages: WP2 Quantum cascade laser and iBEAM focuses on the on QCL -based MIR light 
source, optical components and on-chip beam combiner implementation. WP3 Imaging MIR-ATR arthroscope 
probe entails the design, miniaturization and prototyping of the arth roscope probe for imaging. WP4 Data 
analysis and software development focuses on the development of multivariate data analysis and classification 
tools. WP4 will also implement an easy -to-use software interface tailored to the needs of end -users. WP5 
Prototype development will develop all the electronics and controls within a compact MIR -based arthroscopy 
device.  
▪ Clinical work package: WP6 Demonstration and validation in clinical settings focuses in two main tasks, to (i) 
provide large number of spectra data on human tissues (in vitro) for MIR-based system validation and (ii) perform 
several demonstrations of the device in ex-vivo and animal models. The first task will provide data to WP4 while 
the second task will provide feedback from orthopaedic surgeons related to the clinical use of the device. WP6 
will also demonstrate the functionality and application of the device during a real arthroscopy surgery.     
 
Figure 20. Project overview PERT Chart 
The GANTT chart provides an overview of all work package’s tasks and includes the milestones. The project 
duration will be 48 months (40  months for technological dev elopments and prototyping, and 8  months for 
demonstration in clinical settings). Work breakdown into work packages is based on gathering related work, rather 
than on gathering tasks that occur at around the same time. Therefore, some of the work packages are executed in 
parallel throughout the project. 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 47 of 96 
 
 
Figure 21. MIRACLE GANTT chart
Task Description                                                                  Months 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51
WP1 Clinical applicability
1.1 Ethics
1.2 Clinical protocol development
1.3 Specifications and requirements for MIR arthroscopy device and user interface
1.4 Pathway for regulatory approvals 
WP2 Quantum cascade laser and iBEAM
2.1 Quantum cascade laser light source development
2.2 Beam combiner (iBEAM) development