3.3 Consortium as a whole .......................................................................................................................................................30
3.4 Resources to be committed................................................................................................................................................30 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
1. Excellence 
 
MoniTank Product fast track commercialisation aims at providing continuous condition monitoring system for underground 
storage tanks applications in order to avoid risk, structural failures and losses associated to tanks leakage and corrosion. 
 
The underground storage of petrol in tanks, especially in close vicinity of urban 
and rural environment (petrol fuel station), may pose se veral risks e.g. 
fire/explosion, environmental damage, health effects when handled by 
individuals. Because of the large volumes of petrol used daily (only in EU >400 
million litres) and large service stations network (>100,000 only in  EU) and 
storage capacity surface and subsurface releases are likely to occur.1  Petrol 
gives off highly flammable vapour even at very low temperatures. Because of 
the flammability of pet rol vapours, serv ice sta tions carry a ri sk of fire or 
explosion not common to other types of retail outlets. Petrol vapour is heavier 
than air and tends to sink to the lowest possible level of its surroundings and 
may gather in tanks, cavities, drains,  pits or other low points and will travel 
across the ground due to gravity (down-hill) or may be carried in the direction 
of the wind. Petrol vapours can find their way into basements of buildings and Figure 1 Fuel station explosion due to UST failure 
public drains with serious consequences should the vapours come into contact with an ignition sour ce. If released into  the 
environment, petrol and diesel may also pollute the soil and water supplies. Whenever petrol escapes from an underground 
storage tank (UST) or pipelines, it can travel significant distances. 
 
Leaking underground storage tanks are the most numerous sources of MTBE contamination (Fogg et al., 1998). It is estimated 
that 10-35% of underground storage tanks in the USA are leaking or fail to pass a tightness test (Page, 1989). In one 
survey of 3,500 tanks, only 2% of the tanks were leaking while 10% failed to pass the tightness test. However, in about 
9% of the service stations surveyed petrol was found on the top of groundwater in close proximity to station (Page 
report, 1989).Beside that almost 2702 accidents between 1958  to 2007 in France occurred to due to USTs failure(ARIA 
database, Ministère de l'Ecologie, du Développement durable et de l'Energie, FR). The level of risk associated with fuel leakage 
means early detection of leaks is essential. The very high cost of fuel also means the monetary loss caused by fuel leakage 
should be of concern to businesses, as a 10,000 litre loss =13,500 Euros3. These problem challenges and losses create an 
opportunity and need of continuous condition monitoring system MoniTank a system developed to address needs of monitoring 
and inspection of underground storage tanks. SHELL operates 14000 fuel stations4  and deploy USTs in filling stations in EU 
has shown interest in a commercial MoniTank system. 
 
Consortium behind this action aims to commercialize MoniTank system (already proven at TRL6, received positive feedback 
from potential clients) a low cost monitoring system that actively monitors the underground storage tanks(USTs) online and can 
flag changes in condition before leakage occurs(99% Probability of detection ( POD)accuracy). It will offer an innovative 
system for the early detection of leakages through the assessment of the structural integrity of USTs (tightness, corrosion) in 
order to predict their maintenance using a combination of  Risk Based Assessment (RBA), continuous Structural Health 
Monitoring (SHM) and Quantitative Risk Assessment (QRA) taking advantage of key enabling technologies of acoustic emission 
and guided waves. The system will be meet the ASTM and BS standards of inspection and NDT and will be in full compliance to 
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) mandatory UST monitoring protocols. Commercialisation of MoniTank will create 
€24 million in revenues, €11 million in gross profits and will create 112 direct jobs within 5 years of commercialisation 
for consortium. 
 
Integrity NDT has developed the system internally with TWI and BUL and demonstrated it at Flotek tanks a commercial 
manufacturer and supplier of underground storage tanks, the proved system at TRL6 planned to be tailored in this project as 
per feedback of potential customers mainly filling stations in terms of ease of operation and scaled up monitoring. Consortium 
has been established by bringing in IRIS an advance engineering SME expert in developing cloud based, IoT enabled system 
and software to finalise a commercial version of MoniTank at TRL9, with the aim to enter market within 3 years of start of this 
project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1http://echa.europa.eu/documents/10162/5602401f-1d75-4931-aa77-abd37d436dc9 
2www.aria.developpement-durable.gouv.fr, in the “Analysis andFeedback” section. 
3Class 1 LeakDetection - The ultimate protection, PetrolPlaza Technology Corner (August 2012, Thompson Jamie) 
4 http://www.retail-index.com/Sectors/PetrolRetailersinEurope.aspx 
MoniTank 2 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
1.1 Objectives 
 Specific Objectives: 
Specific Objectives of MoniTank Project are as follows: 
Table 1: Specific Objectives 
Scale up, Testing and Demonstration Objectives 
Specific Objectives Tasks Deliverable / Means of Verification/WP 
MoniTank system scale up to commercial 
version considering commercial value, 
manufacturability and end user 
requirements. (by Month 8)TRL 7 
System optimisation, scaling up 
performance, communication 
system and signal processing 
Scaled up hardware for commercial 
version (Activities to be done in WP1) 
Risk based inspection algorithm fine tuning 
and defect recognition software with 
updated graphical user interface(GUI) (by 
month 10) TRL 7 
Full integration, bug fixing and user 
friendly GUI update 
Fully functional integrated GUI interface 
Software of MoniTank system ( Activities 
to be done in WP1 & WP2) 
Validation of MoniTank predictive 
accuracy(Pre-Production commercial ready 
product) (by month 24)TRL8 
Build reporting functionality within 
the MoniTank software, allowing for 
bespoke as well as standard reports 
to be produced 
Fully functioning commercial system 
(Activities to be done in WP2) 
Minimisation of MoniTank’s system costs 
and market ready MoniTank Product 
packaged system (by month 24)TRL 9 
Industrial testing, Site and field trials 
and demonstrations at commercial 
scale 
All trials and tests completed in Flotek 
USTs for three month and results 
analysed (Activities to be done in WP1 & 
2) 
Certification of the MoniTank system(by 
month 24)TRL 9 
The system should obtain the CE 
marking, ISO/IEC certification and 
the API 581 (Plants operating 
Standard) 
Certification: allows MoniTank users to 
comply with legislation and inspection 
protocols. 
Commercial Objectives 
Specific Objectives Tasks Deliverable / Means of Verification/WP 
Production of Training Manuals, User 
Guides and Training Programmes (by month 
18) 
Development of full training 
collateral to support the MoniTank 
product usage. 
Training Materials produced, training 
courses developed (Activities to be done 
in WP3) 
Launch of online advertising campaign, 
marketing and sales strategy 
implementation and pre-launch clients 
engagement (by month 24) 
Developing online marketing 
campaign to build audience before 
launch, development of complete 
sales and marketing plan before 
and after launch of MoniTank 
Advertising material developed, 
campaign prepared and customers 
engaged before launch(Activities to be 
done in WP4 & 5) 
Development of full commercialisation 
roadmap and sales agents network 
extension(by month 24) 
Produce full commercialisation and 
investor ready business plans. 
Sales agent network extension and 
product training 
Draft and final business plans produced. 
Commercialisation plan including pre- 
contract agreements (Activities to be 
done in WP4 & 5) secured) 
Secure initial contract for sales of MoniTank 
(by month 24) 
Engage with Tier 1 customers 
during the final phases of the action 
to secure contracts for MoniTank to 
be implemented following the 
completion of the action 
Engagement with Tier 1 customers 
undertaken 
Pre-agreements in place 
2 sales Contracts secured 
(Activities to be done in WP 5) 
 
Project Outcome: Continuous sensor based cond ition m onitoring s ystem cap able of transmitting con dition of  underground 
storage tanks online and on defect recognition software in hands of operators making it possible to inspect underground storage 
tanks without need of decommissioning or downtime monitoring activity. 
 
Novelty of Product: Automatic and continuous condition monitoring system based on acoustic emission and guided waves for 
structural health assessment of underground storage tanks in petrol filling stations and oil/gas production facilities integrated 
with digital technology of Internet of things gateways, clo ud based data collection and storage, wireless sensor network and 
innovative risk based inspection algorithm and software for informed decision and preventive maintenance of USTs. 
 
 
 
MoniTank 3 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
Problems and Project relations: In Underground storage tan ks most 
damaging leaks are likely to occur with tank failure. The mo st common 
cause is corrosion. Most tanks are steel, which has a natural tendency to 
corrode. Corrosion is a natural electrochemical process, and any factor in 
the design or installation of a tank system that enhances this process can 
result in accelerated corrosion and premature tank failure. For example, 
corrosion may be accelerated by the following: the use of corrosive or 
non-homogeneous backfill; the use of d issimilar m etals in the tank  or 
piping; the pres ence of sha llow groundwater or  temporary water around 
the tank; dam age to corrosion control coatings; and stray currents from 
electrical power sources. Leaking USTs are one of the leading causes of 
groundwater contamination. They pose the greatest threat in rural areas, 
where normally 95 perc ent of the  population depe nds on well water for 
drinking in EU. As a result, local governments, businesses, and private 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 UST failure contamination underground 
citizens face substantial costs to comply with regulations covering both the tanks and potential clean-up, in case there is a 
problem. Where the average cost for cleaning up a spill or leak is more than €70k. Detailed surveys, interviews done by 
Integrity NDT and TWI with SHELL, TOTAL, BP, ESSO, ENI that operate majority of stations across EU and worldwide 
has expressed an interest in MoniTank as currently, there is a lack of robust continuous condition monitoring system. 
Table 2: Challenges vs. Proposed Solution 
Challenges to be addressed Project solution and value innovation 
Industrial: Increasing transportation and log istics 
needs result in having 132k filling station only in EU 
increasing at 3. 5% CAGR containing more  than one 
underground storage tank at a  station will require 
continuous monitoring system for critical fuel storage 
tanks for performance and cost efficiency. 
MoniTank will increase re liability and performance of  USTs at fu el 
stations  making  them  more  secure,  and  cost  efficient  in  terms  of 
operation and as a result of reduced cost of inspection overall by 75%. 
MoniTank will be able to detect all struc tural faults in ta nks and will 
transmit mon itoring data v ia sen sor network to c entral cloud ba sed 
software  that  will  show risk  profile,  faults  and  maintenance  priority 
areas of tanks. 
Economical: The l evel of r isk associated with fuel 
leakage mea ns early  detection of lea ks is e ssential. 
The very high co st of fuel also means the monetary 
loss caused by fuel l eakage should be of concern to 
businesses, as a 10,000 litre loss =13,500 Euros5. 
MoniTank will reduce c ost of inspection by 75% and will minimise the 
chances of USTs failures un detected by more than 90% providing a 
preventive maintenance avoiding leakages and fuel losses. 
Social: Risk of incidents due to leakage or explosion 
in underground storage tanks can  affect citizens on 
fuel stations. 
MoniTank system will enhance safety as at any time operators of fuel 
storage tanks can see the condition of tanks and avoid any leakages or 
failures before occurrence. 
Legislative: EPA and e nvironmental regulatory 
authorities m ake it mandatory to ha ve continuous 
monitoring of duel storage tanks underground. 
MoniTank will be in co mpliance with standards and leg islations by 
providing 9 9% accurate probability of defect recognition more than as 
asked by  compliance of mon itoring sy stem for USTs(98% is 
requirement). 
Relevance to Horizon 2020 and EU wide Impact: With three industrial companies in the consortium (Integrity NDT, IRIS, 
FLOTEK), the MoniTank action will directly address the European need to support SME’s to innovate in the market pla ce. 
Integrity NDT will use the MoniTank product to rap idly accelerate gro wth in the company and the introduction of furt her new 
products, based on European IP and manufacturing in Europe. For IRIS, the action will enable access to new markets in the oil 
and gas industry based on proven integration technology. The main beneficiaries will be European companies. Oil and gas 
production and storage plant operators and provision of maintenance technologies are major European industries exporting 
technology into global markets with much of the infrastructure and engineering based within Europe. Through this direct impact 
on the European economy, the action addresses H2020 priorities of encouraging SME participation and economic growth as 
well as priorities in securing safer, cleaner, more secure energy product supplies. MoniTank addresses the EU Societal Energy 
Challenge, which aims at supporting “the transition to a  reliable, su stainable and co mpetitive ener gy sy stem”6. The ef fective 
maintenance of ageing infrastructure using the MoniTank will reduce leakages and damages in storage tanks in more efficient 
energy provision and a safer and more secure environment.  The wider European Impacts and relation to H2020 objectives are 
summarised in Table 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5Class 1 LeakDetection - The ultimate protection, PetrolPlaza Technology Corner (August 2012, Thompson Jamie) 
6http://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/h2020-section/secure-clean-and-efficient-energy 
MoniTank 4 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
Table 3: European Impacts and Relation to H2020 Objectives 
 
Employment MoniTank will create new employment opportunities (112 new jobs within 5 years) for  the 
European consortium and those involved in inspection of UST structures in fuel stations with high 
potential for future growth. 
Fuel stations and 
public safety 
MoniTank  will  strengthen  energy  safety  by  ensuring  the  integrity  of  tank  structures,  and 
guaranteeing supply of fuel/petrol/gas without disruptions or threats to environment, health or life. 
Meeting increasing 
energy demand 
MoniTank will allow more cost effective operation of USTs with reduced inspection cost, increasing 
available capacity and throughput. 
Innovation Introduction of MoniTank will cement the reputation of the commercial partners in the consortium 
for bringing to market innovative new products for this important industrial market, allowing them to 
finance and sell further new products and services. This will reinforce the position of European 
industry, and the strong innovation capacity of European SMEs, to bring new technologies to 
market and remain competitive in the global market, ahead of strong competition from the US, 
Asia Pacific and Middle East. 
Table 4: Project solution and associated values 
How Project outcomes solve stated 
Problem 
Buyers Value(End Users) Business Opportunity Sellers 
Value (Consortium) 
MoniTank will prov ide an automatic structural 
monitoring platform for underground storage 
tanks failure mon itoring which represent the 
most number of failures in UST structures. By 
preventive maintenance and monitoring data 
of su ch ta nks maintenance operations will be 
scheduled   before   failure   or   any   damage 
occurs ultimately, enh ancing fuel stations 
operations productivity and reliability, reducing 
failure   risks   and   protecting   environment, 
public and workers. 
Tank operators will be able to 
 Increase safety by75% 
 Reduce downtimes and 
maintenance cost by 60% 
 Reduce Failure Risks by 90% 
 Significant improvement in 
USTs maintenance compliance 
 90% reduction in inspection time 
MoniTank commercialisation will 
create for consortium €24 million 
revenues; generating €11 million 
gross profits and creating 112 
jobs over 5 years post action 
completion.
1.2 Relation to the work programme 
Relation to topic of the developed commercial product is as follows: 
Table 5: Topic expectation vs. Project relevance 
Topic: Fast Track to Innovation of the Work Programme 
Topic Expectation How Project addresses the stated expectations 
Technological innovation 
starting at least at TRL 6 
MoniTank prototype has  already been developed, tested, vali dated and demonstrated in a 
relevant en vironment on a ctual undergro und storage ta nks. This work has been under taken 
through investment allocated by private and public sources The system’s performance proved 
the high business potential and prompted us to follow through with additional investment in 
order to fully commercialise it. 
Relation to "Leadership in 
enabling and ind ustrial 
technologies" and/or to  any of 
the  specific  objectives  under 
the prior ity "S ocietal 
challenges" 
MoniTank, as explained above, is set to greatly reduce accidents and contribute to increasing 
the safety and operation of storage tanks in fuel station and process industry while advancing 
cost-effectiveness by reducing the maintenance costs. Thus it is perfectly in line with the high- 
level EC objectives of Industrial leadership offering a competitive, cost effective structural 
health m onitoring s ystem with a strong po tential of generating e xport r evenues and 
competitiveness of EU companies involved in its commercialisation. 
Clear  and  detailed  business 
and market analysis 
We have formulated a detailed business plan founded upon market research. As presented in 
Section  2.1  our  plan  addresses  the  market  structure  and  competitive  landscape  while 
articulating the IP exploitation process and the resulting economic benefits for each member of 
the value chain (as shown in section 2.1) and the course that will be followed in delivering the 
product to market from manufacturing to distribution. 
High Industrial participation Our consortium is industry dominated, as it includes 2 industrial partners forming a value 
chain set to deliver a quick and successful market take-up for MoniTank. INT NDT, are 
committed to see ing the c ommercialisation process through leveraging their established 
positions and their supplier connections across Europe. Moreover, TWI and BUL have a 
strong network of industrial alliances and members to leverage the sales of MoniTank. Flotek 
is one of the large end user, they will be the potential client for MoniTank system and it’s 
testing during validation process. Flotek will endorse the MoniTank System and will be the 
first customer to buy the commercial system. 
MoniTank 5 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
1.3 Concept and approach 
Overall Concept and Methodology: 
The concept of MoniTank is shown in figure. Acoustic Emission (AE) and Guided Wave (GW) ultrasonic techniques are proven 
for screening pipelines for corrosion and erosion, with long lengths (typically 30m) of pipes being screened from a single 
location  for GW. This  capability  will be extended into condition monitoring  of the UST by permanent installation of the 
transducers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 MoniTank Product Concept 
This Project aims to commercialize, MoniTank a low cost monitoring system that actively 
monitors the tank online and can  flag changes in condition before leakage occurs. An 
innovative system for the e arly detection of  leakages through the assessment of  the 
structural integrity of USTs (tightness, corrosion) in order to predict their maintenance 
using a com bination of Risk Based Assessment(RBA), Structural Health Monitoring(SHM) 
and Quantitative Risk Assessment(QRA). The data coming from the AE sensors are 
transmitted wireless to the master control unit and collected and analysed in the control 
centre.  A  continuous  risk-level  classification  (EN15856)  allows  immediate  notification 
when warning or crit ical levels are reach ed. This automatic fault recognition allows 
operators to predict failures and  leakages before they happen  and to predict the 
maintenance of tanks optimizing the maintenance plan. A method for online condition- 
based m onitoring ( CBM) prov iding a diagn ostic and pre dictive tank  model based on 
historical data and tank operation data. 
This SHM process will be low cost using a small number of  sensors, and will give an 
indication of the condition of the tank without the need for any invasive inspection. 
The  proposed  SHM  strategy  will  combine  liquid  level  and  corrosion  monitoring  with 
detection of sedimentation. A simplified solution to SHM of buried storage tanks including 
a combined GW and AE based strategy will be implemented. Table below shows typical 
inspection of tan ks and associated cost, where MoniTank can reduce 75% of the c ost by 
providing a standalone system of monitoring. 
Table 6: Typical USTs inspection process and associated cost 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 MoniTank Product trials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 MoniTank Demo site 
Process 
Step 
Description Estimated cost (€) 
1 Prepare recipient Tank (tank that will store the product until inspection is finished) 30,000 
2 Move products to recipient Tank 30,000 
3 Open and degas  tank 60,000 
4 Clean tank (labour- and capital-intensive process requiring equipment) 120,000 
5 Non-Destructive Testing -  Magnetic Flux Leakage technique (semi-automated) 70,000 
6 Non-Destructive Testing -  UT technique (manual) 60,000 
7 Close and Seal tank after NDT is carried out 40,000 
8 Refill tank with product (from recipient tank) 30,000 
9 Check seals, vents, hoses etc. 10,000 
10 Paper work, safety checks, management & supervision of above process 10,000 
The above process will typically last for about four weeks and incur an overall cost ranging within €500k to €1m 
Key Enabling Technology application to create commercial value of MoniTank System: 
Key enabling technologies considered to create commercial value of MoniTank system are as follows: 
 
MoniTank 6 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
Table 7: KETs vs. Commercial Value 
Commercial Value/ 
Business Targets 
Technology Enablers 
Automated Continuous Condition Monitoring Optimised Preventive Maintenance 
Safety Automated  continuous  condition  monitoring  will  improve 
safety of fuel stations and environment. 
In service failures will be eliminated. 
Performance & 
Reliability 
Continuous monitoring of USTs will improve performance 
and reliability of filling stations. 
Targeted maintenance will reduce 
variability in service. 
Cost Efficiency Condition monitoring of underground assets will improve 
availability and reduce cost ultimately enhancing efficiency. 
Failure prediction will reduce asset cost 
of ownership. 
A prototype (TRL6) has already been developed and tested with the transducer permanently mounted on a UST. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 MoniTank System validated at TRL 6 
The following features and enabling technologies has already been developed as shown in figure above: 
 Selection of the suitable wave modes and frequencies. 
 Numerical modelling of the transducer array design and performance evaluation. 
 Validation of the choice of the sensors including the validation of either: the conventional piezo-electric or the flexible fibre 
composite. 
 Signal processing routines to improve the signal to noise ratio. 
 The transducers have been installed permanently on a UST. This raised specific requirement with regard to the long-term 
ultrasound coupling to the tank wall, and the packaging of the transducers. 
 Assemble of the electronics. TWI’s BIP has been utilised to deliver the hardware prototype which required specific software 
development to drive the transducer arrays and to meet the site conditions. 
Once the UST structure, specifications and techniques have been analysed, a specific array of sensors has been designed as 
well as the selection of the most appropriate hardware: 
 The prototype comprises multichannel AE capabilities for characterization and localization of acoustic emission sources 
with signal filtering within the frequency range 50-250kHz; 
 Unlike AE which captures signals passively, GW hardware includes an active unit which induces energy. The pulser- 
receiver on the GW flaw detection application requires power to output high voltage signals of approximately ±150V. The 
prototype operate in normal operation at frequencies between 10kHz and 100kHz 
Project Positioning: Activities done so far and to be achieved in this project are listed below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MoniTank 7 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
Measures in concept development for effective market take-up: 
MoniTank product development measures planned in this project for effective market take-up include following tasks: 
 Condition  Monitoring  &  Inspection  Cost  Reduction:  System  performance  to  optimise  to  achieve inspection  cost 
reduction by 75%, inspection process time by 60% and inspection labour time by 40%. (Activities in WP1,WP2) 
    Cost  Reduction  of  the  System:  In  order  to  optimise  the  system  cost  during  scaling  up  the  system,  a  detailed 
components/suppliers/parts availability analysis will be c onsidered, and most co st eff ective, e asily available and high 
performance components will be  used to finalise commercial version of MoniTank. Supply cha in will be sorted for 
manufacturing of MoniTank carefully considering cost and value. (Activities in WP 4) 
    Enhancement of commercial value of the product by extending the performance and application of the system: 
100% automatic , continuous cond ition monitoring, 99% defects recognition accuracy and long lasting sensor network 
functionality(Activities in WP1,2,3) 
 Compact and portable design: Intrinsic safe electronic packaging will be developed in MoniTank weighing overall system 
offering a compact system for operators for ease of use and operations. (Activities in WP2) 
 Easy to operate system with user friendly GUI: To enhance market uptake of MoniTank system for customers, a user 
friendly GUI, with detailed product manual, training guidelines and user/operator training on sale of system is planned in 
project concept development as well. (Activities in WP1,3) 
 
European dimension of proposed Innovation and added value for Europe: 
MoniTank system will address EU-wide challenges by creating more job op portunities in NDT sector. It will offer an innovative 
solution for quality inspection of underground tanks in all kinds of plants specifically in fuel stations before occurrence of any 
crucial problems avoiding accidents and losses thus; will contribute to the environmental and workers safety. The system will be 
distributed and sold to global mar kets as detailed in section 2 resulting in incre asing export revenues for Europe as  well 
contributing to EU competitiveness and economic impact. 
Table 8: EU Impact and Relevance to H2020 
Job Creation MoniTank will create new employment opportunities (112 new jobs within 5 years between 
consortium members) for the European consortium and those involved in NDT inspection of tanks. 
The solution provides opportunities in other industries (petrochemical, chemical etc.). 
Environmental Safety MoniTank  will  strengthen  energy  safety  by  ensuring  the  integrity  of  tanks,  and  guaranteeing 
continued fuel stations operations without neither disruptions nor threats to health or life. MoniTank 
will be in compliance with ASTM, BS standard about ensuring the integrity of process tanks systems 
in the Oil & Gas industry is a key issue with respect to the  process, business, safety, and the 
environment7. 
Energy and cost 
efficiency 
MoniTank will directly impact energy cost by protecting fuel storage tanks that are vulnerable to 
leakage, loss of fuel, corrosion and safety of filling stations. 
Innovation Introduction of  MoniTank technology will cement the rep utation of  the commercial partners in the 
consortium  for  bringing  to  market  innovative  new  products  for  this  important  industrial  market, 
allowing them to finance and sell further new products and services. This will reinforce the position of 
European industry, and the strong innovation capacity of European SMEs, to bring new technologies 
to market and remain competitive in the global market, ahead of strong co mpetition from the US, 
Japan and China. 
Gender Analysis: 
MoniTank will develop and implement a Gender Action Plan to promote gender equality in all possible forms within the project 
ensuring gender equality, promotion of women recruitment and maintaining gender balance.
1.4 Ambition 
Through commercialisation of MoniTank product we aim to create €24 million in revenues, €11 million in gross profits and 
will create 112 direct jobs within 5 years of commercialisation for consortium. 
State of the art: Currently, the most advanced approach to  tank inspection is by internal inspection using manual non- 
destructive testing (NDT) techniques. This requires removing the tank from service, removing the contents, then venting and 
cleaning it to make it safe for manual access. Existing monitoring systems on the market such as manual gauging, inventory 
control and leak detection systems only rely on the tank leaking before it can be detected. The EPA requires the tank to be 
monitored for a leak at least once every 30 days using interstitial monitoring8. For many years in Europe the most utilized 
Secondary Containment with Interstitial Monitor has been the class 2 liquid system (operating using a liquid filled interstitial 
space) but there has been a move in recent years by environmentalists and responsible at oil companies to the Class 1 system 
(using air or nitrogen pressure or by pulling a vacuum on the interstitial space). 
This change is based on a variety of reasons: 
 
 
7 file:///C:/Users/InnoTecUK/Downloads/process_piping_guide_R2.pdf 
8https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2015-07-15/pdf/2015-15914.pdf 
MoniTank 8 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
    In environmentally sensitive areas, even the leak detection fluid is considered a hazard to the groundwater 
    When leaks occur the detection fluid in the interstice has to be disposed of 
    Economy - the cost of leak detection fluid adds to the cost of tank manufacture 
    Operators are taking environmental issues seriously and are changing to the more environmentally friendly systems 
Pressure and vacuum leak detection systems for double wall tanks and pipes have been operating in Europe for over 35 years. 
There are over 700,000 such installations in use monitoring tank and pipes. They detect a small number of leaks each a year, 
around 1% of those being monitored. 75% of those leaking have a leak in the outer wall and 25% in the inner wall. There are no 
existing standalone monitoring system capable to detect leakage in both outer and inner wall of underground storage tank as 
proposed innovation in MoniTank. 
Table 9: Beyond state of the Art and MoniTank Product advantages 
MoniTank 
Technology 
SOTA (State Of The Art) Beyond SOTA; Product 
Differentiation 
Product Advantages Related to Market 
AE sensor platform 
integrated with GW 
and RBI techniques 
Sensor separate from the 
processing functionalities. 
MCU integrated into the smart 
sensor platform 
The AE sensors can send a result and 
can be configured for different CM 
application. 
Wireless 
communication 
Very well established Wireless integration to direct 
transmission to the cloud 
Send results or data to the cloud 
Cloud for Condition 
Monitoring system 
Not used yet CM data travelling by the cloud Data available to correlate results from 
different sensors from different sites. 
CM software to 
cloud management 
Not existing for CM 
systems 
Development of a new type of 
software 
Data management from different sites 
and costumers. 
There are more visual inspection NDT services available on market for USTs inspection and there is lack of systems for 
condition mon itoring of unde rground tanks which makes MoniTank an attr active product to  capture not very m uch saturated 
market.                                                          Table 10: Competitive Overview 
 
Product and Service on Market Limitations Differentiation and value added benefits of 
MoniTank 
SGS ,UK 
 Conventional internal 
inspection: Magnetic Flux 
Leakage / Ultrasonic Testing 
Typical   NDT   service   requires 
decommissioning, down time and 
high labour cost of insp ecting 
tanks, 
 MoniTank is a standalone condition monitoring 
system capable of  detecting structural flaws in 
underground stora ge tan ks   with 9 9% POD, 
capable to monitor metallic double wall structures 
of  tanks,  will  use  cloud  based  communication 
and data a cquisition s ystem so  will be  easy for 
operators to mon itor and inspect co ndition of 
underground ta nks anytime without extra 
inspection time or labour cost. 
 MoniTank    will    reduce    cost    of    inspection 
significantly by 7 5% as once inst alled on  tanks 
sensors will transmit condition of tanks which will 
be analysed using advance risk based inspection 
techniques to give a detailed risk cur ve for 
operators and maintenance personal. 
MISTRAS,USA 
 TankPac Acoustic Emission 
Inspection for Tanks 
 Manufacturer of Acoustic 
Emission testing equipment 
Limited output of inspection only 
detects   condition   of   structure 
walls  and  not  able  to  provide 
high thickness low size defects 
data. 
BMS Group, UK 
Veeder-Root is the world's leading 
supplier of automatic tank gauging 
and fuel management systems and 
one of the few companies in the 
industry to design, manufacture and 
service its own products. 
Not      offering      a     complete 
standalone s ystem but  offer 
different monitoring gauges, not 
able to det ect corrosion and 
internal tank faults. 
 
Table 11: Techniques comparison 
Analysis/ 
Technique 
Application Limitations MoniTank Technique relevance for 
USTs condition monitoring 
Infrared 
Thermography 
Infrared   thermography   (IRT) 
has become a matured a nd 
widely accepted condition 
monitoring tool where t he 
temperature   is   measured   in 
real time in a  non-contact 
manner. 
Limited    to    temperature 
based monitoring, more 
relevant for heated o bjects 
condition monitoring. 
MoniTank is based on acoustic emission 
and  gu ided  wave  t echnique.  AE 
techniques emanate from the practice of 
sorting good parts from ‘clunkers’ by hitting 
them and listening to them ring  (hence 
other commonly used related defe cts that 
have led to me tal to met al conta cts (i. e. 
lubrication breakdown).AE u ses higher 
frequency detection. Metallic USTs in i ts 
working condition produce acoustic signal 
and    this    signal    is    a    characteristic 
Ferrography Ferrography is a  technique for 
analysing the part icles present 
in      fluids      that      indicate 
mechanical wear. 
Limited to fluid based 
condition monitoring. 
 
MoniTank 9 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
Ultrasonic 
condition 
monitoring 
Ultrasonic condition monitoring 
(UCM) is a technique that uses 
airborne (no n-contact) a nd 
structure      borne      (contact) 
ultrasound     instruments     to 
receive high f requency 
ultrasonic em issions prod uced 
by opera ting e quipment, 
electrical emissions and le aks 
etc. to monitor the condition of 
equipment under test. 
High freque ncy, c omplex 
and c ostly co ndition 
technique used for la rge 
application and systems. 
signatures of that structure which does not 
change over time. However, in  cases of 
structural or fun ctional anomaly or fa ilure, 
the  dynamic characteristics of  the  USTs 
change which is reflected in its acoustic 
signals. The nature of the developing fault 
has unique a coustic characteristics which 
can be com pared with the acoustics 
signatures of the tanks working u nder 
normal operating condition. By using 
innovative si gnal analysis algori thm 
developed   in   Mo niTank   device,   it   is 
capable to determine the  exact 
category/type of fault and then transmit the 
data wireless to the cloud platform that can 
be accessed on site, central control unit or 
any other location remotely to  analyse 
underground tanks performance. 
Lubrication oil 
Analysis 
Lubrication oil is used in 
electrical and me chanical 
machines to reduce fri ction 
between moving surfaces. The 
lubrication o il is i mportant 
source of  information for early 
machine failure detection. 
Lubrication oil based 
condition   mo nitoring, 
limited to par ticular 
application                where 
lubrication oil is used. 
 
Table 12: Expected key market applications and differentiation factor for Potential customers 
Project Result/outcome Key Market Application Differentiation Factor(Added value for potential customers) 
Structural health condition 
monitoring system for 
underground storage tanks 
-Fuel/Petrol Station 
-Chemical Plants 
-Process Industries 
-Storage warehouses 
Etc. 
 Cost Effective and 99% POD accurate system 
 Remote access to condition monitoring data 
 Detailed risk profile and failure localisation 
 No need to shut down tanks operation 
 Wireless  sensor  network  and  flexibility  to  place  point  of 
interest in tanks 
Patent search shows there are no standalone systems available, some com panies have developed set of different system to 
monitor condition of underground tanks but MoniTank will offer one system capable to detect all structural faults in USTs. 
Product Lifecycle and Positioning: 
Initial developments in project as shown in the figure depicts higher cost of innovation and low sales, but with time and 
complete market trans fer of Mon iTank the sales and profit will rise as detailed in se ction 2 and c ost will be  reduced due to 
production of the system. Some of the profit will be re-invested in further, development of MoniTank2 second generation 
product for competitive and sustainable advantage. Integrity NDT with partners will continuously seek innovation aspects in the 
product obtaining feedback of clients and their needs and tailoring the system for sustainable competitive advantage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 MoniTank Product Positioning Figure 7 MoniTank Product Lifecycle
2.1 Expected impacts 
Expected Impact under the relevant Topic: 
2. Impact 
The expected impact of MoniTank Project in regards to topic is as follows: 
Table 13: Impact expectation and project relevance 
Expected Impact under the relevant topic Project Impacts 
“Fast   development,   commercial   take-up   and/or 
wide deployment of sustainable innovative solutions 
in enabling and industrial technologies and/or for 
The project foreseen a fast development, commercial take-up and wide 
deployment of an innovative solution to increase the safety of petrol 
stations and reduce their impact on the environment by detecting in real 
 
MoniTank 10 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
tackling societal challenges.” time the risk of leakages and fire/explosion. It will solve social challenges 
by reduction of ri sks and accidents related to le akages and vapour 
emissions, by providing guideline to oil companies and local authorities 
in  determining  the  safe  boundary  of  petrol  station  and  improving 
confidence    in    petrol    stations    security    and    in    particular    in 
unmanned/virtual assisted stations. 
“Time to initial market take-up no later than 3 years 
after the beginning of the FTI project.” 
Based on the market and competition research, we have developed an 
extremely detailed business plan targeting one of the biggest sectors in 
the world’s energy market and we are perfectly positioned to penetrate it. 
The project will last for 24 months and the time to initial market take-up 
will be within 3rd year after the beginning of the FTI project. 
“Enhanced competitiveness and growth of business 
partners in the consortium, measured in terms of 
turnover and job creation.” 
MoniTank will enhance the competitiveness and growth of partners by 
generating €24 million revenues, €11 million in gross profit and creating 
112 direct jobs within consortium. 
“Leveraging mo re pri vate in vestment i nto re search 
and/or innovation. And In creased indu stry 
participation, including SMEs, and more in dustry 
first-time applicants to Horizon 2020.” 
Our project will bring together diverse competences and ba ckgrounds 
from the research (TWI, BUL) to the industrial (Integrity NDT, IRIS) to the 
commercial (Flotek) field. 
Our consortium includes 2 industrial partners with solid positions in the 
condition mon itoring market, 2  RTOs and 1 Underground storage tank 
manufacturer Flotek. 
“Where appropriate, addressing transnational 
value-chains and/or EU-wide or global markets.” 
The project addresses transnational value-chains and targets one of the 
biggest sectors in the world’s energy market. 
 
Project Innovation meeting needs of European and Global Market needs: MoniTank product commercialisation meet the 
technological and economical needs of EU and Global markets, as shown in figure 9 the market for NDT systems have risen to 
600 million dollars in 2016 globally and it is still growing which creates MoniTank system relevant in NDT equipment market. 
Further,  NDT  market  is  being  segmented  on  the  basis  of  NDT  application  (e.g.,  flaw  detection),  technology  (e.g.,  AE 
technology), end-users (e.g., Oil & Gas), and geography. The surface techniques are an established and matured market, with 
ultrasonic testing having an increasing usage as it provides the advantage of indicating flaw depth. The Oil & Gas industry 
specifically is  highly  dependent  on  NDT  to  ensure  quality  and 
maintain a safe operating environment and remains the largest 
end user for the NDT market. The global NDT market for the Oil & 
Gas industry was $273 million in 2014 and is estimated to grow at 
a  compounded  annual  growth  rate  of  3.30%  to  reach  $331.7 
million by 2020. Figure 10 shows the estimated market size of 
NDT in the Oil & Gas market from 2014 to 2027 as shown in 
figure.  Growth  of  the  global  NDT  market,  both  in  terms  of 
production  and  maintenance,  is  driven  by  (1)  Stringent 
government   safety   regulations.   In   Oil   &   Gas   industry,   an 
increasing number of assets need  to be inspected in order to 
prevent any hazards due to leakage and spillage of oil or failures. 
(2) Ageing infrastructure in  developed countries and resultant 
deterioration i ssues. There is a need to extend the usual life of 
existing infrastructure in order to prevent it from deteriorating further. 
The average life of assets such as tanks in Europe is estimated to 
be 40 years; still these assets are required to run at high c apacities. 
(3) Growing demands for NDT from the en d-users to opt imise 
maintenance and ensure safe and efficient operation. Regular 
maintenance of tanks, through their usable life, is required in the Oil 
& Gas industry to avoid unexpected and catastrophic failures due to 
fatigue. 
However, a number of facts that impose significant challenges on 
the NDT market growth, the most important are (1) Impact of 
macroeconomic shocks. A major hurdle by most NDT companies is 
providing high quality service at competitive prices. The end users of 
Figure 9 NDT equipment Market Trend and Growth 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10 NDT Market Trend and Growth 
NDT are highly price conscious; hence, it becomes difficult for NDT companies to provide quality service at lower prices. Thi s is 
exaggerated in the event of macroeconomic shocks that affect the economy of the country and thus their spending capacity, 
such as in Asia-Pacific locations where end users are extremely price sensitive. (2) Lack of skilled labour. The lack of 
availability of skilled technicians is the biggest challenge affecting the NDT market. Considering this fact, it is clear that the 
 
MoniTank                                                                                             11 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
number of people taking up NDT inspection has significantly lowered over time. Stricter government regulations and increasing 
sophistication of NDT methods has led to an increase in demand of skilled inspectors. This demand is currently outweighing the 
supply. Since the NDT industry relies on skilled technicians for revenues, their shortage poses significant problems for growth. 
Global growth of storage tanks by regions is shown in figure 11. MoniTank Project will create a positive and economical impact 
in meeting needs of EU and global NDT market needs as well as storage tanks inspection problems and challenges.SHELL and 
BP has shown intentions of buying commercial MoniTank System as well 
as Malaysian university wants to deploy the system for fuel stations in 
Malaysia run by government. 
Competitiveness  and  growth  of  Industrial  legal  entities  in  the 
consortium: 
The consortium members will benefit in terms of growth due to a higher 
level of  competitiveness from the  innovative uniqueness p rovided by  the 
MoniTank system. The integration of new knowledge from the action will 
be as a result of (i) enhanced monitoring system to monitor the condition 
Figure 11 Global Underground Storage Tanks by Regions 
of underground storage tanks. Scaling up the system will lead to (ii) Evolved condition monitoring platform. The System platform 
will be developed to incorporate a full reporting mechanism which will have the added functionality of being user bespoken, 
depending upon the requirements of individual operators. Through the delivery of this action and the commercialisation of the 
system, the consortium members will experience knowledge growth as well as commercial/business growth. 
Improving innovation capacity and integration of new knowledge: 
MoniTank will overall enhance and improve the innovation capacity of partners and will commercialise the system where there 
is a limited research work available. Partners including IRIS, INT NDT and TWI will be able to enhance their innovation capacity 
in engineering solution development, BUL will be able to enhance its services and knowledge, FLOTEK will endorse the system 
and will enhance its operational performance of storage operations. 
Environmental and Social Impact: 
Environmentally MoniTank offers a tool to ensure safety and security of underground pressure vessels and through preventive 
maintenance will secure the environment from damages that can occur due to tanks rupture or breakdown ultimately not only 
protecting the environment but also the soil from hazardous exposure. 
Table 14: User Needs vs. Project outcomes: 
User Needs MoniTank solution Differentiation factor with state of 
the art methods 
 Reduce risk of catastrophic failure. 
 Reduce risk of low-level leakage and 
environmental damage 
 Reduce environmental impact from 
leaks 
 Enable compliance with EU directives 
(SEVESO III Directive 2012/18/EU, 
Directive 2006/11/EC, Dangerous 
Substances Directive) and local safety 
and environmental regulations. 
Sensor fusion ena bles continuous in- 
service mo nitoring for rap id early 
warning  of  problems  and  forecast 
data to ensure timely maintenance 
Visual or ultr asonic inspection is of 
limited effectiveness, part icularly floor 
bottom  corrosion.  Internal  inspection 
can only be done infreq uently because 
of cost. 
Demonstrate compliance with EU 
directives (SEVESO III Directive 
2012/18/EU, Directive 2006/11/EC, 
Dangerous Substances Directive) and local 
safety and environmental regulations. 
Cloud-based service au tomates 
collection, analysis, arc hiving, and 
presentation   of   data   for   efficient 
reporting and  auditing of sa fety and 
environmental management. 
Current manual  inspection r ecords are 
error-prone and  time co nsuming to 
manage  especially  over  a  20  year 
lifespan of a tank 
Co-ordinate and s hare information with 
other     sites,     other     operators,     and 
government  agencies  to  share  be st 
practice and experience and meet new 
SEVESO III requirements 
Cloud-based platform for data 
management  allows  tailored  access 
and  sha ring  of  inspection, 
maintenance and i ncident inf ormation 
to  improve  risk  a ssessment  a nd 
spread best practice. 
One of the main causes of accidents is 
poor communication and coordination 
within the company and bet ween 
organisations. Currently in spection a nd 
maintenance data are held l ocally with 
no off site access. 
Improve business efficiency through 
accurate  scheduling  and  coordination  of 
internal inspections and maintenance 
MoniTank   sensor   fusion   provides 
improved forecasting a ccuracy for 
timely sc heduling of inte rvention to a 
maintenance plan that m inimises risk 
and makes efficient use of test and 
Outside    of    infrequent    time-based 
inspection, ma intenance is done 
reactively as problems occur. This 
increases  risk  of  environmental 
damage   or   accidents   and   makes 
 
MoniTank 12 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
 maintenance resources scheduling of maintenance difficult. 
Improve bu siness efficiency by  integrating 
inspection and maintenance into  site 
management processes 
MoniTank  pr ovides  s ystemised 
records of i nspection re sults and 
forecasts, available enterprise-wide. 
Current manual  inspection r ecords are 
kept locally and not integrated with site 
management systems. 
Reduce costs of inspection and 
maintenance programmes 
Performing costly internal inspection 
and  repair  only  when  needed  can 
provide cost savings of €50 000  p.a. 
per tank. 
Tank inspection based on time alone 
means that many internal inspections 
(€500 000 per inspection) are 
unnecessary or premature. 
Targeted Market (size, trends, and growth rate) and Project Consortium Strategy: 
There were over 132,136 pet rol stations in the EU, 
Norway, Switzerland and Turkey operating in 2014, fuelling 
some  230  million  cars  and  o ver  30  million  trucks  on 
Europe’s roads. The USA had 114,474 filling stations (gas 
stations) in 2012, according to  the U.S. Census Bureau. 
NDT Inspection in Oil and Gas, currently rated $8,1 billion, 
is expected to grow from 2015 with a global CAGR of 4,6% 
to  reach  $10,2  billion9   in  2020.  We  believe  economic 
growth will push this number even higher. Most of the oil 
and gas structures are owned and operated by large oil and 
gas companies and a great ma jority of these comp anies 
outsource the ir i nspection re quirements to SME ins pection 
companies. The insp ection market in Europe is  dominated 
by SMEs. 
By overcoming the safety issues and data limitations of 
current inspection techniques and systems we will access 
this market with a new product, which will bring benefits for 
the whole value chain (from manufacturing to operation). 
Verdict’slatest data shows that the totalvalue of fuelsoldat 
service  stationsacross  Europe  (based  on  29  European 
countries) will be close to €600bn by the end of 2018, as a 
result of high fuelprices and a marginal rise in fuelvolumes. 
From  a  studyconducted  by  STI/  SPFA  –  Steel  Tank 
Institute/ Steel PlateFabricatorsAssociation10  on typical tank Figure 12 Targeted Filling station by EU countries 
purchase by station owners a typical store own two 12,000 gallon tanks and one 20,000 gallon tank (44,000 gallons 
total).Some petroleum marketers anticipate fluctuating fuel prices and install more capacity so they can buy and store additional 
fuel when itis offered at lower prices—for example, two 20,000 gallon tanks, one 15,000 gallon tank, and one 12,000 gallon tank 
(67,000 gallonstotal).Small mom-and-pop stores i nstall less capacity, perhaps two 12,000 gallon tanks (24,000 gallonstotal).In 
extremely rural areas, a single 20,000 gallon tank with multi-compartments might be installed. 
With these data we can estimate: 
a) a total of: 132136 (petrol stations in EU) x 3 tanks (2X 12,000 gallon tanks + 1X 20,000 gallon) = 390,000 tanks in EU 
b) a total of: 10,234 (unmanned petrol station in EU) x 3 tanks = 30,702 tanks inside unmanned petrol stations (growing market) 
Primary Targeted Market Total Market Size Growth Rate Market Trends 
EU Filling Stations 132316 3.5% Increasing  trend  due  to  high  demand  of  transportation 
vehicles and logistics 
Main Selling Point: 
Main selling points are based on following features for customers: 
• Measures and displays on-line AE activity 
• 4” touch sensing display (not needed here as data will be transmitted wirelessly) 
• Integrated AE sensor signal conditioning circuitry 
• 8GB storage space on internal SD card 
• Wireless data downloading capability 
• Long-term, unattended operation possible by providing power through a DC supply connected to mains or PV module 
• Low cost (4655 euros price) 
 
 
 
9Frost&Sullivan, 2015 
10http://www.atlasoil.com/Blog/Fuel-storage-capacity-at-service-stations 
MoniTank 13 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
Primary Targeted Market 
Size (No. Of 
companies) 
Market Share 
(For MoniTank) 
Number of Targeted 
Customers 
EU Petrol/Fuel Stations 132136 3% 3967 
EU Underground storage tanks manufacturers 1539 9% 133 
EU Tanks operators/storage production facilities 1500 8% 115 
EU NDT Service Companies 1500 10% 157 
Secondary  Targeted Market Size Market Share Targeted Customers 
Global NDT Service Companies 5000 5% 250 
Global Petrol/Fuel Stations and tanks operators 
(USA, Canada, China, Japan) 
 
274000 
 
0.1% 
 
274 
Global underground storage tanks manufacturers 3000 1% 30 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical:   The   commercial   deployment   of   MoniTank 
System represents a major technical achievement that will 
 
 
 
 lay the foundations for new technology developments e.g. 
monitoring  and  risk  assessment  of  pressure  vessels and 
 
 
 
 structural integrity of underground storage assets.  
Social: The main social benefits will be in jobs creation (112 
new jobs within the consortium) and in improved safety of 
 
 
 
 operation of the underground storage operations.  
Environmental:  The  direct  environmental  impact  will  be  to Figure 14 Cost Breakdown of MoniTank System 
 
 
Most Relevant Segment for initial introduction of new solution: 
Segmentation, Targeting, Positioning (STP) model of MoniTank, Targeted market represent share we plan to capture in each of 
customer group: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13 STP Model and Marketing Mix of MoniTank 
Primary and Secondary Targeted Market and Market share in 5 years of post-commercialisation: 
Table 15: Targeted Market 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scientific and Technological Impact of the Project: 
The expected impacts in on technology, socially and environmental 
are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MoniTank 14 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
improve the safety and reliability of fuel stations reducing the occurrence or likelihood of environmentally 
damaging leakages. MoniTank will contribute to the overall reliability and safety of petrol/fuel st ations, thus 
enhancing  the prospects  for safe  sustainable  storage  operations  without disruption  or loss  of  fuel due to 
structural failures. 
Pricing Strategy: is depicted in figure hereby with breakdown of cost, price and profit margin. 
Economic Relevance of the proposed Solution and Financial projections of consortium Members: 
Table 16: Financial forecasting of product sales and partners turnover 
Forecast Year 2019 Year 2020 Year 2021 Year 2022 Year 2023 total 
MoniTank Product Sales Price (1% inflation rate is considered in yearly pricing) 
MoniTank System (€) 4655 4701 4747 4793 4839  
MoniTank Service Package (€) per 
tank 
12000 12120 12241 12364 12487  
Expected Sales to Targeted Customers 
EU Petrol/Fuel Stations 26 132 661 1323 1825 3967 
EU Underground storage tanks 
manufacturers 
6 15 25 39 48 133 
EU Tanks operators/storage production 
facilities 
8 16 25 27 39 115 
EU NDT Service Companies 7 20 30 48 52 157 
Global NDT Service Companies 8 28 38 78 98 250 
Global Petrol/Fuel Stations and tanks 
operators 
2 36 59 75 102 274 
Global underground storage tanks 
manufacturers 
0 2 5 8 15 30 
Total Potential customers 57 249 843 1598 2179 4926 
Total MoniTank Unit Sales (in € ) 228,095 1,095,333 3,883,046 7,529,803 10,355,460 23,091,737 
Total MoniTank Systems + Services 
Sales(in € ) 
96,000 193,920 306,030 333,818 487,003 1,416,770 
Total Revenue (€ p.a.) 324,095 1,289,253 4,189,076 7,863,621 10,842,463 24,508,507 
Profit Margin= 45% on System and 55% on system+ service package, Cost of Unit = €3210 
Total Gross Profit (€million p.a.) 155442 599555 1915687 3572010 4927808 11170505 
Total Annual Cumulative Profit- 
Initial Investment 
 
-2144557 
 
-1545001 
 
370685 
 
3942696 
 
8870505 
 
Net Profit (After Tax /VAT, Average 
Values) 
 
108809 
 
419689 
 
1340981 
 
2500407 
 
3449465 
 
7819353 
Job creation estimation (1 job per 100k profit) 
Total New jobs Created(p.a.) 2 6 19 36 49 112 
Turnover of consortium Partners (Values in € p.a.) 
Integrity NDT(70% profit share) 108809 419689 1340981 2500407 3449465 7819353 
RIS(20% profit share)Software License 15544 59955 191568 357201 492780 1117050 
BUL(5% profit share) 12435 47964 153254 285760 394224 893640 
TWI(5% profit share) 12435 47964 153254 285760 394224 893640 
FLOTEK as end user and consumer will be given 5% discount on MoniTank System, and will have access to non-commercial 
exploitation of MoniTank demos and development results 
New Jobs created per partner INT NDT(78),  IRIS(11), BUL(9),  TWI(9), Flotek (5) 
Return on Investment for EC considering 2.3 million budget 
Return of Investment for EC 11:1 in 5 years Post commercialisation 
Return on Investment for consortium on 5 years of sales of MoniTank 
Return of investment for on sales of 
MoniTank Units 
 
15:1 
For Consortium, calculated considering consortium investment and net 
profit in 5 years, 
MoniTank 15 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
Graphical depiction of economical and job growth through MoniTank Sales for 5 years 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Capital Investment Plan for three years of operation and Funding Mix and relevant Project Activities: 
 Total project eligible costs including FTI funding (€2 million) + consortium partner internal cost input (€500k) = €2.5million 
 Further  funding  requirement  for  first  2  year  period  following  project  completion  from  internal  partner  funding/bank 
facility/venture capital and income inflow from licensing + support fees = €0.5million. 
 Sales of product and associated services to tanks operators will yield above average income returns due to product/service 
uniqueness and attractiveness to the end-users based on benefits on all fronts, i.e. economic, safety, environmental and 
societal. 
Barriers/obstacles/framework Condition and MoniTank Strategy to address: 
Table 17: Barriers and mitigation plan 
Barriers/obstacles and 
framework conditions 
MoniTank strategy to address barriers 
State of the art methodologies of 
visual inspection and other NDT 
techniques 
MoniTank  through  effective  communication,  marketing  and  clients  engagement  will 
demonstrate the efficiency of MoniTank and will gain confidence of end users in investing 
in innovative monitoring system for millions of savings( as calculated above) 
Certification and Standardisation 
requirement for su ch monitoring 
and inspection products 
Certification and st andardisation process will start in early stage to ha ve approved quality 
software in compliance with plant  operation and ma intenance. Storage tanks/pressure 
vessel legislative requirements and protocols will be addressed in MoniTank as well. 
Table 18: PESTLE Analysis: shows dynamics of market of MoniTank 
POLITICAL 
 The involvement of partners from different EU countries will result in a widespread application of the project’s technology 
which means all countries will benefit. 
 Fossil fuel consumption forecast to increase until 2050, increasing demand for safe storage. Liquid and gas fuels (bio-fuels, 
hydrogen) will remain important particularly in the transport sector. 
Integrity NDT will provide a guideline to oil companies and local authorities in determining the safe boundary of petrol station 
ECONOMICAL 
 Enhanced competitiveness in the European and global market (USA, ASIA, etc.) 
 Enhanced competitiveness in the  EU growing market of unmanned/virtual assisted petrol stations 
SOCIO-CULTURAL 
 Reduction of risks and accidents related to leakages and vapour emissions, improved safety of petrol stations (workers, 
citizens) 
 Improve confidence in petrol stations security and in particular in unmanned/virtual assisted stations 
 Reduced need for internal inspections improves worker safety and reduces pollution. 
 New High skill jobs in the EU. 
TECHNOLOGICAL 
 High performance, innovative and low cost monitoring system for USTs, providing real time data on the structural integrity 
of the tanks 
 New methodology based on Risk Based Assessment(RBA) + Structural Health Monitoring(SHM) + Quantitative Risk 
Assessment(QRA) 
 Predictive maintenance of USTs 
LEGAL/LEGISLATION 
The leak detection standards (EN 13160 1-7): Leak detection systems. General requirements and test methods for interstitial 
spaces, leak protecting linings and leak protecting jackets 
The Water Quality Framework Directive (WQFD) adopted by European Parliament on July 18th 2000. 
AE standards: 
 ASTM E 1930 Standard Practice for Examination of Liquid-Filled Atmospheric and Low-Pressure Metal Storage Tanks 
MoniTank 16 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
Using Acoustic Emission. 
    ASTM E 1211 Standard Practice for Leak Detection and Location Using Surface-Mounted Acoustic Emission Sensors. 
 BS EN 15856 Non-Destructive Testing. Acoustic Emission. General Principles of AE Testing For the Detection of Corrosion 
within Metallic Surrounding Filled With Liquid. 
    HPIJ, A Recommended Practice for Acoustic Emission Testing For Corrosion in the Bottom Plate of Aboveground Tanks, 
2005. 
    BS EN 14584 Non-Destructive Testing. Acoustic Emission. Examination of Metallic Pressure Equipment during proof. 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
    Minimising the environmental impact and sustainability of human activity. 
    Reduction of risks of soil and water supplies pollution, environmental damages caused by fire and explosions.
2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
a) Dissemination and exploitation of results 
Dissemination and Exploitation Plan: 
MoniTank consortium is already working with European 
NDT companies (the problem sol vers), and the stor age 
tanks/pressure v essels manufacturers a nd tan ks 
operators (the problem owners). They have provided us 
with considerable information about their requirements 
and expectations of our sy stem. We will continue this 
dialogue and introduce, MoniTank as a potential solution 
for monitoring of underground pressure ve ssels. Our 
demonstrations at end-user sites FLOTEK will be critical 
to provide confidence that investment in the MoniTank 
will provide a return on their investments. The decision- 
making processes require high levels of proof; one of 
the outcomes of MoniTank will be the development of 
the   investment   cases   for   users,   tailored   to   their 
approach.  The  market  analysis  for  MoniTank  has 
 
been and will cont inuously be performed 
initially in  EU countries. MoniTank has  the 
commercial potential to reach glo bal mar kets, 
mainly the North America and Asia Pacific; 
these  markets  will  be  approached  in  first 
phase and rest of the world at a later stage, 
focusing on cri tical success factors for 
deployment. 
Credible  path  of  Innovation  delivery  to 
Market:  Supply chain and Business Model of 
MoniTank is shown in figure 15, 16. 
Dissemination and exploitation measures: 
INT NDT as coordinator will lead the 
development of the e xploitation and 
commercialisation strat egy with commercial 
partner IRIS and  other members; it will be 
based on the following activities (Activities to 
be implemented in WP5): 
 
 
Dissemination Measures: 
 
Figure 15 Supply Chain of MoniTank 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16 MoniTank Business Model 
The project will take a pragmatic approach to the dissemination of MoniTank, as it is seen as central to success. The main 
dissemination activities will be undertaken by INT NDT (in WP5) as mentioned below: 
 MoniTank project website will be the most important dissemination channel during the project. The MoniTank Web 
presence will serve as a central point of entry for all public materials. This site will also be integrated with social media. 
Marketing tools will be used to direct potential clients to the website. 
 Participation in EU and global activities such as NDT technical groups, conferences(e.g. World Conference on Non- 
Destructive Testing(WCNDT),BI NDT,ECNDT 2017,ASNT 2018 etc.) and concentration meetings(pressure vessels Group) 
 
 
MoniTank 17 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
 Cooperation with other projects and initiatives will bring valuable expertise and resources to the project, and will also 
be a key opportunity for advertising the MoniTank activities. 
 Technical papers and Trade Journals will be published in conference proceedings and journals. Special emphasis will be 
given to publishing in peer-reviewed reputable journals and trade journals. 
 By means of newsletters and project innovation briefs, the project will reach out to a wide audience and contribute to 
relevant EU policy developments in the area of international cooperation for research and innovation. 
 Publication of project results in trade journals and international conferences (such as European NDT Conference in 
Europe and the International Conference of NDT). 
 Preparing marketing material including project brochures directed both towards potential users and to other relevant 
organisations, e.g. Global and the European Institutes of NDT and European standards organisations. 
 
Exploitation Measures: 
 Route-to-Market:  The  customers  will  initially  be  storage  tanks  manufacturers,  fuel  station  operators  and  inspection 
companies) and NDT services systems suppliers. As a product and inspection services supplier company(INT NDT), we 
will  directly  approach  customers  with  their  stations  operating  USTs  in  EU  mainly;  Shell(14,000),  Total(11,500), 
BP(8,900) ,Esso (7,100), ENI(6,400), Orlen (2,800), AVIA(    2,600), OMV(2,500), Lukoil (2,500),Statoil(2,000). 
 Exploitation and Business models: There are several ways to ensure a positive return on investment from the MoniTank 
and its IP. However, we want to ensure maximum dissemination and exploitation of the technology without compromising 
our overall IP position or revenue potential. The development of a flexible licence model is vital for this. This approach 
would encompass: (i) An IP licence for market segment and territory, (ii) Regional supplier licenses for franchise operators 
of the MoniTank solution, (iii) licensed benchmarking and optimisation consultancies. 
 Marketing and sales: We will identify our first customers, many of whom we are already in discussion with in Tier 1 
market. We expect to license the sales of the software to agents in North America, Asia Pacific and US beside direct sales 
in EU. 
 Agents and Distributors: INT NDT, IRIS and TWI distributors and agents will be engaged to enable sales of MoniTank, 
agents list is detailed in section 4. 
Table 19: Project potential uses and relevance 
Potential Users and uses MoniTank Relevance 
Technological Sector 
and Research 
Community 
MoniTank provides research community knowledge being generated through the development of 
RBI algorithms and bringing applied research to commercial usage via MoniTank offering NDT 
research community progress beyond state of the art monitoring tool for tanks. 
Commercial Commercialization of Mon iTank will result in potential benefit for users inc luding maintenance 
service provider companies, fuel stations operators, tank manufacturers and process industry as it 
will   directly   impact   by   reducing  maintenance   cost,   downtime,   decommissioning  due   to 
maintenance, structural failures and leakages offering overall cost efficient and safe environment 
by doing preventive real time monitoring of underground storage tanks. MoniTank consortium will 
obtain €24 million in sales of MoniTank in first five years of commercialisation. 
Social MoniTank  system  offers  a  profit  margin  of  45%  thus  providing  an  attractive  opportunity  for 
investors to take economic benefit by investing in such an innovative technology. 
Environmental Contribution to safety by reducing possibility of accidents due to structural failure, fatigue in pipes 
thus creating safer workplace and environment for workers. 
Policy Making and 
Standards 
MoniTank will provide inputs to industrial standards legislations, emerging standards, policies 
regarding  inspection  protocols  and  needs  of  regular  monitoring  of  heavy  equipment  piping 
system. 
Skills and Educational 
Training 
MoniTank provides research community knowledge being generated through the development of 
RBI algorithms and bringing applied research to commercial usage via MoniTank offering NDT 
research community progress beyond state of the art monitoring tool. 
 
Key Stakeholders for commercial exploitation: External stakeholders to be involved in the latter end commercial exploitation 
of the project innovation will include EU and overseas Trade and Industry Associations, EU and global Chambers of Commerce 
and overseas trade delegations, fuel stat ions associations fr om EU countries. NDT inspection companies will be potential 
stakeholders for co mmercial e xploitation of Mon iTank System as well. Flot ek will play a  key role in  engaging their group 
companies globally for su ccessful market penetration of MoniTank. Integrity NDT will engage its distribution ne twork for 
successful exploitation. 
TWI has clients in drilling, production, storage and overland piping facility operators and owners. (as mentioned in members list, 
www.twi-global.com/membership/our-industrial-members ),BUL is providing research and technology development services to 
oil industry, Integrity NDT is NDT service and product development SME active on many sectors including tanks inspection and 
monitoring, IRIS is facilitating digital system for monitoring application in production industry. Flotek is tank manufacturer having 
distribution and sales of tanks all across EU. All consortium members of MoniTank are providing services or products to the 
MoniTank                                                                                             18 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
supply chain companies of inspection of tanks, targeted in MoniTank, thus will leverage the network for engaging clients and 
sales of MoniTank. Table 20: Competitiveness and Innovation capacity development of Consortium Members 
Partners Corporate Strategy Benefit to the competitiveness and Innovation 
Capacity 
INT NDT A  specialist  provider  of  innovative  inspection  services 
and solutions, our quality is highly valued by ourselves 
and our client customers. From small local manufacturers 
to international companies worldwide, we are committed 
to  delivering  cost  effective  Inspection  Solutions  and 
Technical Assurance of the integrity of p lant equ ipment 
and fabrications to our  clients, regulatory and insu rance 
bodies alike. Our qua lity systems are unde rpinned by 
ISO9001 certification. 
MoniTank  system development  and 
commercialisation will enable I NT NDT company to 
expand its product and services portfolio, enhance its 
revenues,  create  internally  more  jobs  and  expand 
new  markets  and  regions  for  sales  of  MoniTank 
system. 
IRIS To improve industry by creating and integrating profitable 
high-end technologies and solutions. 
MoniTank will directly impact competitiveness of IRIS 
as software and  communication mod ule being 
optimised by IRIS will create return on investment as 
well as will enhance prod uct com petencies and 
knowledge of condition monitoring applications. 
TWI TWI is one of the world’s foremost independent research 
and technology organisations, with expertise in materials 
joining and engineering processes as applied in industry. 
TWI aims to be the leader in  innovation, kno wledge 
transfer and in  solving prob lems across all aspects of 
manufacturing, fabrication and  whole-life integ rity 
management. 
MoniTank system will expand the inspection systems 
and services portfolio of TWI; will strengthen their 
expertise   in   investigating   and   monitoring   critical 
assets of age ing storage tanks. It will benef it TWI to 
enhance their ser vices of inspection as well as fuel 
stations integrity. 
BUL Brunel Innovation centre has been dedicated to close the 
gap between academic research and industrialisation of 
technology. BUL is dedicated to technology transfer and 
industrial impact of research. 
BUL utilises its expertise in NDT systems, 
development of algorithm and software platforms and 
will expand its resources, experiences and staff to 
have  more  provision  of  development  contracts  as 
innovation centre and technology developer. 
Flotek To provide high quality product, to manufacture products 
in  house  and  export  worldwide,  expand  markets  and 
business  through  in  house  product  development  and 
continuous innovation of high quality standards 
MoniTank    system    application    on    underground 
storage tanks being manuf actured by FLOTEK will 
help  them  to  enhance  its  life  by  integrating  such 
monitoring system with their tanks; we will be ab le to 
offer tan ks with condition m onitoring system another 
revenue stream. 
Beside activities already explained other steps before taking MoniTank to market will be: 
 IP protection of results/foregrounds: 
Technological development and scal ed 
up systems,    algorithms,    sensors, 
system architecture will be patented 
before commercialising the system. 
 Production  Plan:  In  order  to  reach 
targeted cost, manufacturing proce ss 
will be opt imised and c ost eff icient 
components sel ection will be made. 
Further, prod uction partner agreements 
will be secured. 
 Business       Development       Team 
Training: Business development, sales 
team  and  distribution  repr esentatives 
of  INT  NDT  will  be  trained  about 
product f eatures and applications to 
facilitate     marketing     and     client’s 
awareness. 
 Product Initial Introduction in Events 
and Marketing: INT NDT will attend NDT exhibitions 
 
Figure 17 MoniTank Branding Strategy 
and relevant stakeholders’ events for initial feedback, response and interest of potential clients in MoniTank system.B2B 
meetings will be organised with interesting stakeholders to obtain customer feedback and purchase interest as well. 
MoniTank 19 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
 Distributor’s agreements finalisation: INT NDT will formulate agreements with existing and new distributors globally for 
MoniTank. 
 Product  Packaging: INT NDT  will  develop  and fabricate  intrinsically safe enclosure/box  required  for electronic 
devices for packaging of MoniTank System. 
 Product Branding: INT NDT will develop and implement MoniTank product branding strategy as shown in figure below. 
 
Market Positioning, commercial strategy and Marketing/Sales Efforts: planned strategy is depicted in fig 18. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 18 MoniTank Marketing and Sales Effort Plan 
 
Table 21: Future Competitiveness Strategy 
Expected Results Further Development Strategy Measures of Future Competitiveness 
MoniTank st ructural he alth 
monitoring s ystem for 
underground storage tanks 
The system will be further, de veloped to extend its 
application to above ground s torage tanks, connected 
pipes, ve ssels and valves and all other equipment 
under different environmental conditions. The second 
generation  system  will  be  IoT  enabled  and  cloud 
based and will be  launched after 5 years of 
commercialising and sales of first version of MoniTank 
product. 
MoniTank product will be opt imised 
regularly as per c ustomer fe edback a nd 
continuous  upgradation and 
performance improvements will be done 
in     the     product     for     sustainable 
competitive advantage. 
 
Other Measures to enhance Impact: In addition to the fu ll suite of dissemination activities as previously described, the 
consortium will be publicising information surround the MoniTank system, its developments and the project results through a 
number of industry specific journals and publications. Examples of these publications include, but would not be limited to: - 
NDT Magazines, Industrial Engineering, Future tanks storage Technologies, Computerworld, Global Trading Magazine, I EEE 
journals. During the course of this action, all dissemination activities undertaken will focus on the advancement of the MoniTank 
system  from  TRL6  to  TRL9.  Once  the  action  is  complete  and  the  MoniTank  system  is  commercialised,  the  ongoing 
dissemination activities will be targeted at  enhancing exposure of the product to a wider market.  These actions will include but 
not be limited to (i) Agent demonstrations in Non-EU territories (ii) Direct engagement with petrol station Operators (iii) Case 
studies of MoniTank system and its operational results (iv) Downloadable content through the MoniTank website. 
 
b) Intellectual Property, knowledge protection and regulatory issues 
IPR Management: Specified IP required for sell the MoniTank product will be with Integrity NDT. This provides freedom for 
Integrity NDT to operate in the underground storage tanks market and to access capital required for further growth. An initial 
patent sea rch has be en con ducted which indicates that t here are no infring ement i ssues with other I P. This will be updated 
during the course of the action. IP generated during the a ction will reside with the company generating the IP, and where 
necessary for commercial exploitation of MoniTank. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MoniTank 20 
This proposal version was submitted by Onur YALIM on 25/10/2016 15:18:13 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.  
 
 
 
These IP arrangements are summarised in Table below: 
Table 22: IPR Management 
 
Background IP Ownership Freedom to Operate Foreground IP Ownership 
Systems Integration, instrumentation Integrity NDT Freedom to operate 
for project 
development work 
Manufacturing process 
of complete MoniTank 
system (patent) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Integrity 
NDT 
Will own the 
complete 
system and 
will share 
profit as per 
agreed in 
project 
consortium 
and IP 
ownership 
agreement, 
AE sensors configuration, know-how on 
CM and sensor deployment, signal and 
image processing of AE-GW techniques, 
pattern recognition algorithms, electronic 
design of systems for AE and vibration 
analysis. 
TWI Freedom to operate 
for project 
development work 
Integrated system of 
MoniTank (patent) 
Signal processing and data analysis BUL Freedom to operate 
for project 
development work 
Sensors validation, 
machine learning tool, 
training material and 
standards 
Software, communication and cloud 
based system 
IRIS Freedom to operate 
for project 
development work 
Copyright of User 
interface software and 
data analysis algorithms 
Measures to ensure Commercial Exploitation: 
In order to ensure commercial exploitation of developed IPs, the 
most important task will be  to prote ct the developed system via 
patent before exploitation; this will be done by coordinator with 
the support of other partne rs. Other m easures will include B2B 
meetings with potential clients, marketing of product in regions of 
interest and establishing a strong network of distribution agents 
and affiliate mar keter to engaged potential clients and boo st 
product sales. Fig 19 sho ws SWOT of Mon iTank where strengths 
and opportunities will be e xploited to cater e xternal threats and 
weaknesses will be countered by mitigation plan as proposed in 
section 3. 
Knowledge Management and Protection Strategy: 
Publishing scientific papers about the results is also one way 
to be used for MoniTank dissemination. All the publications will be 
identified as the result of  research of the project, which is 
supported by the European Commission (Horizon 2020 – SME 
instrument). General dissemination activities will include (i) the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 19 MoniTank SWOT Analysis 
inclusion of project results on the partner’s web sites. (ii) The publication of project results in technical papers, trade journals 
and conferences. (iii) Disclosure of information through project brochure to relevant associations (e.g. The National, European 
NDT  associations  and/  or  SHM  Users  Associations).  The  partners  will  publish  papers  on  the  application  of  MoniTank 
technology. 
Scientific knowledge and open access: 
With regards to scientific publications, the Project coordinator will compile all the papers draft and the indication from the 
authors about the selected journals for publication. Coordinator will identify and propose green access solutions for all  the 
scientific papers that will be written. Whether it will not be possible to reach the gold open access standard, the PC will define 
with the authors of the paper a good scientific journal that will allow the highest visibility possible. Besides, the PC in 
associations with the External stakeholders Board, will be engaged to use the green open access standard (e.g. USIEGEN), in 
order to have an online repository of the manuscripts. If the already existing academic repository for green open access will not 
be sufficient, the PC will decide to create a specific USIEGEN repository following the green open access standards. 
Regulations/Standards Requirements before commercial exploitation: 
Table 23: Relevant Directives to MoniTank 
EC Directives Details 
Council Directive 96/82/EC1 
(will  become  2012/18  from 
1st June 2015) 
MoniTank will contribute to managing the risk of operating proce ss plants as covered in this 
Directive on the Control of Ma jor Accident Hazards inv olving d angerous sub stances (T he 
COMAH Directive). 
 
MoniTank 21 
 
 
 
Directive  96/62/EC,  part  of 
2008/50/EC 
MoniTank will support this EU legislation on  pollution control as it prop oses to eliminate the 
requirement to empty and clean the sto rage tanks that releases huge amounts of hazardous 
fumes into the atmosphere. 
Directive  1999/92/EC,  with 
later amendments 
MoniTank will support this Directive setting the European minimum requirements for improving 
the safety and health protection of workers potentially at risk from explosive atmospheres. 
Directive  89/391/EEC,  with 
later amendments 
Also known as the Framework Directive that introduced measures to encourage improvements 
in the safety & health of workers at work will also be supported by MoniTank. 
Directive  2000/60/EC,  with 
later amendments 
This Directive established a framework for community action in the field of leakage of oil and 
the project will achieve the latter by offering more reliable storage tank inspection enabling the 
avoidance of hazardous liquid leakage into the ground. 
 
c) Communication 
With regard to external communication, in order to ensure a maximum outreach and impact of the MoniTank project, we will 
follow a multi-channel dissemination strategy in order to gain maximum visibility including academia, the industry, welfare and 
end-user organizations, policy makers, and the general public. These activities will be covered in WP5. 
 
The communication strategy will focus on: 
 Distributing relevant results among stakeholders and potential customers 
 Propagating research results in the form of new technologies, prototypes, and interactive concepts to the respective 
industry branches and public and corporate audiences; 
 Organizing seminars and workshops to disseminate knowledge on the methodology and technology used and the results 
obtained in the project to professional and non-professional social inclusion actors; 
 Informing the general public of the project results through a dynamic website with high-quality content explaining the idea of 
the system and the guidelines for the evaluation of technology; and 
 Development of an appropriate social media strategy aimed at academics; potential users of MoniTank and related third 
parties such as journalists, bloggers etc. 
 
TWI and BUL will publish and present the main publishable technical findings in refereed high impact journals, 
proceedings of international conferences and workshops, such as: 
 EUROCORR (Annual Conference organised by the EFC), NDT&E International 
 World and European Conference on Non Destructive Testing 
 International Journal of Condition Monitoring (BINDT publication) 
 Conferences of American Society of Non Destructive Testing