4. Starting date 
Unless a specific (fixed) starting date is duly justified and agreed upon during the preparation of the Grant Agreement, the project will 
start on the first day of the month following the entry into force of the Grant Agreement (NB : entry into force = signature by the 
Commission). Please note that if a fixed starting date is used, you will be required to provide a written justification. 
5. Duration 
Insert the duration of the project in full months. 
6. Call (part) identifier 
The Call (part) identifier is the reference number given in the call or part of the call you were addressing, as indicated in the 
publication of the call in the Official Journal of the European Union. You have to use the identifier given by the Commission in the 
letter inviting to prepare the grant agreement. 
7. Abstract 8. Project Entry Month 
The month at which the participant joined the consortium, month 1 marking the start date of the project, and all other start dates being 
relative to this start date. 
9. Work Package number 
Work package number: WP1, WP2, WP3, ..., WPn 
10. Lead beneficiary 
This must be one of the beneficiaries in the grant (not a third party) - Number of the beneficiary leading the work in this work package 
11. Person-months per work package 
The total number of person-months allocated to each work package. 
12. Start month 
Relative start date for the work in the specific work packages, month 1 marking the start date of the project, and all other start dates 
being relative to this start date. 
13. End month 
Relative end date, month 1 marking the start date of the project, and all end dates being relative to this start date. 
14. Deliverable number 
Deliverable numbers: D1 - Dn 
  
   
  
760528 - MoniTank                                           29  Part B  
15. Type 
Please indicate the type of the deliverable using one of the following codes: 
 R Document, report 
DEM Demonstrator, pilot, prototype DEC Websites, patent 
fillings, videos, etc. 
OTHER 
ETHICS Ethics requirement 
 ORDP Open Research Data Pilot 
16. Dissemination level 
Please indicate the dissemination level using one of the following codes: 
 PU Public 
 CO Confidential, only for members of the consortium (including the Commission Services) 
EU-RES Classified Information: RESTREINT UE (Commission Decision 2005/444/EC) 
EU-CON Classified Information: CONFIDENTIEL UE (Commission Decision 2005/444/EC) EU-SEC Classified 
Information: SECRET UE (Commission Decision 2005/444/EC) 
17. Delivery date for Deliverable 
Month in which the deliverables will be available, month 1 marking the start date of the project, and all delivery dates being relative to 
this start date. 
18. Milestone number 
Milestone number:MS1, MS2, ..., MSn 
19. Review number 
Review number: RV1, RV2, ..., RVn 
20. Installation Number 
Number progressively the installations of a same infrastructure. An installation is a part of an infrastructure that could be used 
independently from the rest. 
21. Installation country 
Code of the country where the installation is located or IO if the access provider (the beneficiary or linked third party) is an 
international organization, an ERIC or a similar legal entity. 
22. Type of access 
 VA if virtual access, 
TA-uc if trans-national access with access costs declared on the basis of unit cost, 
TA-ac if trans-national access with access costs declared as actual costs, and 
TA-cb if trans-national access with access costs declared as a combination of actual costs and costs on the basis of unit cost. 
23. Access costs 
Cost of the access provided under the project. For virtual access fill only the second column. For trans-national access fill one of the 
two columns or both according to the way access costs are declared. Trans-national access costs on the basis of unit cost will result 
from the unit cost by the quantity  
    
  
  
 4. Members of the Consortium   
  
   
  
760528 - MoniTank                                           30  Part B  
4.1. Participants  
 
  
Participant Number 1  
  
  
  
Organisation Name: INTEGRITY NDT MUHENDISLIK SAN. TIC. VE LTD.  
(Integrity NDT) Website: www.integrityndt.com  
  
Profile:  
Integrity NDT Mühendislik (INDT) was formed in 2010 in Ankara, Turkey to provide NDT (non-destructive 
testing) services, inspection management services and asset management software to fabrication, power 
and process plant engineers.  
  
Location and Contact   
INTEGRITY NDT MÜHENDİSLİK SANAYİ VE TİCARET LİMİTED 
ŞİRKETİ MelihGökcek Bulvarı EminelİşMerkezi  
18/94 IV  
OGSAN/ANKARA   
Tel: (+90) 3123944331 
Fax: 03123944332  
www.integrityndt.com.tr  
  
INDT is an SME with 11 full time employees.  
  
INDT, certified to ISO 9001:2008, has become a key service provider and approved supplier to the likes 
of GDF Suez, TUPRAŞ (Turkish Petroleum Refineries), SABUL Refineries (KSA), Ipragaz LPG and 
PETKIM Refinery, delivering costeffective inspection management, advanced inspection application, and 
asset management and software solutions, combined with over 35 years’ experienced engineers in 
planning and carrying out all aspects of NDT in fabrication, power and process plant worldwide.  
  
INDT staff has a suite of independent inspection qualifications conforming to ISO 9712 standards Levels 
II and III in all major NDT methods including eddy current, Magnetic particle inspection, liquid penetrant 
inspection, radiography, ultrasonic inspection, weld inspection and metallurgical inspection. Additionally 
INDT specialise in automated ultrasonic testing including phased array (PAUT) and time of flight 
diffraction (TOFD) inspections and developing, verifying and certifying inspection solution applications.  

  
   
  
760528 - MoniTank                                           31  Part B  
  
INDT also provides commercial inspection management software tools; Clients in the power generation, 
oil & gas and petrochemical industries utilise INDT inspection systems. These systems are also applied 
in-house to contracts run by INDT, ensuring accurate QA/QC reporting and efficient project management.  
  
INDT also have experience of selling in -house developed products such as our software systems, AUT 
system scanners and specialist application scanners and accessories.  
  
Commercially available software systems include:-  
QUARTZ: is a web based inspection management solution developed for planning and maintaining 
records over the pre and in- service life of a plant asset. The management of industrial plant is reliant on 
detailed system drawings, with unique identification assigned to critical items, for example, high pressure 
systems pipework; welds, hangers, and bends, etc.  From available plant drawings and site surveys, 
Quartz links scaled 3D CAD pipework modelling, through ‘live’ on screen tags, to a bespoke database of 
inspection records and a document management system, with the ability to attach original construction 
related documentation, as well as records of associated ongoing inspections and system management 
documentation. Providing engineers with a powerful means for planning inspection regimes and result 
management, it facilitates the easy consolidation and analysis of reported inspection results and data.  
  
QUARTSITE: We provide commercial outage management software ‘QUARTSITE’ into which we 
upload the  
shutdown/outage programmed inspection activities. The software is designed specifically to manage and 
track individual task status, and control stored outage QA/QC requirements. Throughout the project 
duration, ‘QUARTSITE’ provides vital up-tothe-minute inspection status reports for every inputted activity, 
through to the final detailed test reports produced at project close-out.  
  
The use of this software to control and manage work scope activities creates real efficiencies in 
the following areas; 
  Defines the precise inspection work scope and the tests to be applied.  
• Provides ‘Work Pack’ Instructions to Inspection Personnel, including specification of the 
procedures and techniques to be applied.  
• Monitors and controls the progress and status of inspections, providing the client and other 
site teams with regular reports on progress, status and any items with commercial 
implications.  
• Processes results through established acceptance criteria or through metallurgist or plant 
specialists  
• Ensures that all activities are completed, the QA ‘loop’ is closed out, and the plant made 
available for service in the desired timescales  
• Produces comprehensive controlled electronic inspection reports.  
  
  
  
   
  
760528 - MoniTank                                           32  Part B  
  
Mission and Objectives  
INDT specialise in the inspection management of power plant outages and refinery shutdown ‘turnarounds’. 
Through our industry wide experience of NDT we deliver a range of services in our approach to plant 
inspection and asset management, including a range of metallurgical analysis and materials testing. We also 
supply commercial inspection management software; it is the use of our in- house developed software systems 
which significantly adds value to our asset management approach to project management from outset to 
delivery.  
  
A specialist provider of innovative inspection services and solutions, our quality is highly valued by ourselves 
and our client customers. From small local manufacturers to international companies worldwide, we are 
committed to delivering cost effective inspection solutions and technical assurance of the integrity of plant 
equipment and fabrications to our clients, regulatory and insurance bodies alike. Our quality systems are 
underpinned by ISO9001 certification.  
  
Investing in our Engineering team is our investment in our future and what supports our integrity to our clients, 
and we are committed to a continual training programme. Our team of engineers supports our integrity and 
commitment to our clients. Across our team of engineers, INDT hold independent inspection qualifications 
conforming to ISO9712 standard, levels II and III in all methods; magnetic particle, liquid penetrant, eddy 
current, ultrasonic and radiographic inspection. Additionally INDT specialise in advanced ultrasonic testing 
TOFD and phased array. We have a clear focus is on the future and continual investment in technology in our 
field, in alignment with our commitment to our clients and their requirements is our priority.  
  
Centred in Ankara Turkey we have; offices, workshops, metallurgy/development and training facilities.  
Role in Project:  
At the Phase 1 - Feasibility Study stage, INDT will be the single SME in the project and will act as Project 
Coordinator. The company directors/senior managers will make all of the decisions relating to the project as 
follows:- (a) All contact with the EC project officer/representative  
(b) The day to day running of the project according to the work plan  
(c) All dealings with prospective subcontractors  
(d) Resolution of any problems that arise  
Reasons for Participation:  
INDT specialise in advanced NDT applications in the energy industry sector including oil &gas and petrochemical 
as well as power generation. They are therefore enthusiastic to explore the market potential for this specific 
technology application of LNG Tank inspection as they see significant EU and global market potential. Having 
significant experience in AUT on Tank inspections and  
  
existing commercial links, are well positi oned to commercialise and exploit the TANK -TEST system following 
Phase 2 engineering design, build, validation and demonstration should the Phase 1 Feasibility Study and 
Business Plan justify it.  
Existing Customers/End Users:  
GDF Suez  
HUBCO HubPower Power Plant Energy Generation (Pakistan)  
STANWELL Energy (Australia)  
TUPRAŞ (Turkish Petroleum Refineries)  
SABUL Chemical Manufacturing (KSA), Ipragaz LPG 
(Turkey) PETKIM Refinery (Turkey)  
Key Personnel:  
  
  
   
  
760528 - MoniTank                                           33  Part B  
Görkem Bayten BSc Physics Engineering, MSc MBA.  
Görkem has been involved in NDT and Inspection Management for 8 years and holds a BSc Honours degree plus 
a suite of Level II qualifications in NDT and Weld Inspection,He specialises in Automated UT application including 
Phased Array, TOFD and the development of ‘solutions’ to specialist applications. Combined with extensive 
experience in devising and advising on asset management software solutions to plant operators.Görkem is also 
experienced in managing software develop ment with regard to client requirements and the business 
development/marketing/distribution and systems management, for an existing and growing client base utilising 
Integrity NDT Software products.  
  
Özgen Bulut BSc Physics Engineering.  
Özgen has been involved in NDT and Inspection Management for 8 years and holds a BSc Honours degree plus 
a suite of Level II qualifications in NDT and Weld Inspection combined with extensive experience in devising and 
advising on asset management software solutions to pla nt operators. He also covers all other areas of the 
business, from outage inspection management to specialist ultrasonic testing applications such as TOFD, Phased 
Array, and High Frequency boiler tube Oxide Thickness measurements, and EMATs. He also worked  on design, 
manufacture and sale of basic ultrasonic testing accessories such as probe splitters and umbilicals.  
  
Onur Yalim BSc Physics Engineering.  
Onur has been involved in NDT and Inspection Management for 2 years and holds a BSc Honours degree plus  
Level II qualifications in NDT and Weld Inspection. He is experienced in shutdown/outage inspection applications 
including AUT TOFD.  
  
John Stephenson IMechE, MInstNDT, LEP.  
John has been involved in NDT and Inspection Management for 30 years. He is a former employee of the Central 
Electricity Generating Board and Nuclear Electric and holds a suite of Level II and III qualifications in non -
destructive testing. He specialises in outage or plant shutdown inspection management, and to date has managed 
inspection activities on over twenty Alstom 13E2 Gas Turbine and Steam Turbine shutdowns around the world. 
Additionally, John is highly experienced in carrying out semi and fully automated ultrasonic inspections and has 
designed and manufactured Integrity NDT semi-automated TOFD (Time Of Flight Diffraction) and Phased Array 
Scanner systems, as well as bespoke scanners for one-off special application solutions.  
Software Systems - John has been involved in the design/development of Integrity NDT Software products for over 
10 years, and has experience of marketing/sales and distribution to an existing client base.  
  
    
Participant Number 
2  
  
  
  
  
  
Organisation Name: INNOVACIO I RECERCA INDUSTRIAL I SOSTENIBLE 
SL (IRIS)  
Website:www.iris-eng.com  

  
   
  
760528 - MoniTank                                           34  Part B  
Organisation Description:  
IRIS (www.iris.cat ) is a technology SME that was established in Barcelona in 2007 and specialises in photonics 
(spectroscopy) and sensor technology integration and SMAC (Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) Technology 
for the development of advanced monitoring and control so lutions and for IoT -enabling equipment and 
machinery for transitioning industry to  the  Industry4.0 paradigm. To date, our target sectors are the food 
industry, agriculture, pharmaceutical and chemicals.  
We have engineering and production facilities in S pain and in 2016 we opened Commercial Offices in San 
Francisco and New York, as part of our international commercialization expansion strategy. We have a sister 
company in Dublin, VISUM Ltd. that specialises in the development of NIR spectroscopy -based measurement 
systems, and we also have a shareholding in a technology start -up in Finland that specialised in time -gated 
Raman (Timegate Instruments OY).  
We are ISO 9001:2008 certified and we are one of the few Spanish companies to also have UNE -EN-ISO 
166002: Management Systems R&D&I certification.  
We currently employ 50+ staff and have a turnover of approx. € 4 M + IRIS is a member of the following networks: 
SPIE (International Society for Optics and Photonics), SECPHO (Southern European Cluster of Photonics), 
SPIRE (Sustainable Process Industries). IRIS is an SME Champion (has an SME Instrument award - Phase 2 
project).  
Relevant Publications:  
▪ IRIS provides advanced monitoring solutions to the industry: www.iris.cat In terms of its market expertise, 
since 2011, IRIS has been building a portfolio of private B2B contracts and has developed advanced 
monitoring solutions and products for a number of companies, predomi nantly from Catalonia, but also 
serving some international companies, with references such as:GESCASER, TORRES, ESTRELLA 
DAMM, OLLER, ITPSA, ALMIRALL PRODESFARMA, NESTLE, ETC.  
▪ E. Gaston (2013). Hyperspectral imaging (HSI) - an emerging platform technology  that is set to 
revolutionise process monitoring and quality control. Pharmaprocess 2013, Innovation Forum in 
Pharmaceutical Process. Barcelona, 20 October 2013.  
▪ E. Sola, C. Jumilla (2011). Composting monitoring: a real world challenge for WSNs, 4th Intel liCIS 
Workshop, Vilanovai la Geltru (Barcelona), Spain between 13-14 June 2011.  
▪ "Wireless Sensor Network for Smart Composting Monitoring and Control".Oscar Casas, MargaLópez, 
Marcos Quílez, Xavier Martinez-Farre, Gemma Hornero, Carlos Rovira, Mirta R Pinilla, Pedro M Ramos, 
Beatriz Borges, Hugo Marques, Pedro Silva GirãoMeasurement 01/2014; 47:483 - 495.  
▪ “Delivery of courses to industry in chemometrics tools for Process Analytical Technologies (PAT), e.g.: 
“Chemometric tools forprocess analytical technologies. ChemoPAT”, University of Tarragona 16-18 July 
2014; PAT: Innovando en tecnología de controlde procesos farmacéuticos (Asociación de Químicos e 
Ingenieros del IQS)- May 28th 2015.  
Relevant Projects:  
  
HYPERA: Disruptive detection Technology Grant Agreement 726572, SME Instrument Phase II, on-going) IRIS 
Coordinator.  
IbD: Intensified by design.Grant Agreement 680565. H2020 SPIRE, on-going) IRIS Coordinator.  
Propat: Tackling the future of plant operation – How to integrate online data-analytics, process control, and PAT 
for optimal plant operation. Grant Agreement 637232. H2020 SPIRE, on-going) IRIS Coordinator.  
ShareBox: Secure management platform for shared process resources (Grant agreement no.: 680843, H202 0 
SPIRE, on-going) IRIS Coordinator.  
WASTE2FUELS. Sustainable production of next generation biofuels from waste streams. (Grant Agreement no: 
654623 Horizon 2020-LCE-11, on-going). IRIS Coordinator  
  
   
  
760528 - MoniTank                                           35  Part B  
 
  
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
  
IRIS is equipped with a Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, an FTIR-ATR 
(Interspectrum), two  
UVVIS(PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), one Extended -SWIR (StellarNet) and one NIR (Mightex) 
spectrophotometers as well as a SWIRHyperspectral imager (Specim-Xenics). The associated staff are trained 
and skilled in chemometrics modelling by using a commercialsuite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad 
hoc non-commercial chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes). Electronics, mechanical and opti cal 
workshops and laboratories equipped with up -to-date hardware and tools: signal generators,wide band 
oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for programming microcontrollers, CNC-
millingmachines for electronic and mechani cal prototyping, and CAD software [SolidWorks], among others. 
ZEEMAX software for the designof optical systems and design setup by means of advanced optical components 
and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasersand light sources and related “opticalware”).  
In addition IRIS has an INNOVATION HUB with its own co -creation area that has floor -to-ceiling blackboards 
for brainstorming andconceptualisation, a demo and presentation area, a sprint room. In addition, IRIS has an 
auditorium for more formal presentations and training.  
Profile of Main Persons  
MSc. ALEJANDRO ROSALES . Male. M. Sc. in Physics from the Universidad de La Habana (1986). His 
background comprises theoretical and technical skills in several scientific and technological areas: optics, lasers, 
high vacuum, colorimetry, UV -VIS- NIRMIR spectroscopy, chemometrics and design of measurement 
instruments. He has extensive practical experience in programming, electronics and mechanical CAD design as 
well as R&D methodology and management . His career has included positions as researcher applications 
engineer, design engineer, business developer and R&D manager. In 2000s, he worked in the FTIR 
spectroscopy field applied to quality control in the wine industry, whereby he developed two new measurement 
instruments for wine analysis. His career as industrial physicist has been focused in applying his wide expertise 
to provide solutions for industrial problems. Knowledge in PAT, QbD, DoE and he has delivered numerous 
courses to industry in the f ield of practical PAT adoption. Knowledge in leading the building of chemometrics 
and multivariate analysis modelling tools. He is the Science and Technology Manager in IRIS. During this project, 
Alejandro will act as the Innovation Manager and he will also work closely with the engineering team in IRIS.  
  
  
  
   
  
760528 - MoniTank                                           36  Part B  
DR. TIMOTHY KEHOE. Male PhD in Engineering, University College Cork, Ireland- developed an IR photometric 
measurement system for thermal diffusivity in anisotropic materials. Masters in Optoelectronic s, Queens 
University Belfast. Designed an Echelle spectrometer while based at Andor Technology Ltd. Worked at Tyndall 
National Institute, Cork, and Catalan Institute of Nanotechnology, Barcelona, developing diffractive optical and  
acousto-optical  metrolo gy  techniques  for  nanotechnology applications, in particular for characterisation of 
nanoscale structures fabricated by nanoimprint lithography and directed self- assembly. Other research activities: 
quantification of ordering in self -assembled structures by image analysis techniques and optical sensors using 
hydrogel materials.  
OONAGH MC NERNEY Female Director and Co-founder of IRIS. Hons. Degree in International Business (1992), 
Uni. of Stirling, Scotland. Prior to establishing IRIS in 2007, she spent 15 years working in the industry, technology 
institutes and Business Development Agencies in the areas of technology transfer, innovation, business 
development and industry foreign direct investment. Expertise in new product development, leadership of applied 
R&D, commercialisation, branding and marketing.  
COLM DIGBY. Male. General Manager and Co -Founder of IRIS. B.Sc. Hons. in Applied Computing and a 
Diploma in Industrial Studies from the University of Ulster, Magee College, N.Ireland. Prior to IRIS he worked in 
the IT sector throughout Europe holding positions at IBM Europe in Paris, European Space Agency in Rome and 
Picas SA in Barcelona, where he was involved in many trans -European projects involving the sharing of data 
across international borders. With PICIS he has been involved in the implementation and support of PICIS Health 
Care system around Europe and the US.  
JOAN PUIG LAGO. MALE.  Operations Director at IRIS. Engineering Degree in Electronics from 
UniversitatPolitecnica de Matar óand in Industrial Organization from Escola UniversitatPolit écnicad’Enginyers 
Industrials de Terrassa. Executive Education inProgram for Management Development from ESADE. 12 years 
industry experience in automation of industrial processes for the main automoti ve & aeronautics companies: 
Mercedes, VW, SEAT, EADS, BOEING, etc. Solid knowledge in definition of strategies and targets, and aligning 
systems and workflows, according to the operations schedules and within agreed costs and high quality levels. 
Extensive experience in managing Technical Departments and Operations such as organization and monitoring 
of production and processes, development of operational plans, and giving guidance in the design and in the 
implementation of the final solutions  
  
.  
  
  
IRIS SALES TEAM, DISTRIUTION CHANNELS AND 
PRODUCTION  
FACILITIES INFOGRAPHICS  
  
   
  
760528 - MoniTank                                           37  Part B  
  
  
 
Participant Number 
3  
  
 
Organisation: TWI Ltd.  
Website:www.twi-global.com  
Organisation Description:  
TWI Ltd (TWI) works across all industry sectors with expertise in key aspects of materials, materials joining, 
structural integrity, static and dynamic testing and Non -Destructive Testing (NDT) and Non -Destructive 
Evaluation (NDE). The majority of TWI’s activities (65%) are contracts, funded by industry and built around 
the development of advanced technologies. TWI is also an active participant in collaborative programs in 
Europe. TWI has a substantial fee paying industrial membership of around 3000 members from 70 countries 
centered mainly in energy-related business sectors such as oil & gas, petrochemical, process plant, power 
generation and their support industries (e.g. oil & gas plant maintenance and NDT). Also, in the 
transportation industry sector of aerospace/air-transport, marine/shipping, rail and automotive and their 
support manufacturing and maintenance organizations. This extensive network with the industry and its 
state-of-the-art facilities makes TWI a perfect partner for the SmartSense optimization & validation and 
commercialization process, creating a direct connection with international markets and targeted industries. 
TWI has a continued growth reaching €80M revenues and assets for over €100M in 2014. Currently with 
€8M of financial surplus and more than 1000 employees, TWI is one of the most successful RTO in the 
world. TWI has been involved in over 90 European framework projects, many of which have been in the 
field of NDT and Condition Monitoring involving ultrasonic testing. Projects of this type are usually targeted 
at the aerospace, oil & gas and energy related industries. TWI, therefore, has the ideal credentials to deliver 
a successful project on time and within budget. TWI will be heavily involved in SmartSense exploitation at 
the end of the project and particularly where the project developments are highly relevant to their industrial 
membership that is currently around 3000 organisations in over 70 countries.  
Role in the project:  
• Leading Project management as Coordinator of the SmartSense product optimization using 
TWI’s expertise in product development, NDT and optimization.  
• Risk management plan for both commercial and technical SmartSense (WP7)  
• Customization of SmartSense for customer applications and adjustment of SmartSense  
system for precommercial application.  

  
   
  
760528 - MoniTank                                           38  Part B  
Relevant Publications:  
• Lee Smith, Mike Gittos and Philip Threadgill, 1999. High quality and productivity joining 
processes and procedures for titanium risers and flowlines. Titanium Risers and Flowlines' 
Trondheim, Norway, 17 February 1999; published by SINTEF, Trondheim, Norway, 1999.  
• J R Rudlin, C R A Schneider and G R Razmjoo, 2004. Reliability of inspection for root 
flaws in riser girth welds 23rd International Conference on Offshore Mechanics and Arctic 
Engineering OMAE, Vancouver, Canada 20-25 June 2004.  
• Graham R Edwards, 2007. Detection of corrosion in offshore risers using guided 
ultrasonic waves. 26th International Conference on Offshore Mechanics and Arctic 
Engineering, OMAE 2007, San Diego, California, 10-15 June 2007. Paper no. 29407.  
• Amir Bahrami, 2009. Fatigue performance of riser girth welds for deep-water applications. 
Deep Water Technology Conference, Asia, Kuala Lumpur, Asia.  
• Colum M. Holtam (TWI North America LLC), David P. Baxter (Atkins Oil & Gas), 2001. 
Fatigue performance of sour deepwater riser welds: crack growth vs. endurance. ASME 
30th International Conference on Ocean, Offshore and Arctic Engineering, OMAE 2011, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands, June 19-24, 2011.  
  
   
  
 
  
  

  
   
  
 
760528 - MoniTank                                           35  Part B 760528 - MoniTank                                           
36  Part B  
  
  
TWI facilities.  
Profile of Main Persons  
Name: Angela Angulo  Gender: Female  
Role: Project coordinator  Education:BSc, MSc Structural Integrity  
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
Extensive laboratory facilities enable products to be assembled from very small geometry electronics and medical 
diagnostics devices to large power generation and cooling systems. TWI’s national and international networks also allow 
it to source suitable suppliers of materials, machining, assembly, inspection and control equipment. It can also provide 
training and post production back‐up in terms of the production line and product troubleshooting and additi onally, it 
can assist in product upgrading and life extension.  
• Full‐scale pipe bend test rig  
• Full‐scale pressure and burst test facilities  
• Seven resonance test rigs for full‐scale accelerated fatigue testing of pipes  
• Weld corrosion testing facilities  
• Sweet and sour service testing capability at high temperatures and pressures  
• High‐pressure hydrogen testing facilities  
• Small, medium and large‐scale testing in H2S  
• Testing facilities to supply NDT, mechanical and corrosion testing  
• Rapid decompression testing  
• Fluid compatibility testing  
  
   
  
 
Ángela is a Condition Monitoring Project Leader at TWI. Ángela has a master’s degree in Industrial 
Engineering from the University of Navarra, and she is pursuing further study in the technical area of 
Structural Integrity. She started her career development at Advanced Technologies Inspiralia, on the 
development of electronic control systems, mechanics, hardware and commun ications software 
development area. She was also working in collaboration with the business development strategy, 
validation of concepts, identification of partners and report development. On January 2013 Ángela joined 
TWI, Integrity Management Group, whic h provides costs savings and reliability assurance through the 
development and application of advanced innovative inspection, assessment and risk management 
solutions for Oil & Gas or any other industry. Within the Condition Monitoring Section, Ángela works on the 
following areas of expertise: SHM using vibration analysis, acoustic emission, modal analysis and guided 
ultrasonic waves, LRUT, novel ultrasonic techniques (emats, magnetostrictive transducers) and NDT 
performance demonstration.  
Name: Graham Edwards  Gender: Male  
Role: WP2 leader  Education: C. Eng, BSc Hons.  
Graham Edwards has over 40 years of experience in Non -Destructive Testing (NDT). Along with several 
other graduates, he started his career in NDT with the Unit Inspection Company, where he received training 
in all aspects of NDT and weld inspection. In 1973, he was one of the first ultrasonic test technicians to gain 
CSWIP approval. For the next four years, he worked in the N. Sea offshore oil, the French nuclear power 
and Middle Eastern petrochemical industries. In 1977, he joined Baugh and Weedon Ltd. as an Applications 
Engineer and was involved in the development of the award-winning ‘Seaprobe’ underwater ultrasonic test 
equipment. In 1981, he became a lecturer in the School of Applied  NDT at The Welding Institute (TWI), 
before moving over to the NDT Research department in 1986. There, his research projects included NDT 
of plastics and composites, expert systems, and acceptance criteria in BS5500 for ultrasonic testing. He 
also set up the specialist site services team. While at TWI, he collaborated with the French Welding Institute 
on the NDT of fillet welds and was seconded to the Edison Welding Institute in the USA for two years to set 
up the NDT section there.  
  
760528 - MoniTank                                           37  Part B  
  
   
  
760528 - MoniTank                                           42  Part B  
Participant 
Number 4  
  
  
  
Organisation Name: FloteksPlastikSanayiveTicaret A.Ş. (Floteks)  
Website: www.floteks.com.tr  
Organisation  Description:  
FLOTEKS, since 1983, is a fully integrated Rotational Moulding production plant and is the first of its kind in 
Turkey. It is located in Bursa, the heart of Turkish Automobile Industry; 20 km from one of the biggest seaports 
in Turkey, Gemport. Floteks emp loys 17 engineers and 23 technicians within its 146 people staff in order to 
maintain leading technologies that enable customers around the world to build safer, lighter, durable plastic 
articles for vehicles, infrastructure, municipalities, FMCG, storage, gardens, homes, etc. Through memberships 
in many professional and trade associations, as well as extensive QC, research and development facilities, 
Floteks has been successful in supplying many complicated technical and difficult to produce products to th e 
market. Plastic liner parts of some of the newly introduced composite fuel tanks in the market are products of 
Floteks. The company has certifications ISO 9001, EN 16949, EN 14001, 16949, 14001, EN 13589, EN 1176, 
OHSAS 18001001, obtained from organisati ons such as TÜV, BSI and TSE and a fully equipped Plastic 
Products R&D lab. For the last 8 years, Floteks has developed its own infrastructure of products using the 
TUBITAK framework and has successfully sold the  know -how of  these  products  to India  (V ectus Inc.,  
www.vectus.in ) and made a license agreement for 7 years.  
• Production Pallett: 70 % of the production for automotive industry, main customers OEM’s, 
Mercedes, Suzuki, CNH, Ford, Hyundai, Renault… Diesel tanks, Ad Blue tanks, air ducts, water 
tanks of various sizes, roofs being among the main products. Complying with all the product 
standards of the main automotive OEM’s  
• 30 % of the production various rotomolded articles, from 1 kg weight to 700 kg weight. Floteks is 
touching a wide variety of sectors. From water, chemical, rain harvesting tanks, for both 
underground and above ground storage, manholes for infrastructure, sewage systems, 
playgrounds, trash containers, both underground and above ground… Production complying with 
many EU standards e.g. EN 13598, EN 1176, etc. Customers  

  
   
  
 
  
  

  
760528 - MoniTank                                           44  Part B  
 
  
760528 - 
                                          39  
 MoniTank  
 Part B  
Relevant Publications:  
 
  
 “An ERP system for Rotomolding” by Mehmet Beysel, Rotoworld, Volume X Issue 4, 2014, P.56  
 
  
 “Maintaining QC and QA as a Rotomolder” by Celal Beysel, Rotoworld, Jan / Feb 2015  
 
  
 EU Funding for Rotomolders Facilitates R&D and Innovation by CelalBeysel, May / June 2015  
 
  
 Various presentations with various topics by Celal Beysel throughout the world in Associations of Rotomolders, since over 15 
years for example in Cairns/ Australia, Minneapolis / USA, Lyon / France, Ostend/ Denmark, New Delhi / India, Goa / India and 
lately, the presentations in ARMO event Sept. 2015 in Nottingham, GB: “Can a Rotomolder Afford to Research and Innovate?” 
and in STAR India event in Goa, February 2016, “ Do You Know Your costs” and “NDT Systems for Rotomolders”.  
  
Product Range:  
Floteks has designed various products with IP rights, from playgrounds to tanks and also has many patent applications, both in 
Turkey and abroad.  
• 
  
 Both Vectus and PDL are acting as agents in their respective countries, Vectus already selling some products in India. 
• 
  
 Various distributors in Iraq and Saudi Arabia.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
 
    
  
Underground container  
   
  
 
  
Patent applications  
 

  
760528 - MoniTank                                           46  Part B  
  
  
 Some services that Floteks provides:    
  
  
  
PRODUCT TESTS  
 
  
Regulation tests  
 
  
  
  
    
CONSTRUCTION & DEVELOPMENT  
  
Moulds  
   
  

  
   
760528 - MoniTank                                           47  Part B  
 Relevant Projects:  
• Floteks has completed 5 different R&D projects using TUBITAK/Turkey funds successfully. Utilising the knowledge attained from 
one of the TUBITAK Projects, links have been established with Vectus Ltd in India for manholes and a licensing agreement with the 
company for 7 years has been created. Total Commercial Value of know how transfer, licence and mould sales to Vectus: over 
€900,000.  
• Research for a Rotomoldable PP developed by an Australian company, PSD ( www.plasticsales.com.au).As a result of this project, 
inspecting mould ability, weldability, low temperature and long term creep behaviour of the PP have developed further, with 
funding provided by PSD. Prof. Yusuf Menceloglu ( yusufm@sabanciuniv.edu ) from Sabanci University in Turkey is the advisor in 
this project. Commercial value up‐to‐now for the PP research: over €100,000.  
• Manufacturing trial productions of LFRT (Long Fiber Reinforced Thermoplastics) with twin‐screw extruder, using PP and testing the 
effects of LFRT in Rotomoulded products, self funded.  
• Participated in various EU Projects such as: Partner in F7 Project DeiceUT (concluded in August 2015) and Coordinator SME partner 
in FP7 “SafeHPower” project ( to be concluded in February 2016).  
• Successfully submitted the H2020 SME‐I Project “LeakFree” as  the sole beneficiary and Coordinator. The Project started in June 
2015. The aim is to detect leakage of tanks for OEM’s after production, using acoustic emission.  
  
   
760528 - MoniTank                                           48  Part B  
 

  
   
760528 - MoniTank                                           49  Part B  
  
Profile of Main Persons  
Name:V.CelalBeysel 
Gender: Male  
Background:  
CelalBeysel founded Floteks in 1977, as a small company with 4 personnel. He has developed the company to be the 
leading rotomolder, known worldwide. Besides being an entrepreneur, he has been chairman of major business associations 
both local and nationwide (4 years BUSIAD and 5 years TURKONFED). Celal has worked as the president of a respected 
foundation for Vocational Education in Turkey (5 years BEGEV), having written many articles on  Vocational Education, 
SME’s, R&D and Innovation, published in Turkish newspapers and magazines in Turkey and abroad.  
  
Education:  
Chemical Engineer graduated from Zurich Technical University ETH, speaks English, German and French.  
  
Work Experience:  
President of the Board and Founder of Floteks, a major plastics manufacturer in Turkey using Rotational Moulding 
Technology.  
  
Product Development Experience:  
• Constructed his own rotomolding machines in 1983, which the company used till 2000, until he decided to go over 
to state of the art German designed machinery  
• Personally constructed pulverisers used for rotomolding production in 1983, which are still in use, after some 
renovations.  
• Constructed the extruders used in the company for compounding, making renovations when necessary.  
• Has led the design team to design products and moulds for production in Floteks, since the beginning.  
• All product development, R&D and Innovation efforts for products, raw materials and finishing jigs/devices in 
Floteks are lead, advised and controlled by CelalBeysel.  
• Currently leads the automation efforts in the company, for welding and NDT mostly.  
• Has developed the technical knowledge for manholes and infrastructure products for Floteks.  
• Has introduced the know-how of manholes to India and sold knowledge/ license to a major company, with a 
commercial value of €900,000.  
• Has developed underground garbage collection system for a municipality in Bursa, achieved a sales value of 
€600,000.  
• Has bought up the idea for the EU project “Leakfree” and helped in writing the project proposal.  
• Has led the PP development and testing efforts for Australian company PSD, sales value over €100,000.  
  
Intellectual Property Management:  
CelalBeysel is leading the IP rights applications and management in the company. The IP Protection i n Floteks started in 
the 1990’s, when Floteks introduced Rotomoulded Playgrounds to the Turkish market, but was severely copied. Starting in 
2000, when the company managed the “Quantum Jump” to be a Co-designer for Automotive OEM’s, the competition started 
to copy technical articles as well. CelalBeysel has been instrumental in defending Floteks’ rights with patents.  
  
Innovation Management:  
Floteks, being a supplier to the automotive OEM’s, has to stay a technological leader and innovation / R&D champion, to 
be able to protect its position as market and technology leader within the very competitive automotive world. Therefore, 
CelalBeysel, as the founder of  the company, has left the daily concerns of the company to the experienced Floteks team 
and is occupied with developments needed for the future of Floteks.  
  
   
760528 - MoniTank                                           50  Part B  
CelalBeysel is known to the rotomolding world, as he is attending many meetings of the rotomolding associations 
throughout the  
  
 
  
  
   
760528 - MoniTank                                           51  Part B  
world, for networking and also presenting his ideas / know how / leadership. This way, he was able to 
commercialise the manhole know how of the company, achieved by doing a research project with the Turkish 
funds of the organisation TUBITAK, also persuade the Australian PP developer to use Floteks’ premises and 
knowhow for testing the material. Receiving SME-I Phase 2 Funding for the Project LEAKFREE for his company 
FLOTEKS was his last success.  
Name: Ali Balcı 
Gender: Male  
Background:  
Has knowledge in the use of Catia V5R16, Autocad, Ansys FEA, Solidworks. He has training and Certificates 
for Control Apparatus Design, Design Seminar on Rotational Moulding Technology, Metrolog XG VER 9.002, 
Geomagic Studio, Patran Training, Statistical Process Control, A.P.Q.P. an P.P.A.P. , ISO/TS 16949:2002, MSC 
M arc – Patran Nonlinear FEA Training, ANSYS Nonlinear Training, Training in Efficiency and Cost Reduction 
Techniques, CNC Milling, CastAluminum and Sheet Metal Mold Design and Production Training. He is the most 
experienced mechanical engineer in the company, having an insight in CAD, CAM, FEA, mold design, product 
design, production and engineering analysis.  
  
Education:  
Mechanical Engineer graduated from Uludağ University Bursa (2004), speaks English. Attended many courses 
in CATIA, ANSYS,  
ROBOTICS, Mitsubishi and Siemens PLC’s, Festo Academy.  
  
Work Experience  
2 Years AKTAS Holding, a major EPDM compounder and producer for Air Springs for 
Vehicles in Turkey 10 years Floteks, a major Plastics manufacturer in Turkey using 
Rotational Moulding Technology  
  
Product Development Experience:  
In charge of the R&D Lab in Floteks. With his education, training and long years of experience, he is designing 
and producing automation devices for Floteks, also programming the PLC’s assembled in these machines.  
  
Intellectual Property Management:  
Ali is one of the major contri butors within the firm for writing patents; additionally he is responsible for creating 
the designs of the products to be patented.  
  
Innovation Management:  
Leads mechanical innovation and R&D activities, makes FEA’s for new products.  
Name: Mehmet Beysel 
Gender: Male  
  
   
760528 - MoniTank                                           52  Part B  
Background:  
Started life as an entrepreneur, Mehmet gained significant international experience selling the products of his 
company Flopark throughout the world, including: Sudan, USA, GB, Germany, Russia and Israel. Later, he 
handed Flopark over to a professional team, however he stayed on as the president of the board whilst taking 
over the daily running of Floteks. He speaks English and  
German.  
  
Education:  
Graduated in 2000 from Duke University, Durham / USA,  Major in International relations, Minor in Economics  
  
Work Experience:  
Took over the company, Flopark, a Playground production company, in 2001. The company grew to make a 
turnover of €2 million per year, selling Playgrounds in Turkey and exporting. In 2010, he became the Automotive 
Sales Director at Floteks, before becoming the General Manager in 2013. Through his work in making the 
automotive operation more productive and competitive, he was able to expand Floteks’ automotive business 
and export products to a variety of countries. His success in introducing Floteks to Hyundai, will double the 
turnover of Floteks per year within 2017. Floteks achieved the Innovative Company of the Year award under his 
management.  
  
Product Development Experience:  
The new products he has introduced to Floteks will show their effects in 2017. He was able to double the orders 
from Mercedes Benz, which will reach €1,000,000 turnover in 2017. Furthermore, he persuaded H yundai to 
choose Floteks as their Adblue tank provider starting in 2015, reaching a turnover of €7 million per year in 2017. 
The Leakfree project was initiated with the future need of doubling the leakage control of the tanks produced in 
Floteks.  
  
Innovation Management:  
The Hyundai tank was actually a blow moulded tank. It needed some changes in design, to make the tank with 
rotomolding technology. It has cost Floteks two visits to the Hyundai technical team in South Korea to persuade 
them to change over to rotomolding and also a lot of development efforts between both parties.  
Name: Canan ERAT 
Gender: Female  
  
   
760528 - MoniTank                                           53  Part B  
Education:  
Chemistry graduated in 1994 from Gemlik  High School Bursa, speaks English. Attended many courses in 
Microsoft office, Quality Management Systems and many plastics test applications.  
  
Work Experience:  
5 years Floteks, a major Plastics manufacturer in Turkey using Rotational Moulding Technology, as a technician. 
She is using laboratory equipment of Floteks, to make the required daily tests. DSC, Tensile Strength, QUV, 
Drop and Impact Test, Density, MFI, Ring Stiffness, Vacuum Test  devices,  polarised  Microscope  and  
Ultrasound  thickness  Ga uge  are  the  devices  she  uses. She has been working on the SME -I Project 
LEAKFREE since she started working in Floteks.  
  
Product Development Experience: She has an experience for testing 
plastic products using the necessary equipment..  
  
Innovation Management:  
She works on R&D activities and product development as a laboratory technician.  
Name: EmreAkbay  
Gender: Male  
Education:  
Automotive Engineer graduated in 2012 from Marmara University Istanbul , speaks English. Attended many 
courses in Solidworks, Catia, ANSYS.  
  
Background:  
He has training in CAM and engineering analyses. He is fluent to use Catia V5R16, Solidworks and ANSYS.  
  
He is also using laboratory equipment:  DSC, Tensile Strength, QUV, Drop and Impact Test, Density, MFI, Ring 
Stiffness-Control the Temperature monitoring, Vacuum Test devices.  
  
Work Experience:  
4 years at Floteks, a major Plastics manufacturer in Turkey using Rotational Moulding Technology. He worked 
2 years as a manufacturing process engineer .He has been working as a research engineer since 2014.He has 
been working on the SME-I Project LEAKFREE since he started working in Floteks.  
  
Product Development Experience:  
Technical Designer and Research Engineer in the R&D Department of Floteks.  
He is also designing new underground products and fixtures and making the FEA’s. He has an experience for 
testing plastic products.  
He is also defining process parameters of new products and improvement existing products using temperature 
monitoring system.   
  
   
760528 - MoniTank                                           54  Part B  
  
  
 
  
Participant 
Number 5  
  
  
  
  
  
Organisation Name: Brunel University London (BUL)  
Website: www.brunel.ac.uk/BUL  

  
   
760528 - MoniTank                                           55  Part B  
Organisation Description:  
Brunel University London has been highly successful in creating an industrial innovation research resource, 
named Brunel Innovation Centre (BUL), which sits between the knowledge base and industry, supporti ng 
partners in industry to transfer academic research into industrial application. Brunel has a wide range of 
knowledge and expertise in the following research areas: (i) Power ultrasonics; detection, cleaning of fouling and 
fouling prevention techniques n on-invasively software (ii) Smart NDT; autonomous devices, miniaturised 
multifunction systems for NDE in bespoke environments; marine, high temperature, aerospace, pattern 
recognition hardware / software, (iii) Active SHM and Condition Monitoring (iv) Desi gn of associated hardware 
and software (v) Signal and image processing and numerical modelling - Noise reduction, signal condition and 
control (including active vibration control), data interpretation and analysis, (vi) Automation and robotics of 
inspection system, (vii) Improved or new and robust sensors (Piezoelectric, Electromagnetic) e.g. high 
temperature inspection, transduction (viii) Electronics - Low power consumption for multiple channels, wireless, 
high speed, wideband, fast bps, energy harvesting . In year 2015, BUL has received the Highly Commended 
Innovation Awards from The Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET) for two award categories: (i) 
Measurement in Action and (ii) Manufacturing Technology. The collaborative European project (FP7)  was put 
forward to the competition and was chosen from over 300 entries from 28 countries (globally).  
  
 
  

  
   
  
760528 - MoniTank                                           56  Part B  
  
  
Role in the Project:  
BUL will lead the Certification, Quality and Maintenance, and Training Development work package and produce 
training manuals and product documentation. BUL will bring their expertise in developing complete, concise and 
organised documentation for best practices. Relevant training materia l including Getting started section, user 
guide, examples, screen cast tutorials and FAQs will also be embedded in Help section of the software itself. 
BUL will coordinate the Awareness and Promotion events as part of the Dissemination, Exploitation and 
Communication work package. This will include interaction with end -users in power sector through newsletters 
and press releases. BUL will assist TWI in coordinating the project by managing financial, regulatory and 
operational risks in the service of innovation by analysing statistics, reports and market trends.  
 
Relevant Projects:  
• Adapted Composite Repair Tooling for in -situ wind turbine blades structural rehabilitation 
(CORETO), funded by FP7. Project website: http://coreto-project.eu/index.php  
• Automated  Ultrasonic  Inspection  of  Aerospace  Composites  with  Enhanced  Defect  Detection  
Probabilities  Aided  by Gantry Deployed, CAD Controlled Robotics (AutoDISC), funded by Innovate 
UK. Project website: http://autodisc-project.com/  
• Radio Frequency Sensing for Non -Destructive Testing of Carbon Fibre Reinforced Composite 
Materials for Structural Health Monitoring (Comp -Health), funded by FP7. Project 
website:http://comphealth.eu/  
• An ICT Enabled Approach to Optimising the Reliability of Manual Ultrasonic Non-Destructive Testing 
(ICARUS), funded by FP7. Project website:http://www.icarus-project.eu/home/index.jsp  
• Continuous monitoring systems for the SAFE storage, distribution and usage of Hydrogen Power 
for transport  
Main Partners & Collaborations: 
  
  
   
  
760528 - MoniTank                                           57  Part B  
  
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
• Management, administration and accounting department  
• Design and development of signal processing and pattern recognition software  
• Data management and handling software  
• NDT and Condition Monitoring hardware i.e. Acoustic Emission and Ultrasound equipment  
• Power amplifier, oscilloscope and impedance analyser  
• Optical tracking device and High resolution cameras  
• Several powerful work-stations including signal and image processing software  
• State of the art 3D Laser scanning vibrometer for: wave propagation; transducer analysis; 
ultrasonic detection / cleaning; ultrasonic anti-fouling; condition monitoring purposes  
Experimental industry specific set -up rigs for detection and cleaning of fouling, rotating machinery; mock -ups; 
inspection, monitoring systems demonstrated in full scale.  
 
Profile of Main Persons  
Name: Dr Alvin Chong  
Gender: Male  
Qualifications: BEng (Hons), PhD, CEng, IntPE (UK), MIET, MIOA, MIEEE  
Experience/ Career History: Dr Alvin Chong graduated with a BEng (Hons) degree from University of Hull (UK) 
in Electronic Engineering. He holds a PhD from  Open University (UK) where he researched on acoustic wave 
propagation in periodic structures (sonic crystal). He joined BUL in March 2012 and currently he holds the 
responsibility as a Research Fellow Team Leader for the Smart Non -Destructive Testing (NDT ) team. His 
research in BUL predominately focused on the novel NDT methods for the aerospace applications.  
Work Experience: Dr Alvin Chong undertook the roles as Project Coordinator and Project Leader for various 
European Commission (EC) Seventh Framework Program (FP7), Clean Sky and Innovate UK research projects. 
Many of which have either been successfully completed or research in progress.  
Product Development Experience: In light of his research activities in BUL, he has developed various functional 
prototypes demonstrated to mid-tier Technology Readiness Level (i.e. TRL 4 to 6).   
Innovation Management: He has published more than 25 papers in international refereed journals and 
conferences on ultrasonic NDT, electromagnetic NDT, laser system, acoustic b and gap material, structural 
analysis, local resonance material and computational modelling based on finite element method.  
Name: Liang Chen  
Gender: Male  
  
   
  
760528 - MoniTank                                           58  Part B  
  
Qualifications: BSc, MSc, PhD, MIEEE  
Experience/ Career History: Dr Liang Cheng received the B.Sc. degree in electronics from Peking University, 
Beijing, China, in 2007, the M.Sc. degree in communications and signal processing from Imperial College 
London, London, U.K., in 2008and the Ph.D. degree in failure models and life cycle assessment of wind turbine 
systems at Newcastle University, U.K in 2013.  
He has involved several EPSRC and FP7 projects for development of electromagnetic, thermographic and 
ultrasonic NDT systems. In 2013, He received PhD degree from Newcastle University, UK. His research topic 
is non-destructive evaluation for carbon fibre reinforced plastic wind turbine blades using eddy current pulsed 
thermography (ECPT). During the PhD study, part-time RA at Newcastle and the exchange in China, Dr Cheng 
developed and re -designed the ECPT sensing system and was also involved design of eddy current and 
magnetic flux leakage system with colleagues. He developed ECPT technique for both composite and metallic 
components  for  the detection and quantification of crack,  corrosion,  de lamination  and  impact damage  
through  both simulation and experiment. Signal/image processing algorithms were developed using Matlab for 
feature extraction and defect detection, classification, quantification. From 2013, he joined Brunel Innovation 
Centre. His current research interests cover electromagnetic acoustic transducer design for absorb tubes used 
in concentrating solar power, guided wave transducer for de-icing of wind turbine blades, guided wave modelling 
for complex geometric structure such as power cables, nuclear piping etc.  
Work Experience: Dr Liang Cheng undertook the roles as Project Leader or got actively involved in European 
Commission (EC) Seventh Framework Program (FP7) and Innovate UK research projects. Many of which have 
either been successfully completed or research in progress.  
Product Development Experience: In light of his research activities in BUL, he has developed electromagnetic 
acoustic transducer prototypes for monitoring of absorber tubes in solar plants at high temperature, eddy current 
pulsed thermography NDT&E system for composites and metallic structures, phased array on time -of-flight-
diffraction configuration for high temperature pipes, demonstrated to mid-tier Technology Readiness Level (i.e. 
TRL 4 to 6).  
Name: Jiangtao Sun  
Gender: Male  
  
   
  
760528 - MoniTank                                           59  Part B  
  
Qualifications: BSc, MSc, PhD, MIEEE  
Experience/ Career History: Dr Jiangtao Sun received his BSc and MSc degrees in Measurement Technology 
and Instrumentation from Xidian  University (China) in 2008 and 2010, respectively. His PhD was awarded in 
Electrical and Electronic Engineering from University of Manchester (UK) in 2014, specialized in electrical 
tomography for industrial applications. In September 2014, he joined BUL as a research fellow in Smart Non -
Destructive Testing (NDT) team. He is currently working on automated defect recognition based on X -ray 
radiography, X-ray CT and ultrasonic C-Scan imaging. Dr Jiangtao Sun is currently involved in several Innovate 
UK projects as technical leader, including “automated in-line inspection and quality control of net shape powder 
metallurgy components using microfocus three dimensional x ray computed tomography imaging (Qualinet)”, 
“automated,100% production quality assurance of  net shape manufactured components using in line micron 
resolution x -ray sterographic imaging”, and “automated ultrasonic inspection of aerospace composites with 
enhanced defect detection probabilities aided by gantry deployed, CAD controlled robotics (AutoDISC)”.  
Product Development Experience: He successfully developed an embedded system for the locking of a 
second-class frequency standard to the reference signal from GPS, including hardware and software design, 
during his master study. He is currently d eveloping an image processing toolbox suitable for industrial X -ray 
radiographic and CT imaging using Matlab.  
Innovation Management: He has published more than 10 papers in peer -reviewed international journals and 
conferences, mainly focusing on electrica l tomography sensor design and image reconstruction for industrial 
applications and image processing for non- destructive testing and evaluation using tomographic methods.  
Name: Dr Haitao Zheng  
Gender:Male  
Experience/ Career History: Dr Haitao  Zheng studied Engineering Mechanics as an undergraduate and 
postgraduate at Tongji University, Shanghai, China. During his doctoral study at Keio University, Yokohama, 
Japan, his research focused on the application of system identification and time series  analysis to structural 
health monitoring. He had significant work and research experiences on structural health monitoring, NDT and 
condition monitoring, monitoring system implementation, and transforming research results to viable algorithms 
and application software.  
Work Experience: Dr Haitao Zheng undertook the roles as Project Leader for various European Commission 
(EC) Seventh Framework Program (FP7) and Innovate UK research projects. Many of which have either been 
successfully completed or research in progress.  
Product Development Experience: In light of his research activities in BUL, he has developed various functional 
prototypes demonstrated to mid-tier Technology Readiness Level (i.e. TRL 4 to 6).  
Innovation Management: He has 22 published pape rs in international refereed journals and conferences on 
structural health monitoring, structural dynamic analysis, reflection seismology, wave propagation in structures, 
novel NDT in civil engineering etc.  
Name: Maria Tyler  
Gender: Female  
Experience/ Career History: Maria received a BCom (Hons) degree in Accounting and Finance from the 
University of Birmingham. She joined Brunel Innovation Centre (BUL) in May 2014 as Project Coordinator. She 
has experience in portfolio management, client projects, contract negotiation and project management. She is 
responsible for the effective administration and coordination of BUL.  
  
 
 
  
4.2. Third parties involved in the action
 (including use of third party resources)  
  
 
  
  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
action should not be sub-contracted)  
Yes  
The common view of the consortium following various discussions is that there is 
considerable room for improving the end product.   
More specifically:   
• The design of the 3-channel boards including wiring should be reviewed by an 
experienced electronics company whose core business is equipment development and 
manufacturing (Task 1.1).  •  Firmware should be improved in order to increase the 
speed of signal post-processing (Task 1.1).   
• Software, Graphical User Interface should also be reviewed and improved in the 
light of discussions with potential end-users, (Kadoil and Shell being development 
partners in this project) (Task 1.2).   
• The overall product structure needs to be optimized considering also cooling of 
the equipment (Task 1.1).  
• The product should be packaged professionally with due consideration differing 
operational conditions. Ideally, different models of the product should be made available 
to the market depending on specific operational needs (Task 1.1).  
Therefore, this work scope mainly related to WP1 will be subcontracted to Arlentus 
Control and it is expected from Arlentus Control that the first working prototype will be 
delivered to the Consortium to be tried during the site trials in Bursa and Ankara.  
It was confirmed that the cost of subcontracting will be 20,000 EUROS.  
The consortium has gone through the Best Value for Money (BVM) procedure and 
collated three proposals. Arlentus proposal was the proposal chosen by the consortium 
to be the best proposal for value to the expected outcome. On the 8th May 2018, it was 
agreed by a unanimous decision that the total value of subcontracting will be equally 
shared by the five members of the consortium.  
  
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties  N  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  
N  
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International 
Partners [2] (Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)?  
N  
  
  
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111