4.MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM .............................................................................................................................................................. 59 
4.1. PARTICIPANTS (APPLICANTS) ..................................................................................................................................................................... 59 
4.2. THIRD PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE PROJECT (INCLUDING USE OF THIRD PARTY RESOURCES).......................................................................... 105 
5: ETHICS AND SECURITY ........................................................................................................................................................................... 112
5.1 ETHICS ................................................................................................................................................................................................... 112
5.2 SECURITY ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 113 
ANNEX: SUPPORT LETTERS FROM ADVISORY BOARD ..................................................................................................................................... 114 
 
 
Acronyms Table (except Partner & Advisory Board members’ shortnames found in their respective table part A and in Annex after Section 
5) 
AB advisory board  
AlOx Aluminum oxide deposit 
Bio- prefix for bio-based polymers 
BO Biaxially-oriented  
CAGR compounded annual growth rate 
CAPEX Capital expenditure. 
CE(P) Circular economy (package) 
CF(C) Carbon Fibre (Composite) 
DoE Design of Experiments 
DSC Differential Scanning Calorimetry 
DST Decision Support Tool  
ELV End of life Vehicles 
EoL End of Life 
EVOH ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer 
FRP fibre reinforced plastic 
FRC fibre reinforced plastic 
FTIR Fourier Transform InfraRed 
GF(C) Glass Fibre (Composite) 
HSI Hyperspectral imaging 
IC Innovation Committee 
IPR intellectual property rights 
KERs Key Exploitable Results 
KPIs Key Performance Indicators 
LCC Life Cycle cost 
(s-)LCA (social) Life Cycle Analysis 
LIBs laser induced spectroscopy 
LFT Long Fibre Thermoplastics  
MEMS Microelectromechanical systems 
ML Multilayer 
MSDS material safety data sheets  
NIR Near InfraRed 
OG&S Other goods & services 
OPEX Operational expenditure 
PA Polyamide 
PAT process analytical technologies  
PE Polyethylene  
PEDR Plan for the Exploitation & 
Dissemination of the Results 
PET Polyethylene terephthalate 
pc post consumer 
pi post industrial 
PO: polyolefins 
PLA polylactic acid 
PP polypropylene 
PSC Project steering committee  
r- prefix for recycled  
ROI Return-on-Investment 
Sc-CO2 super critical carbon dioxide 
SiOx Silicium oxide deposit 
SCM Sheet compression moulding 
SRM secondary raw materials 
SWOT Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats 
TEA techno-economical analysis 
TDS technical data sheets  
UV-VIS Ultra-Violet, visible  
VOCs Volatile organic compounds 
WEEE Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment 
  
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 9 of 117 
1. Excellence
1.1 Objectives  
Plastics bring unprecedented value in terms of convenience, versatility of design and lightweight to European consumers as well as increasingly advanced performances even in high end applications. Independently of the duration of use of the plastic goods, they all share insufficient recycling rate and, while the limit of our natural resources has been identified as one of our key societal challenges decades ago, the depletion continues. Only 31% of plastic packaging are currently recycled and an excessive 30-40% are landfilled, this being due to infra-developed technologies or to their unsatisfactory economic viability1. This is in fact aggravated by considering plastics as commodity where their economic value is linked to a single use, often not taking into account the potentially generated end of life (EoL) hurdles. Plastics have ubiquitous uses but also too often uncontrolled leakage in the environment (according to the Ellen MacArthur Foundation2, as much as 32% end up out of controlled waste management systems) among others due to the low incentives for their secondary use. In line with the just released Plastic Strategy for Europe (as well as with the Packaging Waste Law to come into force e.g. in Germany in 2019 assigning the core responsibility to producers and introducing sanctions below threshold recyclability rates), the time has come to shift to a Circular Model in the plastic sector improving the recycling rate but also the value of secondary raw materials (SRM) from plastic recycling. As such, to support significant technological advancements to meet such strategy and with an overarching mission to maximise the valorisation of our finite plastic resources, MultiCycle will develop a tailored sustainable process approach to the recycling of thermoplastic-based multi-materials to enable their use in multiple life cycles at their outmost properties. Our process, which is applicable to virtually any plastic or composite material, will be demonstrated in 2 main large volume applications: 1. Multilayer packaging (including PET, PE, PP and barrier layers such as EVOH, PA, metallised films) but also flexible films that cannot be recycled cost effectively to date. This accounts for around 50% of plastic packaging, i.e. ca. 10 mio tons/year in EU. 2. Fibre reinforced thermoplastics (FRP) (e.g. based on PA12 or PP matrix, long glass or carbon fibres). Plastic parts constitute around 16% of EU End-of-Life Vehicles (ELVs) wastes, i.e. ca. 1 mio tons/y (details of market size in section 2.2.2.F)15. On the one hand, while nowadays multilayer plastic films are needed to pack gas sensitive goods and their share on the packaging market is increasing (in some cases flexible barrier solutions even substitute rigid packaging), they are not recycled in practice, since pure polymers are needed for reprocessing, and the vast majority of them end up in landfill or energy recovery systems. In fact, even small monolayer films as used for pouches, lids, etc. are difficult to handle in the context of current mechanical recycling plants and only rarely recycled. Furthermore, despite their high value and sustainability potential, there has been very little evolution so far when it comes to materials recycling of bioplastics, such as PLA3, due to insufficient market penetration and/or economic levers. On the other hand, there is an increasing use of fibre reinforced plastic parts in the transport industry especially for lightweight purposes. Nevertheless, the mechanical recycling of composites, even based on thermoplastic matrices that can be melted and are increasingly used instead of thermosetting counterparts due to sustainability and process advantages, poses several limitations like high energy consumption, partial polymer degradation and downgrading the fibre length due to the grinding needed before reprocessing. Therefore, recovered materials are often directed to low value applications or only a minor recycled material fraction can be mixed with virgin materials to avoid deteriorating parts properties. Similarly to packaging, bioplastics (e.g. bio-PA11, bio-PA10,10, bio-PA4,10, PA5,6) are emerging in the automotive sector as matrix material in composites and require to define a cost-competitive recycling route. For both previous applications, we will use a novel process (CreaSolv®4) that has been patented by partner FRAUNHOFER 
 
1 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/news/first-ever-europe-wide-strategy-plastics-2018-jan-16_en 2 The new plastics economy rethinking the future of plastics, Ellen MacArthur foundation, 2016 3 PLA presents limited organic recyclability at high thickness or when laminated with certain materials. Other selected bioplastics, bio-PA, PET, PE are durable. 4 CreaSolv® is a registered trademark of the Creacycle GmbH, Grevenbroich, Germany 
 Fig 1: MutiCycle recycling process allowing multiple multimaterials’ 
life cycles in automotive and packaging value chains 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 10 of 117 
and is currently being industrially scaled up for polyolefin (PO)-based packaging applications. This is a solvent based selective extraction process that allows pure plastics to be recovered due to their specific solubility. It has no by-product (solvents can be used in a closed loop endlessly with only few ppm lost in each cycle) and a very low environmental impact demonstrated by peer-reviewed LCAs. Unlike general chemical recycling that generates monomers requiring a new polymerization step, CreaSolv® generates polymers. One further advantage is that by using successive steps with tailored solvents, even mixed input materials can be recycled. Furthermore, due to the mild conditions used, it maintains the polymer properties. For composites, CreaSolv® showed to preserve the quality and length of the reinforcement fibres. Since it allows removing contaminants and possibly revalorizing additives, it also solves a significant challenge for mechanical recycling of complex primary formulations when trying to match the composition required for the secondary application.  MultiCycle’s goal is to build on past promising results, overcome the remaining challenges of their demonstration, and prepare for their market uptake. As a preamble to our MultiCycle recycling process chain, we will deliver tailored solutions to identify/monitor the composition of input mixed multi-materials. Such waste will therefore fuel the novel separation process allowing the recovery of the single polymer fractions with properties equivalent to virgin counterparts and long reinforcement fibres. The process for recycling packaging and automotive materials will be upscaled in an industrial pilot plant that will be built and will include a smart control system based on Process Analytical Technology (PAT). In terms of subsequent reprocessing, any adjustment in performance for the secondary use will be handled by optimising the compound formulation. In order to facilitate wide market adoption, the characterisation of reprocessed materials and accessible applications thereof will be given utmost attention to match specified requirements for their secondary use (e.g. packaging for food & personal care applications and textiles-based reinforced & composites automotive parts). The potential to substitute a high amount of virgin materials will be a key pull strategy for the recycling value chain and for reducing the overall carbon footprint of the plastics industry along multiple life cycles. As the recycling of traditionally non-recyclable materials depends not only on the availability of suitable solutions, but also on economic viability considerations, the CAPEX and OPEX of the Multicycle process will be calculated and compared with other solutions whenever available. In addition, LCA and LCC (life cycle and life cycle costs assessments) will allow the demonstration of the most sustainable EoL approach. Based on the economic & environmental analysis, a decision support tool (DST) will be developed using different value chain scenarios. The assessment will recommend optimal network connections on the basis of multi-objective optimisation such as techno-economic criteria (cost, profit, efficiency), environmental and sustainability metrics and will support the creation of circular processing paths and materials’ use.  In parallel with upscaling activities leading to price and performance improvements, MultiCycle will include a number of outreach activities to improve both industry and society acceptance of recycled plastics. The project will deliver a set of recommendations for stakeholders and policymakers to overcome barriers such as reluctance to use market available recycled materials due to perceived property or variability issues, as well as the deficient regulations and standards. These recommendations will cover the benefits for the different stakeholders along the supply and value chain of the new recycled materials and will facilitate engagement and lobbying towards decision makers in the marketplace. To sustain the industrial initiatives investing in new recycling facilities, they will also provide suggestions for the creation of Tax and Incentive Schemes based on the percentage of recycle-able/ed resources to transition to materials with lower environmental burden when considered in a holistic circular use. Further outreach will centre on raising consumer perceptions in relation to responsible choice for more sustainable materials. To support the roll out of the project results in the future processing industries, the project will also cover technical and transversal training activities showing the new processes and valuable SRM’s applications. They will be a vector for preparing the next generation of EU recycling professionals and for cross-fertilization with other related projects, encapsulated in our dissemination activities including a Circular Plastic Helix creation. The consortium includes all stakeholders to prepare the MultiCycle supply and value chain from (bio)polymer producers and recyclers, converters and technological solution providers. Furthermore, end users are involved from the packaging and automotive industries as well as associations with demonstrated access to policy and decisions makers, innovation and training experts. While our project will focus on the needs of the above stated sectors, both in terms of post-consumer (pc) and post-industrial (pi) wastes, the relevance of its results goes far beyond, extending for example to the recycling of coated and/or glued materials, polymer blends (even mixed residues from polyolefins recycling plants), micro/nanoparticles reinforced composites, among others. InSPIREd by the Circular Economy ethos, the overriding goal of MultiCycle is to deliver an innovative recycling pilot plant and demonstrate that the resulting processes are economically & environmentally sustainable for valorising currently non-recyclable materials (multilayer packages and composites). The project will combine several approaches to optimise the material recycling: i) recycling and reprocessing upscaling in an industrial environment, ii) advanced monitoring and PAT solutions, iii) demonstration of recovered materials’ potential for packaging and automotive applications. By overcoming the challenges linked to multi-materials recycling, setting up the initial value chains, raising industry acceptance and demand for more sustainable materials, MultiCycle will have enduring impacts for significantly reduced landfill and environmental impact as well as increased consumer satisfaction.  To realise this, over a 36-month work plan, the following specific objectives, linked to their respective WPs and 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 11 of 117 
performance indicators (later used as milestones), are defined: Objective 1: To define the specifications of the materials to be recycled via the tailored MultiCycle processes (WP1) After an updated state of the art, patent and market review, a survey of available end of life options and the market requirements, the specifications of the packaging and fibre reinforced composites which will be recycled will be defined. This work will be conducted in synergy with the regulatory analysis performed in WP4-5-9. The process will also be mapped by the recycling plant leader and converters of the recovered materials (steps, throughputs, scales, etc.), as well as the strategy to maximise the overall economic/environmental viability of the MultiCycle recycling approach. Performance Indicator: By M4, the materials to be recycled, requirements of their recycling process, target properties of recovered materials to be used in packaging and automotive demonstrators, the analytical methods to prove them and benchmarks will be defined. Objective 2: To adjust the MultiCycle process to the selected materials in an existing pilot plant and to establish their recycling scenarios (WP2) Based on previous projects and partner’ patents, the recycling process will be tuned in an already existing small pilot (recycling 5-10kg of materials per day) by selecting the solvent composition and optimising the subsequent steps to maximise the recovery rate. Performance Indicators: By M12, the process to recover >80% of the polymers, fibres and other selected substances from packaging and FRC will be specified for its upscaling and recovered materials will be available in sufficient quantity to run reprocessing work at pilot scale (>20 kg of each fraction). Objective 3: To design a dedicated MultiCycle industrial pilot plant and develop the waste monitoring and PAT-based process control approach to optimise the upscaled recycling process (WP2, 4, 7) In line with the previous activities, a flexible industrial pilot plant capable of recycling both packaging and composites will be designed with particular attention to the performance of each step and to safety considerations. The most suitable photonics techniques for monitoring the composition of the waste to recycle will be evaluated and developed, and the process monitoring systems will also be established for following the evolution of the extraction steps and the purity of the recovered fractions. Performance Indicators: By M18, the MultiCycle pilot plant (equipped with a PAT control system) that can run at a yield of > 50 times the existing pilot plant will have been finely designed & engineered based on the results from objective 3 and the initial LCA /LCC results available by M14. Objective 4: To characterize the fibres recovered from the MultiCycle process (WP3) The long glass and carbon fibres (CF & GF) recovered will be characterized. Performance Indicators: By M15, the reusability of the recovered fibres will be defined especially in terms of mechanical properties and sizing agents. Objective 5: To develop the suitable compounds based on recovered additives and polymers (WP3) As the main target is to substitute virgin materials in packaging and automotive applications (including textile and composites), following the characterisation of the materials that have been recycled, recompounding trials will be performed. Recycling based on supercritical sc-CO2 will be used to remove any volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and to improve the properties and dispersion of the additives in the matrix. Performance Indicators: By M21, the reprocessing route for both conventional and bio-based polymers for packaging and automotive will be specified at pilot scale using at least 80% of recovered materials from the MultiCycle process, and the compound formulations suitable for film and fibres making will be selected for upscaling phase. Objective 6: To integrate the industrial pilot plant to upscale the recycling process (WP4) The different elements of the pilot plant, including the PAT monitoring systems, will be integrated at LOEMI. The process will be set up based on the results at small pilot scale and the safety and functionality thoroughly verified. Performance indicators: By M24, the tailored industrial pilot line able to recycle at least 25 kg of plastic packaging or FRP per hour will be operating and materials will start being delivered to WP5-6 (ca. 5 Tons expected till the end of WP4). Objective 7: To demonstrate the use of MultiCycle process for waste packaging and FRP at TRL7 (WP4) Large scale demonstration trials will be performed for each selected material type (fig 12 and 13). Performance indicators: By M27, the potential for recycling at least 80% of the currently not recycled packaging fractions will be established as well as the optimised route for recycling CFC and GFC demonstrating MultiCycle process at TRL7. Objective 8: To perform large scale converting trials of recovered materials into new packaging (WP5) The materials recovered from the MultiCycle pilot will be characterized and compared to virgin benchmarks for specified food (secondary packaging or food contact layer from pi-waste) and personal care packaging. Performance indicators: By M34, small series of prototype packaging demonstrators will be produced containing >70% of recycled materials (approx. 18 types of monolayer films, 6 coextruded films, 8 multi-layer laminates and end packaging format) and tested to confirm the usability of the materials recovered using MultiCycle process meeting applicable legislations and industrial requirements. Objective 9: To perform large scale trials regarding the conversion of recovered materials into new automotive parts (composites with short and long fibres, textiles) (WP6) The materials recovered from the MultiCycle pilot will be processed as injected parts (GF reinforced compounds) and as thermoformable nonwovens where both the fibres and polymers come from recycled streams. These will be characterized and compared to virgin benchmarks. In addition, the recovered thermoplastics will be processed to textile materials used in 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 12 of 117 
the car interior. Performance indicators: By M34, small series of prototype automotive parts containing >70% of recycled materials (including at least 6 types of demonstrators semi-finished and final components) will confirm the usability of the materials recovered using MultiCycle process meeting industrial requirements. Objective 10: To demonstrate the final processes and products’ environmental & economic sustainability (WP7) An LCA, S-LCA (societal) and LCC will be performed on the developed processes and resulting materials to show the reduced environmental impact vs. current end of life options. The overall techno-economic viability will be evaluated with inputs from all previous WPs. Performance indicators: By M34, the LCA, S-LCA, LCC, CAPEX, OPEX, techno-economic assessments will confirm the future commercial viability and improvement vs. current solutions. Objective 11: To develop a DST for the assessment of environmental and economic sustainability (WP7) A Decision Support Tool (DST) will be developed to determine the optimisation path for the reuse of the recycled materials based on the environmental, economic and social sustainability of the entire value-chain. Performance indicators: By M35, the user-friendly DST-based software will be up and running. Objective 12: To leverage training and capacity building activities for stakeholders along the value chains and to inform and influence policy and decisions makers towards an improved recycling framework (WP8) A set of measures will be undertaken to establish a positive framework to stimulate the uptake of the MultiCycle innovation. Targeted communication and training campaigns will be performed. Furthermore, we will intervene at macro level by lobbying towards relevant policy makers for the creation of initiatives that promote recycling and the use of recycled materials to impulse a paradigm shift towards more sustainable manufacturing and consumption. Performance indicator: By M6, our impactful Vision 2020 Circular Plastics Helix will be running to leverage significant mobilisation around the project (target 500 affiliates by the end of the project). By M36, a robust communication strategy will have ensured the recognition of MultiCycle as a reference recycling process in the plastic sector. At least 500 process engineering professionals and 500 students will have been trained regarding MultiCycle. Position papers, policy and regulatory recommendations will have been addressed to the EC among other relevant regulatory bodies.   Objective 13: To maximise the innovation impacts of MultiCycle, including growth and jobs creation, via post project industrial commercialisation of the project outcome (WP9) The business model along the involved circular value chain will be defined and the Value Propositions of our Multicycle innovation will be formulated. The logistics and investments for the industrial implementation of the recycling process will be studied. The project knowledge and results will be managed and protected. Business plans and exploitation paths will be elaborated for all Key Exploitable Results (KERs) to map the post-project phase. Business and marketing strategies will be established. Performance Indicators: By M36, final plans will be in place for the transition to the post-project phase and reaching the market, as well as the plan to successfully integrate MultiCycle in future waste management practices and circular value chains. 2 patent applications will have been filed to support partners’ optimal competitive commercial position.
1.2 Relation to the work programme  
The relation of the project to the specific challenges and scope addressed by the topic CE-SPIRE-10-2018 Efficient recycling processes for plastic containing materials (IA), as part of ‘Leadership in enabling and industrial technologies – Nanotechnologies, Advanced Materials, Biotechnology and Advanced Manufacturing and Processing' work programme are outlined in table 1 below: 
Table 1: How MultiCycle relates to the scope and challenges of the CE-SPIRE-10-2018 topic 
Scope/challenges  How MultiCycle addresses them 
Raw materials of fossil origin 
(e.g. PE, PP, and PET) […], bio-
based plastics. Sustainable 
raw materials... 
The CreaSolv® Process used as a basis for our project is extremely versatile while adjusting the selected 
solvents’ solubility parameters towards the target polymer fraction. This will therefore allow us to recycle a 
number of raw materials of fossil origins, such as PE, PP, PA, and PET, as well as bio-based: bio-PA, bio-
PE, bio-PET (which can be used in mixed batches with their fossil counterparts) & PLA (at lab scale for the 
later). We focus on polymers with major market volumes as well as on emerging ones. 
Wide range of applications […] 
composites and packaging. 
In addition to engineering, our project is relevant to several SPIRE sectors derived from chemicals and 
plastics which are characterised by a high dependence on fossil raw materials and energy in their production 
and processing technologies and are therefore under greater pressure to shift to circular models. We will in 
particular cover composites and packaging, which on the one hand side represent a large share of plastic 
consumption (40% of plastics are used for short term packaging applications while automotive consumes 
10% of the plastics produced in EU5), and on the other side were selected among their mutli-materials 
subtypes that are currently not recyclable/recycled.  
Reusing plastic waste, 
delaying final energy recovery 
at the end of life material, and 
avoiding landfill. Cover 
processes for the production 
of recyclable materials 
MultiCycle is based on CreaSolv®, a process that can be adjusted to different plastic and composite 
materials and is extremely suited for heterogeneous ones as the different fractions can be separated. Quite 
uniquely vs. more standard mechanical recycling approaches, the SRM recovered from it do not suffer a 
downgrading in plastic properties (without degradation or molecular weight reduction), nor in terms of 
fibre length. These are critical performance benefits that enable (after suitable reprocessing) the production 
of recycled materials that are in turn virtually recyclable an infinite number of times in multiple subsequent 
 
5 Plastics Europe, association of plastics manufacturers : Plastics, the facts 2017, An analysis of European plastics production, demand and waste data 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 13 of 117 
containing plastics... 
Process flexibility and ability 
to utilise waste heterogeneous 
plastic materials, including 
plastic composites, as input to 
allow the recycling and the re-
processing of this widely 
available resource into added 
value products (excluding 
fuels). 
cycles using MultiCycle process. Only a minor fraction of the complex material may have to be valorised for 
energy (if its recovery is not economically viable). This is a dramatic improvement vs. the current situation 
whereby most of the target packaging and composites are either landfilled or used for energy recovery of 
the organic part. In addition to current drying after the CreaSolv® Process, the later use of supercritical 
carbon dioxide (sc-CO2) assisted extrusion will allow the cleaning step to be improved in a process 
intensification approach, as it will be done as part of the normal compounding (encompassing removal of 
VOCs, solid contaminants and required readditivation). This process was evaluated successfully in the 
EXTRUCLEAN LIFE+ project where large plastic containers for transporting toxic and dangerous products 
(paints, lubricants, solvents, etc..) were recycled for their reuse in the same application. 
Develop process technologies 
and process streams, utilising 
plastic waste as starting 
material for the production of 
added value products 
The project tackles the different steps of the recycling process and of the reprocessing of the polymers and 
the fibres recovered from composites into added value materials such as packaging, textiles, composites, 
often suitable for similar uses as in their primary life cycle. Furthermore, as CreaSolv® allows the separation 
of the pure fractions included in mixed input wastes, SRMs can be reformulated freely (so we will not be 
bound to reprocess a bumper into a new bumper, as is often the limiting approach in current recycling 
approaches). This will be an enabler for opening more cross-sectors links and for broadening SRM’s 
potential to substitute virgin materials. As such, we will complement the technical aspects by the study of 
the supply and value chains both in terms of compatibility and enhancements needed for current waste 
collection and management systems. 
Integration with the relevant 
value chains, ensuring the 
secure supply of the raw 
material streams. A clear 
strategy to involve the relevant 
actors along the value chain is 
expected; 
The project consortium includes representatives that cover the basis of the value chains for packaging and 
automotive application, where related companies act as suppliers of wastes and users of the recycled 
materials (further justified in section 2.1.3). WP9 will dedicate one task on defining the circular business 
models. Supported by the DST delivered in WP7, we will assess the optimal paths for the definition of the 
value chains. The DST will recommend optimal network connections and will reveal value supporting 
creative solutions within a sustainable development context. That will also facilitate new cross value chains 
links (eg. polymers recovered from packaging being used as technical textiles for cars). 
Key issues related to the 
quality of the raw (including 
secondary) material streams 
should be covered, and in 
particular the heterogeneity of 
the waste plastic material, as 
well as the wide variety of 
substances contained in 
plastic materials (e.g. 
plasticisers, anti-oxidants, 
etc.). The valorisation of fillers 
or fibres from composites 
should also be covered;  
Quality/specifications of the 
yielded streams ensuring their 
usability by downstream 
industries; 
The post consumer (pc) wastes fed in our recycling process will be obtained from waste management 
companies through ISWA and from GBP so they are fully representative of the complex nature of such 
currently non recyclable mixtures. They will be complemented by post industrial (pi) wastes from the material 
converters in the consortium. Their composition will be analysed in the lab and through specifically designed 
monitoring systems tailored to the needs of each sector (where respective collection systems are totally 
different) with a target to assessing and optimising the performances of the CreaSolv® Process in different 
scenarios (WP4). Beyond the main polymers, all the substances (including additives and non polymer 
materials, see fig. 12 and 13) will be considered and recovered in keeping with verified economic viability 
(FRAUNHOFER already demonstrated the technical feasibility of CreaSolv® to recover or remove specific 
additives like halogenated fire retardants, fibres, plasticizers or colour pigments6,7,8). The process itself does 
not reduce diameter or length of recovered fibres, so that size of recycled fibres depends on 
cutting/shredding of feed material only. The conservation of the fibre sizing agent is also possible in certain 
cases (as proven with diamonds powder and silanes) but it has to be studied for each combination of 
polymer, filler/fibre, sizing agent to ascertain eventual further formulation tuning needed. 
In addition to taking into account the broad range of specifications for the materials to be recovered, we will 
dedicate particular attention to the requirements for the SRM to be useful. As such, from WP1, we will define 
the properties that the recycled materials should fulfil to set the roadmap for reprocessing development in 
WP3. In WP4, the MultiCycle pilot process will be equipped with advanced PAT systems that will allow inline 
quality control of the recovered polymer streams. WP5-6 will demonstrate that the appropriate properties 
are obtained (meeting initial specs) for using the material according to industrial requirements in the 
packaging and automotive fields respectively. In-depth characterisations will be made eg. in terms of 
molecular weight, thermal and processability behaviour, needed for each application. The results, compared 
to virgin polymers, will feature in technical data sheets (TDS). 
Non-technological hurdles, 
such as regulations and 
standards, to enable the 
prompt deployment in industry 
of the developed concepts and 
economic indicators (e.g. 
CAPEX and OPEX). 
The initial CAPEX and OPEX values are already calculated in Section 2.2.2.E based on results existing at 
high TRL on different materials. WP7 includes economic and environmental sustainability studies 
complemented by a techno-economical analysis (TEA) that will lead to refined CAPEX and OPEX when 
projecting the recycling process to a competitive scale. In terms of standards, aspect overseen in WP7, they 
will also be covered in several tasks along the development of the pilot plant in WP4 and regarding the 
reusability of the recycled plastics in packaging in WP5. The effects of existing legislations will be studied: 
e.g. waste legislation leading to reduced land filling of packaging or end of life vehicles (ELV) directives 
requiring OEMs to use recyclable materials are expected to positively push the market uptake of our process 
and materials. We will also embed policy makers recommendations in WP8 for example in terms of 
incentivizing the actual recycling of multi-materials, as well as to reconsider the use of recycled materials in 
food contact since we will show that the material recovered with CreaSolv® is as pure as virgin ones at 
molecular level, so the current regulatory barrier should be limited to standard mechanical recycling. 
Demonstration activities, 
prototypes and pilot 
The MultiCycle pilot process chain will be set up initially in non industrial environment (WP2-3) and will then 
be demonstrated in a real industrial environment (WP4-6). The large MultiCycle pilot plant (TRL7) will be run 
 
6 Schlummer et al. Recycling of flame-retarded plastics from waste electric and electronic equipment (WEEE). Waste Manag. Res. 2006, 24, 573-583 7 Mäurer, Andreas: Recycling von PVC-P. PVC Extrusion 2017, 5.Dec. 2017, Nuremberg, Germany 8 Arends, Dagmar; Schlummer, Martin; Mäurer, Andreas: Removal of inorganic colour pigments from acrylonitrile butadiene styrene by dissolution-based recycling. Journal of material cycles and waste management 14 (2012), No.2, pp.85-93. 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 14 of 117 
implementations in real 
industrial settings for the 
concepts proposed are 
expected. 
extensively by LOEMI to establish a stable recycling process and recover a significant amount of materials 
(expectedamount of 5T) that can be used by respective industrial partners SILON, AMCOR, ELG, BONDL, 
FARPLAS, TOFAS, to produce recycled plastic compounds, textiles, films and composites used in small 
series of automotive and packaging prototypes to be broadly tested according to industrial requirements, as 
well as compared to virgin materials (ARKEMA; BONDL). 
Include actions designed to 
facilitate cooperation with 
other projects; to enhance 
user involvement; and to 
ensure the accessibility and 
reusability of data produced in 
the course of the project. 
The project includes a number of actions in WP8 to generate a broad collaborationframework  with relevant 
initiatives, such as other projects funded in the same call topic, the NMBP26 call and other calls identified in 
the new EU plastic strategy, as well as with on going projects where partners participate, CEFLEX among 
others. MultiCycle will also engage with relevant activities through ISWA recycling working groups, as well 
as other associations linked to the Advisory Board (AB). V2020 will establish a Circular Plastics Helix that 
will form the basis of our engagement with other stakeholders and initiatives, and will give very high visibility 
to MultiCycle. End users are involved within the consortium, and will be also reached via the AB, the Circular 
Plastics Helix, the Capacity Building programme as well as through a DST that will service towards the 
support of economic feasibility and environmental sustainability of selected circular recycling paths and the 
reuse of materials recycled from MultiCycle.  
In terms of generated data, the project will subscribe to the Open Data Programme and deliver a Data 
Management Plan early in the project (by M6) that will allow partners to have an outmost curation of the data 
(many of the process data will be directly fed from a process analytical platform and used for process 
optimisation) and internal use (eg. as a source for the model-based DST), as well as to provide non 
patentable data to external parties with the aim of extending the deployment of MultiCycle so that an 
increasing amount of multi-materials becomes recycled in the post project phase. The open access database 
(under a license) will support the replicability of the project results.  
Start at TRL5, achieve TRL7  See table 3, with all activities in the stipulated range. 
EC contribution of € 6-8 M  The EC contribution is of 7.7M€ (budget of 9.7M€), providing high value for money in view of the expected 
technical breakthrough and generated impacts. 
The fit to the Focus area: Connecting economic and environmental gains - the Circular Economy (CE) and more especially to the Plastic strategy in a circular economy9 package released on 16/01/2018 is further justified in Section 2.
1.3  Concept and methodology 
(a) Overall concept underpinning the Project The European plastics industry plays a vital role in the EU economy, with 1.45 million employees and a turnover of 350 billion (including converters and machine building producers). The current plastic recycling business is sizeable with 1000 companies, 30.000 employees, a capacity of 3 million tonnes recycled per year and a €2 Bn turnover10. Nevertheless, if we consider that each year in Europe around 25.8 Mio tonnes of post-consumer plastic wastes are generated, with less than 30% being used for material recycling, 31% ending up in landfill and 40% being used for energy recovery, the opportunity to further unlock high value applications from this waste is clear. Established processes present numerous deficiencies in the recycling of our target multi-materials and recycling is currently typically limited to post-industrial waste reprocessing or energy valorisation, therefore highlighting the need for significant improvements throughout the waste management chain.  In terms of packaging material recycling, monomaterial rigid bottles, cups and containers, usually made with petrochemical polymers, are currently the most separately collected and recycled packaging, with chains and final products established on the market. In a context where the plastics from post-consumer waste are sorted by separating the PET bottles and the PP/PE rigid container fraction11, high barrier packages with a multilayer structure represent an issue. The residual part, recovered in the bottom of the plant, consists of mixed plastics that can represent as much as 40% of the total pc plastic. Usually multilayer packages, but also monolayer films, are present in this fraction going to incineration.  In terms of automotive, End-of-Life Vehicles generate an estimated ca. 8 M tons of waste annually in the EU12. After decontamination of vehicles, the remaining structure and indoor elements are shredded and metal is recovered. Remaining materials like ELVs’ plastics, composites, foams and textiles, glass, wood, wires, little metal parts, little electronics and rubber, known as ‘light leftovers’ (<200 kg/m3 apparent density), are also indiscriminately and independently of their values incinerated or even landfilled if PVC is included13. Such practices do not help meeting ELV directive targets in terms of materials recycling >85-95% of materials. Among ELV materials entering the dismantling processes, mostly metals are recovered and directed for either, reuse, remanufacturing or recycling, so improvements are clearly needed for plastics & composites14,15.  Separation and valorisation of polymer based multi-materials is challenging. It has been addressed by a specific solvent-based process (Figure 2) that has been developed and patented by the Fraunhofer Institute for Process Engineering 
 
9 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/documents-strategy-plastics-circular-economy_en  10 http://www.plasticsrecyclers.eu/facts-figures  11 Coltelli M.B., Aglietto M., Riutilizzo dei materiali polimeri, Edizioni Nuova Cultura, 2015 12 J. Heiskanen et al. (2013). “A look at the European Union’s End-of-Life Vehicle Directive - Challenges of treatment and disposal in Finland”. 13 GHK. (2006). A study to examine the benefits of the End of Life Vehicles Directive and the costs and benefits of a revision of the 2015 targets 14 Sawyer-Beaulieu, S. Gate-to-Gate Life Cycle Inventory Assessment of North American ELV Management Processes. Ph.D., University of Windsor, 2009 15 Miller et al. Challenges and Alternatives to Plastics Recycling in the Automotive Sector, Materials 2014, 7, 5883-5902 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 15 of 117 
and Packaging IVV, Germany. The proprietary CreaSolv® Process uses proprietary trade secrets solvent formulations with a low risk for both users and the environment, and ideally not to be classified according to Globally Harmonised System (GHS) criteria. Solvents used consist of a range of adequately selected (polymer specific) polar/apolar and protic/aprotic solvents. These selective solvents-mixtures extract the target pure polymers from heterogeneous waste input streams at subcritical conditions, allowing the polymer solution to be selectively separated from undissolved components or harmful and/or prohibited pollutants, such as plasticizers or halogenic flame retardants.16,17 At the end of the process, the solvent is recovered by drying in order to ensure closed-loop circulation and to keep the process economically viable. The recycled polymer is solvent free, meets the properties of virgin material, and is a suitable substitute material in production processes. The conservation of additives/fillers in the polymer can also be designed on a case by case basis. In general, the CreaSolv® Process comprises the following unit operations:  1. Dissolution of a target polymer from a plastic rich input fraction, e.g. composite  2. Purification of the dissolved polymers from dissolved and undissolved matter (non-target polymers, foreign materials…) 3. Precipitation is an optional first mechanical step to separate polymer from solvents 4. Drying of the polymer by separation and re-circulation of the applied solvent formulation 5. Treatment of the solvents collected in purification, precipitation and drying steps and recovery for complete re-use.  6. Granulation We refer to the MultiCycle process chain as the overall steps for handling the multi-materials to be recycled, from the waste collected (which will be monitored before entering the process) until the production of all the new target fractions ready for use, encapsulating the CreaSolv® Process repeated a number of times, which will be upscaled and improved, and optimised reprocessing steps that will also be adjusted to the polymer and fibres thereof. It will be applied on fractions with complex compositions that are currently not recycled by existing recycling plants. 
 Fig. 2: General CreaSolv® and MultiCycle process scheme (subsequent steps can also allow the separation of further fillers contained in 
each recovered polymer, like for organic additives dissolved with the polymer containing them, which can be removed or not, as preferred) 
Purification is performed by mechanical and extractive means and removes insoluble matter like non-target plastics, dust, metals, alumina, printing inks, etc. Compared to other recycling processes, the CreaSolv® Process has already shown to achieve higher purity and mechanical properties of recovered single polymer fractions. It can source polymers from waste fractions that are not suitable for state-of-the-art recycling processes.18  Further reprocessing steps also bear a fundamental role in warrantying the properties of the recovered polymers are suitable for the application (in standard recycling processes, the amount of recycled materials is very limited). Using enhancement processes, and possibly compensating any degradation occurred during first life cycle, such as sc-CO2 injection during compounding as well as the addition of selected additives, our target is to reach a content of recycled polymer as high as possible (target>80%) in the products obtained from recycled materials, to avoid the need for blending SRMs with virgin polymer (only minor additives will not be from recycled origin). Table 2 compares CreaSolv® with other processes for similar material recycling. 
Table 2: Comparison of CreaSolv® with other recycling approaches 
Process Advantages Disadvantages Process requirements Applicability to ML packaging recycling Applicability to recycling of CFC/GFC 
Solvolysis (i.e. downgrading 
Releases metallic, ceramic and CF components of composite  
High CAPEX OPEX depends on revenues from non-polymeric products 
Polymer matrix is vulnerable to chemical decomposition  
No, since polyolefins are not vulnerable to solvolysis  
Yes, in case of PA or PET based matrices, will not work for PP  
 
16 Schlummer, M. Chapter: Chapter 25 - Recycling of Postindustrial and Postconsumer Plastics Containing Flame Retardants. In: (eds.) Constantine D. Papaspyrides, Pantelis Kiliaris: Polymer Green Flame Retardants, 2014: pages 869-889; Elsevier., ISBN: 9780444538086 17 Mäurer, Andreas: Recycling von PVC-P. PVC Extrusion 2017, 5.Dec. 2017, Nuremberg, Germany 18 Knappich, Fabian; Hartl, Ferdinand; Schlummer, Martin; Mäurer, Andreas. Complete Recycling of Composite Material Comprising Polybutylene Terephthalate and Copper. Recycling 2 (2017), No.2, 12 pp. 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 16 of 117 
polymer chains) Not applicable to multilayers of PO +polyesters and/or PA 
Pyrolysis 
Releases metallic, ceramic and CF components of composite  Valorizes multilayer plastics energetically  
High CAPEX OPEX depends on revenues from non-polymeric products  
Emission control of the process is required if there is a chance of hazardous emissions  
Does not enable material recycling Waste to Energy concept  
Yes 
Mechanical disintegration and separation 
Cheap and many processes available as state of the art  
Limitation in applicability Not applicable to multilayer films   Conditions the formulation available for secondary use. 
Composite is vulnerable to mechanical forces, components can be separated/ sorted mechanically 
No No 
CreaSolv® 
Releases metallic, ceramic and CF components of composites. Separates different fractions in polymers blends and laminates. Enables polymer recycling. Removes legacy additives.  
High CAPEX OPEX lowers as there are revenues from polymeric and non-polymeric products 
Based on thermoplastic polymers  Yes 
Yes, as long as thermoplastic polymers are applied as matrix component 
 
In terms of recycling demonstration on packaging waste, as seen, we will focus on currently non recycled materials that include flexible mono and multilayer packaging, as well as rigid ones that are multilayer or use a low volume material that does not make a separate recycling line economically feasible. Statistics provided by ISWA will bring a clear picture of available non-recycled fraction depending on the country so the used waste compositions are representative of different cases existing around EU (due to variable collecting and recycling systems). Based on AMCOR (world leader in packaging)’s list of 10 highest volumes materials that would fall under this “difficult to impossible” to recycle category in the current situation, we shortlisted a number of representative complex materials including different combinations of laminated or coextruded polymers layers like PET, PE, PP, but also barrier made of Aluminum foil, oriented PA (OPA), metalised PET, physical vapour deposited (PVD) Silicon oxide SiOx or Aluminum Oxide AlOx on PET, EVOH (ethylene vinyl alcohol), as well as in cases paper layers, and of course inks, tie layers and adhesives as needed respectively for printing, co-extrusion and lamination. We will recycle all major polymers found in this mixture: PA, PE, PET, PP but also PLA as a case of emerging material (further details section 2.1.1, fig. 12).  Packaging demonstrators from SRM are planned to be produced with at least 70% of recycled content (using virgin materials only to replace the materials that were not viable to recover, and allowing a bit of flexibility of design) in small prototype series in WP5 by AMCOR by means of extrusion, vapour deposition and lamination processes, which are commonly used processes by the converters in the packaging industry. The evaluation of the processability of the SRMs will be performed by the production of mono- and multi-layered structures for food, and non-food packaging applications including personal and home care products (18 monolayer films, 6 coextruded films, 8 multi-layer laminates and end packaging format). The packaging demonstrators for food will not have the processed SRM (except if from pi waste) directly contacting the food due to current legislative barriers, although their suitability for such purpose will also be tested.  In terms of recycling demonstration on composites waste, we will mainly focus on FRP materials of relevance in the automotive sector, including materials compatible with very different types of processes such as thermoforming/compression moulding of non-woven of long fibres, continuous fibres composite sheets, over-moulding with short fibre reinforced compounds, etc. The target will be to recover the polymers, e.g. PP or PA of different types, as the main thermoplastic matrix used in the sector but also GF as well as CF from emerging composites used for now predominantly in sport & electrical cars or other sectors. The availability of cheaper and sufficiently long r-CF will enable new opportunities for CF-based composites (CFC) to be opened up, especially when combined with recycled polymer matrices. Since MultiCycle will recover pure fractions, the SRMs can be recombined in new structures in a flexible fashion as desired by the converters. Composites demonstrators with at least 70% of recycled content are planned to be produced from the SRM (coming mainly from recycled composites but also from recycled packaging-derived textiles) in small prototype series in WP6. SILON will produce textiles based on pure r-PET and r-PA. Non-wovens will be produced by ELG using r-CF (up to 100 mm), optionally with a variable amount of PA fibres (20-80% ratio vs. CF). Continuous fibre-reinforced thermoplastic sheets will be produced by Bond-Laminates (BONDL). Standard reinforcements (plain or twill weaves) will be impregnated with the recycled polymer to obtain GF+r-PP, GF+r-PA and CF+r-PA sheets' (with a fibre volume content of ca. 45%). The different semi-finished products will be used in semi-structural and structural automotive applications and will be processed via SCM, insert or hybrid moulding at FARPLAS and TOFAS. In terms of inter-disciplinary considerations and use of stakeholder knowledge, our trans-disciplinary team combines all the relevant skills and organisations needed to address the full extent of the challenge of demonstrating innovative 
 Fig 4: Example of FRP part 
(FARPLAS) to be recycled 
using MultiCycle and 
reobtained from SRM thereof 
Fig 3: Example of multilayer packaging (AMCOR) to be 
recycled using MultiCycle and reobtained from SRM  

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 17 of 117 
sustainable multi-materials recycling process and recycled plastic applications. The participation of a number of leading industry players will maximise the consortium’s capability of transferring this know-how to enable further post project qualification towards commercial solutions. Transversal knowledge is also given very important consideration. MultiCycle will enable technical and market knowhow transfer between technology institutes (3 RTDs with core expertise in plastics converting, recycling, packaging, textiles and composites: FRAUNHOFER, AIMPLAS, CTB) and industry participants (7 SMEs, 8 large enterprises, 1 association- 5 of which A-SPIRE members to maximise the understanding of the challenges involved in sustainable process industries). The latter cover the required supply and value chain: plastic/ packaging/ composites suppliers/ converters/ recyclers (ARKEMA, SILON, AMCOR, BONDL, ELG, GBP, FARPLAS, TOFAS), technology providers of recycling equipment and process control and monitoring systems (LOEMI, IRIS respectively), LCA, LCC and TEA techno-economic assessment (VERTECH). We also have included experts in innovation & IP (AXIA, ILS respectively), as well as technology transfer, training and dissemination (BRITEST, V2020). Through ISWA, MultiCycle has a significant policy outreach capacity to raise environmental political awareness, which, in addition to the ground-breaking performance and competitive advantages, could further encourage the adoption of our new solutions. End users actually have a key role in supplying post-industrial and representative post-consumer wastes (complemented by pc waste streams from ISWA, GPB among others) and using recycled materials. Furthermore, additional stakeholders will be involved in an Advisory Board (AB) consisting of well selected members, each with a specific role (summarised before their support letters, annexed to the bid after Section 5) including 8 European & national associations and 3 SMEs in complementary sectors to the consortium: FPE, CEFLEX, EuCIA, EUBP, PACKCLUSTER, IVLV, ZLV, ANARPLA, ARCTIC, DIAD, AEROCIRCULAR. They will be consulted as necessary for both technical (possibly providing samples, assessing the relevant of the results for their case), policy and business-related insights and further AB members may also be appointed if needed. Positioning of the project In terms of TRL, the main activities performed in MultiCycle span from validating the technology in an industrially relevant environment (TRL5) to demonstration in operational (TRL6) and relevant (TRL7) environments. The majority of the technologies involved in the project have already been validated thoroughly at pilot scale in RTD environments based on prior research from involved partners, and in some cases on other relatively similar materials. This will help to focus the efforts where required. It is deemed realistic to state that all the main processes and the resulting secondary raw materials reuse will be demonstrated at TRL7 to reach the ambitious project goal. Table 3 summarises the TRL advances that will be achieved for the key components of the project (generally referring to initial inputs from projects listed in table 4). 
Table 3- Summary of the TRL advancements that will be brought about as a result of the MultiCycle project  
Technology Initial 
TRL 
Final 
TRL Comment 
CreaSolv® technology for recycling of target polymers from polymer containing waste fractions 5 7 
CreaSolv® can treat a number of polymers (PE, PP, PA, PET, PS, ABS, EPS, PLA, PBT, PVC) from a large variety of waste fractions (pi and pc packaging, ELV, WEEE, Building & Construction waste, pi composites). For pi automotive composites, we have a consolidated TRL5, for PE recovery from multilayers it is even higher, however, for recovery of more than PE (e.g. PP, PA, PET) from multilayer packaging, the current TRL is 5. 
CreaSolv® technology for recovery of reinforcement fibres from composites without loss of length (aspect ratio) 5 7 CreaSolv® can dissolve and recover a variety of polymers (PP, PA, PET, PS, ABS, PBT, PVC) from fibre reinforced composites leaving fibres as inert polymer free residues. This has been shown in technical scale aggregates at LOEMI (TRL 5).   
Monitoring of the different steps of the recycling process chain 5 7 
Different optical techniques are broadly used in the scope of industrial sorting. Others have been used inline to support polymer converting processes. Furthermore, the methods for measuring all parameters of interest for tracking Creasolv® Process are already set up in the lab. MultiCycle inline monitoring approach and PAT will consist in the calibration of established sensors for the purpose of the project following the Lab2line solutions of IRIS. 
Additivation and regeneration of plastics coming from pc sources (reactive extrusion, sc-CO2,..) 5-6 8 
AIMPLAS has a broad experience in working with pc and pi recycled thermoplastics. AIMPLAS was participated in previous projects related to performance improvements of recycled materials using optimal additivation, chain extenders and removal contaminants using continuous recycling pilot 
plant processing > 20 kg/h (grinding, washing, drying and extrusion). 
Use of recycled fractions in final products 5 (or more) 7 
Feasibility already demonstrated for rCF at industrial scale by ELG, but not in combination with recycled polymers. In the case of rGF, limited to short fibres recycled by compounding. In the case of packaging, limited amount of recycled plastics are used in specific commercial products (see also 
non-technical barriers in Section 2.1). The same holds for textile products. 
 
When considering the whole value chain underpinning the MultiCycle project, it is clear that we will start from relatively mature processing technologies and combine them with breakthrough process innovations. Therefore, main TRL advancements are focusing on the recycling routes, while the re-processing techniques, generally already standardly used within the involved industrial sectors for virgin materials, as well as the further conversion processes, will need very little adaptation to process our SRMs. The absence of commercially available multilayer packaging or composites from close to 100% SRM is due to the insufficient properties/ high cost of currently available recycled materials, not to a technology gap. National or international research and innovation activities linked to the project Importantly, the project will build on prior state-of-the-art as well as IP belonging to several project partners. A selection of relevant projects that the MultiCycle partners are/have participated in are listed in Table 4 (further projects can be found in 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 18 of 117 
the respective partner profiles) along with the derived expertise, methodologies, pilot processes that will feed into MultiCycle.  
Table 4- National or international research and innovation activities linked to the project 
Project (Funding programme, reference), Description Partners involved Opportunity for carryover to MultiCycle 
ProPAT (SPIRE GA 637232), Robust and affordable process control technologies for improving standards and 
optimising industrial operations IRIS (coord) PAT platform to uptake new sensors and adjusted to the target recycling process case 
SHAREBOX (SPIRE GA 680843), Secure Management Platform for Shared Process Resources IRIS (coord) Digital platform for automating and optimising Industrial Symbiosis and enabling Circular Economy business model in EU Process Ind. 
URBANREC (H2020 GA 690103) New approaches for the valorisation of URBAN bulky waste into high added value RECycled products,  AIMPLAS, CTB Use the technologies developed in URBANREC for accurate separation of the different plastic fraction. Re-use of recycled fibre materials in various applications 
EXTRUCLEAN (LIFE): Demonstrative Project for the removal of hazardous substances during the recycling process of polyethylene hazardous waste packages, 
employing supercritical carbon dioxide.  
AIMPLAS Use the CO2 cleaning technology developed in the project to remove solvents and tune the polymer coming from CreaSolv® Process. 
ECOBULK (CIRC GA 730456) Circular Process for Eco-Designed Bulky Products and Internal Car Parts  AIMPLAS, IRIS, VERTECH, GBP Recycling PA and PP parts from automotive industry. 
SUPERTEX Sustainable Flame Retardant Technical Textile from Recycled Polyester (CIP 2014) CTB Reprocessing of recycled PET (from bottles and post-industrial packaging waste) to fibres 
BIO-EOL End-of life possibilities of biopolymer based 
products (CORNET-Eranet, 2014) CTB End of life processability routes for biopolymers (main focus on PLA) 
Resyntex (H2020 GA 641942) - Symbiosis project on recycling of textiles, including polyamides ARKEMA Preliminary investigations on solutions for polyamide recycling. 
STYLE (SPIRE GA 636771): Pragmatic sustainability assessment tools and methodologies for industrial 
application throughout a project lifecycle. 
BRITEST (Coord) Published guidelines from STYLE (and the related SAMT, MEASURE projects) suitable to inform approaches to LCA for emerging products 
and processes 
SPRING (SPIRE GA 767412): Approaches to enable 
enhanced impact from SPIRE projects 
Britest (Coord), 
IRIS 
Emerging guidance on best practise approaches to training material development for cross-SPIRE impact will inform the design and delivery of training materials 
CloseWEEE (H2020, 641747): Integrated solutions for pre-processing electronic equipment, closing the loop of post-consumer high-grade plastics, and advanced recovery of 
critical raw materials antimony and graphite 
FRAUNHOFER, VERTECH 
(Coord.) Recycling of ABS and PC/ABS from WEEE  
FORCYCLE (Bavarian Federal State Ministry): Recycling of metal-polymer composites.   FRAUNHOFER Recycling ABS, PC/ABS, PA and PBT from automotive post-industrial waste composites (metal plated parts, Carbon fibre reinforced composites, GF reinforced PBT) 
Innovip (H2020, GA 723441): Innovative multi-functional Vacuum-Insulation-Panels (VIPs) for use in the building sector FRAUNHOFER Recycling of plastics from multilayer films  from insulation applications, technical film 
PolyRessource (German BMBF): High-quality injection plastic moldings from shredder residues FRAUNHOFER Recycling of ABS and PS from shred of WEEE through optimised CreaSolv® Process  
OPTIJECT (FP7R4SME, GA 262623): A novel spectroscopic instrument for in-line monitoring during injection moulding.  IRIS Specific NIR-UV-VIS probes working in reflectance /transmission modes for monitoring polymer melt streams in harsh conditions.  
SUSPLA (German BMEL 22010814, 22031812, 22019212, 
22031312, 22012414) FRAUNHOFER Sustainable recycling strategies for products and wastes from bio-based 
plastics, including PLA.  
CEFLEX: A circular economy for flexible packaging. Collaborative project of a EU consortium of companies and associations representing the entire value chain of 
flexible packaging 
AMCOR 
Understanding the challenge throughout the value chain. Measuring, demonstrating and communicating the resource efficiency and waste prevention benefits. CEFLEX is in our AB for maximising synergies and 
giving visibility to MultiCycle as best practice for flexible packaging EoL. 
In addition to these projects, during Task 8.2 of the work plan, we will build links with numerous other synergistic initiatives and projects from H2020 (e.g.SC2, SC5 calls) especially those from calls listed in the EU Plastics Strategy, as well as national and regional schemes (RIS3), SUSCHEM, CEFIC, Plastics Europe, and other associations from the plastic, packaging, composites, textiles automotive sectors for exchange of information and best practices. (b) Methodology Our approach and methodology involve two main components: 1) Technical piloting & Demonstration: After upscaling the process, we will extensively demonstrate the feasibility of the recycling of selected packaging and composite case studies (summarised in fig. 12 and 13, section 2 and WP5-6). In addition, the demonstration work will focus on reprocessing tailored formulations and production of new packaging and automotive parts. The performance of the demonstrators and process to obtain them will be evaluated by environmental and TEA using LCA & LCC methodologies among others, since it is essential to use precise analysis of the impacts to back up the claim of improved environmental impact.  2) Innovation: This work will accompany and cross-cut the innovation action with the aim of preparing for post-project market replication of the project results. It consists of the following activities: a) analysis of the market, regulatory, social & safety aspects that could impact the future commercialisation of the proposed technologies leading to the drawing of guidelines and recommendations used in lobbying with retailers and policy makers in relation with new potential to improve resource and waste management. The safety of the developed 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 19 of 117 
products & processes will be studied according to applicable legislations throughout the action. An SLCA will complement WP7. b) dissemination & training of the project results, including a series of activities to exchange knowledge between the relevant actors to validate their interest in the results of the project and with policy makers who will be a perfect window to echo the relevance of our new solutions. A training programme based on the learnings from the Educate to Innovate Programme from SusChem will be delivered. c) exploitation and business planning to plan the investments needed for full scale production and recycling of MultiCycle solutions to carry them over the notorious ‘valley of death’ towards commercial adoption. How sex and/or gender analysis is taken into account in the project’s content Innovation will consider the gender dimension and cater for the needs, motivations and differences of females where applicable, inspired by how taking gender into account has yielded new research results and sparked creativity, opening new avenues for future research for those who give it serious attention19. It will be relevant in the consumer-specific communication activities regarding the MultiCycle resulting products: the consideration of environmental factors on packaging selection is likely to vary depending on the gender. In addition, although the plastic and recycling industries consist of a majority of males, it is clear that women are predominantly involved both in the purchase and waste sorting at household level. As such, our project will consider the relevance of the gender dimension in communication & training, to ensure this is picked up in the right message as appropriate to reach both males and females. This is important in ensuring the education of the current professional and next generation of scientists, technologist and others needed in the EU to foster the future of the CE and maximise its creativity and innovation potential. The gender dimension of our consortium and our measures to align with the article 16 of the H2020 programme are presented at the end of section 3.3.
1.4 Ambition State of the art and progresses in the field of Plastic-based packaging recycling There are few positive examples of recycling plastics from packaging applications: 59.8% of the petrochemical based PET going to bottles or containers were recycled in 201620, and mono-material packaging made of polyolefins as well as some grades of mixed plastics can be used for downgraded applications at lower cost than the virgin grades they compete with. When it comes to more speciality materials, however, such as the plastic-based multilayer structures used in packaging, there is generally no current industrial solution for their recycling. One major advantage of the multilayer packaging is the possibility of reduction in costs by combining different types of layers having different functionalities (e.g. oxygen/moisture barrier, UV-protection, printability, mechanical protection, or sealability) at reduced layer thicknesses in comparison to the layer thicknesses needed from a single layer to perform the same function. They are environmentally advantageous due to the low use of materials and energy, low carbon footprint, and reduction in food waste. However, because of their poor recyclability, today most multilayers typically are incinerated or end up in landfill.  Low-, high-density polyethylene (LDPE, HDPE), PP, and PET make up the largest share of plastics used in packaging, followed by polystyrene (PS) and other plastics such as PLA21, 22. Polyolefins are used for sealability and moisture barrier. PA is used for mechanical stability, and oriented PET films provide an excellent surface for printing. A two-layer packaging consists of a sealing layer facing the product (e.g. LDPE), and an outer layer (e.g. PET) for mechanical resistance, printability or barrier. A three-layer structure includes an additional barrier layer such as an inorganic layer, e.g. metallised Al, or SiOx coated on the PET or PP substrate used outside. An adhesive layer is also needed for lamination of these coated layers on sealing layer. In some cases, barrier layers such as EVOH, or PA6 are used in the centre of multi-layered structure. They need to be adhered to the sealing layer and to the outer layer by means of adhesives.23, 24, 25  The EoL treatment of pc-plastic packaging waste includes collection, sorting and reprocessing steps. After sorting, they are reprocessed in 3 ways: (i) Incineration; recovery of electrical or thermal energy from polymers, no material delivery and production of toxic gases, and residue is another big disadvantage 26, (ii) Mechanical recycling; processing the plastic waste with shredding, dissolving or melting combined with subsequent purification techniques26, 27, . The disadvantage is the deterioration of properties in each cycle due to degradation or insufficient cleaning of the recycled polymer, (iii) Chemical 
 
19 Londa Schiebinger (2008). Gendered Innovations in Science and Engineering. ISBN: 978080475814 20 European PET Bottle Platform  http://www.epbp.org/  21 PlasticsEurope. Plastics—The Facts 2016; PlasticsEurope—Association of Plastics Manufacturers: Brussels, Belgium, 2016. 
22 Consultic. Produktion, Verarbeitung und Verwertung von Kunststoffen in Deutschland 2015; Consultic Marketing & Industrieberatung GmbH: Rückersdorf, Germany, 2016. 23 Gesellschaft für Verpackungsmarktforschung (GVM). Flexible Plastic Packaging Market in Germany and in Europe; GVM—Gesellschaft für Verpackungsmarktforschung: Mainz, Germany, 2017. 24 Ebnesajjad, S. Plastic Films in Food Packaging—Materials, Technology and Applications, 1st ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2013; ISBN 9781455731152. 25 Wagner, J.R. Multilayer Flexible Packaging, 2nd ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2000; ISBN 9780323477185. 26 Hopewell, J.; Dvorak, R.; Kosior, E. Plastics recycling: Challenges and opportunities. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 2009, 364, 2115–2126. [CrossRef] 27 BIO Intelligence Service. Studie über ein Erhöhtes (Werkstoffliches) Recyclingziel für Kunststoffe; Plastics Recyclers Europe: Brussels, Belgium, 2013. 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 20 of 117 
recycling26, where plastic waste is turned back into its oil/hydrocarbon components, is not the preferable circular approach. For multilayer packaging composites, especially flexible ones, there is no high-quality recycling established currently in EU. Even recycling of flexible monolayer packaging is challenging because it is difficult to sort, convey and process by recyclers, who are more prepared for rigid packaging. As a consequence, most material is used for energy recovery only, which is achieved by incineration plants with an average efficiency of 35%, or land filled depending on the country. Currently, multilayers are usually an impurity and have to be separated from the presorted input in an additional separation step, thereby it is crucial to deliver a solution for their recycling. Today, there are 2 ways to recycle multi-layered packaging structures28; (1) to process the components together in one compatibilization step, (2) to separate the different multilayer components and make them available for recycling in separated recycling streams. The first option, compatibilization, can be used, however, only for recycling of pi-plastic waste, because the composition of the waste input needs to be known, and kept constant, for the selection of the optimum type and amount of the compatibiliser. One example is the recycling case of PET/PE bilayer, widely used for packing fresh foods. It can only be recycled by grinding and then extrusion. However, PET and PE are immiscible and their compatibility must be improved for high-value applications by using proper compatibilisers29,30,31 but the resulting cost is not viable. Furthermore, it was observed that the presence of the adhesive, often poly(ethylene-co-vinyl acetate) (EVA), between the two layers can result in yellowing of PET/PE blended granules32 due to EVA degradation. Another example is multilayers containing polyolefins and a barrier layer of EVOH that cannot be separated and is incompatible with PE and PP33 during recycling. Therefore, only recycled products with low mechanical properties are obtained. Additionally, the only possible EoL treatment of these recycled polymers is incineration, leading again to a limited scope of its application for multilayers.  The second option, separation of different components, can be performed by 1) delamination, or by 2) recycling of polymers by dissolution methods: The delamination can be performed physically by the dissolution of macromolecules, and mechanically or chemically by the decomposition of an interlayer. For the recycling of multilayer pi-waste34,35 a delamination process has been proposed. This approach addresses the removal/dissolution of the adhesive layers of multilayer packaging. It results in separation of the components of a multilayered structure, but requires a subsequent separation of the segregated films by density, NIR or electrostatic. The technology is provided in technical scale by the German company Saperatec GmbH35 and uses a micro emulsion to separate composite films. However, the application of this concept is not yet universal, as many different adhesives are used in the multilayer market, making it not possible to apply for recycling of pc-plastic waste. One of the most promising and advanced approaches is the recycling of polymers by dissolution method. The solvent based CreaSolv® Technology, developed by FRAUNHOFER IVV36,37 uses specific solvents to dissolve one polymer type out of a waste stream, including mixed polymers and polymer-based composites. Multi-step procedures allow step-by-step dissolution of different components of a multilayer and recover the polymers in high purity by removal of impurities and recirculation of the solvent. Applied to packaging waste, the CreaSolv® Technology so far targeted PE and PP mainly, resulting in a quality close to that of the virgin material. CreaSolv® does not require extensively sorted infeed materials. The waste can be a mixture of different multilayer and non-multilayer packaging systems, making the technology appropriate for the recycling of real pc-packaging waste including high shares of multilayer packaging items, thereby reducing waste and increasing overall valorisation of multilayer films. One major drawback of this technology is that the technology is not yet available at industrial scale and positive business cases have not been stated in operational practise, drawbacks which will be overcome thanks to this MultiCycle project.  The increased use of bio-based plastics having by far the highest growth rate among all packaging materials (in comparison to the overall, the market volume is still quite low; forecasted market share is 1.7 % in 2021, a niche product) will result in new types of materials entering into the established ways of plastic waste management. Legislation in some EU countries (Belgium, Netherlands, Luxembourg, Italy) actively support biopolymers. The EU Directive regarding the reduction of the consumption of lightweight plastic carrier bags is another law that boosts the use of biodegradable films in some countries. These regulations increase the opportunities for new packages designed for recycling, being made of recycled raw materials as well as from renewable resources. Bio-based plastics with identical chemical structures, e.g. the partially bio-based PET (Bio-PET) or the near 100% bio-based polyethylene (Bio-PE), undergo the same recycling processes as their fossil-based equivalents. PLA, which is one of the mostly used biopolymers in packaging (100% bio-based, and very versatile), was the 
 
28 Kaiser K, Schmid M, Schlummer M. Recycling 2018, 3, 1, doi:10.3390/recycling 3010001 29 Coltelli  et al. Modified styrene-butadiene-styrene block copolymer as compatibiliser precursor in PE/PET blends. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2005, 90, 211–223 30 Aglietto et al.. Postconsumer PET/polyolefin blends through reactive processing. J. Mater. Cycles Waste Manag. 2004, 6, 13–19 31 Yousfi, et al. Morphology and Mechanical Properties of PET/PE Blends Compatibilized by Nanoclays: Effect of Thermal Stability of Nanofiller Organic 
Modifier. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2013, 128, 2766–2778 32 Bartoli,et al. Conversion of post-industrial PET-PE scraps into compatibilized plastic blends for new applications. AIP Conf. Proc. 2012, 1459, 160 33 Wang et al Effect of high-density polyethylene-g-maleic anhydride on the morphology and properties of HDPE/EVOH alloys. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2007, 106, 3220–3226 34 APK AG. Available online: https://www.apk-ag.de/de/  35 Saperatec AG. Available online: http://www.saperatec.de/technology/#technologie_top  36 Mäurer, A. et al. (2004): Good as new. Recycling plastics from WEEE and packaging wastes. Waste management world Vol 4, May/June, pp. 33-43.  37 Unilever. Unilever Develops New Technology to Tackle the Global Issue of Plastic SachetWaste. Available online: https://www.unilever.com/news/Press-releases/2017/Unilever-develops-new-technology-totackle-the-global-issue-of-plastic-sachet-waste.html. 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 21 of 117 
focus of a study (SUSPLA) initiated by the German Ministry of Food and Agriculture (BMEL). The research alliance produced pc- as well as pi-waste containing PLA and tested the feasibility of the material and feedstock recycling processes accompanied by LCAs. The CreaSolv® Process was implemented to the heterogeneous waste mixture of pc-PLA waste with about 30% impurities. The recyclates were processed by means of injection moulding tests and no differences were observed in comparison to the results obtained by using the virgin PLA material. It has been demonstrated that with an approximately 50% higher yield, the CreaSolv® Process offers substantial economic advantages compared to conventional material recycling. This is due to the process not requiring prior pre-treatment steps of density separation and air separation. Although NIR can sort PLA from PET, the presence of minor amounts of PLA in PET waste can lead to degradation and PET recyclers’ reluctance, which has hindered the market entry of PLA. CreaSolv® can separate small fractions of mixed polyesters, thereby resolving such issue.  Beyond the state of the art, in MultiCycle the most commonly used polymers in multi-layered packaging -PE, PP, PET and PA- will be recovered by means of the CreaSolv® Process in MultiCycle upscaled plant (PLA will be recovered at lab scale only due to insufficient amount in pi/pc waste). These target polymers will be selectively dissolved from the plastic waste and contaminants will be removed from the solution using special purification methods. Customized solvent formulations will be applied in combination with the novel designed CreaSolv® plant to recover PA and PET with properties similar to the virgin polymers, not recovered so far from pc-waste. Single-, and multi-layer packaging films and laminates used in new demonstrator packages designed with high recycling potential, will be produced from the recycled polymers using industrial converting lines; such as film extrusion, physical vapor deposition, coating and adhesive lamination processes. The usability of the plastics recovered by the MultiCycle processes at content > 70% and their ability to meet applicable legislations and industrial requirements for packaging will be confirmed. Safety compliance will be ensured for the recyclates obtained from pc-waste and pi-waste for food and non-food applications.  State of the art and progresses in the field of recycling processes for Fibre Reinforced FRP The recycling of carbon fibre thermoset composites is economically viable due to the high cost of virgin carbon fibres and the good quality of the recycled carbon fibres. The lower cost of recycled carbon fibres allows industries, such as the automotive industry- who previously, due to financial limitations, could not use virgin carbon fibres- to consider recycled carbon fibres as a lightweight solution. Two typical processes for valorising carbon fibre composites are pyrolysis and solvolysis38, of which the most advanced and most commercially used is the pyrolysis process, with or without oxygen. Waste in the form of prepregs, dry fibres or hardened laminates are processed in temperatures between 450 and 700 °C. The waste is converted into fibres, oils and gases. The oil contains monomers that in principle can be reused in new resin. However, due to economic constraints, extraction of monomers is not carried out in practice. After shredding the recyclate, it typically consists of fibres (up to 150 mm) that can be used in the compounding industry as chopped fibres, milled powder or as nonwovens. The process is currently at an optimisation phase in which the gas treatment systems are gradually being altered and fine-tuned. For example, project partner ELG, managed to lower processing energy consumption in 2015 by 35% by improving their gas treatment process and is planning on establishing a new abatement system (2018) to increase throughput while limiting the gas released in the atmosphere. Solvolysis is a recycling technology in which a solvent dissolves the composite matrix at lower temperatures than pyrolysis (but still up to 300ºC possibly also generating some CF degradation) and was mainly developed for thermosetting matrices. Commercial applications currently remain limited, even though it appears to be a very promising route making it possible to retain the fibre structure, as well as the plastic monomers. Unlike the pyrolysis process, this process also avoids the formation of carbonized materials, which contaminates the fibre surface and as such prevents good fibre matrix adhesion. Besides pyrolysis and solvolysis, other techniques are being studied such as electrodynamic fragmentation, grinding/pelletising of the composite waste to be used in injection moulding and direct re-forming, but none of these reached so far maturity due to economic and/or processing reasons (e.g. harmful carbon dust production during grinding).39 Compared to standard solvolysis processes, as dissolution temperatures in CreaSolv® are typically below solvolysis temperatures, effects on fibre diameters are lower40. For pyrolysis, a reduction of fibre diameters has been reported.  In contrast to CF, it is more difficult to apply pyrolysis to glass fibres. At a pyrolysis temperature of 500 °C, the residual strength of the glass fibres is already decreased to less than 50%. The high temperatures degrade the sizing of the glass fibre and the glass fibre structure.41 Studies show that the current most efficient way of valorising glass fibre composites is by processing them in cement ovens. Milled material is mixed with other raw materials in which 30% of the composite is used as the source of energy and 70 % as the raw material. This process is however not economically attractive. Also mechanical milling technologies are commercially available, but only on a small scale and the GF abrasion leads to high intensive energy & resources consumption.  
 
38 Current status of recycling of fibre reinforced polymers; University of Birmingham; 2015 39 Composites recycling: Where are we now?; Composites UK; 2016. 40 F. Knappich et al.: Complete Recycling of Composite Material Comprising Polybutylene Terephthalate and Copper. Recycling, 2, 9 41 Thomason, J.; Jenkins, P.; Yang, L. Glass Fibre Strength—A Review with Relation to Composite Recycling. Fibers 2016, 4, 18. 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 22 of 117 
Beyond the state of the art, MultiCycle will: produce recycled carbon fibres with superior lengths, with properties similar to those from the primary fibres, and which will be structured into nonwovens. Also recycled glass fibres with high quality will be recovered. Contrary to the current state-of-the-art, no downcycling to less demanding applications (e.g. plastic filler) is anticipated. There is also a good tolerance for the presence of other materials on the composite part like paints, adhesives... Moreover, contrary to the standard composites recycling processes, the thermoplastic matrix will be recovered as well and reprocessed to textile fibres that will be reused as matrix in composites or applied in the textile industry.  State of the art and progresses in the field of waste plastic identification/ monitoring Packaging material recycling from mixed waste plastics is challenging and based on sophisticated process chains combining different sorting steps like screening, wind sifting, NIR sorting, removal of metals and others. The main purpose is to separate the recyclable mono-materials like PE, PP, PET for further mechanical recycling, but mainly in their rigid form since flexible counterparts, even monolayer films, are difficult to handle by recyclers. Equipment to automatically identify plastics, are already widely commercially available e.g. via spectroscopic identification systems, including near-infrared, X-ray, colour, or laser, and combinations thereof42, but currently many recyclers are still sorting plastics by hand which is unreliable, expensive, and not suitable for transparent flexible films. Due to the need to sort plastics by colour for mechanical reprocessing, camera or visible spectroscopy are often used as a first sorting step. Therefore most state of the art devices are used to identify the “wanted” rigid fraction and the rest including multilayer/films, aimed at incineration, are generally not the purpose of the sorting systems. IRIS has experience in developing customised fast online VIS/NIR spectroscopic tools for plastic processing monitoring to precisely identify their composition and traces of unwanted substances43,44. Results from IRIS show hyperspectral imaging (HSI)’s capacity to distinguish coloured from natural HDPE and from LDPE from multilayer films including PE among its layers using chemometrics analysis selecting different principal components (fig. 5)44.  In terms of composites from ELVs, since light fractions are normally handled together, the most common identification technique in place during the car dismantling process, based on induction sensors, is for detecting metals. An added difficulty for automatic optical sorting of automotive parts is that the majority are black/ use carbon black preventing the penetration of NIR. Different emerging techniques such as TeraHertz45 and Laser Induced breakdown sprectroscopy (LIBs)46,47 have though been reported to allow determining the composition of different plastics even in black colour. In contrast to general recycling processes, the perfect pre-sorting of materials is not needed in the case of MultiCycle process that is tolerant to mixtures, nevertheless, in view of the variable compositions in the packaging fraction nowadays rejected by the recyclers, having a composition monitoring system will be a fundamental facilitator for the optimal set up of the process (e.g. predicting automatically if all dissolution steps implemented in the recycling plant should be activated or not in cases whereby in the batch in question, the content of e.g. PA is below a threshold that does not warrant the viability of its recovery). As such, we will optimise the hardware and software for the waste monitoring system thanks to advanced chemometrics analysis and combining several spectroscopic technologies (possibly NIR and visible hyperspectral imaging) to go beyond the conventional NIR results in order to provide accurate reliable compositional information even of monolayer and flexible films via data fusion. For composites, the project will deliver an innovative handheld monitoring system (based on TeraHertz or LIBs and possibly coupling UV-VIS) also using optimised chemiometrics approach, to monitor the type of plastic used in different composite parts and identify those worth recycling separately through MultiCycle process. 
 
42 Plastic handbook chapter 8: PLASTICS RECYCLING AND BIODEGRADABLE PLASTICS, Susan E. Selke: 43 OPTIJECT project (Grant Agreement no. 262623) 44 B2B contracts for the detection of good batches of recyclates as well as for HSI-based monitoring solution for plastic identification in recycling line 45 https://www.recyclinginternational.com/system/files/other/issue_article_no_premium/2016/rt2017_application_toratecnica_pdf_15078.pdf  46 Aguirre et al., Analysis of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) using laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) and multivariate analysis,  Talanta, 117, 2013, 419-424;  47 Gregoire et al., Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy for polymer identification, Anal Bioanal Chem (2011) 400:3331- 3340 
 Fig 5: Example of NIR HSI chemometrics analysis on pc films (ML: light blue) 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 23 of 117 
State of the art and progresses in the status of implementation of the CreaSolv® Process The basics of the patented CreaSolv® Process concept were already described in Section 1.3. Here we will cover its main applications and its technical readiness for the project end uses. The process has been applied to ABS, PS and PC/ABS from WEEE, PP from ELV, PA from fibre composites and other waste streams. In studies with WEEE plastics, CreaSolv® was able to remove brominated flame retardants dioxins and furans below levels of concern48,49. It was reported that CreaSolv® is a substantially better environmental option than landfill and also a better option than incineration with energy recovery as it is a low energy consumption process and requires rather simple process equipment. In the PolyREssource project, the CreaSolv® Process was further optimized in terms of productivity and selectivity (e.g. dissolving ABS and PS consecutively) and it provided product qualities well acceptable for downstream polymer processing. PA has been subjected to CreaSolv® Processes in a series of public projects and small scale feasibility studies, amongst others aiming at PA 6.12, PA 6 or PA 6.6.50 Obtained recycled PA types were evaluated positively and considered to replace virgin PA in colour-insensitive applications. A recent evaluation of the economy of the CreaSolv® for styrenic polymers revealed comparably low process cost (70-80% of the expected revenues from the products when calculating SRM prices with 75% of virgin).  Existing production capacity is available at the small technical line at FRAUNHOFER IVV with a research related capacity of 5-10 kg a day (fig. 6) and some single unit operations can be performed in technical scale aggregates of LOEMI, however, the latter are not combined to a complete line. There is no CreaSolv® Plant at industrial or commercial scale yet. However, in 2018, two processes will be installed at industrial scale, one plant by UNILEVER for post-consumer multilayers packaging originating from South-east Asian landfills. Another plant will be run by the PolystyreneLoop Corporation to recycle PS from waste EPS from Construction and Demotion sources that contains the persistent organic pollutant HBCD, so a different field from those covered in MultiCycle. The multilayer plant in Asia, however, will only extract PE as main fraction from the waste stream. PP, PA, or PET, which are also expected in these waste streams are not intended to be valorised there and require an adapted CreaSolv® Process, which is the scope of MultiCycle. Besides, there is no industrial plant available for the solvent based separation of fibre reinforced plastics, despite the emerging markets for these products and the increasing amounts of post-industrial waste streams.   Beyond the state of the art, MultiCycle will design and install a CreaSolv® Pilot plant which allows flexible demonstration of the innovative process for both target waste streams, recovering main polymers and fibres from multilayers and FRP. The plant concept will reach a capacity of 25 kg /h (so 600kg/ day) vs. the current 5-10 kg /day and will be equipped with process automation technologies, enabling mass and energy balanced trials as well as transparent and optimal process control. To optimise the process and its cost effectiveness, advanced Industry 4.0 digital solutions will support the upscaling of the recycling process. A number of sensors will be installed along the MultiCycle process chain resulting in data that will be gathered in a PAT platform to feed data fusion models allowing relevant process decision making. MEMS viscosity sensors will be used to track the end point of the dissolution of a given fraction, and will enable the cycle time to be optimised, while triggering the next CreaSolv® step automatically. In addition, the melted output polymer will also be monitored by NIR (among others) in terms of absence of unwanted mixed polymer, additives, particles and of VOC content. Predictive models will facilitate the process set up based on the mining of the data from previous recycling trials and the monitored input composition. Depending on the exploitation scope, the predictive models could also allow the initial process set up to be adjusted to maximise given targets of e.g. selective recovery of certain fractions.  State of the art and progresses in the polymer reprocessing. Plastics materials are formulated with complex blends of materials collectively known as additives. These are used to improve among others the impact strength, clarity, chemical and heat resistance, weather resistance and colour retention properties of base polymers. They also aid in the processing of plastics by increasing melt strength, heat stability and lubricity 
 
48 Schlummer et al, Recycling of flame-retarded plastics from waste electric and electronic equipment (WEEE). Waste Manag. Res. 2006, 24, 573-583 49 Freegard, K., Morton, R., Lund, I., Huisman, J., Studds, P., Freer, E.,2005. WRAP Project PLA-037: develop a process to separate brominated flame retardants from WEEE polymers. Interim Report 2. The Waste and Resources Action Programme, Banbury, UK. 50 Menz, V et al. Werte wiedergewinnen. Kunststoffe 102 (2012), No.7, pp.72-75  
Fig 6: FRAUNHOFER IVV pilot plant for the CreaSolv® recycling process (TRL5) 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 24 of 117 
to help plastics processors to achieve greater output rates and increased efficiency without loss of quality51.  During its life time or within the recycling, some of the additives could be removed or deactivated (by oxidizing processes) and depending on the secondary material’s application, it may be necessary to add some additional additives. The type and amount of additives to use depends on the expected requirements but at least antioxidants, internal lubricant and heat stability are required since they will have lost properties during the first process. The additives will be added to the recovered polymer during melt processing using a twin-screw extruder or in a single screw extruder using additives as a masterbatch. Although Creasolv® does not lead to further polymer degradation, during the plastic primary use, polymer can be degraded and require regenerating. Regeneration consists in repairing the polymeric backbone by joining the sides of different broken polymer chains and increasing the molecular weight. As a consequence, the mechanical properties, melt strength and viscosity are increased. Amongst others, this backbone reconstruction is based on the use of chain extenders52 as additives53. Although several technologies exist to reclaim degraded resins, use of chain extender is a new simple, efficient, and low-cost alternative54. Chain extenders have direct influence on the distribution of both hard and soft segments in the polymer. The degrees of crystallinity and crosslinking are also affected by the structure and chemical composition of the chain extender. These can be used to rebuild the polymer chains in plastics polymerized via condensation (such as polyesters or polyamides), ultimately restoring the melt strength of the polymer sufficient for stable processing (figure 7), increase its hydrolytic stability and mechanical strength. They could be used if degradation is detected after the CreaSolv® Process due to first life cycle or if the secondary application requires longer chains. Additionally, some studies demonstrated that chain extenders also improve the compatibility of plastic with different melt flow index. Supercritical (sc) fluids provide the ideal conditions for extracting compounds with a high degree of recovery in a short period of time. In general, sc-CO2 technology is much cleaner and safer than conventional processes and preserves the active ingredients as well as the characteristics of the substances. AIMPLAS has a sc-CO2 technology tandem recycling plant (figure 8) to improve the performance of plastics (e.g. removing odour components in natural fibre compounds, cleaning polymers and helping additives dispersion). It has been shown that sc-CO2 compatibilises polymer blends and produces morphological changes in the polymer, improving the specific surface and effectiveness of the coupling agents and other additives. The use of CO2 in a continuous process (e.g. compounding) allows to: i) reduce the viscosity of the plastic blend in order to improve the interaction of immiscible polymers and in consequence, the efficiency of chain extenders, ii) dissolve and remove gases formed during the extrusion steps due to contaminants or polymer additives degradation, iii) reduce the amount of required additives and iv) increase extruder output. CO2 injected to the extruder can be recovered, cleaned and pressurized to be reused in the extrusion process avoiding any CO2 or VOCs emissions. The FP7 CLIPP55 and LIFE EXTRUCLEAN56 projects aimed at recycling package polyolefin materials that contain volatile substances, have demonstrated important advantages of sc-CO2 in comparison with standard extrusion process, not only in terms of final plastic quality, also in energy and cost savings.  Beyond the state of the art, MultiCycle aims to reformulate the recycled materials (PET, PA, PE, PP) coming from the CreaSolv® Process by continuous melt process (compounding) assisted with sc-CO2, to remove any VOC and improve additives dispersion. The recycled polymers will be suitable to be processed by extrusion and injection moulding and fulfil all the requirements of end-users. If it is necessary, polymer regeneration will be achieved by the use of a synergic combination of chain extenders and antioxidants in order to achieve the required melt strength, viscosity and properties to be reused in the food (pc waste-based SRM as sealing layer) or non-food packaging and automotive sectors. 
 
Innovation potential  Addressing our societal and environmental challenges, e.g. the depletion of non-renewable resources and sub-optimal end of life compatibility of current materials with existing waste management scenarios, is recognized to be a major catalyst for 
 
51 Additives for Plastics Handbook  (Second Edition) John Murphy ISBN: 978-1-85617-370-4 52 Low-molecular difunctional chain extenders can react to linearly link chains or segments into thermoplastic linear macromolecules with minimal crosslinking 53 Makkam et al., Rheological and Mechanical Properties of Recycled PET by Reactive Extrusion, Energy Procedia, 56, 2014, 547-53. 54 Menglong et al,Chain extension of PA6 using multifunctional chain extenders and reactive extrusion for melt foaming,EU Polymer Journal, 96, 2017, 210 55FP7-NMP-2007 www.biostructproject.eu/; FP7-NMP-2009 www.ecoplastproject.com/; FP7-SME-2010 www.clipp-project.eu/ 56 www.life-extruclean.eu/index.php  http://www.life-extruclean.eu/index.php  
 
Fig. 8. AIMPLAS pilot plant to recycling materials 
using CO2 assisted technology 
Fig. 7. Polymer melts strength increase due to Chain Extenders addition (right vs. left) 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 25 of 117 
increasing our innovation capacity, and for the integration of new knowledge generated as a result of research into our practical societal and industrial contexts. The CE also unlocks tremendous potential for the development of innovative new materials % processed. The global paradigm shift from take-make-dispose linear model towards a Circular model represents a unique opportunity for Europe and the European Process Industries to kick-start a world leading competitive CE with significant economic, environmental and societal benefits.  The broad innovation potential from MultiCycle results arises from delivering solutions tapping into currently unmet market needs, as well as facilitating enforcement of existing environmental legislations such as ELV and packaging waste management directives (94/62/CE and 2004/12/CE) in an inclusive EU economy (target <10% landfill in municipal solid wastes by 2030). The expected derived growth potential in terms of jobs and revenues are discussed in Section 2 along the supply and value chain. Importantly, our project has a strong industrial involvement and is extremely well positioned for a successful post-project phase towards commercial use of the results through: a) Recycling process licensing, sales of equipment, control system, software b) Provision of environmental, safety, support to upscaling and validation services c) Packaging and composites solutions from recycled materials. Besides, our innovative new processes will also be enablers for innovation in other sectors that could adopt a similar approach or become end users of the new SRMs such as: packaging for additional applications that can turn circular at EoL such as pharma blisters, recycled thermoplastics for textile, injected goods e.g. for toys, tools or other consumer products, composite matrices and fibres used in the same but also combined with thermosetting matrices for transport in broader term, aeronautics, marine, construction, energy, sport goods, among many more. Below, we benchmark MultiCycle with existing solutions in terms of recycling and materials, all following growing trends: Packaging considered for recycling and circular use Following resource efficiency and lighweighting drivers, flexible packaging is growing in share vs. rigid counterparts especially thanks to improvements in properties. Flexible packaging represents ca. 43% of the plastic packaging market57, itself 40% of the plastic market. The amount of multilayer packaging films is increasing even in cases substituting rigid formats while saving materials. Multilayer packaging makes up about 14% of all flexible packaging films and 12% of the rigid packaging22. In general, plastic/plastic multilayer (ML) films can be subdivided into five different categories, whereby plastic/plastic are multilayer films with more than one plastic layer and a plastic content over 50% of the total mass (paper/plastic composites are excluded from the definition23). The market segments comprise: i) plastic/plastic ML without barrier layer, ii) plastic/plastic ML with organic barrier layer, iii) metallised plastic/plastic ML (films with coatings based on AlOx or SiOx,) iv) thermoformed (rigid) plastic/plastic ML, and v) plastic/plastic ML with Al foil (in decreasing market size), all relevant to MultiCycle. In Europe a total of about 1610 kt of multilayer films were distributed in 201623 corresponding to about 18,000 Mio m2 out of 130,000 Mio m2 of the total flexible packaging market23. In fact while our recycling process has unique advantages for dealing with multilayer packaging, it is in fact also relevant to the whole packaging films, including monolayers (conventional and bio-plastics), which are not currently recycled (so overall close to 10 Mio T per year5). As seen in the SOA (Section 1.4), there is no suitable industrial-scale recycling process available on the market to date leading to incineration with energy recovery, or landfilling in other countries, counteracting the efforts towards conservation of resources and crude oil-independency. The EU Circular Economy Package (CEP) sets clear goals for recycling 65% of municipal waste; and recycling 75% of packaging waste by 2030. As such our target fraction cannot continue to be kept out and innovations are clearly needed.  In terms of packaging materials currently produced from recycled materials, except from PET Bottle-to-Bottle, where the amount of r-PET is not marginal, use of pi-SRM, and low demanding packaging such as PE bottles for detergents, their presence is limited. This, besides generally observed properties being downgraded using established mechanical recycling processes is due to very stringent regulations when it comes to use in food contact. In food packaging, a recycled material can be incorporated into the centre layer; however recycled plastics from pc-waste should not be in direct contact with food according to Regulation (EU) No10/2011. For non-food packaging, no restriction exists concerning the contact with the filling material. No packaging from recycled material has typically reached the high amount of recycled plastics envisaged by MultiCycle. Further innovation potential will be generated through innovative converting (e.g. applying SiOx on recycled BO-PET) and smart ecodesigns that enable high SRM content in packaging even for food, as well as MultiCycling EoL. Composites considered for Recycling and circular use 
 
57 https://www.all4pack.com/content/location/136757, http://www.smitherspira.com/resources/2016/february/global-packaging-material-outlooks, http://www.smitherspira.com/resources/2016/february/global-packaging-material-outlooks 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 26 of 117 
Although relevant to the whole fibre reinforced thermoplastic sector, due to its ability to maintain fibre length, MultiCycle is even more relevant to those with long fibres such as Long Fibre Thermoplastics (LFT) or nonwovens. The LFT market is estimated to grow from USD 3.28 Billion in 2016 to USD 5.55 Billion (480 thousand metric tons) by 2022, at a CAGR > 9% from 2017 to 202258. The applications of LFT include automotive, consumer goods, industrial goods, sporting goods, and others. The increasing use of LFT is driven by growing automobile production, regulatory requirements to improve fuel efficiency and the resulting replacement of steel with plastics. LFTs are being used in automotive applications for front-ends, bumper beams, dashboards, and underbody shields. They have a significant potential for mass-transit applications in buses, trucks, and railroad vehicles. LFTs are processed with a thermoplastic matrix, such as PP or PA reinforced with long glass (or carbon, aramid...) fibres with lengths >12 mm through a pultrusion processing method. LFTs can also be processed by injection or extrusion-compression moulding. Going one step further- since the longer the fibre, the better all main composite properties (fig 9)-, Bond-Laminates (BONDL) is the only current manufacturer that has (continuous fibres) weave-based thermoplastic composites (Trademark Tepex, commonly also referred to as organic sheets) in automotive mass production. Tepex® materials are manufactured made-to-order in a continuous lamination process. The manufacturing process, based on proprietary technology (patents listed in table 18), ensures complete consolidation of the individual fibre structure with the thermoplastic matrix (fig. 10). Being produced in a continuous process Tepex® materials can be delivered as sheets (with a standard width up to 1250 mm and a sheet length that can be optimized per application) or as cut to size sheets as well as complex geometric shapes ready for processing in thermoforming, compression or injection molding processes. ELG in turns has unique 100% r-CF and hybrid (eg. with PA) nonwoven (mats with r-CF length up to 100 mm) typically used in closed mould processes with liquid resins or converted by SCM. Reported applications are seat pans for example with hybrid nonwoven and bonnet parts with 100% rCF nonwoven. Besides the superior mechanical properties, the main advantage of all those thermoplastics composites in comparison with thermoset ones is that they are fully reformable and recyclable. Lower melting points than metals require less energy input to fabricate components and processing or reprocessing does not create any toxic effluents producing favourable LCA benefits. However, the current reprocessing technologies require the grinding and re-melting with a significant reduction of fibre length and in consequence a significant reduction of mechanical properties so recycling of composites is not closed-loop in terms of resource efficiency as recycled fibres or matrix cannot be reused in the same secondary applications59-60. The MultiCycle project aims to recycle these composite materials to be used in similar (semi-)structural applications as the virgin counterparts by maintaining the original length of the reinforcement fibre and properties of the polymeric matrix. The separated pure fractions will furthermore be compatible with a number of processes. Sheet Compression Moulding (SCM) is the most common choice for converting high-volume composite parts. This process produces high strength, complex parts in a wide variety of sizes. Features such as ribs, bosses and inserts can be moulded in. Compression moulded parts have 2 excellent finished surfaces and outstanding part-to-part repeatability. As seen in the state of the art, at the moment, in terms of composite recycling, practically only CF coming from pi sources are being recycled & re-used for the manufacturing of composites, the high cost of primary carbon fibres being the main driver. R-CF currently available on the market suffer a decrease in mechanical properties, but are 20 to 40 % cheaper than the primary material. Primary GF are relatively cheap and no high quality recycled glass fibres are currently on the market. Therefore, except the case of short r-GF included in a compound that is recycled via re-compounding or alike, the use of r-GF in composites is at the moment inexistent to the best of our knowledge. MultiCycle will deliver both high quality r-CF (to be channelled through ELG already producing r-CF) and r-GF (to be channelled through BONDL’s mother company LANXESS already producing virgin GF and compounds thereof) that can be recovered from selected pi and pc types at an acceptable cost when considering the overall recovery scheme of both polymer and fibres, therefore filling the currently existing gaps. Currently for BONDL, producing continuous fibre reinforced sheets at close to 50% fibres wt. ratio, there is no economically viable solution even for their pi wastes, which can be as much as 25% when cutting the final part. Indeed, even if mechanical recycling with high downgrading (going to short fibres for compounding) could be feasible, there is no recycler interested in such material as the dilution with pure material would have to be too significant and it is very abrasive for shredders. When filler fraction is too high or in presence of specific additives (eg. halogenated or when pc wastes contain 
 
58www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/long-fiber-thermoplastic-market-143452466.html  59  Oliveux et al, Current status of recycling of fibre reinforced polymers: Review, reuse & resulting properties, Progress in Materials Sci. 72 (2015) 61–99 60 Bruijn et al, Recycling c/PPS laminates into long fibre thermoplastic composites by low shear mixing, 21st Int. Conf. on Composite Materials Xi’an,2017 
 Fig. 9: Qualitative relationship between mechanical properties and fiber length in LFT GF-PP compounds. 
     Fig 10: Tepex process: unwinding reinforcement + polymer, impregnation, consolidation, control, cutting  

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 27 of 117 
PVC), recycling is inhibited, and even incineration not feasible, leading to landfilling a lot of valuable materials (at a cost of 100-200€/T). Even if the project mainly tackles the challenge of fibre reinforced composites for the demonstration of the process and SRMs, the MultiCycle approach for ELV materials is also compatible for jointly recycling simpler fractions like neat polymers. Textiles (for use in composite structures) from recycled polymers Within the textile market, it is important to distinguish between pi and pc waste. Many textile extrusion companies re-use their own production waste directly in their process. The purity of these materials is very high and they have a perfect control of the input material. Very often this pi waste is mixed with virgin polymers at approx. 10% to avoid property decrease due to the multiple melting steps. Pc waste is much less valorised within the textile sector owing to the poor quality of the recycled polymers due to degradation and impurities (issues that could be compensated for by the MultiCycle approach), leading to uses in lower value applications (such as non-wovens for fleece fabrics and automotive low end applications). Moreover, the rheological and viscoelastic properties of the recycled materials induce some limitations for the application of the recycled products in the textile extrusion industry. The recovery of suitable material properties (i.e. Intrinsic Viscosity and molecular weight) relevant to the process parameters as well as aesthetic properties (i.e. whiteness; dyeability) by means of the application and/or introduction of selected chemicals can promote the usage of the recycled materials. Another main reason for the limited application of pc waste in textiles is the cost of recycled polymers which, in view of current respective properties, is too high compared to the virgin ones. This is predominantly because of the low availability of recycled polymers on the market unbalancing supply and demand leading to high price for recycled polymers and because of quality requirements (only high purity recycled materials such as PET from bottles can be used). Project partner SILON has vast experience with recycled raw material processing, mixing and blending to obtain a stable quality, e.g. using of end-reactors for liquid state polycondensation and can thus work with 100% recycled PET, from different higher and lower value sources.  Besides the mechanical recycling mentioned above, some companies also apply chemical recycling routes to recycle waste and re-use them in textile applications. The Italian company Aquafil collects PA post-consumer and post-industrial waste and depolymerises it to caprolactam monomers, which are next polymerised again to PA6 and processed to yarns for carpets and clothing. Compared to mechanical recycling, chemical recycling allows the removal of all foreign substances, resulting in a 100% virgin quality. However, it also implies several additional process steps, which increase cost very significantly. In contrast, MultiCycle obtains pure polymers and can supply the textile market with high quality recycled polymers, allowing the much broader usage of recycled materials, also in high value applications with strict quality requirements. As sustainability and the CE become increasingly important in the textile sector, thermoplastic fibres recovered from waste packaging or composite matrices hold a bright future, the properties of which will be mainly demonstrated in the demanding composite reinforcement application but are relevant to many more textile segments.  Table 5 shows how we expect the MultiCycle process to comply with the industry needs comparing cost and performance competitiveness vs. other EoL approaches when existing referring to the project KPIs from Section 1.1. 
Table 5: Benchmarking of our planned innovations vs. other commercial solutions (*: normalised to current standard approach, 
extrapolated from past projects using CreaSolv® which has lowest CO2 emission due mild conditions & no repolymerisation needed) 
 Aspect Standard  solution Other Emerging solution MultiCycle solution 
Multilayer packaging 
EoL approach Landfill or incineration for energy valorisation 
Chemical recycling is complex, expensive and chemicals degrading PET or PA do not degrade PE and PP (if so they would lead to PE and PP oligos + PET and PA monomers) 
Recycling using CreaSolv® process and tailored reprocessing can apply to both standard multilayer (laminated, coextruded, metalised) and to new emerging materials, also solving sorting issues 
Cost*  70-200 €/t Variable depending on solution 500-700 €/t but covered by revenues for recycled polymers 
Reuse opportunity 
Limited to pi waste with some downgrading and/or blend in a limited % with virgin materials. Recycled % < 20% 
Recyclable by designing materials with e.g. specific adhesive allowing separation followed by mechanical recycling. 
Reuse in the same application or similar applications (in the case of food-contact where we have regulatory limitations). Recycled % > 80% 
CO2 emission* 2.82 E+03 kg CO2 eq. 4.09 kg CO2 eq. 2.71 kg CO2 eq. 
Composites 
EoL approach Landfill or incineration Solvolysis Recycling using CreaSolv®  process and tailored reprocessing. 
Cost* 
Landfill costs 100-200€ in general in EU but is e.g. not allowed in Germany, incineration is a threat for plants so cost is high, 100-400 €/T 
500-1000 €/t depending on plant capacity but costs are not covered by revenues from recovered monomers 
500-900 €/t but covered by revenues for recycled polymers and fibres 
Reuse opportunity 
Limited to pi waste with some downgrading and/or blend in a limited % with virgin materials. Recycled % < 20% 
Use of monomers in diff erent applications or repolymerisation.  
Recycled fibres and matrix can be used in a range of applications including LFT processed by SCM and others, Recycled % > 80% 
CO2 emission* 3.39 E+03 kg CO2 eq. 3.59 kg CO2 eq.  2.36 kg CO2 eq.  
To maximise our innovation commercial potential, along with the definition of the new value chains and outreach activities, a comprehensive series of measures including consumer perception, standardisation and regulatory aspects, as well as business planning, value proposition design, and knowledge /IPR management will be undertaken. While in recognition that it is important to Europe that future projects build on previously funded efforts and outputs in the spirit of open dissemination 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 28 of 117 
and sharing, MultiCycle’s intention is to open source a fair amount of the innovation and technology advancements. That said, MultiCycle also intends to file at least 2 patents, with a view to protecting the more strategic/valuable innovation within Europe. This, in turn, will secure freedom of use, exploitation and commercialisation for members of the consortium, as well as protecting competitive commercial advantages in Europe in these strategic areas. Hence, strategic IP will be anticipated and protected at the EU and US patent offices, and carefully managed in a way that will not impede the underlying aspirations to open source and make available the majority of MultiCycle’s innovation and technology to European researchers, SMEs, University and Industry to benefit from and to build on/from.  Taking into account existing patents from partners that will be used in the project as a basis for the planned advances in the project (see background table 13 in Section 2) and the 2 new ones that will be filled, we have a very strong IP position which will help to ensure our results stay under our control and benefit EU growth. The member base of the participating association in the consortium and AB (together representing over 200 recyclers, and 680 plastics and composites converters and 260 packaging & food producers) are all potential early adopters of the new recycling process or users of the SRMs (directly or through their value chain). Growing emphasis on Corporate Responsibility may indeed encourage companies currently not involved in recycling or plastic business, such as UNILEVER, which, as seen above, is building a recycling plant despite their core business is food and personal care. In fact, while the properties of the recovered polymers promise to be similar to the primary ones (as long as no significant deterioration occurred during first life, as is often the case for short term uses such as packaging- or which would be compensated for example by chain extenders), even plastic manufacturers like ARKEMA could be interested in hosting such a plant to recover pi- and maybe even selected pc- wastes. Already, freedom to operate has been given a major attention as it is vital for the commercial exploitation of the results. A patent search has been performed around each of the target technologies on which our new processes are based by the respective technology holders and experts (reflected as relevant in the state of the art). The prior art is indeed rich, as has been seen throughout Section 1.4. While certain areas are covered by patents- which will be taken into account in the project development-, there is certainly space for further innovation. Whenever possible, the project will consider not only developing confidential know-how, but also innovative aspects that could be protected by patents following a deepening of the IP search performed at proposal preparation stage and ascertaining the business opportunity- as is further explained in WP9 and Section 2.2. In particular we expect to derive IP from the CreaSolv® Process improvements and its smart monitoring and automation based on monitored data, as well as in the improvements enabling the recovery and reuse of the long fibres within composites, in addition to recycled matrix. In terms of relevant patents in our main innovation areas, Table 6 summarises the key ones of relevance and our differential factors are also highlighted (when relevant these patents will be further monitored during our Technology Watch activities to see the evolution of their approval and enforcement status)61:  
Table 6: Results of the patent search focused on the main innovation area of the novel IP considered to be generated in MultiCycle 
Patent (reference, title, status) Relevance to MultiCycle Conclusion in terms of impact on the project 
Recycling fibres from polymer composites, WO2012172357, withdrawn in Europe Approach to particularly recover fibres from composites in fluidized bed 
Technology is different and target is above all for thermosetting resins so although recovered fibres could compete, it does not have all the advantages of our dual recovery 
Process for delacquering of lacquer coated plastic articles, EP1205513B1, expired  
Removal of lacquers for recycling support polymer wash it in solvent and add a porous adsorbent to soak the extracted lacquer/solvent mix 
It is a different chemical approach from MultiCycle. We expect automotive parts matrix to dissolve leaving in residual stream any paint. 
Method for treating waste containing plastic, WO2011082802 A1, under examination, renewed 
Separation of polymer gels from impurities undisolvable materials as it is required multilayer and composite recycling   
IP belongs to Fraunhofer and can be used within MultiCycle 
Verfahren zur Anreicherung von mindestens einem Polymer aus einem Polymer-haltigen Abfall und Polymer-Recyclat, DE102013212813A1, idem 
Upgrading of recycled polymers by addition of stabilisers within a solvent based recycling process 
IP belongs to Fraunhofer and can be used within MultiCycle 
Method for separating and recovering target polymers and their additives from a material containing polymers 
and use therefore-  EP1311599B1, granted, renewed 
Solvent based recycling procedure for (amongst others) PC and PET IP belongs to Fraunhofer and can be used within MultiCycle 
Green aircraft interior panels and method of fabrication EP 2463083B1, granted, renewed Panels based on the use of continuous or long fibres and thermoplastic matrix. 
IP belongs to AIMPLAS and can be used within MultiCycle for applications out of Aerospatiale ones where IP belongs to The Boeing Company 
 
2. Impact 2.1 Expected impacts  
2.1.1. Expected impacts mentioned in the Work Programme.  
‘Plastics’ is one of the five priority areas addressed in the “EU action plan for the Circular Economy”62. MultiCycle has the ambition to become a key accelerator of the transition of the plastics industry to the CE and to be recognized as a pioneer through its Circular Plastic Helix. It is a high impact project to develop a sustainable, low carbon, resource 
 
61 excluding patents that deal with thermal recycling of FRP eg. milling and melting/ compounding as the resulting quality would not compete  62 COM/2015/0614 final, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52015DC0614&from=EN  
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 29 of 117 
efficient and competitive economy in Europe, as it is hinged on delivering a versatile process for recycling multi-materials and formulations based on SRMs to maximise the sustainability from cradle to cradle of a number of automotive composites and packaging applications. This impact will be achieved by demonstrating the commercial viability of the concept in practice, analysing the successful potential exploitation pathways and assessing and managing any related risks. MultiCycle is extremely well aligned with the the Plastic Strategy for Europe released on 16 January 2018 by the EC63 and it contributes significantly to the expected impacts (in blue below) listed in the topic CE-SPIRE-10-2018 Efficient recycling processes for plastic containing materials as described below:  More efficient & sustainable chemical process & processing technologies utilising plastic waste as starting material for the production of added value products such as recyclable plastic materials (e.g. composites) & chemicals excl. fuels As discussed in Section 1, MultiCycle is based on the patented CreaSolv® Process, which has already been tested by FRAUNHOFER on a wide number of materials from pi and pc origins including heterogeneous ones such as WEEE (whereby halogenated compounds were recovered as well as polymers), multilayer (where different polymers were recovered), composites (where matrix and fibres where shown to be recoverable), Building & Construction waste, etc. The flexibility of the process, so far tested up to TRL5 on complex materials and even TRL 7 on WEEE and for recovering mono-materials in laminated packaging, will be greatly improved in the delivered industrial pilot plant that will be capable of handling composites and packaging wastes. Process Analytical Technology (PAT) monitoring systems will enable the automation of the process and ensure constant quality of the output fractions, optimise the cycle time, etc. The PAT systems installed in the MultiCycle pilot plant will support the optimisation of yielded streams in spite of the variability of the input streams, thereby leading to improved efficiency. The composition of the waste materials will be checked using tailored monitoring systems for ELV and packaging wastes, as input data for optimally setting up the process on a waste batch to batch basis.  In the following process step, the reprocessing of such recovered polymer will also be optimised using sc-CO2 compounding where needed to compensate for any degradation occurred during primary use, and tailored reformulations to meet the SRM properties specified in WP1 for the different demonstrators (see Section 1.3) that we aim to produce in industrial processes in WP5 and 6 respectively for packaging and composites. Similarly we will pay particular attention to the recovered fibres to be reprocessed into long fibre composites or FRP, adding e.g. adequately selected compatibilizers in the compounds. An advantage of our process vs. others lies in the fact that plastic converters expect drop-in solutions and this is indeed granted by our recycled materials. There are no constraints, such as having to match the formulation of the primary use when planning the use for the SRM.  As seen in the State of the art regarding our core polymer recovery and reprocessing technologies, they have shown to preserve the quality and value of the virgin polymers. This is a great improvement since, in spite of collecting for recycling ca. 30% of all the plastic currently commercialised in EU, the EU plastic strategy deplores that this currently only retains 5% of its initial value64. Indeed, most of the recycling processes lead to significant downgrading of the properties. This is a key aspect that will be addressed by MultiCycle to provide a breakthrough vs. current state of the art recycling situation, especially when applied to currently generally landfilled or incinerated wastes. The added value products to be reprocessed from the SRM from the project are considered to be very similar to those of the primary ones: multilayer packaging and FRP (so high performance materials excluding any downgrading and lower value valorisation in the waste hierarchy pyramid- with exception of minor by-products amounts that could be used for energy recovery or used as fillers in basic value plastics, task 4.6).  In terms of comparison with other recycling processes- stressing once more that for the selected target materials to recycle, there is no efficient mature solution avoiding downgrading-, we can refer to recent results from the CloseWEEE project whereby CreaSolv® has been compared with other recovery technologies such Antisolv, Centrevap (lab scale) and Liquid Ion, as well as with mechanical recycling. It has been reported that from those technologies, CreaSolv® was the best performer with good upscaling ability. This situation is reflected in the Eco-efficiency diagram (fig 11). Detailed CAPEX/ OPEX are provided in the business plan, Section 2.2. It has also been demonstrated that CreaSolv® improves the sample cleaning (less impurities leading to better mechanical performance) and that the environmental impact was positive for all recycled grades.  The technologies proposed should provide a decreased utilisation of primary fossil resources in the process industry of at least 30%; The concepts proposed should provide a decrease in CO2 emissions of at least 20%; 
 
63 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/documents-strategy-plastics-circular-economy_en 64 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/news/first-ever-europe-wide-strategy-plastics-2018-jan-16_en 
 Figure 11. Eco-efficiency diagram of different recycling methods 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 30 of 117 
While modern economies are highly dependent on plastics (at 99% from fossil resources) and Europe consumes in the range of 50 mio T per year5, only 25-30% of plastic waste in Europe is currently recycled (high variability between countries). In light of the EU’s CEP objective of achieving a resource efficient recycling society it is hard to accept that in Europe we still landfill 31% of plastic waste and 39% is incinerated65. This all contributes to the depletion of these limited resources.  To cope with this challenge, one of the current trends in the packaging industry is that of low-weighting to decrease resource consumption. Nevertheless, flexible packaging is more difficult to handle in mechanical recycling plants and the need of using multilayer barrier structures worsen the case as, for those, no market ready process is techno-economically feasible. Finding better solutions in the packaging sector is of utmost relevance as this sector consumes 40% of all plastic produced each year. Film recycling significantly contributes to the reduction of the Global Warming Potential in comparison to landfill as end of life option. According to the EC DG ENV "Plastic waste in the environment" study from 2011, plastic recycling could potentially reduce the GWP by 0.74 kg CO2 eq per kg recycled plastic vs. landfill66.  In addition, while bioplastics still have a very limited share among plastics (1%), they grow at a CAGR of over 10% and are surely a way to reduce the carbon footprint of involved primary resources. Indeed, by substituting fossil resources with bio-based raw materials, taking into account (bio)refining step, bioplastics can save 26 kg of CO2 equivalent per kg compared with conventional counterparts67, but also reduce climate change impact. 58% of produced bioplastics are used in packaging and 7% in automotive sector68 and are in both sectors seen as an emerging technology that drives future trends. The compatibility of the developed processes not only with currently more broadly used fossil based plastics, but also to maintain bioplastics value over several cycles in a more effective way than organic recycling and growing of new crops, is therefore an interesting added value in the preparation to the future Circular Bioeconomy for Europe, especially if bioplastics are used in multi-materials or complex/thick structures which in turn may jeopardize their compostability. In terms of automotive materials, every year, end-of-life vehicles (ELV) generate ca. 8 million tonnes of waste in the EU12, which should be managed correctly. Directive 2000/53/EC (ELV Directive) aims at making dismantling and recycling of ELVs more environmentally friendly. In line with the ELV, since 2015, manufacturers are due to employ materials that are reusable or recyclable in a share of over 95% in new cars and likewise to recover 85% of those from existing ELV. In cars, trends are also led by light weighting of materials used as it is recognized that reducing a car part by 100 kg leads lowering fuel consumption by 0.3L per 100 km so to CO2 emission reduced by 10 g per km. When considering that CO2 emissions originate predominantly from the use phase, with only ~1% being attributed to the recycling and waste stage15, substituting metals by structural composites such as Teplex seems extremely relevant. As such they will receive major focus in our demonstration and we will allow recyclability not to be a weakness anymore vs. metals in current ELV handling schemes. That will also help them replacing more widely used long fibres composites with thermosets matrices which recycling is still almost impossible. There are also calls for improved solutions for the growing share of thermoplastic composites which have additional materials such as metal inserts, paints, adhesives (all compatible with MultiCycle approach as opposed to mechanical recycling).  In terms of environmental impact, we can provide peer-reviewed LCA results from previous projects (TRL5-7) using CreaSolv® showing a benefit in terms of environmental impacts in all cases: e.g. EPS packaging study from BASF69, external study on WEEE70, etc. LCA data for the process itself are reported in table 7.  
Table 7: LCA (SimaPro) data for Creasolv®. 
Impact Category Methods Average Values 
Global Warming Potential (including Carbon footprint) (kg CO2 eq./kg) CML-IA baseline V3.01 / EU25 2,53 
Fossil fuel depletion (MJ/kg) CML-IA baseline V3.01 / EU25 18,10 
Ecotoxicity potential (kg 1,4dichlorobenzene (1,4-DB) eq./kg CML-IA baseline V3.01 / EU25 0,004 
Cumulative Energy Demand (MJ eq./kg) Cumulative Energy Demand V1.08 20,83 
Water Footprint (m3/ kg) Boulay et al 2011 (Water Scarcity) V1.01 0,004 
 
The main benefits are related not only to the reduced CO2 footprint, but also to the possibility of closing the loop through viable recycling reducing the pressure in terms of exploitation of natural/non-renewable resources. LCA results from using CreaSolv® showed a benefit in terms of CO2 emissions reduction ranging from 33% (1.2 kg CO2 eq.) to 99% (3.4 E+03 kg CO2 eq.) compared to conventional multilayer packaging and composites treatments (Table 5). Production upscaling is expected to lead to further improvements in terms of environmental impact.  The energy consumption is estimated to be reduced up to 70-90% for the production of recycled composites vs the energy necessary for the primary production of composites49, besides avoiding emissions of particles and various VOCs emitted during inefficient incineration (when not prohibited by the presence of e.g. PVC in the mixed light fraction from ELV leading to landfill as currently deplored by GBP). It was in fact estimated that plastics production and the 
 
65 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/plastic_waste.htm 66 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/studies/pdf/plastics.pdf  67 www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/sustainability-and-resource-productivity/our-insights/the-new-plastics-economy-rethinking-the-future-of-plastics 68 http://www.european-bioplastics.org/market/applications-sectors/ 69 Update of Life Cycle Assessment of ETICS End of Life Treatment of Expandable Polystyrene, Nicole Kambeck, BASF SE 70 Develop a process to separate brominated flame retardants from WEEE polymers Final Report, The Waste & Resources Action Programme (WRAP) 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 31 of 117 
incineration of plastic waste give rise globally to approximately 400 million tonnes of CO2 a year63. Seeing such figures and bearing in mind the target using of >70% of recycled materials in all our secondary applications (see next paragraph), thereby substituting primary (fossil or bio-based) resources by SRM, there is no doubt that we can on the long term expect an overall significant effect on the plastic processing industry (especially as our 2 end uses consume 50% of all plastic produced). Importantly, we will design our demonstrators so they can virtually be recycled infinitely with the same recycling approach. All in all, the use of renewable (recyclable and recycled) resources in our target sectors yields countless advantages that can be used by brand owners to support their green image, corporate responsibility, such as reduced environmental impact, increased recycling of own pi- waste to improve sustainability, lowered greenhouse gases emissions, while safeguarding the performances of SRM in a cost competitive way. By delivering our process and resulting RMs and products to the market, the overall environmental impact will be decreased along the new value chains as will be justified by LCA, LCC and S-LCA during the project and we will also indirectly address a huge number of very relevant other environmental and socially important challenges as discussed later on. The concept should utilise at least 70% of waste material including at least 40% of plastic waste; As seen in Section 1.3, the used polymer recovery process is very versatile, and can adapt to different qualities and compositions of raw materials including the most challenging ones targeted in the project such as multilayer packaging and composites that respectively contain additivated plastics of many types, adhesives, inks, metals, paper and formulated plastics matrix with particles, plasticizers, fibres, paints, inserts, etc. The recovery of each substance is generally feasible by adding further steps with tailored solvent and conditions in the MultiCycle process (fig. 2) but the economic feasibility of the recovery of a minor fraction has to be ascertained on a case by case basis (as will be tested in WP2 at small technical scale, WP4 at large pilot scale and WP7 in terms of final global TEA). In any case in the target waste fractions (fig 12 and 13), we will always recover above 80% (main layers in multilayer plastics, and matrix, fibres, + optionally fillers, in automotive composites with a content above 40% of plastics even in composites with high amount of fillers and/or fibres). Our target applications are generally similar to the primary ones, which therefore show that while we will not downgrade the single materials performance, we can expect a similar fraction of recycled materials to be usable as the one recovered. All the demonstrators have already been carefully thought of to meet such target and mainly the additives and minor fractions (e.g. thin barrier layer) not recycled will be tapping upon virgin resources. Such target is also feasible for food packaging although the sealing layer will be limited to SRM from pi waste, but all other main layer can be from pc waste- SRM. For such high recycled plastic amounts (far above the state of the art) to actually become used in marketable products beyond mere product demonstrators, in addition to our targeted dissemination activities discussed later, our circularity will help to mobilise both ends of the value chains. Indeed, at the one end we have partners that want to provide their pi waste- or that the pc they are responsible for is recycled to avoid landfill taxes- and at the other end, we have partners that want to reuse this material as a less expensive alternatives to conventional materials and with better environmental credentials.  Effective dissemination of major innovation outcomes to the current next generation of employees of the SPIRE sectors, through the development, by education/training experts, of learning resources with flexible usability. These should be ready to be easily integrated in existing curricula and modules for undergraduate level and lifelong learning programmes. Activities purely aimed at disseminating the project results are broadly covered in Section 2.2. In addition, key attention has been paid to embed Effective knowledge transfer from the technical partners in the project to organisations both internal and external to the consortium, as is addressed in Task 8.1 Education, training and capacity building. This activity is fundamental for paving the way towards commercialization, guaranteeing that sufficient knowledge and competencies to 
 Fig. 12. Packaging recycling flow chart 
 Fig. 13. Automotive materials recycling flow chart 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 32 of 117 
exploit results are acquired. The involvement of the SME BRITEST, who is a SPIRE member and well networked within SPIRE (and will ensure effective targeting of the SPIRE Sectors), and who has a track record in working closely with and in transferring research results to industry, as well as providing training and educational programmes, is a valuable asset, which will ensure that we bridge the innovation gap that frequently prevents industry adoption of R&D outputs. In addition to their expertise in supporting the transfer of innovative research into industrial uptake through a variety of scalable training mechanisms, BRITEST led the SusChem-funded Educate to Innovate (E2I) project that explored how EU funded research could be used to enhance academic courses to support the training of the next generation of industrial practitioners. E2I demonstrated that, whilst it was not possible to develop a single module based on an innovative output that would meet the needs of university courses across Europe, it is possible for IA projects to provide materials and case studies that can be tailored by academics to fit within their own institutions’ requirements. The training activity within MultiCycle will draw on the experience of E2I, further enhanced by guidance developed within the H2020-SPIRE SPRING project and its Academic Stakeholder Group, to develop materials and case studies that will enable the academic community to exploit the results of MultiCycle to enhance their educational offer with the novel concepts and system design principles that will be identified and developed during the project. Some of the topics tackled in the project shall become part of Master degree courses, as well as research topics for Master & PhD theses, offering students a taste of research problems that have practical impact and interest, and the opportunity to perform research in a high quality international environment. To maximise the use and impact of the project outputs, a MultiCycle Capacity Building Programme will be designed and delivered through Task 8.1 to support stakeholders across Europe. This programme will address: 1. Infrastructure sustainability, intending to facilitate the adoption of the MultiCycle process. 2. Human capital development, by offering: (i) Training programs (e-training modules, online modules and online workshops) on the functionalities, configuration, operation and use of the MultiCycle pilot plant and of the resulting SRM, and (ii) Collaboration tools (communication and knowledge sharing tools integrated in the e-training modules) that will facilitate the flow of knowledge and experience (including best practices) between involved stakeholders. 3. Organisational development, aiming at supporting continuous learning and incorporation of lessons learned into future materials and update of best practices. The MultiCycle Capability Building Programme will aim at keeping participants’ knowledge and capabilities sharp during and after the project. Therefore, activities include:  Agreeing on the design and management of training activities.  Developing “dynamic” flexible and modular formats capable of being continuously updated.  Setting up online workshops and hands-on training labs, to allow experimentation and piloting with the MultiCycle pilot plant and SRM test use cases (WP4, 5, 6 mainly), amplifying the opportunities to learn, develop & apply the new skills.  Creating a trusted community of knowledge exchange via the Circular Plastics Helix to encourage the interactive sharing of knowledge and best practices between participants. BRITEST will ensure effective targeting of SPIRE sectors.  2.1.2. Other substantial impacts (Socio-Economic & Environmental) Besides addressing unmet demands for recycling multi-materials in controlled waste management context and therefore creating growth in Europe, MultiCycle will also contribute to other environmental and socially important impacts especially in terms of pollution and consumer health that are side effects but equally important in the EU plastic strategy. According to a report of the Ellen MacArthur foundation2, the amount of plastic wastes leaking from our waste management streams shows as much as 32% of plastic ending up in our environment (fig. 14). Long term plastic persistence in the environment is aggravated by a cumulative effect, due to both accidental and intentional littering. Recognized as one of the major international environmental challenges by the European Environment Agency (EEA)71, plastics account for 89-95% of marine litter (roughly 8 million tons every year). Besides, 25 MT of plastic waste is accumulated annually in soil worldwide, being detrimental to the environment (irreversible soil contamination, degradation of soil quality, pollution of rivers and groundwater) and human health (heavy metals, dioxins and furans released during plastic burning are associated with endocrine disruption, heart disease, cognitive 
 
71 State of Europe's seas, EEA Report No 2/2015, ISSN 1977-8449 
Fig. 14: Global flows of plastic materials in 2013 (Ellen Mc Arthur Fundation) 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 33 of 117 
and motor disabilities, and human carcinogen)72.  MultiCycle solutions for improved economic viability of plastic recycling & reduced landfilling will contribute to lowering the amount of plastics leaking out from controlled waste management systems resulting in reduced environmental pollution and improved ecosystems and a positive contribution in relation to consumer access to healthier soils (reduced landfill) and seas and therefore food that contains less harmful substances leaking from plastics or microplastic fragments. Contribution to improving the innovation capacity and the integration of new knowledge According to estimates of the EU plastic strategy, only 5% of the value of plastic packaging material retains in the economy, the rest is lost after a very short first-use73. As such, the MultiCycle innovation will allow the EU to reduce the related annual bill of between €70 and €105 billion lost by not maintaining plastic within Circular Economy at sufficient value. In terms of the automotive industry alone, we estimate this to cost directly > €16 billion (5Mio T per year of plastic used in automotive sector at an average cost of 3€/kg+ landfill costs). While the generation of new knowledge is positive, it is in its industrial use that innovation capacity is increased and impact is realised. As such, to allow generating truly market replicable innovation, the MultiCycle consortium unites the industry value chain necessary for market success, and the project has integrated a number of transversal activities such as environmental, regulatory, safety and techno-economic assessments, and finally business planning activities to maximise the post-project exploitation of the results. The project gives trans-sectorial industry and transdisciplinary research and technology players an opportunity to collaborate and share all required technical knowledge and market expertise. Effective knowledge transfer from the RTDs (AIMPLAS, FRAUNHOFER, CTB) to the participating enterprises, especially SMEs often lacking own R&D capacities, laying down the basis for supporting the industry partners to carry forward the results post-project, is fundamental to increasing the likelihood of market uptake. To this end, a dedicated task, T8.1 Education, training and capacity building, with key focus on SPIRE sectors, will ensure seamless knowledge transfer occurs.  As discussed in the innovation potential section, MultiCycle is founded on a unique patented process (with potential patentable improvements), which together with the high added value applications, have great potentials vs. existing processes and recycled products. We have included in the work plan all activities to maximise the post project readiness of the process and its PAT system to exploit the project results in a short term and therefore grant the availability of SRM of high quality to feed the downstream value chains. To increase the innovation capacity of the industry, our approach is to capitalise on a valuable opportunity for the EU plastic recycling industry and the end-user industries to substitute currently used virgin, often fossil based, materials. The closed loop will also provide them with opportunity to obtain value from their waste instead of having to pay for their disposal. MultiCycle represents a very timely development to enable circular shift in the EU plastic industry (which is a major industry within the European Process Industries and a key SPIRE sector). This will result in great business opportunities reinforced by increased visibility, and policy awareness and support for such solutions. Following the current market trends for recycling, the respective growth in the target end use sectors that we will tap into and in view of the massive EU plastic business (€350 billion turnover per annum), MultiCycle will be a key enabler to support the CEP targets of recycling 75% of plastics by 2030, leading to significant revenues and jobs at the waste provision upstream and recycling levels of the value chain. They will be reinforced at the downstream (SRM converters & end users) level who benefit from new products, revenues from their pi wastes and reduced landfilling taxes. Estimates about how partners respectively expect to grow their business and create jobs with the new MultiCycle solutions are given in section 2.2. MultiCycle offers the European Plastics Process Industry a concrete and economically sound way to get a strong foothold in the multimaterial recycling, which will lead to an invaluable headstart in this global competition.  2.1.3 Main Barriers/obstacles/framework conditions We have already identified a number of framework conditions and during WP9, we aim at using several tools like SWOT (draft of which can be found in Section 2.2) and Porters’ Five Forces analyses to identify and manage the relevant barriers and threats that could impact our technical and business success. 
 
72 D. Briassoulis et al, Review, mapping and analysis of the agricultural plastic waste generation and consolidation in Europe, Waste Management & Research, 2013, Vol 31, Issue 12, pp. 1262 – 1278  73 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/news/first-ever-europe-wide-strategy-plastics-2018-jan-16_en 
Fig. 15: Plastics life cycle for a sustainable future 2 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 34 of 117 
Value chains readiness- The actual success of new recycling technologies like MultiCycle depends on the willingness of the full value chain to embrace it. As such, we will prepare for the future creation of operative new value chains based on extensively tested and demonstrated new recycling process and SRM solutions. As further justified in Section 3.4, the consortium leverages partners at every stage of the supply and value chain, as well as additional companies and sectoral associations in the AB. To support the market deployment of the project results, we integrate in as much as possible with related existing upstream value chains in terms of waste sourcing by: i) maximising compatibility with waste management systems in model EU countries will be the object of task 1.1 by ISWA, ii) we expect to be able to directly plug and play our new process as a solution for recycling currently non recycled fractions within the generally already well organised collection systems for EoL packaging, iii) automotive companies can handle the new process through dismantlers that can feed new MultiCycle recyclers (specialised for composites, or multifeedstocks) or using it directly in the recovery of ELV plastic parts or post industrial wastes. In terms of use of SRM from MultiCycle process, again we maximise the compatibility with existing downstream chain where: i) the polymers and fibres can be uptaken by established compounders (specialised or not in recycled plastics as we deliver polymers with no downgrading) who may need minor process adjustment such as sc-CO2 inlet, ii) Reprocessing of SRM with similar technologies as virgin materials and generally similar to primary applications to provide pull and push effects for the circular value chain to be successful. This closed loop scenario maximising synergies along the value chain will be tested in the project. However, it is not considered as a real limitation since pure polymers & fibres will be obtained and thus will be available for any application that can benefit from our results (later discussed fig. 20). As illustrated in Fig. 16, in MultiCycle, we aim to create 2 new stable and effective circular value chains (with possible interconnections) that can supply waste and substitute their petrol-derived virgin products with recycled polymers and fibres. The value chain approach, furthermore supported by systematic training programme, will also guarantee that sharing of selected knowledge occurs among the participating partners to reach a seamless exploitation tapping into increasing market and consumer demand for environmentally friendly materials but also on the regulatory obligations supporting the CE transition. Cooperation among MultiCycle members will be particularly important in the post-project phase, as results of the project are pre-competitive and additional investment before MultiCycle is ready for commercialisation is required (and will require engagements across the value chain).  Recovering useful resources/energy out of disposed products or by-products (originating from the EU plastics processing industry) leads to new CE business models to be studied in task 9.4. A DST will be deployed to maximize the value extracted from the project results evaluating the environmental and economic feasibility of circularity in a full set of paths. Legislation & policies- MultiCycle will be a key enabler for implementing the Circular Economy Package (CEP), the Waste Framework Directive (WFD), the Packaging and Packaging Waste Directive (PPWD), the New German Packaging Law replacing the current Packaging Ordinance by 201974, ELV, and other frameworks pertinent to our innovations. Regulations and standards can represent a massive ally for the implementation of new technologies related with the Circular Economy. As such the project includes policy makers outreach efforts in WP9 to demonstrate how the new technical solutions could lead to significant increase in recycling rates and how they could benefit in their market introduction from public incentives and support along the value chains.  Nevertheless, current legislations can also result in barriers and this is especially the case in terms of use of recycled materials for food contact that is currently generally not allowed with few exceptions such as PET from bottle to bottle as fruits and vegetables for which the use of recycled PE have already been approved75. Although we consider alternative applications too (textiles for composites, secondary packaging, food packaging with a functional virgin or pc waste based food contact layer), we will benefit from FRAUNHOFER’s unique experience in such matters at EU level to certify the technical usability of the recovered materials in food contact. In view of the existing result on the purity delivered by CreaSolv®, we are confident that test results will demonstrate usability and such data will be used in policy outreach so that 
 
74 Landbell AG. Verpackungsgesetz-info.de. Available online: verpackungsgesetz-info.de/  75 https://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/topics/topic/plastics-and-plastic-recycling, http://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/efsajournal/pub/4016, or in few cases by FDA: http://www.custom-pak.com/news/plastics-approved-food-contact-applications/) 
Fig. 16. Circular value chain addressed by MultiCycle 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 35 of 117 
our SRM are food contact approved to maximise their market potential. Whereas our main target for recovery in terms of polymers and fibres are exempt from registration and evaluation under REACH (EC No 1907/2006), any other additives recovered will be checked to prove that its structure is equal to the virgin ones maintaining its REACH status. Furthermore, all regulations needed to obtain the CE marks for the MultiCycle pilot plant will be followed to enable its safe operation in ATEX environments (handling solvents) in Task 4.2. Others- As other boundary conditions, awareness about the right sorting of the new materials and end of life treatment will be required to foster best practices among citizens, waste management bodies, recyclers, etc. Likewise, the perception of underperformance of any recycled materials or even related safety concerns will have to be handled. This will be greatly facilitated by our dissemination and exploitation activities, which will be continued in post-project efforts to create adequate policies, demonstrate economic viability, and encourage intra and inter value chain cooperation.  Possible barriers may also arise from the need for specific knowledge of how to perform the MultiCycle process especially at the CreaSolv® step. We have therefore included extensive training and knowledge sharing actions in the workplan for targeted at the process industries under the leadership of BRITEST. Moreover, the advanced & user friendly PAT control systems that will be implemented will facilitate process understanding and implementation.  As previously discussed, the required investments to implement a MultiCycle process will also be considered as a potential barrier and therefore we will favour a synergistic approach compatible with existing infrastructures for all the other steps (that are very little changed) and where waste generators could also be secondary users and possibly host a recycling unit for the pi, and collected pc wastes. For fostering a green economy, growth in income and employment are often driven by public and private investments to reduce carbon emissions and pollution, enhance energy and resource efficiency, and prevent the current resource depletion. These investments need to be catalysed and supported by targeted public expenditure, policy reforms and regulation changes. To this end, a key barrier that could prevent us from achieving our expected impacts is the lack of a favourable enabling framework and regulatory conditions for further incentivising the shift to a Circular Plastic Economy. Consequently, engagement with policy makers, considering possible public incentives to support initial ramp up of the new recycling facilities by factoring socio economic benefits gained over the whole value chain, is an important aspect of this project that will be supported by the implication of ISWA in the consortium. MultiCycle will without doubt benefit from the CE plastic strategy and its enforcement throughout EU, as well as contribute to it whereby it will engage to propose a concrete set of actions. An important measure that MultiCycle will support lies in the alignment of the fees for waste management of marketed materials to their environmental credential. We propose for example, the collection and landfill to be transferred to the recycler of the multi-materials using novel processes such as MultiCycle (as a governmental incentive that could even be financed by increasing fees on the materials with greatest environmental burden) to maximise the introduction of our SRM which would become, in addition to their environmental unique selling points at equal performance, cheaper than virgin counterparts. Given that about 80% of European customers want to buy products with a minimal impact on the environment76, our materials could indeed succeed even without such incentives, as we respond to these consumer needs. As discussed in section 2.2, we will also look at other public and private funding to support this market replication step as the initial investment or other public incentives will be key in transitioning the recycling companies in engaging in the novel recycling process across the Valley of Death.
2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
2.2.1 Plan for the dissemination and exploitation of the project results. Our vision is to lead the transition towards a sustainable post-petroleum society in the plastic sector- under the major SPIRE sector linked to Chemicals- while decoupling economic growth from resource depletion and environmental impact by serving industry with the provision of cost-effective industrial plastics recycling processes that are economically and environmentally sustainable especially focusing in currently non-recyclable multi-materials. In order to assist Europe in the transition towards a Circular Economy, new sustainable cross-sectorial value chains will be established providing competitive recycled polymer feedstocks with properties comparable to virgin polymers, thus reducing reliance on new fossil-based resources. In order to realise this vision, post-project exploitation pathways have been carefully planned already during MultiCycle proposal preparation. We have devised our initial strategy for the dissemination and the exploitation of the project results, with a view to increasing the innovation and business outcome from the project as well as its social and environmental impacts. Outline of the dissemination plan: The dissemination & communication plan is illustrated in fig. 17, further detailed in table 20 at the end of Section 2, and comprises a set of actions to transfer the non-confidential results and knowledge generated during the project to ensure that as many relevant audiences as possible have access to them. The dissemination plan for MultiCycle will be led and facilitated by WP8 leader BRITEST – an organisation with extensive experience in managing the dissemination of results from multi-disciplinary, collaborative innovation projects and one that is well positioned to outreach and engage with the European Process Industries – and supported through the co-operative 
 
76 Eurobarometer survey, European Commission, 2013 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 36 of 117 
work of the consortium partners. Dissemination activities will be reviewed, evaluated and refined throughout the project to ensure the effectiveness of each individual action. Our underpinning purposes are to heighten awareness about the tangible and intangible outputs of the MultiCycle IA, to make these outputs available to those best placed to make use of them, and to broaden their impact beyond the original project focus. In this way we aim to avoid duplication of research, and contribute to knowledge building and advancement of innovation in Europe. There is a strong mutuality between dissemination of project results and communications activities on behalf of the project (described more fully later). We will employ both traditional channels such as conferences (presentations, papers and posters), publications in peer-reviewed and open access journals, dissemination in industry magazines, newsletters and on-line platforms, as well as more vanguard channels, such as social media platforms (ResearchGate, Academia.edu, SlideShare, Twitter, YouTube, LinkedIn), blogs, etc. The project website, will serve as a lasting virtual hub for disseminating downloadable public deliverables and outputs of MultiCycle, as it will house the ‘MultiCycle Green Channel’ for open access to the peer-reviewed publications of the project.  All in all, the primary platform from which these various actions will be co-ordinated will be a new Circular Plastics Helix (virtual technology cluster) to be established by V2020. This will act as a vehicle to attract additional stakeholders (e.g. plastic packaging, product and component manufacturers and users, recyclers, processing and recycling equipment vendors, local waste management authorities, regulatory bodies, policy makers, researchers, academia, etc.) and through which to seek and address answers to ongoing questions, concerns, issues or challenges that may arise. The Helix will establish an online community promoting: a) visibility to end-users of the project and its bigger picture sustainability context for the EU plastics industry, b) a sense of both inclusion and solidarity by virtue of being united with a broader group who are collectively pursuing a shared and common vision, c) a vehicle to regularly post updates, progress reports, news and events to the stakeholders involved, maintaining and sustaining their interest, (in that sense it will be cross-linked with the project website and share contents of all MultiCycle’s main news, blog post, etc.), d) a central online space for the project, restricted to members and contributors to the project, allowing users to post questions and receive answers in an open and transparent forum.  V2020 is a unique open innovation platform that connects RTOs and businesses to collaborate, innovate and grow in the area of research and innovation. The network currently consists of more than 350 organisations from 42 countries (including membership from all EU Member States) demonstrating pan European reach and impact to ca. 400k researchers and innovators. The V2020 Helix model (Fig. 18) creates virtual technology clusters that are generally led by RTOs (here AIMPLAS, a recognized RTO in the field of CE for plastics and in view of their huge network of affiliated companies). There are currently 16 live Helixes in areas such as Materials, Manufacturing, etc). The Circular Plastics Helix will be integrated into the V2020 Helix network and will be promoted at all relevant V2020 events across Europe (ca. 12 thematic collaboration events per year). The Helix will use V2020’s technology tool “Crowdhelix” so that project partners and all relevant stakeholders from the V2020 network can profile their expertise and interest in MultiCycle activities. The Circular Plastics Helix, aimed at reaching 200+ organisations by the end of the first year and 500+ by the end of the 
Fig. 18: The Helix model 
Fig. 17: MultiCycle Communication, Dissemination and Training Plan 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 37 of 117 
project, will be structured around the following key areas of activity: (a) People and Organisational Profiling (b) Knowledge and IP Profiling (c) Facilities Profiling; (d) Collaboration projects in the area of research and innovation. Crowdhelix will map and match opportunities to skills (at organisational and researcher level) to create new forms of collaboration and innovation across the plastics recycling and materials landscape. The Helix will profile 150+ organisations i.e. from the V2020 network and other organisations involved in projects within the relevant domain area that have been funded under Horizon 2020 and/or are identified as contributors to the EU Plastic Strategy. We will also link with specific initiatives such as CEFLEX involving all major packaging companies in EU, as well as with all the relevant members of the associations in our AB, but also with Ellen Mac Arthur Foundation, and of course we will also link in and cooperate with A.SPIRE for mutual impact. The Circular Plastics Helix will act as the primary stakeholder engagement platform for MultiCycle and will provide a self-sustaining communication and dissemination platform post-project (increasing our long term impacts). It will also provide an open innovation environment where new forms of collaboration can and will be created within and beyond MultiCycle project. Furthermore, it will play an integral role in shaping and driving through the project’s IP Framework and commercialisation strategy, e.g. leveraging of potential clients/ licensees for the patents/ process or for the SRM.  The Circular Plastics Helix will be complementary to existing Helixes developed by V2020 and is extremely timely in view of the recent official release of the Plastic Strategy for Europe. This engagement is pivotal to the project’s impact, and will be hosted by AIMPLAS with close support from BRITEST, IRIS & V2020 and the participation of all members of the project team. The MultiCycle dissemination activities will also intersect with dissemination strategies of the SPIRE PPP, via our 5 SPIRE association members, especially IRIS & BRITEST, who are partners in the SPIRE CSA project SPRING which is developing guidance for project co-ordinators to enhance project impact (as well as through synergies with many other SPIRE projects with presence of MultiCycle partners). This will contribute to the distribution of project outputs across the relevant European and international communities and amplify the project dissemination effort. All dissemination activities will be developed with an eye towards the exploitation of the project results by other parties, to lay down the basis for subsequent innovation actions as well as other private initiatives which can accelerate the route towards the take-up of new technologies within the MultiCycle selected applications of plastics recycling and converting and beyond. 
2.2.2 Initial Business & Exploitation for MultiCycle A.   Market Analysis & Segmentation:  Plastic Recycling and recycled plastic market: The global plastic recycling market has been gaining a steady momentum over the past few years due to the related directives and growing awareness about CO2 emissions and the need to reduce them. This, together with the overflowing state of landfills has also triggered an urgent need for recycling plastic instead of producing new material. According to recent market reports, the global plastic recycling market, which was valued at €25 bn in 2015 (of which only €2 Bn in EU10 ) is expected to reach a figure of €45 bn by 2024. During the forecast period of 2016 and 2024, the global market is expected to grow at a CAGR of 6.9%. Analysts anticipate that China alone will make a contribution of over 50% to the global plastic recycling market. Europe is also expected to show steady growth in the global market due to stringent laws pertaining to the use of plastic in the region. Furthermore, the increasing awareness about protection of the environment is also anticipated to boost the Europe plastic recycling market. In 2012, out of the 25.2Mt of plastics collected for recycling, 6.6 Mt were recycled and 8.9 Mt were incinerated. Incineration is massively used, with for example 38.8% of plastic packaging waste5 treated that way, which as seen, contributes to global warming and recovers insufficient value. Currently, according to the Plastic Recyclers Europe, 1000 companies are operating with 30.000 employees and a 3Mt installed capacity10. Thus, the European plastic recycling market is not only saturated, but there is a huge potential for adopting new efficient technologies if they are proved economical viable. In terms of material, the global plastic recycling market is segmented into PET, PP, HDPE, LDPE, PS, PVC, ABS, PA and PC. These types of plastics are used among others for making bottles for household chemicals, storage containers, and personal care products. The global competitive landscape of the recycling market is quite fragmented in terms of key players (including e.g. Kuusakoski Oy, Plasgran Ltd., Envisison Plastics, KW plastics etc.77).  
Cost of recycling: The disposal of the recyclable waste in landfills compared to recycling appears at first glance cheaper because no sorting or processing is required beyond transporting the waste to the landfill, it requires less human labour cost and less energy for work done by machines. But in reality, recycling is not always the cheapest and most efficient alternative thus the reuse becomes an obvious option where applicable. Reuse, recycling (including organic recycling where applicable), energy recovery and even landfills have materials for which they are the least wasteful disposal method, but as technology finds new ways to sort and recycle waste, the fraction of waste going to landfills or incineration can certainly decrease. More specifically, the following cost are taken into account for recycling:  Energy Costs: expressed as the ratio between the energy cost to recycle the product into SRM and the energy to make products from virgin materials: there are energy savings when manufacturing from recycled rather than virgin material for all the typical recyclable materials (in the range of 70-90% less for MultiCycle vs. primary source, as seen in section 2.1).  Transportation Costs: Transporting materials to recycling facilities, the fuel used to transport recyclable fractions 
 
77 https://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/plastic-recycling-market.html 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 38 of 117 
is a significant cost that can range from €16 to €57 per ton77. The logistics costs will be studied in MultiCycle depending on the uptake of the new process which may be at an established recycler having a non-recyclable fraction from its own sorting (therefore not adding transport), or a different actor in the supply and value chain requiring a different collection approach.  Sorting and Handling Costs: Another significant cost is the time and attention it takes to properly sort recycled materials at the collection facility. In the current recycling industry, the various plastics need to be separated by their resin type excluding complex materials. This laborious step will not be necessary for MultiCycle, where mixed fractions are accepted. Instead of a sorting system, we will use composition monitoring data as input to set up the MultiCycle process.  Value as Commodities: Recycled plastics are commodities and thus they have value in the marketplace that can help covering the cost of recycling. The price of commodities goes up and down depending on supply, demand and the political climate. Current commodities prices for recycled materials are available for purchase through several distributors.78 According to EPA, a well-run curbside recycling program can cost anywhere from €40 to more than €122 per ton. Trash collection and disposal programs, on the other hand, cost from €57 to more than €160 per ton. This demonstrates that, while there is still room for improvements, recycling can be cost-effective and, if managed correctly, should cost cities (and taxpayers) less than garbage disposal for any given equivalent amount of material.79 For example, a study taking into account the macro-level costs and savings of their recycling programs showed it costs close to €15 M more per year than landfill disposal, but allows savings of €20–100 M per year80. With a well-designed program and the right technology, recycling is therefore efficient in terms of money, energy and natural resources when compared to a linear system that manufactures everything from virgin materials and sends it all to landfills when consumers discard it. 
B. Identification of Exploitation Plans, Key Exploitable Results (KERs) & Routes for Exploitation.  The MultiCycle consortium mobilises the necessary partners for the pilot scale development of the different MultiCycle recycling and reprocessing steps (WP2-3), its demonstration at a precompetitive scale (WP4) but also to validate the new recycled plastics applications for packaging and automotive (WP5-6) as environmental and economic sustainability (WP7), a set of activities which are all highly relevant for future market exploitation (WP9) that will be strongly supported by the dissemination and training activities (WP8). A market-oriented approach will drive MultiCycle IA capitalising on the expertise of the recyclers, plastic converters and end users in the consortium and AB, ensuring that sufficient knowledge is collated to steer the research towards delivering a solution with good market potential. Our intention is to realize all exploitation pathways for the results:  a) Commercial exploitation: a key exploitation route will be the industrial use of the project knowledge for the creation of innovative recycling processes resulting in a broad range of SRMs with true market potential and virtually no property downgrading, uses within and beyond the validated applications, new monitoring systems, engineering and advisory services to deliver high competitiveness and growth impacts.  b) Education and training: the use of the new knowledge generated for upskilling and enriching curricula in European education will have a high impact for raising the European knowledge base to prepare current and future generations of plastics recyclers, producers and end users in multiple sectors of the European Process Industry, as well as discrete manufacturing for the transition to the Circular Economy;  c) Further research: planning future spin-off research and development projects especially in areas that will contribute to the transferability of the project results to new applications, with particular focus on ensuring enduring impact in the European Process Industries and SPIRE sectors;  d) Contribution to standards: while providing techno-economically feasible and sustainable solutions to enable the recycling of materials which currently only have deficient end of life options, the project results could on the long term contribute towards new regulations in the field of plastic waste management among others (see section 2.1.3). During the proposal stage, each partner has communicated clear exploitation expectations (Table 8), in line with business activity and positioning on the value chain. The Exploitation Plans will be drawn up in detail in WP9 to maximize the innovation impact. While we have favoured the involvement of mainly SMEs along the value chain of the new recycling process implementation (IRIS, LOEMI, VERTECH, AXIA) for whom a successful market uptake of the results can provide a significant growth opportunity for their businesses, the large companies involved as material suppliers/converters and end users (ARKEMA, BONDL, AMCOR, FARPLAS, SILON, ELG, TOFAS) have in turn a massive potential to act as powerful market pull and push actors, which will lead to substantial growth and significant impact for the EU. As early adopters, these blue chip enterprises will act as lighthouses for other actors in related sectors.  
Table 8: Summary of exploitation intentions of the MultiCycle partners  
no partner Core Business Intention for use of project results 
1 IRIS Industry 4.0 solutions Commercialisation of tailored control /PAT, monitoring systems for the MultiCycle plant. New application notes and business cases. A new application for our OEM go-to-market strategy.   
2 FRAUNHOResearch Licences on Fraunhofer patent and know-how, Cooperation with plant engineering company upon commercialisation. 
 
78 https://sciencing.com/cost-recycle-aluminum-vs-plastic-24066.html 79 https://www.thoughtco.com/benefits-of-recycling-outweigh-the-costs-1204141 80 http://large.stanford.edu/courses/2012/ph240/micks2/ 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 39 of 117 
FER Technical solutions/consulting for mutilayer packaging design for easy recycling.  
3 CTB Textiles research CTB aims to use the built-up knowledge on the use of recycled materials using the different steps of MultiCycle process chain for technical consulting, potentially also leading to further research projects in this emerging field.   
4 AIMPLAS Plastic research AIMPLAS plans to use the knowledge of recycling materials using the different steps of MultiCycle process chain in technical assistance of SMEs, new financed project opportunities (such as SME instrument or FTI) and improve our portfolio activities related to plastic recycling and characterization. 
5 ARKEMA Polyamides among other polymers 
Use the recycling process to promote new materials that could be recycled more easily with the new technology. Investigate the potential use of extracted polymers for other applications. Arkema's polyamides are in general in the range of 10 €/kg leaving good prospect for the r-PA to be competitive. 
6 SILON 
PET stapple fibre 
production, PP, PE, PA compounds 
Reprocessing of waste material for automotive applications for both fiber production and compounding. Replacement 
of virgin material by environmental friendly solution in less demanding areas. Reprocessing of waste returned from customers. 
7 ELG recycled carbon fibres Evaluation of the new way of recycling carbon fibres and the production of nonwoven with both carbon and thermoplastic recycled (improve portfolio activities) 
8 BONDL Chemistry, continuous FRCs  i) Showing recyclability for both fibres and polymers from post production and post industrial wastes, ii) To substitute in certain products the virgin polymer and the continuous glass fibres by recycled ones 
9 GBP Car dismantling Generate added value dismantling selected composite parts so they can be sold for recycling instead of current energy recovery 
10 FARPLAS Car part processing Supply parts with recycled materials and support our customers in enhancing recyclable materials ratio 
11 TOFAS Car production Reduce landfill and related costs, to use recycled materials for cost reduction especially in case of CFC and polymers and to improve green image 
12 AMCOR Flexible Packaging Use of recycling process to promote recycling-ready flexible packaging with this new technology. Investigate the potential of using pcr-resin / film for food compliance applications 
13 LOEMI Engineering of plants Pilot to be constructed and demonstrated in the project will be used as a model for commercial scale plants and will be used to perform feasibility and upscale studies with specific inputs of future customers.  
14 VERTECH Sustainability 
services Further opportunities to support LCA, LCC, TEA analysis around MultiCycle deployment towards the market 
15 AXIA DST & Business plan development 
In close collaboration with companies, research and technology organizations will make contracts in order to exploit the activities and achievements of the project as well as its own exploitable results that relates the Decision Support Tool. AXIA also develop further know how on the technology transfer to various sectors (recycling, logistics, polymers, packaging, etc.). 
16 ILS Innovation and IP management 
Further opportunities to manage MulltiCycle’s IP towards the market and commercialisation through the partners’ planned go-to-market efforts. Protecting strategic IP will secure freedom of use, exploitation & commercialisation and competitive advantages in EU in these strategic areas.   
17 BRITEST Tools, industrial trainin, process understanding 
Develop training services for industry and academia based on the training materials developed in the project, acting in collaboration with other partners where appropriate 
18 V2020 Innovation intelligence Extend the Helix network with a very timely and strategic area- Circular Plastics Helix- leading to many new members 
19 ISWA Waste management  Support members of ISWA to access new technologies to recycle currently non recyclable materials and influencing the evolution of waste policy to promote recycling 
The following table gives a summary description of a selection of the expected MultiCycle KERs: 
Table 9: MultiCycle Key Exploitable Results (Knowledge, products or technologies) 
WP KER  Owner(s) Envisaged IPR Tool Type of exploitation  Target end-users Timetable 
2-4 
Conditions for recovering the 
different fraction using CreaSolv®  process step 
FRAUNHOFER 
Existing CreaSolv®  
patents and confidential knowhow 
Knowhow transfer and licensing to new companies implementing similar processes. Services for developing adjusted process for new materials. 
Recyclers, converters to recycle production scrap, end users, waste managers 
At project end 
Monitoring systems for input waste composition 
IRIS (GBP user) 
Confidential design for the 
HSI based system and patent pending illumination system for the NIR 
Commercialisation of tailored monitoring system for: i) identification of parts that are 
worth recycling using CreaSolv®  process steps to create new value for users like GBP, ii) monitor the composition of mixed fractions not accepted by current recycling plants to help setting the CreaSolv®  process accordingly 
1 year 
Design and comissioning of industrial plants based on CreaSolv®  process steps 
LOEMI Confidential design 
Commercialisation tailored plant and part thereof, support for process set up, maintenance services 
2 years (time to convert prospect and sell the plant) 
Process control using advanced PAT in order to optimise the MultiCycle process 
IRIS, LOEMI 
Confidential design, software copyright, patentability if applicable 
Commercialisation of tailored controlled systems for new plants commissioned, including also the calibration, software adaptation, installation and maintenance services (sold by LOEMI but integrating some technologies provided by IRIS) 
2 years (as above) 
3 
New compound formulations from CreaSolv®  process and sc-CO2 process improvements 
AIMPLAS In-house expertise 
Specific projects or technical assistance to recycling companies to improve their recycled compounds or end-users to adapt the recycled materials to their requirements. 
Recycling companies and end-users of recycling plastics. At project end 
5 Multilayer films and packaging from recycled polymers AMCOR Industrial secret 
Commercialisation of packaging with improved environmental credential and reduction of taxes for end users as such packaging will 
Food companies (for virgin packaging that would now be recyclable and for 
Shortly after availability of SRM from MultiCycle process 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 40 of 117 
also be recyclable packaging coming from pi waste), and personal care packers and other films users for SRM 
3-6 
Knowhow in processability of recycled 
thermoplastic polymers to fibres 
CTB In-house expertise 
Technical consulting to textile companies on processing of recycled materials, offering of testing and characterisation of recycled 
thermoplastic materials; SILON: Sale of fibres from recycled content 
Textile and composite 
companies, companies using textile fibres for technical applications (like automotive, construction...)  + recycling companies wanting to develop new application (only CTB) 
At project end 
Compounds and Fibres for specifics in processing and end-use 
SILON Industrial secret 
Development of tailored grade based on 
performance tests (VOC, abrasion resistance) and commercialisation of fibres 
1 year using improved sc-CO2 process for commercial polymers 
(r- or not) or shortly after availability of SRM from MultiCycle process 
4-6 
r- and virgin PAs (including bio-PA) ARKEMA Industrial secret 
Increased commercialisation of PA that is 
recyclable when used in composites and possible commercialisation of r-PA provided the recycling process chain is set up and properties are equivalent 
Mainly automotive value chain, packaging at low extend 
Shortly after availability of SRM from MultiCycle  
r-carbon fibres and 
non woven thereof with r-polymers or not  
ELG Industrial secret 
Recycling service for their customers who 
produce CFC and commercialisation of composites for over injection with improved environmental credential  
Composite converters, car dismantlers 2 years 
6 Composite sheets with r-polymers BONDL Industrial secret 
Commercialisation of composites for SCM, thermoforming with improved environmental 
credential  
Tier 1 and OEM (automotive and beyond) 
Shortly after availability of SRM from 
MultiCycle process 
6 Automotive parts from recycled fibres and polymers 
TOFAS, FARPLAS Industrial secret 
Commercialisation of parts/cars with improved environmental credential and reduction of taxes for end users as such composites will also be recyclable 
consumers Shortly after availability of SRM from MultiCycle process 
7 Results of LCA, LCC, TEA VERTECH In-house expertise Commercialisation of services Recycling companies and end-users of recycling plastics. At project end 
7 Value chain Multi-criteria optimization model  AXIA Software secured by code 
Assess benefits to integrate future production paths and innovative value chains in the sector of circular economy plastic recycling, support capital investment end environmental analysis 
Industrial, engineering consultant groups At project end 
 
C. MuliCycle SWOT analysis During the project each partner will describe its specific market and business network in order to define a global business framework of the project. In this respect, a SWOT analysis is necessary in order to identify and mitigate the weakness and threats and on the other hand to enhance the strengths and opportunities. An initial version is presented below. This is an evolving tool that will be periodically revised during the project.  Helpful to achieving the objective Harmful to achieving the objective 
Internal origin(attributes of the system) 
Strengths 
 Cost savings resulting from process tolerance to variable composition 
 New value chains based on recycled polymers 
 Reduction of transportation costs of the plastic waste  
 Strong scientific and technological knowledge on the fields 
 Secondary materials available for reuse with similar properties as virgin one  
 Ability to separate different plastic fractions from each other 
 Low technology barriers: exploitation available for smaller parties 
 Raw material conservation 
Weaknesses 
 new to the market 
 End users are relatively reluctant to accept new 
technologies  
 Need for strong IPR policy 
 Close co-operation required between parties in the 
value chain.  
External origin (attributes of the environment 
Opportunities 
 Legislations are becoming more and more demanding in terms of recycling needs 
 No direct competition as we tap into currently non-recyclable materials  
 Required technologies and know how available by consortium partners 
 Extremely high market potential 
 Scope of product line expansion 
 Developed products will comply with new EU regulation for green & sustainable 
production 
 Waterfall effect: once one company adopts then other companies follow to keep 
up with advances  
 Provide services for new SMEs and product development 
 Diversify through innovative services. 
Threats 
 Competitors making it tougher to retain our differential 
factor. 
 Regulatory approval processes, Strict 
regulation/legislation framework 
 Resistance to change in well-established procedures 
of waste management. 
 Threat of new entrances in European market. 
 Difficulty to position vs primary polymers if value chain 
does not value environmental aspects leading to mere 
price competition making market entry difficult  
                   Fig. 19: MultiCycle SWOT analysis D. MultiCycle Business Model Canvas  MultiCycle partners have already set up preliminary business plans, which will be further studied and elaborated during the project. For simplicity reasons, the Business Model Canvas has been used and crosses the entire supply chain of MultiCycle, featuring core KERs, starting by the development of MultiCycle processing plants and finishing at the polymer producers of SRMs (Table 10). Each partner with established sales network and distribution channels will approach the 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 41 of 117 
relative market before the extension of the commercialization. Thus, for each involved partner it will be necessary to identify the total number of potential customers based on the current trends of the market. Once the target market is established, the analysis of the competitors, when present, will allow the partners to make a sales forecast, based on their market share. Finally, a product commercialization phase will be planned to turn the project’s components into a suite of commercially viable products and services. During the project, each partner will proceed with the development of an individualized business plan, under the activities of WP9. This will be instrumental to develop and pivot the related business models during the project. The final business plans (D9.4) will provide the details on how the project’s results will be used in commercial exploitation activities, for training purposes, for further research activities as well as for standardisation activities. They will also specify in detail for each result both joint & individual exploitation strategies in terms of technology roadmaps, finance requirements, commercial opportunities and related business plans, taking into account IPR. Further measures will be planned in the framework of this task to increase the likelihood of continuity of the established ecosystem and value chains, as well as market uptake of MultiCycle KERs for European industrial sustainability, competitiveness, growth and jobs.  Our new process and products will present technical and commercial advantages which the industrial and academic partners of the MultiCycle consortium will exploit during and after the project. The entire approach towards the novel circular recycling and reuse solutions deployed in the MultiCycle will present unique branding properties with high market potential compared to the existing solutions where fossil-based polymers are often landfilled or incinerated. The reduction of carbon footprint towards the entire life cycle of the proposed materials is an additional advantage of the MultiCycle solution.  
Table 10: Preliminary Canvas business model of MultiCycle ®, to be applied to each KER in WP9 
Key partners  - Polymer   suppliers and producers - Polymer waste processing 
facilities - Composites and Plastic packaging manufacturers - Waste management bodies  - R&D partners - Engineers - Strategic alliance between partners - Dealers & Distributors  - Licensees  - Joint Venture 
Key Activities - Design, build and  install MultiCycle plants - Process Upscaling  
- Develop application for SRMs - Technology Integration- Network with customers  - Network with partners - Value chain management, sells and distribution  - Product exploitation management - IPR management 
Value  Propositions - Pilot plant for recycling of packaging materials and 
composites- to be used post project for new applications and end users demonstration - Adaptable Plant Design (in size and materials to recycle) - PAT-based control system to support process optimisation - sc-CO2 for properties enhancement and VOCs removal  - Recovered polymers maintaining excellent 
properties and purity that can be used in any application as virgin counterpart but reduced carbon foot print - Circular value chain  - Decision support tool 
Customer Relationship - Personal assistance - Sales representatives - Co-creation 
- Stakeholders - Lobbying with retailers and policy - Retailers - Manufacturers  - Consultants - Direct marketing  - Free initial application assessment for client capture (eg. using the MultiCycle pilot plant) 
Customer Segments  Industrial 
plant producers   Plastic converters (e.g. table wear, textile, packaging, automotive components) Packaging   
End Users  Composite parts   Converters and end users 
Key Resources - Experience in polymers, processing  recycling and synthesis  - Existing small-scale materials recycling and processing Lines  - Engineering design, software & hardware  - Online monitoring and control systems  
- IPR (patents ownership rights) - Human and financial resources  
Channels - Already established  partners’ network in their countries and across EU - Dealers &Marketing channels - Existing distribution channels  
- Social media (Internet/advertising) 
Cost Structure - Purchasing all needed raw materials and components  - IPR protection – patents 
- Sales management and distribution cost  - Upgrade modification of existing facilities 
Revenue Streams - Industrial plants of multilateral and composite recycling - Exploitation of the recycling lines to sell marketable SRMs 
- Advanced monitoring and PAT systems - Sales on polymers for packaging applications (especially personal care) - Sales on polymers for composites (automotive and beyond) and textiles market  - Licensing to other companies 
F. Market deployment plan of main MultiCycle KERs Fig 11 represents the expected full scale coordinated deployment of the different steps of the MultiCycle process and resulting semi-finished materials and finished products. We expect the process to reach TRL 9 and start sales 2 to 3 years post-project, allowing SRMs to be delivered in our target markets from the next year and the adoption to new applications in the following years. Although MultiCycle requires a substantial investment into a new recycling process capability, its high compatibility/complementarity with existing waste management streams and the critical mass of materials available throughout Europe to be thus recycled can accelerate the market introduction of the MultiCycle results. In addition, the subsequent reprocessing and secondary materials’ applications, often in closed loop, were chosen to require limited to no investments. As such, only process fine-tuning is required and should not delay the use of the MultiCycle materials once recycled polymers and fibres become available. Once the initial application of MultiCycle in the automotive and packaging sectors successfully reach the market, further momentum will be created around the replication to other sectors both as suppliers of end of life materials (especially composites) and as users of the secondary materials (whereby uses within numbers SPIRE sectors are envisaged, all enabled by the engineering sector- through IRIS & LOEMI- being core in SPIRE). In terms of the measures that will be in place in order to effectively plan for the exploitation of the results of the project, the robust industry involvement in the consortium (SMEs and large companies, including leaders in the polymers and composite fields), backed by strong knowledge management, knowledge transfer and market exploitation plans, and 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 42 of 117 
their key role in the project activities will boost an industry-driven approach to the project respecting market, consumer and regulatory requirements. This will ensure that MultiCycle is successful in transitioning knowledge towards the market overcoming potential barriers that may hinder the swift uptake of the results of MultiCycle research in the post-project phase.  The very strong training as well as market & technical knowledge transfer programme led by BRITEST, described in section 2.1.1 and to be implemented in WP8, will be a key enabler for the innovation to transfer smoothly among partners along the value chains and TRL levels. The inclusion of 2 companies (AXIA, ILS) with extensive experience in translating R&D output into actual commercialisation and market penetration, is another important added value for the consortium and will contribute to ensuring a systematic and methodological approach to planning for the important post-project stage. MultiCycle consortium furthermore includes ISWA, which has direct links and communications with numerous public and private entities working worldwide in the field of waste management and recycling worldwide, a lot of which could be potential licensees for the new recycling process across Europe.  Importantly, we will follow a cautious and transparent communication policy both in terms of sourcing and end of life, backed up by LCA results, which will contribute to raising industry and policy makers confidence that will further support the market-introduction of environmental-friendly processes, as well as the new sustainable packaging and automotive materials.  Sound management of the knowledge generated during the project, active planning in relation to post-project exploitation activities, further work for escalating along the TRLs, as well as scouting for possible viable financing routes to commercialisation that will allow us to quickly scale up, bridge the innovation gap, navigate the ‘valley of death’, and swiftly overcome the critical stage between pre-competitive results and the market according to previously outlined market deployment timeline (fig 20). In particular, for the SMEs LOEMI and IRIS, which will play a key role in the commercialisation of the new recycling technologies, funding schemes like FTI or SME Instruments will be studied to reach TRL9 after the positive conclusion of this IA. In short: the foundations for achieving the expected impacts of the project have been laid: an innovative research agenda, a resourceful action plan for the contextualisation and exploitation of the expected results, and an excellent conglomerate of actors in the consortium who are in pursuit of a shared common goal.  E. MultiCycle Financial Forecast All industrial partners expect to have significant financial benefits from the exploitation of the project results either by increasing their direct sales, enlarged market share or by savings occurred in materials and energy. In the following paragraphs some basic financial assumptions and initial projections for business planning are presented. The projections concern two revenue streams derived from the exploitation of the recycling lines and of the recycled polymers. Those will be refined and similar financial projections will be done for all industrial partners during the project in the framework of business plan development (Task 9.4 & D9.4).  Available materials to recycle from pi and pc wastes  The first consideration to confirm our process is viable is the availability of suitable materials to recycle (amounts and types). As seen, 50MT of plastics are consumed per year in EU (of which 40% for packaging, 10% for automotive).  In case of packaging, our main focus is on ca. 10 mioT (table 11), but it could be even broader as, although in theory there is no need for MultiCycle process for recycling rigid monolayer packaging unless for specific polymers in low shares, in presence of specific additives that condition secondary use, MultiCycle can avoid downgrading generally observed during mechanical recycling. In case of automotive, our main focus is on 250kT (FRP, table 11), as the estimated share of such material in current cars. It could in fact also grow to the whole plastic parts: despite neat and short fibres reinforced plastics used in car parts are theoretically recyclable mechanically, nowadays it is mainly done for pi waste, and there are a lot of reasons that prevent 
 Fig. 20: Market deployment plan of main MultiCycle KERs (note: a single 
flexible MultiCycle plant could process materials from/for the 2 sectors) 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 43 of 117 
recycling ELV wastes whereas pure fractions are needed for mechanical recycling such as: i) difficulties in identifying and separating the parts (in our project we will make advances in the composition monitoring even of black parts), ii) the presence of paints, adhesives, etc., iii) downgrading during mechanical recycling leading to low value SRM. Therefore, we estimate we can tap into 1MioT which is the amount of plastics currently found in ELV12 (plastics use in cars has increased a lot in the last decade, so it will also grow in future ELV wastes to recycle further justifying our solution to arise). Therefore in our 2 target sectors, the MultiCycle route is relevant throughout the used materials and although we focused in the project on technical demonstrations compatible with the greatest challenges (and indeed the fastest growing segments), there is no doubt that when recycling facilities would be available with greater capacity, the process could be extended basically to the rest of the materials wherever relevant. For simplicity reasons as we chose circular reuse, the specific case of our waste generators in the consortium is discussed together with the opportunity for them to reuse as SRM. 
Table 11: Materials shares in our target sectors (dark green: main focus for Multicycle, light 
green compatible with potential advantages discussed above), figures from FARPLAS+ ref 23 
Revenue from the commercialization of recycling lines The Multicycle recycling process requires substantial investments (as do the setup of mechanical recycling plants from scratch, estimated to cost 3M€). CAPEX and OPEX have already been calculated for CreaSolv® applied in different scenarios. For example, CloseWEEE project evaluated recycling of 500 T/a to 5.000 t/a WEEE with ABS and PC/ABS as target polymers from dismantled Monitor computer housing (ICT), ICT and mixture of small domestic appliances. For 500 t/a there was no economic scenario, for 5.000 T/a, 10 €Mio CAPEX (including engineering) and 500- 700 €/t OPEX were calculated depending on the share of target polymers and a larger set of pre-conditions. The costs and economic indicators of the best scenario in economic terms, which was that one in which shredded plastics were used as inputs streams, are reported in in table 12. Based on such figures from another project at advanced TRL, but the greater flexibility we need, we extrapolate for 5.000 T/a capacity input, €10 Mio CAPEX and 500-700 €/T OPEX for multilayers and 700 – 900 €/T in case of composites. That will of course depend on the number of different fractions it should be prepared to recover. FRAUNHOFER will license a group or patents and knowhow to recycling companies and other stakeholders in order to exploit the core step of our recycling process that is based on the CreaSolv® technology. LOEMI and IRIS will build up the recycling lines and their monitoring systems respectively based on contracts concluded with companies having as first clients the MultiCycle partners that will have discounted prices. For example, partners like ELG and GBP have shown interest to host MultiCycle plants to recover specific fractions like GF-PA and PA-PP respectively. ISWA further brings numerous opportunities to license the new process to the affiliates of their national organisations. The licensing fees will be negotiated on a case by case basis (compound model between minimum per year and %). AIMPLAS will further transfer knowhow for the compounding step (not accounted in initial figures below). The following assumptions have been made in the table 13 below: i) Royalties of 1% on the revenues generated by the use of the patented process in the MultiCycle plants, ii) According to above CAPEX, initial commercial price of the production lines with capacity of 5.000 t/year is estimated to be 10 million € with a profit margin of 15%; iii) The revenues from licenses are based on a conservative 200€ profit per ton of recycled polymer as analyzed in the next paragraph “Revenues from sales of recycled materials”, with operation at 90% of full capacity, equal to 4.500t/year; iv) Additional revenue stream in the maintenance and service of the lines; v) Inflation rate of 2%. 
Table 13: Forecast of the revenues from MultiCycle recycling lines commercialization (negative in red) 
 
Based on the above table, the 3 partners (LOEMI, IRIS, FRAUNHOFER) will have profits after the 2nd year of commercialization (recovering the amount that they are expecting to invest in sales force and technical staff to reach commercial readiness in the prior years). After 5 years, the 3 entities will reach a total 13 M€ per year profit (cumulative of 24.5 million € in 5 years). Taking also into account a conservative value in the manufacturing industry for a new job to be triggered for every additional 100.000€ of profit before taxes created, 245 new jobs will be created in this step of the value Number of unitsRevenueNumber of unitsRevenueNumber of unitsRevenueNumber of unitsRevenueNumber of unitsRevenueRecycling lines 2 20,000,000€  4 40,410,000€   7 70,717,500€  11 111,127,500€    15 151,537,500€   Maintenance 0 -€                 2 202,050€         6 606,150€        13 1,313,325€        24 2,424,600€       Licencing Initial and additional investementProduction/maintenance costsOther costs (marketing)Profit/loss per yearCumulative profit18,000€                                  36,369€                               63,646€                             100,015€                                136,384€                              20242025202620272028(18,000,000)€                        (36,510,435)€                     (64,070,055)€                   (100,934,078)€                      (138,080,970)€                    (10,000,000)€                        -€                                      -€                                    -€                                         -€                                       (8,382,000)€                           3,531,834€                         6,302,849€                       9,881,011€                            13,176,260€                        (400,000)€                              (404,100)€                           (408,242)€                         (412,427)€                              (416,654)€                             (8,382,000)€                           (4,850,166)€                       1,452,683€                       11,333,693€                          24,509,953€                        
Automotive thermoplastics fibres reinforced  with other fillers neat 
Overall market (wt%) 2,5% 82.5% 15% 
Plastic packaging Flexible rigid 
Overall market (wt%) 43% 57% 
Monolayer 86% 88% 
Multilayer 14% 12% 
Table 12: CAPEX in  CloseWEEE project €     6,000,000.00 €  Production  (t/yr) Price (€/t) Annualized CAPEX €/yr     1,197,648.75 € ABS 893.65 1,040 OPEX €/yr     1,366,693.63 € Sb2O3 19.98 13,000 Annualized costs €/yr     2,564,342.39€  Br 36 50 Income €/yr     3,544,532.00 € PC/ABS 1,479.74 1,432 Benefit €/yr        980,190.07€  PS 750 720 ROI % 82 %    Product recovery yield T/yr 3179    
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 44 of 117 
chain. The primary target for the first 5 years after the commercialization will be the EU market and secondly the global markets, based on the existing clientele and distribution channels as well as assuming that we will present annual increase of the market share due to the benefits that the new technology will represent for their customers. The pilot plant built in MultiCycle will be maintained as a demo plant in LOEMI and the aim will be to make it portable to facilitate transportation and set up for trials at customers sites for converting prospects thanks to fine case validations. The capacity that can be granted by the 25 recycling lines in place by 2028 would be of 125kT recycled plastic per year, which, when compared with the material listed as our primary focus earlier (10 Mio T of packaging and 1 Mio T of Automotive plastics) is yet a small 1% share recycled but shows a very promising initial market introduction that will warrant a continued growth in the later years. With an expected global market of 300 MioT of recycled plastic in the packaging and automotive sector, further global exploitation (directly or through licenses) will increase significantly the revenues from the project. Revenues from sales/use of recycled materials The following table summarises a market search that has been contacted by the MultiCycle consortium concerning current commercial prices of virgin materials and of SRM. Also the OPEX, machine depreciation (CAPEX divided by 5.000 T and 10 years, leads to amortization cost of €200/T) and expected commercial price per ton of the SRM that will result from the MultiCycle process is projected. 70% of the virgin material costs has been assumed as a general base for the projection of the Multicycle SRM price. Although we expect that the MutliCycle SRM will not suffer any degradation of properties compared to the virgin ones, this ratio of price has been selected on one hand to have competitive price compared to virgin materials (if SRMs and virgin materials have similar price, SRMs will not be attractive) and on the other hand in order for the users of Multicycle technologies to create additional revenues.  
Table 14. Comparison of prices of virgin materials vs current state of the SRMs and Multicycle SRMs 
  PP PE PET PLA PA CF GF 
Commercial price of virgin/tn [81] 1,290 € 1,340 € 1,060 € 2,100 € 2,600 € 32,000 € 2,000 € 
Price of SoA SRM/tn [82] 560 € 580 € 410 € 830 € 1,010 € [83] 10,000 € [84] 600 € 
OPEX+ depreciation of Multicycle process/tn 700 € 700 € 700 € 800 € 900 € 1,100 € 1,100 € 
Projected price of Multicycle SRM 903 € 938 € 742 € 1,050 € 1,300 € 16,000 € 1,400 € 
From the above table it is evident that the operators of Multicycle pilot lines will have significant revenues especially companies that are in the field of fibers recycling (ELG). Based on the projections concerning the sales of the Multicycle recycling lines presented in the previous paragraph, in 2028 where 39 machines will be operating leading to recycle 125 kT and the same conservative assumption 200€ profit per ton of recycled material (as the shares between the different fraction is not easy to assume upfront), an additional annual profit of €25 Mio will be generated in Europe leading to 250 new jobs in the recycling section of the value chain (not limited to partners).  Finally, additional revenues are expected from the use of the recycled materials by companies downstream of the value chain (and upstream as they will provide then new materials to be recycled) through the commercialisation of different types of semi-finished/processed materials and final products. The use of SRMs in new products will touch the environmental awareness of consumers and will be adopted as a concept by the market. The synopsis of the estimation of increase in turnovers and jobs for all the participants of the Multicycle project, for the first 5 years after the full commercialization of the results is provided in the table 15.  In terms of plastics, ARKEMA will study how a shift to circularity can support selecting recyclable materials from the outset of the value chain. Standard PAs, used as matrix for automotive composites, cannot be easily recycled for now or if they are recycled the final material is significantly downgraded. Bio-based PA of different types (PA10.10, PA11…) as well as PA12 from end of life products will be considered for recycling. As such ARKEMA expect significant growth, for example from the shift from thermosets composites to PA-based ones. AMCOR and SILON will support the compounding of different plastics (PET, PE, PA, PP and PLA when available in sufficient quantity to afford recovery) that will have better properties than the currently available mechanically recycled alternatives. SILON, already active in the recycling value chain using mechanical reprocessing, will further produce technical textile fibres for composites, extending its sales thanks to base SRMs of improved quality. AMCOR will further study SRMs’ convertibility into packaging, especially for the food, personal & home care sectors using innovative processes. AMCOR leads the EU plastic packaging market (According to PCI study, AMCOR has 
 
81 http://www.plasticsnews.com/resin/commodity-thermoplastics/current-pricing, www.gurit.com/-/media/Gurit/Datasheets/guide-to-composites.ashx  82 http://plasticker.de/preise/marktbericht2_en.php?j=12%26mt=9%26quelle=bvse 83 https://www.alibaba.com/product-detail/recycled-polylactic-acid-pla-plastic-scrap_60544773534.html 84 http://www.elgcf.com/assets/documents/SPE-ACCE-2016.pdf 
Table 15: Expected growth for the partners 5 years after results commercialization  
no partner Profit 
(M€) 
New 
Jobs 
1 IRIS 3  30 
2 FRAUNHOFER 3   30 
3 CTB 0,3 2 
4 AIMPLAS 0.3 2 
5 ARKEMA 3 30 
6 SILON 5 50 
7 ELG 5 50 
8 BONDL 3 30 
9 GBP 2 20 
10 FARPLAS 2 20 
11 TOFAS 3 30 
12 AMCOR 5 50 
13 LOEMI 19 190 
14 VERTECH 0.8 8 
15 AXIA 0.4 4 
16 ILS 0.3 3 
17 BRITEST 0.2 2 
18 V2020 N/A  
19 ISWA N/A  
 
Table 16: impact of EoL management on packaging cost 
Fees Film Tray 
Collection € / m2 0,028 0,175 
Landfill € / m2 0,042 0,263 
 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 45 of 117 
19% Share of demand in Europe flexible packaging in 2016) and its push and pull effect will be fundamental to successfully roll out our recycling process, especially as they have a central role in industry wide initiatives like CEFLEX setting the tone in terms of good practices for packaging. For its customers, packing different goods and putting them on the market, broadly represented in the AB, there will be a positive effect, that could even be reverberated at the consumer level, in relation to decreased packaging waste handling fees (table 16).  To complement the polymer recycling and make the overall process more cost effective, especially when CF are traded above 25€/kg, fibres recovery has been given particular attention. As such, we have included key players for both glass and carbon fibres (BONDL, ELG respectively). They already have experience in recycling fibres and are very keen on exploring the improvements that MultiCycle can provide by avoiding reducing size during recycling and avoiding high energy consumption during their recovery. The combination of recycled plastics and fibres is also of high significance both in terms of environmental and economical sustainability improvements for the participating composite converters and end users companies such as FARPLAS (TIER1) and TOFAS (OEM), who are interested in replacing virgin materials with recycled ones, meet ELV directive, avoid landfilling or incineration taxes (100-200€/tonT or more), but also in substituting metals with composites in structural parts. This is even more needed since TOFAS exports 60% of its total car production to EU where ELV directives are most stringent. BONDL pays 100-200€/Ton for landfilling of their composites waste (they produce 25% process scrap due to part cutting). Same goes for GBP, as PVC, which cannot be taken to incinerators, is present in the light fraction. Eliminating PVC does not compensate the price of the product in the incinerator vs. the cost of landfilling. GBP could recycle PP (but also lower amounts of PA and fibres): taking into account that the r-PP can be priced at € 903/ Ton (table 14) leading to 203€ profit /ton, and that the average production could be 700 Ton / month, GBP expect to be able to generate €1.4M profit per annum (in addition to saving €1.2 M costs of landfilling), leading to an interesting payback of 7 years. The project will confirm it counterbalances added efforts to dismantle additional cars parts. 
2.2.3. How the participants will manage the research data generated and/or collected during the project  Although the exploitation interests will be favoured by default, MultiCycle will participate in the Pilot Open Access Research Data scheme for a selected amount of research data generated by the project. A Data Management Plan has been included as a Deliverable in WP10. Non-confidential results will be widely disseminated in open access media. All publications and selected recycling trials, LCA, and characterisation results will, among other, be considered for this in view of their scientific relevance after an agreed embargo time allowing excluding the commercially sensitive details in case of selected process conditions and successful formulations. All publicly available data will be protected by copyright statements. 2.2.4. Strategy for knowledge management and IPR protection Protection of intellectual property rights (IPR) is of great importance to the participating partners, therefore, the non-confidential results and information on the project to be publicly disseminated will be carefully identified. In order to safeguard commercial and academic interests, dissemination activities will be subject to a confidentiality policy. By default, and building on the consortium members’ experience in collaborative projects, any result of the project will be treated as confidential and will only be disseminated after agreement of the project partners through an approval process following the relevant clauses of the Consortium Agreement. This approach allows us to retain complete control and make sure that no “exploitable” information is disclosed prior to being protected. The RTD participants in the consortium will publish results in peer-reviewed journals, which, if successful, will be an indicator of overall project success, and an important element of dissemination towards industry, standardisation bodies, and policy makers. The industrial partners and market actors will focus on showcasing and disseminating results at conferences and trade fairs, and through other industrial channels such as technical/sectorial magazines, industry network meetings, and the like.  The Dissemination, Training & Communication Manager (Dr John Henderson, BRITEST) will work closely with the project innovators and the IPR & Data Manager (Dr. Pat O’ Sullivan, ILS) as well as the Innovation & Exploitation Manager (Dr. Ioanna Deligkiozi, AXIA) to manage the identification of non-confidential disclosable information that can be published/disseminated. Dr. Henderson will lead the project partners in strategically planning and effectively implementing the dissemination through a dedicated activity on dissemination planning carried out as part of Task T8.2 Dissemination and Stakeholder Engagement. All the measures will be tailored taking into account the project needs, the target groups’ background and the expertise of the project partners. 
The Knowledge Management Strategy (Fig. 21) which will be followed throughout the duration of MultiCycle is heavily interconnected with the exploitation and dissemination activities to pave the way for post-project exploitation. An integrated approach will be followed for the identification, capture, retrieval, distribution, sharing, use and reuse of MultiCycle information and knowledge assets. This will be essential to drive the value and benefits of these information and knowledge assets, and contribute to maximising 
Figure21: Integrated Knowledge Management 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 46 of 117 
the innovation impact of the action. Knowledge management sessions will take place regularly during the project meetings. These sessions will be chaired by the IPR & Data Manager (Dr. Pat O’Sullivan, ILS), attended by all project beneficiaries, and will facilitate the disclosure of the IP and the novelty of the project results. The aim of these sessions is to review: i) Expected results per Work Package (WP), ii) Evaluation of the IP (technology watch/prior art review), iii) Evaluation of protection options (IPR tools evaluation), iv) Third party components included in the project activities including tools and datasets, v) Confidentiality of project results, vi) Expected publications per partner, vii) Exploitation intentions per partner. 
Background IPR and access rights Background is information and knowledge (including inventions, databases, etc.) held by the partners prior to their accession to the EC grant agreement, as well as any intellectual property rights which are needed for carrying out the project or for using results held by the consortium, or indeed by third parties. We have defined the current status of Background at proposal preparation stage (Table 13). This will be revised again and included in the Consortium Agreement prior to signature of the Grant Agreement. Access to Background that is, or will be found to be, necessary for the implementation of the project will be granted royalty free and background needed to use the results of the project will be provided either royalty free or under fair and reasonable conditions.  
Table 17: Background per partner 
No    Name  Background 
1 IRIS Knowledge in Process Analytical Technologies, chemometrics, machine learning and data fusion. Knowhow in process monitoring. Patent 
pending NIR devices for in line monitoring. Knowledge in plastic monitoring using HSI. Knowledge in data mining for process optimisation.  
2 FRAUNH
OFER 
Recycling of ABS, PS, PA, PBT, PET, LDPE, HDPE, PP, PVC, EPS and other polymers from plastic waste by use of CreaSolv® Solvents. Recovery of these polymers from polymer solutions. Removal of soluble and unsoluble contaminants from polymer solutions. Pilot scale production of multilayer films. 
3 CTB Expertise in the re-processing of recycled thermoplastics to textile materials and plastics. Work has been done on the typical fossil-based 
polymers but also on biobased polymer such as PLA. Knowledge on the recycling of waste consisting of polymer blends.  
4 AIMPLAS 
Broad experience in thermoplastic and thermoset recycling, additivation of plastic materials using twin screw extruders and other high speed 
mixing process, recycled plastic processing (sheet, film, bottle or profile extrusion, injection moulding, etc..) and recycled materials 
characterization (mechanical, physical, chemical, thermal and ageing). Patent related production of thermoplastic panels for transport 
industry. Knowledge in sc-CO2 as a cleaning agent in continuous extrusion processes. 
5 ARKEMA Some experience of recycling its own polyamides in the past. Currently the process is no longer used since multiplicity of products on the 
market, and difficulties to sort have complexified the process. Exclusive producer of bio-PA11, the oldest bio-PA on the market. 
6 SILON Processing of recycled polyester in wide range of applications (automotive, hygienic, special). 15 years of practical experience with recycled 
PET processing. Technology fully suitable. Reactive extrusions of polyolefins, experience with recycled material as well. 
7 ELG 
Knowledge on rCF and its market as the world's first commercial scale continuous carbon fibre recycling plant since 2009. Patents Pyrolysis 
system and method of recovering carbon fibres from carbon-fibre-containing plastics US2016039118 (A1).  Method and device for recovering 
carbon fibres from carbon-fibre containing plastics US2016060535 (A1) 
8 BONDL Continuous fibre composites technology and processing. Patents: WO2016202672 (A3)   -  Method for producing a plastic molded article, 
plastic molded article and mold, WO2008058971 (A1) fiber composite and method for the production thereof   
9 FARPLAS Fibre reinforced plastics, composites and plastics part processing 
10 TOFAS Materials for automotive sector and end of life constrains 
11 GBP Know how on handling of ELV and derived materials 
12 AMCOR 
knowledge on industry-wide circular economy projects such as Trash Free Seas, MRFF, REFLEX (scope = UK), CEFLEX (scope = Europe), 
EMF New Plastics Economy (scope = world). CEFLEX and EMF will define more precisely what is the requirements for recycling-ready 
flexible packaging.  CEFLEX is also working on the infrastructure part and is applying for EU funds to do so. Number of patents (although 
not expected to give differential position when using recycled vs virgin materials) 
13 LOEMI Engineering of solvant handling plants, control systems and process support 
14 VERTECH  Knowledge in Creasolv process assessment via LCC, LCA and TEA (CloseWEEE project) 
15 AXIA Development of Decision Support Tools based on GAMS with application to renewable breviary processes. Business development, 
knowledge transfer. 
16 ILS Strong IP consultancy capability to secure IP protection for MultiCycle partners and leverage successful spin-outs, commercialisation as 
well as subsequent venture capital/angel investor funding. 
17 BRITEST A suite of process understanding tools and associated facilitation techniques which might be used to capture generic learning from across 
the project for incorporation in the training packages developed. Skills in training programme development and delivery. 
18 V2020 Open innovation management 
19 ISWA Waste management 
 
Results definition, protection, ownership and access rights  Selected results from the project were previously listed in Table 9 along with the expected scenarios of results ownership. This table will be updated during project implementation to ensure we account for all project results in line with developments. The project results will be continually assessed in terms of novelty, patentability and protection (with a target >2 new filed patents) through Task 9.3, as part of an effective knowledge management strategy. IP protection (patents) will be prioritised based on MultiCycle’s anticipated commercial roadmap, in turn providing a valuable commercial incentive to the commercialising actors as well as both a competitive and strategic go-to-market advantage that will also set up opportunities for Venture Capital and/or Angel Investor funding (where investor confidence is typically increased when patent protection is confirmed). By default, results will be owned by the partner generating them. To avoid doubt or confusion over ownership, a protocol of procedures will be defined, which will be followed by each partner to clearly show the development of the generation of knowledge or results. In case a result is jointly generated (i.e. where the separate parts of some result are attributed to different participants), it will be jointly owned. Consequently, Joint Ownership Agreements will regulate the 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 47 of 117 
allocation and the terms of exercising this joint ownership(s). However, an overriding principle will be that the participating industry partners, especially SMEs, are always provided with the access that they need to the results to exploit them in keeping with the needs and strategy of their business. As such, access rights to results for implementing the project will be granted on a royalty-free basis. Access rights for use purposes will be granted either royalty-free, or on fair and reasonable conditions (these conditions will be established in Exploitation Agreements that will be negotiated between the requester and granter of the access rights). First drafts of Exploitation Agreements will be discussed by M18, and final versions will be signed at M36 and annexed to D9.4. 2.2.5. Open access to peer-reviewed scientific publications MultiCycle partners will provide peers and end-users with free of charge online access to the project peer-reviewed scientific research articles. Partners can follow two routes towards open access (1) by self-archiving their journal articles in an open access repository, also known as 'green' open access, or (2) by publishing in an open access journal, known as 'gold' open access. Whereas fees to cover publishing in gold open access journals have been budgeted, in case significantly greater impact factors are then accessible, MultiCycle will privilege green open access, whereby the partners will publish in peer-reviewed scientific publications and then self-archive a version in repositories (using only those indexed in specialised search engines like Scopus). The project website will complementarily house the ‘MultiCycle Green Channel’ for open access to the peer-reviewed publications of the project. In relation to expected publications from the project, these include but are not limited to: results from LCA, usability of SRMs, food safety analysis, use of the recycled polymers in packaging laminates, dual recovery of CF and polymer matrix, process for composite and packaging recycling, etc. b) Communication activities Effective communication activities are important for promoting our action and outputs to our target stakeholders in order to generate awareness and positive perceptions of the MultiCycle SPIRE innovation action, and positive engagement with its results. To successfully connect, engage, cooperate with, and acquire positive support from relevant stakeholders, including the public at large, a strategic plan will be implemented in Task 8.2, building on the preliminary outline presented in Table 17. The overall communications campaign, covering the whole project duration, will be led by the Training, Communication & Dissemination Manager, Dr. John Henderson (BRITEST), heavily supported by V2020, who will take advantage of established extensive network and communications capacity to ensure that benefits and impacts of the project are effectively conveyed to key stakeholders including industrialists -especially SPIRE community-, policy makers, and the general public. Our aim is to i) generate understanding of what MultiCycle seeks to achieve, ii) stimulate interest and support, and iii) motivate the collaboration of actors across the value chain through to public consumers of plastic-based and packaged goods in order to boost the transition to the circular economy in EU. Our communications strategy leverages one-way, bilateral, and multilateral channels. Following a preliminary stakeholder analysis (to be further developed in Task 8.2), the target audiences of MultiCycle communication activities comprise polymers manufacturers and compounders, composites and packaging converters, polymer and composite recyclers, food and other packaging end users and retailers, carbon and glass fibres producers, textile producers, engineering companies, consumers, associations, public authorities, standardisation and safety agencies/organisations and scientific communities.  Particular efforts will be made to engage with and raise awareness amongst the general public, whereby we will take the opportunity to address consumers’ concerns by informing the public about issues (such as our current strong dependence on fossil-based conventional plastics and composites, lack of design for reuse and consequent single use cycles, and deficient end of life options like land filling and downcycling), but also to positively frame existing and emerging possibilities and provide a sense of agency – that is that individuals can make positive choices that will make a difference, and thereby enhance their lifestyle and society. In this way, individuals become aware actors motivated to make responsible choices about, for example, using recyclable materials, collecting adequately used packaging, and thus exerting pressure for change on major manufacturing value chains (e.g. optimal handling of ELV materials in the automotive sector). The awareness raising actions carried out in MultiCycle will use optimal transparency and appropriate language, enabling EU consumers to make informed purchasing and consumption decisions, for example bolstering the message that recycled materials can display equal performance to virgin ones. A set of key messages will be developed specifically to popularise complex subjects and to bring the issue closer to people’s lives by making it more understandable. These will be rolled out through various channels and tools, with the following approach: 1. ‘Push’ communication (graphic identity, newsletters, press releases, promotional materials, website gadgets, etc.) and 2. ‘Pull’ communication and interaction (social media, liaison with other initiatives and projects including community groups, face to face events, joint communication, etc.). The fact that our demonstrators are broadly focused on consumer applications like packaging and automotive will assist with maximising the awareness of the positive impact of the Circular Economy, and indeed of the SPIRE programme, on everyday lives. The use of recycled plastics needs to be properly explained and marketed. We will use a strong green branding providing information in digital factsheets and infographics e.g. about: recycling, green house gases emissions saving, etc. Our messages on safety, environmental protection, circular sourcing and recyclability are extremely consistent with the green policy of our end users and a majour community of companies and retailers, which will be leveraged. 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 48 of 117 
3. Implementation 
How (Method) Why (Purpose) To whom (Audience) What (Message) When KPI / Target 
Website 
Awareness, Inform, 
Engage, Promote 
All External Stakeholders 
General project info, objectives, impacts, 
consortium, progress, events, feedback form, etc. 
Launched by M2. Ongoing throughout 
project and post-project > 5000 visits 
Helix Awareness,  Engage, Promote 
Stakeholders related to plastic waste, recycling, circularity 
Opportunities for cross-fertlization Launched by M6. Ongoing throughout project and post-project Target > 500 affiliates 
Brochures Awareness All External Stakeholders Project aims, expected impacts, consortium Available from M3, throughout the project >1000 copies distributed  
Commercial Posters/ Banners 
Awareness  Promote (eg. identify potential licensees) 
Supply and value chain: Polymers producers, Compounders, Recyclers, waste management entities, composites & packaging converters, brand owners, OEMs; communities interested in 
CE initiatives in the plastic sector.  
MultiCycle process and resulting materials’ competitive benefits. Demonstration in EU Industry  
Tradeshows & Exhibitions in the field of waste management, polymer technologies, packaging and composites such as:  Compounding World Expo, Waste Expo, EcoMondo, Interpack, Hispack; Anuga FoodTec, EURATEX, Techtextil, JEC world, 
Composites Europe. 
Partners’ participation in at least 10 fairs leading 
to > 500 industry consultations visits 
Newsletters Awareness 
EU packaging and automotive materials industries; Policy makers; Research community 
Project progress and updates; Industry testimonials and interviews; Contribution 
to Industry clusters, Roadmap objectives, etc.  
Every 12 months No. of consultations received 
Project videos 
Awareness, Inform, Engage, 
Promote 
All External Stakeholders 
General project info, recycling processes and benefits from the use of the MultiCycle 
materials 
Released at midterm and updated during the last project year respectively 
2 videos with >800 views from the project website, 
YouTube and alike 
Press Releases  Awareness General public 
Public interest content about the impacts of the project for competitiveness, growth, jobs, societal and 
environmental benefits 
At project Kick Off, and in line with public interest developments in the project, events, etc. 
>10 extern medias publishing it  
Project Blog/social media 
Awareness, Inform, Engage All External Stakeholders Posts about non-confidential developments, updates, observations, conclusions At least one post per month Readership & No. of consultations / likes  
Programme meetings  
Engage.  Knowledge interchange and reuse between projects. 
SPIRE Community, but also networking with all CE projects and other EC/Nat. Projects as well as Ellen Mac Arthur & CEFLEX initiatives  
Thematic content in relation to recycling process optimization, in line monitoring capabilities, plastic valorisation,  etc. 
At least 4 over course of project (e.g. organization of joint meetings, participation in cross-project events) 
No. of engagements   No. of consultation for further collaborations 
Conference  Presentations & Posters 
Engage, Promote Research community   
Scientific and research methodology, new development, results and conclusions in relation to improved process, validation work, etc. 
Conferences such as:  ISWA World Congress, Waste Management, Waste & Recycle Conference, Plastics Recycling Conference, Bioplastics Conference, SAMPE conference, JEC conference, Anuga, etc. 
No. of engagements  
Journal Articles Inform Research and Industry community 
Peer reviewed Review articles and Research papers (open access favoured) as well as technical journals showing results and conclusion on project results 
Packaging Technology and Science, Reinforced plastics, Plastics todays, Pack World, Bio-based News, Plastics films, Waste Management World Waste & Management & Research (ISWA-run Journals)  
No. of citations 
Knowledge Transfer & Training sessions 
-Engage  -Inform -Attract young people to R&I careers in the CE field 
Recyclers at first place. Plastics converters; End users industries; Research community;  (specific focus towards early stage researcher and process engineers) Research community 
Improved recycling processes, validation results in each involved production line.  Multi-actor approach to support the transition towards a circular economy. 
During the last year of the project to coincide with key demonstration activities. They will finalise with final stakeholder engagement event established via the Circular Plastics Helix 
No. of attendees & No. of engagements.  No. of downloads from web for online presentation/webinar 
Policy recommendations  
Awareness. Policy changes 
Waste directorate, EFSA, other national food safety and waste management authorities 
Results of LCA, recyclability, food safety, proposal for incentives 
During last year (WP8), participation in round tables and provision of the white papers No. of engagements 
Workshops, Demonstrations (e.g. at trade fairs), application   notes, case studies 
Inform 
Recyclers, Plastics converters; End users industries especially packaging, automotive but also other composites users 
The benefits of MultiCycle technologies; results of LCA and other performance assessment 
During the last year of the project as the final results get ready (one to be hosted at the MultiCycle pilot plant location), organised together with the associations in our AB to facilitate mobilisation. 
>1000 attendees & consultations from industry  
Reports and other project documents Inform Available to all external stakeholders Public deliverables (from the deliverables list) Upon completion according to the deliverables list 
No. of downloads from web & No. consultations 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 49 of 117
3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables  Brief presentation of the overall structure of the work plan A competitive work plan has been devised in order to deliver on the objectives of the MultiCycle project providing recycling and reuse solutions for a number of packaging and composites especially used in automotive and packaging applications. This will provide new business opportunities, preserve our resources and environment, help the European Process Industries to meet sustainability KPIs, but also meet the expectations of green-minded consumers. The project objectives (from Section 1.1) have been used as the starting point for planning the work that needs to be implemented in the work plan. All the actions that are required to fulfil the project objectives have been collectively analysed by the interdisciplinary consortium. It was agreed how best to distribute the workload among the various experts in keeping with their relevant fields of knowledge, capacity, infrastructure, resources and in the context of involved supply and value chains, including waste management aspects. This bottom-up planning process has greatly facilitated the task of arriving at a clear, comprehensive and realistic work plan (see Gantt Chart and Pert Diagram). The work plan is split into 10 WPs logically distributed along the value chain, each with clear tasks that will enable the project’s objectives to be fulfilled through a coherent structure that will also facilitate project. To ensure the clear focus towards the target application of this Innovation Action building upon past successful research, most WPs, except WP1-2-3 dedicated to initial review of state of the art, specifications and process development, are led by industrial partners (with a key RTD providing support in the validation WPs, respectively AIMPLAS for compounding, FRAUNHOFER for packaging as well as recycling process upscaling and CTB for composites, fibres and textile in WP4-6). The first phase (WP1) deals with industry-led specifications definition to guide the following innovation work to match the market needs. The second phase (WP2-3) deals with the pilot scale development and upscaling of the suitable recycling process and formulations from secondary materials to meet the properties for each application. The third phase (WP4-6) deals with the demonstration of the processes and of the materials for different end uses. In a fourth transversal stage (WP7), we will cover the environmental and economic aspect of the developed processes and products with a toll gate at midterm to provide inputs to transition from phase 2 to phase 3. To complement the first 7 WPs linked with technical development and demonstration activities, in the last phase dedicated to project and innovation management, transversal activities like value chain study, knowledge management, exploitation, business planning and dissemination will be undertaken to prepare the market uptake and maximise the project impact. The work plan is clearly linked to the objectives (and related KPIs used as milestones) set out in Section 1.1 and the consortium is confident that this work plan is robust to ensure that the project’s technical and innovation goals are fulfilled. The development and demonstration work is encased in a comprehensive risk assessment and management strategy, sound communication and training to heighten the impact of the knowledge generated, as well as knowledge management to pave the way for planning and implementing the project’s exploitation and dissemination pathways, and robust project coordination and ISO certified project management procedures. The WPs and tasks form a complex inter-weaved matrix of actions, many interdependent, with very close interaction between the WP and task leaders, which is essential for the delivery of the full suite of outputs. During the work planning stage, consideration has been given to logistical matters, such as the time needed for ordering parts/components, the time needed for shipping of prototypes from development to test sites, installation times, the ‘what if’ scenarios of parts not arriving, installation work throwing up challenges, delays in samples, delays in necessary inputs/results from feed in tasks or subtasks, etc. The link between WPs in terms of needed output material/sample quantity required by next activities were also accounted for. As this is a highly experienced development team, and in particular with many members of the consortium experienced in applied R&I under tight timeframes, as well as experience in integration work at industrial sites, the work planning has benefited from this ‘on the ground’ pragmatic experience, especially in terms of consideration of interdependencies and timings. The potential risks have been identified and contingency plans proposed, which are discussed in Section 3.1 under “Critical risks and mitigation measures”. Importantly, the collective planning of the work plan has achieved the ‘buy-in’ of all the project participants and an early understanding of the importance of a team effort, team planning and active communication among WP and task leaders. Moreover, the one-page Gantt itself (which includes all the deliverables and milestones) will be a very effective tool for high level control and obtaining a “helicopter overview” as part of effective project management during the project.                                                          
Fig 22: Pert Diagram 
WP1 Definition of sustainable recycling processes specifications for plastic-based multi-materialsWP10 Project Management 
WP7 Environmental & Economic Sustainability assessment WP2 Design of the monitoring systems and pilot separation process for plastic-based multi-materialsWP3 Development of the pilot reprocessing process of recovered plastics and fibresWP4 MultiCyclePilot plant demonstrationWP8 Training & DisseminationWP9 Market strategy & innovation impacts WP5 Demonstration of recovered materials for packaging applications WP6 Demonstration of recovered materials for automotive applications 
57TRL
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 50 of 117 
Gantt chart showing the timing of the different WPs and their components outline   
 
Nov-18Dec-18Jan-19Feb-19Mar-19Apr-19May-19Jun-19Jul-19Aug-19Sep-19Oct-19Nov-19Dec-19Jan-20Feb-20Mar-20Apr-20May-20Jun-20Jul-20Aug-20Sep-20Oct-20Nov-20Dec-20Jan-21Feb-21Mar-21Apr-21May-21Jun-21Jul-21Aug-21Sep-21Oct-21Nov-21Dec-21Jan-22Feb-22Mar-22Apr-22NoWPsLEADERStartEnd1234567891011121314151617181920212223242526272829303132333435363738394041421 AIMPLAS14#1.1Updated review of the state-of-the-art including commercial solutions and patentsISWA13■ 1.2Specifications and requirements for the involved recycling and reprocessing processesLOEMI 1 4■ 1.3 Specifications of target secondary raw materials’ applicationsAIMPLAS14■ 2 FHG327##2.1CreaSolv® Process tailoring on target multi-materials fractionsFHG312■ 2.2Production and delivery of model waste fractionsFHG6122.3 Production of secondary raw materials at small technical scale FHG 8 27■ 2.4 MultiCycle Pilot plant design FHG 4 122.5Design and calibration of monitoring and PAT systemsIRIS427■ 3 CTB826##3.1Characterisation of recovered materials as inputs for reprocessingCTB821■ 3.2Tuning of recycled thermoplastics for new applications via compounding AIMPLAS1121■ 3.3Melt spinning and films extrusion trials with the recycled thermoplasticsCTB1226■ 3.4Film extrusion with the recycled thermoplasticsAIMPLAS1221■ 4 LOEMI1033##4.1Detailed Engineering of pilot plantLOEMI/IRIS1019■ 4.2Installation, functionality trials & safety assessment of the MultiCycle pilot plant and its control system LOEMI 13 22■ 4.3 Sourcing and characterisation of waste ISWA 13 244.4Large scale demonstration of the MultiCycle pilot recycling of waste multilayer packaging  LOEMI/FHG 19 33■ 4.5Large scale demonstration of the MultiCycle pilot recycling of waste fibre composites  LOEMI/BONDL19 33■ 4.6Post treatment of residues and by-productsFHG21335 AMCOR1840#5.1Processability testing of the recycled materials from MultiCycle pilot plant and reprocessingFHG 18 335.2Novel single- and multi-layered structures using the recycled materialsAMCOR1838■ ■ 5.3Functional characterisation of packaging materials produced from secondary raw materialsAMCOR 27 395.4 Food contact compliance tests FHG 18 40■ 6 TOFAS 18 40#6.1Upscaling of compounding processSILON1833■ 6.2Production of Textile nonwovens for the car interiorSILON2538■ 6.3Production of Carbon fibre reinforced nonwovens for compositesELG2539■ 6.4Production of glass fibre reinforced materials for automotiveBONDL25396.5Production of automotive parts using long fibre recycled nonwovenTOFAS3040■ 7 FHG141# ##7.1Environmental Life Cycle AssessmentFHG1407.2Social LCAFHG17417.3 Life Cycle Costing and Economic Feasibility AssessmentFHG1141■ 7.4 Integral Assessment of recovery processesFHG1941■ 7.5 Decision support tool towards optimal circular paths AXIA 19 41■■ 8 BRITEST 1 42# #8.1 Education, training and capacity building BRITEST 1 42■ ■■ 8.2 Dissemination and stakeholder engagement BRITEST 1 42■ ■ ■■9 AXIA142#9.1Innovation ManagementAXIA142■ 9.2Exploitation planningAXIA142■ 9.3IPR management and patent filingILS142■ 9.4Business models definitionAXIA142■ 10Project Management IRIS110.1 10.2 10.3Management of project resources Implementation of the management proceduresCoordination with and Reporting to the ECD10.1-D10.3IRIS 1 42●ᴥ■  ■ ¤■●ᴥ¤●ᴥ ¤●ᴥ ¤review●ᴥ ¤ ¤●ᴥ ¤ ¤●ᴥ ¤ ¤FinalDemonstration of recovered materials for automotive applications EXTENSION PERIODDefinition of sustainable recycling processes specifications for plastic-based multi-D1.1-D1.3; ML1Design of the monitoring systems and pilot separation process for plastic-based multi-D2.1-D2.3; ML3Design and delivery of the pilot reprocessing process of recovered plastics and fibresD3.1-D3.4; ML5,7MultiCycle pilot plant demonstrationD4.1-D4.4;ML6,8,9Demonstration of recovered materials for packaging applications D5.1-D5.3; ML10D9.1-D9.5; ML15■ Deliverable / # Milestones ●Steering Committee Meetings / ¤ Technical Committee Meeting  / ᴥ Exploitation Committee Meeting (colour for meetings: green passed independent if schedule from DoA is followed as it was just an initial not compulsory plan, blue planned in DoA)D6.1-D6.4; ML11Environmental & Economic Sustainability assessment D7.1-D7.6; ML4, 12, 13Training & DisseminationD8.1-8.7; ML2,14Market strategy & innovation impacts
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 51 of 117 
 
Figures from task 2.5: 
 
Figures from task 4.2: 
 
Figure from WP6: 
Fig. 25: flow chart of materials/processes along the different tasks 
 
  Fig 23: Illustration of the HSI based monitoring belt for 
packaging (left) and handheld system for composites (right) 
 Fig 24: Conceptual drawing of the automated CreaSolv® step in the Multicycle process 
chain (4 replicates expected to recover target polymers for packaging/ should also suit composites) 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 52 of 117 
 
Fig 26: SCM (above) and hybrid part (below) production
3.2 Management structure, milestones and procedures  Organisational structure and decision-making  The project will be managed by the experienced Project Coordinator (PC), IRIS. They follow proven project management procedures, which adhere to ISO 9001:2008 certified processes and UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems for R&D&I. The organisational structure (Fig. 27) consists of the Project Coordinator (the interface with the EC), who is supported by a Project Steering Committee in the strategic management of the project. The Coordinator will ensure the timely and accurate completion of the questionnaires sent by A.SPIRE for the annual progress monitoring report of the SPIRE cPPP. At executive management level, the PC is supported in the implementation of the work by a Technical Committee on the one hand and an Innovation Committee on the other, the roles and decision-making capacity of which are discussed below. As opposed to a monopoly role of the PC, this structure distributes the governance between various partners according to their background to allow a good balance in decision and management of different aspects. An Advisory Board (AB) is also included, which consists of a voluntary group of industry actors and stakeholders who will engage with the project at different points along the work plan. This body has no voting rights and a Confidentiality Agreement will be in place with all AB members. Project coordinator  The Project Coordinator (Dr. Ana Maria Lopez, formerly Dr. Elodie Bugnicourt from IRIS) is responsible for the day to day running of the project, and for ensuring that the work programme adheres to its schedule, fulfils its objectives, and that the project meets the needs and expectations of all the partners. She will be active in steering the evolution of the project by closely monitoring the work performed by each partner. She will assume responsibility for ensuring that the project management procedures are correctly implemented and that all deadlines and obligations are met. She will also act as the communication and administrative interface with the EC, to carry out the reporting and overall administrative management of the project. She will also in many instances act as the public face for the project e.g. in networking events between EU projects or when the project receives enquiries by external agents like press or policy makers. As this is also a leadership role, it requires a profile that is sufficiently experienced and capacitated, not only to supervise the execution of the work programme and delegation of the technical and innovation implementation, but also one that possesses strong communication skills, can foment team-building, motivate the team and encourage proactive participation, facilitate collective problem solving and can show leadership and direction in the taking of timely and appropriate corrective actions where necessary.  As an organisation, IRIS has demonstrable experience, the available technical and administrative resources (with an 
 
Fig. 27: Overview of MultiCycle Management Structure 
 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 53 of 117 
experienced Project Management Office that will provide support to the Project Manager in administrative, financial and contractual management tasks), linguistic and communications skills to successfully perform project management coordination tasks. In terms of the competence of Dr. Bugnicourt to successfully execute this role, she brings a wealth of project management experience from both private contract research and funded EC projects. In FP7, she leveraged her industry knowledge and expertise to the coordination two  “Research for SMEs” projects: DURAWOOD (Grant Agreement No. 232296); and, OPTIJECT (FP7 GA nº 262623), as well as an NMP project OliPHA (FP7 GA nº280604): Among others, she was also technical manager and heavily involved in the General Steering Committee for the “Research for SME Associations” project, WHEYLAYER (Grant Agreement No. 218340-2) and follow up Demonstration Activity project WHEYLAYER2 (FP7 GA nº 315743). In H2020, she is now managing an NMP-Pilots project called OPTINANOPRO (Grant Agreement No. 686116) that is developing solutions for the processing and control of novel nanomaterials in packaging, automotive and solar panel processing lines. She is very familiar with all the modalities and administrative procedures involved in the management of EC research projects, from the grant preparation process, preparing and maintaining the Consortium Agreement, monitoring work, reporting requirements, the use of tools for communication with the EC, etc. Prior to this, she has successfully managed R&D projects in the chemical industry, and in particular in the development of nanocomposites as well as FRP and bio-sourced resins. She has shown herself to be a motivational leader, a fair and intelligent facilitator, with a sound understanding not only of materials science but also of process and associated industries. In addition to having been involved in some of the projects feeding into MultiCycle, Ana Maria is driven by a genuine green awareness, is passionately involved in sustainable processes for 10+ years, and she worked also as project coordinator previously giving her invaluable experience in relation to Project Management. Project Steering Committee To ensure that the project is implemented according to the needs and requirements of all the project partners, and to empower each partner organisation with a role in the strategic management of the project, a Project Steering Committee (PSC) is established. It consists of a key representative of each of the beneficiaries. The PSC will meet every 6 months (or for remote extraordinary meetings convoked by the Project Coordinator in case of urgent matters to be solved in between) and will be facilitated through the chair of the Project Coordinator. Through this Committee the partners will closely monitor and control the work performed, following the principles of “quality, time, cost”. The Project Milestones (Table 3.2 a) will be used as a valuable tool for evaluating critical performance and determining whether or not the project is on schedule. In terms of decision making mechanisms, when strategic decisions need to be taken, such as action to solve conflicts, action to mitigate critical risks to project implementation, action to manage changes in the work plan, decisions in relation to IPR and exploitation, etc., it will be the responsibility of the Project Coordinator to seek consensus with the PCS, whereby each beneficiary will be assigned one vote. Decisions will be taken by simple majority. In the event of a tie situation, the Coordinator will take the final decision. Each representative of the PSC will be responsible for mobilising and coordinating the active and coherent participation of the other personnel from their organisation who are involved in the project team, and they will also ensure that reporting and cost statements from their organisation are submitted on time and correctly.  Technical Committee  The Technical Committee (TC) is established to take care of scientific and technical (S&T) issues and for supporting the Project Coordinator in ensuring that the S&T objectives and activities of the project are successfully accomplished in a timely manner, taking into account the interdisciplinary approach and the interdependence between the technical tasks of the work plan. The TC is composed of the WP and task contributors in WP1-7 who are further gathered into 2 Working Groups (WGs) allowing the required interactions across the WPs developing the key individual technical results. The TC is chaired by the Technical Manager, who will preside over the WP leaders and WGs: Dr. Martin Schlummer, a Senior Researcher from FRAUNHOFER IVV, whom research specialises in the field of plastic recycling and who has already occupied that role in numerous EU-projects. FRAUNHOFER is optimally suited for supporting this role as they cover the not only the recycling proprietary knowledge at the basis of the project but also expertise in plastic conversion and in the packaging sector as key application for the project. Each WG is led an expert from the respective thematic and will consist of the contributing partners (note partners involved in market aspects (AXIA, V2020, BRITEST, ILS) will work with any of the WG when relevant): • WG1: packaging (leader: AMCOR, participants: FRAUNHOFER, AIMPLAS, SILON, IRIS, VERTECH, ISWA) • WG2: composites (leader: TOFAS, participants: BONDL, ELG, FARPLAS, FRAUNHOFER, CTB, SILON, BFP, ARKEMA, VERTECH, ISWA) The appointment of WGs will greatly facilitate the implementation of the work, especially in view of the ambitious, highly interdisciplinary nature of the activities involved. Whereas the WP leaders, who will themselves be fuelled by their task contributors and their teams, will assume responsibility for the implementation of the work towards the fulfilment of the associated Project Objectives (and milestones related to the WPs), each WG will ensure the consistency (selection of processes suitable for later scale up at end users) and compatibility (e.g. amount of materials needed for different purposes of validation, etc.) between WPs within their thematic through the proper engagement of the partners and entrusting to the WPs leaders. The WG leaders will act as facilitators for the integration of the transversal knowledge without losing the 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 54 of 117 
benefit from synergies between the recycling/conversion processes involved in the 2 applications thanks to the common partners involved. The respective WG leaders will ensure the seamless integration of the results of the group by convoking meetings on a regular basis with the implementation teams (virtually or on-site meetings will be scheduled as appropriate). It is expected that the WG structure will increase the potential for early identification of inter-WP scientific or technical risks and WP deviations level that could impact other activities in their thematic to enable effective and timely management (using the procedures outlined in task 10.2). Each WP leader will report on the status and progress of the work involved in their WP to the Project Coordinator in monthly remote and quarterly presential meetings of the Technical Committee (chaired by the Technical Manager). While the TC will have the mandate to take decisions that relate to the implementation of the workplan, any decisions that could affect the scope of the work, its budget, or have a strategic impact on the project will be escalated via the Project Coordinator to the PSC for voting and decision taking.    Innovation Committee  The Innovation Committee (IC) is responsible for identifying and managing innovation from the project. A key goal will be to ensure that the project results are effectively protected and exploited to the full for future industrial growth and competitiveness. The IC consists of a qualified representative from each beneficiary.  This Committee assumes the important role of Innovation Management in the project. Within this context, the IC committee will manage the implementation of the innovation cycle, and the feedback linkages to the development work. It will evaluate the knowledge as it is generated in line with its market impacts. It will also ensure that the project results are effectively protected and exploited to the full for future industrial growth and competitiveness. Key strategic issues, such as IPR protection mechanisms, IPR sharing and routes to exploitation will be discussed extensively during meetings the IC. The IC will also ensure that Business and Exploitation Plans are further developed based on the draft plans from Section 2.2.  The IC will be chaired by the Innovation & Exploitation Manager, Dr. Ioanna Deligkiozi (AXIA) who will lead the partners in effective management of the innovation cycle of the project. She will also act as a driver for the industrial partners in defining the post-project concerted value chain commercial strategy. She has, for this role, the perfect balance between technical (as Chemical Engineer by formation) and market knowledge of the issues related with the introduction of new technologies on the market. She will be supported by Dr. John Henderson (BRITEST) will also act as Training, Communication & Dissemination Manager–His native English, polymer scientist education, strong track record in process improvement, training, facilitation and leading dissemination and deployment programmes in collaborative environments will strengthen his capacity for accurate communication fundamental for the role. This role is very aligned with the main mission of BRITEST in the transfer of knowledge to the process industry. They will be supported by V2020 in terms of Circular Plastic Helix creation and ISWA in terms of outreach towards policy makers. John will be responsible for leading the consortium in further planning and implementing the project Communication and Dissemination activities, as well as ensuring the project reaches out to different audiences in the most effective way, and will also ensure the confidentiality of the results is safeguarded until the IP is protected. An IPR & Data Manager- Dr. Pat O’Sullivan of ILS- will also be appointed. He will be responsible for assisting the partners in identifying and managing innovation from the project, advising on the scope and potential of the innovations arising from the project, and paying attention to discerning IP at regular checkpoints. He will also mobilise the rich expertise of other members of the consortium in IPR management and in successful commercialization and spin-outs. Pat will also supervise data management, ensuring a systematic curation, an important aspect to ensure no knowledge slips through the net. Dr. O’Sullivan has successfully filed over 500 patents across his career, dozens of which were filed in joint names with collaborating partners on research projects and subsequently commercialised, and is therefore intimately familiar with the process for handing and managing IP, Patent Filings, Outside Council and Office Actions from Patent Offices. The IC will meet regularly (at least every 6 months) and pay attention to discerning IP at regular checkpoints. The Innovation & Exploitation Manager supported by the IPR & Data manager will have holistic view of the innovations arising out of the project, and will advise individual partners on IPR and funding strategy, with the aim of maximizing the commercial potential of the innovations created. IP ownership will belong by default to the partner’s creating it, and will be subject to terms and conditions outlined in the Consortium Agreement. The Innovation & Exploitation Manager will update the Project Coordinator of the innovations arising, and recommendations for next steps on how best to handle it. In relation to decision making, the IC will decide on all matters with regard to IPR and exploitation, whereby each beneficiary can decide how best to protect and own its own IP, and joint IP will be decided by the beneficiaries involved, with each beneficiary in this case being assigned a vote (and decisions being taken by simple majority). The IC will have the ability to take decisions that relate to the implementation of the WP9, but any strategic decision such as those in relation to IPRs that affect the consortium, etc. will be raised to the PSC for voting. Moreover, in meetings of the PSC, the Innovation & Exploitation Manager on behalf of the IC will report on the status of Innovation Management Activities.  Appropriateness to the complexity and scale of the project This organisational structure is considered appropriate for the management of this project, in view of its size, multidisciplinary nature and its S&T scope and ambition, and its expected innovation impacts. With key roles and responsibilities, each body 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 55 of 117 
within the structure ensures that there is dedicated and qualified management and skills-sets mobilised at the different levels, as opposed to a centralised, one-dimensional management approach, which would be highly unlikely to deliver the necessary versatility. To this end, there is an integral approach to the management of the project, ensuring:   effective management of the day-to-day running of the project & its resources, appropriate interfacing with the EC (Project Coordinator)  all participants have a stake in the strategic management of the project (Project Steering Committee)  effective management of the execution of the interdisciplinary work plan and its ability to deliver impact, whereby two executive-level Committees have been planned- the Technical Committee will be responsible for ensuring the project achieves its research objectives through sound management of the overall S&T work and it potential risks; the Innovation Committee will be responsible for effective dissemination and management of the knowledge and data generated, Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs), as well as the other innovation-related activities required to deliver market exploitable results and to map out the route for further research in order to build on the project results. Innovation management  A key objective of publicly-funded research is that it should lead to the exploitation of results, which goes one step further than the mere production and dissemination of new scientific knowledge85. As such, our project envisages an Innovation Committee and an Innovation & Exploitation Manager in its organisation structure (as described above) and we also have a dedicated Task 9.1 for Innovation Management, which will be closely linked with the IP and Knowledge Management work in Task 9.3. Our Innovation Manager, Dr. Ioanna Deligkiozi from AXIA, has the necessary entrepreneurial spirit to foment the conditions for an innovation eco-system to flourish. She has a deep business understanding, along with a strong technical background for ensuring creative ideas are anchored to the required market, regulatory and performance requirements. In addition to IP protection, our Innovation Management activities will pivot around the implementation of an innovation cycle, which is a vital component for ensuring success in market-oriented research projects. Close interaction with the Technical Committee will be promoted to facilitate co-creation and fluid interaction between the development teams and our industry end-users. Open brainstorming, idea management, and the Quality Function Deployment (QFD) method employed at the project outset in WP1 will contribute to a deep understanding of the market needs, industry constraints and regulatory/standards framework. Thereafter, and in particular through WP2-3 where the recycling and reprocessing processes will be upscaled to produce the new materials in sufficient amounts in WP4 for WP5-6 whereby validation for 2 sectors end users case studies will be performed. The market strive will accompany the entire work plan and the development teams will be guided by feedback loops from fellow developers, end-users and market insights to fuel an innovation cycle that leads to exploitable project results for a successful project outcome in terms of innovation impacts. In addition to the market drive of the technical development, we are in fact embedding our innovation strategy in a quadruple innovation helix model by contextualizing it within number of inputs from/ and outcome to the ‘natural environments of society’ as well as ‘media-based and culture-based public’ and ‘civil society’ by involving interactions with governmental/policy makers as well as stakeholders including consumers again contributing to a multiplying effect for our innovation potential and impact (fig. 28). Our V2020 Helix also provide an open innovation environment to generate new collaborations. Critical risks and mitigation measures Risks can be categorised as follows; technology related risks, market related risks and transversal risks (environment related risks and organisation related risks)86. Technical risks will be managed by the Technical Committee through its thematic working groups. Market-related risks and environment related risks will be closely analysed by the Innovation Committee, and organisational-related risks will be managed by the Project Coordinator supported by the Project Steering Committee and will be embedded in the close monitoring of the evolution of the work. Table 3.2b shows the main risks identified to date, their probability of occurrence, the severity of the problem (impact), the actions to mitigate the risk and foreseen contingency actions. Through Task 10.2.1, a continuous process of risk identification and management (of these risks below and any newly identified risks) will be implemented based upon the principles and guidelines of the FERMA (ISO 31000 related) Standard87. Agreement sought for risk-related contingency actions from the TC (in relation to technical risks) and the IC (in relation to market- and environment-related risks) will be taken by the PSC.  As will be further defined in the Consortium Agreement, in case of a significant unexpected risk requiring a quick decision, 
 
85 Innovation. How to convert research into commercial success story? Part 3: Innovation Management for Practitioners. European Commission. Directorate-General for Research and Innovation, 2013. Nanosciences, Nanotechnologies, Materials and New Production Technologies (NMP) 86 Kasap et.al. Risk Management in R&D Projects. Management of Engineering and Technology, Portland, US. 5-9 Aug 2007. ISBN: 978-1-8908-4315-1 87 Federation of European Risk Management Associations (www.ferma.eu)  
Fig. 28: Quadruple innovation helix embedding our  innovation management  
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 56 of 117 
an emergency/ extraordinary meeting of the relevant committee will be called by its responsible. In addition, as seen, a decision procedure has been defined within each committee, where each member has a vote. To avoid the case where the corrective/decided action is blocked due to disagreements between the different committees, all transversal decisions as well as decisions of strategic importance to the Project will be the mandate of the PSC, acting above the other committees. 3.3 Consortium as a whole  Bringing together public and private organisations across Europe to perform collaborative research and development is key for the interdisciplinary approach often needed for Circular Economy based innovation linked to highly diverse markets. The MultiCycle consortium is made up of 19 partners from 10 countries: 7 EU countries (Belgium, Spain, Germany, France, Czech Republic, Greece, UK), 2 associated countries (Turkey, Switzerland, involving partners with major European sales to safeguard we maintain our core impacts in EU, e.g. TOFAS, partly owned by FIAT, (and its TIER1 FARPLAS) work mainly for European OEMs who are in turn responsible for ELVs), as well as Austria-based international associations with significant policy outreach capacity. As such we have an integrative consortium covering a broad geography and from small Eastern EU-firms to world leading blue-chip Global companies. Our team constitutes a pan-European eco-system that unites the necessary infrastructure, knowledge, expertise, services and industry value chain to succeed in delivering on the project’s objectives to realise the expected impacts of the topic CE-SPIRE10-2018- Efficient recycling processes for plastic containing materials. As illustrated in fig. 16, the consortium brings together comprehensive interdisciplinary pockets of knowledge. There is solid scientific presence covering all relevant fields (AIMPLAS, FRAUNHOFER, CTB), combined with strong industrial and commercial involvement (7 SMEs, 1 AGs and 8 large enterprises) to ensure that the value chain of commercial actors can progress swiftly towards the introduction of new viable solutions for the recycling of plastic based multi-materials. To this end, RTOs working closely with technology and engineering companies (LOEMI, IRIS), polymer and fibres producers/recyclers (ARKEMA, BONDL, ELG), compounder specialised in recycled plastics (SILON), packaging manufacturer (AMCOR), composite converter (BONDL, FARPLAS, TOFAS), service providing SMEs in terms of TEA, LCC and LCA (VERTECH) as well as global waste management association ISWA. To strengthen impact, complementary partners have been included in terms of transversal activities and to ensure a business-driven focus to the project: innovation, market and supply chain study and exploitation planning (AIXA), IPR & Data management (ILS), training (BRITEST), Dissemination (V2020). In short, this is a complete storyboard of actors. Importantly the consortium will draw on the voluntary and objective advice, expertise and support of an external Advisory Board, in order to complement the consortium’s industrial and technical insight in relevant fields. AB members include FPE, CEFLEX, EuCIA, EUBP, PACKCLUSTER, IVLV, ZLV, ANARPLA, ARCTIC, DIAD, AEROCIRCULAR. Each will provide invaluable insights into different applications to be recycled or that could use SRM, and could act as strategic adopters obtaining a license for the developed technologies.  As is fitting for an IA, this is an industry-oriented project. It is coordinated by the highly experienced technology SME, IRIS, and a number of the WP leaders are also from industry. The industry participants have been instrumental in helping to shape this project, and MultiCycle is considered a highly strategic for assisting them in gaining a competitive edge and in being a pioneering group in driving forward Circular Economy-enabled innovations in the field of plastics. Each industry participant will be able to grow their businesses and improve their competitiveness in line with their position on the value chain. Fig. 29, where partners are clustered according to their positioning on the supply and value chain, shows how each partner is relevant and complementary.  Finally, in relation to the gender dimension of our consortium, our team of researchers, technologists, industrialists, business experts, and policy influencers has a good participation of females. A number of the key management and decision-making positions within the project organisational structure have been assigned to highly qualified women, not least the roles of the Project Coordinator (Dr. Ana Maria Lopez and formerly Dr. Elodie Bugnicourt) and Innovation & Exploitation 
 
Fig. 29: Sectors and expertise brought by the MultiCycle consortium 
 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 57 of 117 
Manager (Dr. Ioanna Deligkiozi), as well as number of WP and task leadership roles. Interestingly, females are among the key drivers of this project (Ana Maria Lopez, Elodie Bugnicourt, Ioanna Deligkiozi, Isabelle Jenny, Paola Castrillo, Mathilde Poulet, Jana Kadlecová, Aditi Ramola, Esra Kucukpinar, Lien Van der Schueren, Marinella Tsakalova, etc.). Recommendations regarding recruitment for securing future researchers and development profiles for the project will be overseen by the Project Coordinator in WP10 to ensure a reasonable level of balance between the sexes (gender balances will be considered as a selection criterion between equally qualified candidates).  Other countries: No other countries have been included.
3.4 Resources to be committed The project budget has been built using a bottom-up methodology. There is a logical budget distribution among the partners and each has mobilised the necessary staff/person months (Table 3.4a) and infrastructure to get the job done in a competitive timeframe. The necessary personnel resources reflect the realistic efforts required to deliver the project objectives, and have been costed up based on actual costs for staff for each partner organisation (in line with average staff costs within the sectors and reflected the differences in cost of living between the different participating EU regions). Equipment costs included in the project are for depreciation only. A reasonable budget has been allocated to mobility of developers and industrialists between sites, which is important for knowledge exchange and building excellence among multidisciplinary and international teams, as well as for practical on-site testings across partners as needed. Minimal subcontracting costs have been budgeted as the consortium has the internal resources and knowledge to perform the work.  The other goods and services (OG&S) that need to be contracted have also been included (and a breakdown of these costs are provided in Table 3.4b- for those partners whose Other costs exceed 15% of personnel costs). In line with the piloting and demonstration activities in this IA project, material costs have been budgeted to reach large prototype series of the target demonstrators for each sector. It should be further stressed that in the range of 1 M€ is allocated in direct costs for the MultiCycle pilot plant (included in the budgets of LOEMI and IRIS) that will be used for pre-competitive demonstration of the feasibility of the multi-material recycling and will be further upgraded to a portable version to facilitate ease of transportation for facilitating post project exploitation. It is noteworthy that the cost of this pilot plant, in addition to the critical and significant role of FRAUNHOFER in supporting the industrial implementation of its proprietary process, as well as their role related to packaging technology, along with the presence of 2 more German partners, accounts for the significant budget share directed to Germany. The SMEs and industry partners occupy a sufficient portion of the budget (49% of the EC contribution goes to SMEs- 2 of which non-profit, 20% to large, 2.5% to the involved AG and 28.5% to RTDs), ensuring a practical research-industry partnership for high competitive impact. There is an appropriate budget allocated to communication, dissemination, IP and knowledge management and business planning activities for impact. In relation to the EC Contribution, SMEs and industry partners will finance 30% their budgets- which each is readily committed to doing given the strategic nature of the project for their businesses and the expected growth potential generated. As such, the mobilisation of private co-funding heightens the impact for the EC of this ambitious project. Considering that there are 19 partners in the project, and a competitive 36-month work plan that will output knowledge, high TRL processes and pilot plant for recycling plastic based multi-materials, in addition to packaging and composite demonstrators from SRM with high transferability to other industries, a requested EC Contribution below 7.7M€ is very good value for high impact.  
Table 3.4b: ‘Other direct cost’ items (travel, equipment, other goods and services, large research infrastructure)88 
1 IRIS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 25000 travel costs*, dissemination events and other partners visits for installations and trials 
Other goods and services (OG&S) 87250 
generic costs# (8k€). Materials for the building of 2 waste monitoring systems (HSI-based, LIBS, and UV-Vis), NIR, optomechanical parts for sampling systems and others, software licenses, shipment and insurance costs for the prototype (64k€).  Audit certificates (5k€). Generic costs (10k€)#. 
Total 112250  
2 FRAUN. Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 32000 for Project Meetings (GA, technical meetings, workshops) and for technical support of demonstration trials at LOEMI 
OG&S 90376 
generic costs#. Materials for tests (e.g solvents and others) and outsourcing of specific analysis. Audit certificate. Databases or non permanent software licences for life cycle assessment 
Total 122376  
 
88 Equipment included only for partners for whom it is relevant. No infrastructure costs are reported. Direct costs are reported for all partners even when < 15% direct costs.      *Travel costs depends on the number of people involved per organisation and accessibility of journeys’ origin - include travel to project meetings (up to 13 meeting in 3 years, depending on the location, travel costs will be used by the host for organising the meeting), dissemination events and other partners visits.       #generic costs adjusted to each needs include dissemination material and events registration, publication fees for open access journal. In terms of IP costs, ILS budget covers 2 patents filing for most compelling innovations with commercial relevance to give the consortium a competitive advantage. Some other partners have assigned a little amount for other IPR issues (eg. national patent or utility model, or trademark) in the generic costs 
3 CTB Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 17000 travel costs* and other partners visits 
Equipment 30000 Depreciation of multifilament extrusion equip. 
OG&S 6000 generic costs#. Audit certificate 
Total 53000  
4 AIMPLAS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 17000 travel costs* and other partners visits 
Equipment   
OG&S 70000 
Plastic materials. Additives, gases, tools/consumables for compounding and CO2 lines, reactives and laboratory consumables, generic costs#. Audit certificate 
Total 87000  
5 ARKEMA Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 13000 travel costs* and other partners visits 
Equipment 19000 Depreciation of laboratory infrastructure calculated 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 58 of 117 
per Man.month  (1000 €/M) 
OG&S 8000 generic costs# 
Total 40000  
6 SILON Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 17000 travel costs* and other partners visits 
Equipment 52000 depreciation fiber lines, compounding lines, auxiliaries 
OG&S 110000 generic costs#. Adjustment of the technology using CO2 purification (pump, modification, installation), adjustment of technology for filled fiber production 
Total 179000  
7 ELG Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 17000 travel costs* and other partners visits 
Equipment 40000 Depreciation of surface characteristics tester and other equipment used 
Other goods 6000 generic costs# 
Total 63000  
8 BONDL Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 17000 travel costs* and other partners visits 
OG&S 25000 cost of virgin materials to be combined with recyclate, cost of shipments & other materials, generic costs# 
Total 42000  
9 FARPLAS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 10400 travel costs* and other partners visits 
OG&S 104725 
generic costs# 6K€; Shipment 1,5K€; Quality and mechanical properties test costs of parts 13,5k€; Cost of material testing to prepare udb files for Moldflow 30k€; Machine/Hr cost(55 €/hr) for termoforming trials, 55€ x 5 trials x 10 hrs per trial x 5 molds =13.750 €; Machine/Hr cost (55 €/hr) for injection molding trials, 55€ x 5 trials x 10 hrs per trial x 5 molds = 13750 €; Machine/Hr cost (85 €/hr) for fiberform injection molding trials, 85€ x 5 trials x 10 hrs per trial x 5 molds = 21.225 €; Training Moldflow for Recycle  Materials module 5k€ 
Total 115125  
10 TOFAS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 24000 travel costs* and other partners visits 
OG&S 15000 generic costs#, materials, consumables and transportation of goods 
otal 39000  
11 GBP Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 18000 travel costs* and other partners visits 
OG&S 25000 Consumables for sorting and shipping materials, dissemination material and events registration, and publication fees for open access journal 
Total 43000  
12 AMCOR Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20000 travel costs* and other partners visits 
OG&S 212510  
Raw material cost based on the 10 laminates (500 kg of each of the laminates) + logistics, sc-CO2 injection pump. Internally involved costs: 10 days of pilot line trials (5 of extrusion trials, 1 of Ceramics trials, 3 of lamination trials, 1 of packaging trials) & 10 days of Analytical lab testing. 1000€ analytical lab for 1 day, 6000€/day. Audit certificate. generic costs#.Cost of processing services from suppliers like blown film extrusion for PA or PET, film orientation or preparation of flakes from pi samples (37510€) 
Total 232510  
13 LOEMI Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 17000 travel costs* and other partners visits 
OG&S 1041000 
Material and Equipment for Pilot plant (no depreciation as there will be no commercial use afterwards). Includes sets of reactors, purification units, pumps, vacuum chambers, solvent recovery systems, tubing, PLCs, mechanical and electronic parts, sensors, etc. Viscosity sensor 20k€. Generic costs#, CE-mark certification, ATEX certification 
costs, audit certificate, solvents for trials, shipments 
Total 1058000  
14 VERTECH Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 2108 travel costs* and other partners visits 
OG&S generic costs# 
Total 2108  
15 AXIA Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 17000 travel costs* and other partners visits 
OG&S 12000 generic costs#, market data 
Total 29000  
16 ILS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 
 
4619 
travel costs* and other partners visits 
OG&Sº 
Flat fee for 2 patent filing in the US, Canada and 
France including: IP/Patent related meetings (conference room rental, equipment, catering for 3 x 1-2day for 3-4 persons) 
2 patent filings, including :• Formal EU and USPTO file documents, individually filed at both EU and US patent offices, supported by outside legal council (IP attorney drafting fees), to furnish legally compliant patent applications and associated text, drawings, claim sets, specifications • Patent office admin fees in each country/region of filing, including filing fees, addressing office actions, required amendments, registration costs for patent inventors, etc. • Translation fees, subsequent filing in USPTO, and subsequently translation for other EU countries where relevant/ appropriate• Search fee associated costs• Government fees and other associated costs in registrations, stamp duties, local taxes/charges  
Total 4619  
17 BRITEST Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 50000 travel costs*. Additional cost of traveling for the attendees of AB members to the stakeholder meetings (30k€) 
OG&S 14000 generic costs# 
Total 64000  
18 V2020 Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 7000 Travel costs* 
OG&S 10000 Helix events to promote the project to 320+ organisations that will be onboarded within the Circular Plastics Helix. 
Total 17000  
19 ISWA Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 17000 travel costs* and other partners visits 
OG&S 16000 generic costs#. Room rentals for hosting 3 events. 
Total 33000   
20 ICP Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 
107881 
travel costs* and other partners visits 
OG&S 
Flat fee for 4 patent filing in the US, Canada and 
France including: IP/Patent related meetings (conference room rental, equipment, catering for 3 x 1-2day for 3-4 persons) 
2 patent filings, including :• Formal EU and USPTO file documents, individually filed at both EU and US patent offices, supported by outside legal council (IP attorney drafting fees), to furnish legally compliant patent applications and associated text, drawings, claim sets, specifications • Patent office admin fees in each country/region of filing, including filing fees, addressing office actions, required amendments, registration costs for patent inventors, etc. • Translation fees, subsequent filing in USPTO, and subsequently translation for other EU countries where relevant/ appropriate• Search fee associated costs• Government fees and other associated costs in registrations, stamp duties, local taxes/charges  
Total 107881  
 
 
  
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 59 of 117 
4.Members of the consortium  Map of the MultiCycle partners and Advisory Board89 Summary of AB members and roles is provided in the Annex after Section 5, including Letters of Intent.  
   4.1. Participants (applicants)  Participant no. 1 Name (short name)/ Country Innovacio i Recerca Industrial i Sostenible S.L. (IRIS) / Spain Description of the legal entity  IRIS (www.iris-eng.com) is an advanced engineering company that was established in Barcelona in 2007 and specialises in the manufacture and integration of Process Analytical Technology (PAT)-based real-time quality monitoring solutions for the process industries and IoT systems for smart manufacturing, predominantly targeted at the food, pharmaceutical and chemical industries. In particular, our product line comprises proprietary state-of-the-art IR analysers for at-line and in-line process monitoring.  On the one hand our solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics-in the fields of MEMs Near Infrared Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral Imaging, and Raman. On the other hand, we leverage ICTs, whereby we apply Machine learning, Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining techniques for predictive and active control, as well as for decision support 
 
89 Position marks indicate country and not a specific city 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 60 of 117 
systems. In addition to photonics-based analysers, we also work with IoT sensors for enabling equipment and machinery for smart manufacturing and transitioning industry to the Industry4.0 paradigm. Our solutions are cloud-based for mobility, remote monitoring and multi-site applications.  Our Innovation Division which is governed by an Innovation Committee comprising Senior Management, and an Innovation Unit for managing and executing the companies innovation roadmap, has 3 core strategic lines, for shaping the Factory of the Future: 1. New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process optimisation 2. ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms) 3. Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorisation In addition to running an internal R&D programme, as well as carrying our various joint private projects with industry partners, our Innovation Division is highly experienced in working in collaborative R&D projects in H2020 (both as coordinators and partners), and principally in the SPIRE, FoF, and BBI programmes. The company was established in 2007 and currently employs 60+ staff with a turnover of € 5 M. It is equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified and also is certified under UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i. We are also certified by the local (Catalonian) government as a provider of technological R&D services (Tecnio Certification). IRIS is a member of the following sectorial networks: SPIRE, SPIE and SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial collectives such as Smart Space (association of companies and organisations that specialise in the ‘smartification’ of industry). 
 Main tasks IRIS will have an active role in WP1 in terms of defining process monitoring specifications. They will have very strong roles in WP2, leading the development of 2 monitoring systems for the packaging and automotive wastes but also PAT monitoring systems for the MultiCycle pilot plant. In WP4, they will support the demonstration of all previous systems and further develop predictive model to support process optimisation. In WP8, they will also contribute to dissemination and training activities in terms of PAT, as well as to WP9 in terms of IPR, innovation but also in the design of the app for the decision support tool for value chain optimisation. They will design the different dissemination materials and website for the project. Finally, IRIS will act as Project Coordinators (WP10) and they have extensive expertise at this level, and in 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 61 of 117 
particular in the context of industry-driven FP7 and H2020 projects, and private contacts with the industry. How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project IRIS has a matrix of multidisciplinary knowledge groups in the company with strong expertise in data science, biopolymers, chemometry, spectroscopy, among others. With its team and resources, including electronics engineers, mechatronics, mechanical, optical engineers, industrial design engineers, system engineering, application programming and web development etc. the group can carry out full system design and engineering, including electronic design (PCB) and assembly, firmware and software development, electrical harnesses and interconnections, mechanical design for enclosure and prototype integration, as well as installation, validation and industrialisation of prototypes and equipment in food and pharma production plants. As such they have recently delivered advanced plastic sorting devices. In addition to this broad cross-disciplinary engineering team, IRIS’ research team consists of material scientists and physicists, among other, who have the expertise to validate the technologies developed.  IRIS has significant expertise in the use of such co-creation methods as Quality Function Deployment (a very useful framework for translating often subjective client quality criteria into objective information ones that can be quantified and measured and subsequently used to design and manufacture the product)90, Kano91 (for prioritising the spoken and unspoken customer wants and needs and translating then into technical characteristics and specifications), scoping sessions, Design Thinking, among others. In addition, IRIS uses agile methodologies, such as KANBAN for managing development task implementation. CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work PhD. ANA MARIA LOPEZ SABIRON (Female). Project and Innovation Manager at IRIS. Chemical Engineer (2006) and European PhD in Engineering (2011) by University of Zaragoza. Besides other technical courses, she has management training, e.g. 'Innovation leading and management' by UNIR, 'Development of intermediate managers' by CEGOS or 'Business analytics, Economics for managers and Financial accounting' by HBX Harvard Business School. With more than 15 years of experience working closely to the industry at research centres for the promotion, launching, development and implementation of R&D and innovative projects at national (e.g. private, CDTI, CIEN) and European level (e.g. H2020, BBI, LIFE FP7) even as Project Coordinator (VULKANO-H2020-SPIRE), her expertise focuses on sustainability of industrial systems and processes, circular economy, development and application of new technologies, or improvements in process integration, among others, especially in energy-intensive sectors and agro-industry. Moreover, she is author of several publications in international peer-reviewed journals and book chapters and participated in numerous international conferences for results promotion. Dr. Ing. ELODIE BUGNICOURT. (female) Masters in Material Science & Engineering (2002), PhD in Polymers and Composite Materials (2005), both from National Institute of Applied Science (INSA), Lyon, France. Leader of the Eco-Materials business unit in IRIS since 2009. Coordinated several European projects in the fields of bio-based packaging materials development, process monitoring, surface treatment. Previous industry experience: R&D in chemical industry especially related to reactive polymer formulations: i) Arkema (ex. Cray Valley, 2002, Spain) in the field of polyester powder coating; Wacker Chemie (2002-2005, Germany and France), Silicone division that funded her PhD thesis: development of nanocomposites based on an epoxy matrix and silica; iii) Ashland (2006-2009, located sequentially in US, Spain and France) in the Composite Polymers division, focussing on bio-sourced resins, flame retardant resins, SMC resins, PU and epoxy structural adhesives. Led and participated in many R&D projects aimed at developing new formulations, understanding mechanisms and structure-properties relationships, developing new analytical methods and modelling (for improved quality management); as well as collaborations with academic labs and other players in the supply and value chain. Author of several papers in peer-reviewed and technical journals, and has presented her work in numerous international conferences.  MSc. ALEJANDRO ROSALES (male) has a M. Sc. in Physics from the Universidad de La Habana (1986). His background comprises theoretical and technical skills in several scientific and technological areas: optics, lasers, high vacuum, colorimetry, UV-VIS-NIR-MIR spectroscopy, chemometrics and design of measurement instruments. He has extensive practical experience in programming, electronics and mechanical CAD design as well as R&D methodology and management. His career has included positions as researcher applications engineer, design engineer, business 
 
90 Reilly, Norman B, The Team based product development guidebook, ASQ Quality Press, Milwaukee Wisconsin, 1999  
91  Kano, N, Seraku, N, Takahashi, F and Tsuji, S (1984) Attractive quality and must-be quality, The Journal of the Japanese Society for Quality Control 14 
No 2 pp 39e48 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 62 of 117 
developer and R&D manager. In 2000s, he worked in the FTIR spectroscopy field applied to quality control in the agro-food (wine) industry, whereby he developed two new measurement instruments for wine analysis.  His career as industrial physicist has been focused in applying his wide expertise to provide solutions for industrial problems.  Since 2011, he has been the Technical Manager in IRIS, leading a staff of 20 engineers and researchers involved in R&D projects aimed at developing novel high-end solutions for industry. Currently, he is the Science & Technology Manager in IRIS. Dr. LAURA RODRÍGUEZ TURIENZO. (female) B.S in Food Science & Technology (2008) Masters in Innovation in Safety & Food Technologies (2010), PhD in Biological Sciences (2011), all from University of Santiago de Compostela (USC), Spain. She has participated in a number of R&D regionally and nationally funded projects aimed at developing and validating new bio-based active edible packaging, physico-chemical characterization of novel foods and valorisation of food industry wastes. She is author of several papers in peer-reviewed journals and has participated in different national and international conferences. Dr. MARIANO PERÁLVAREZ (male): PhD in Physics from the University of Barcelona (2009). Currently Project Technical Responsible and Optical Engineer at IRIS, Mariano is specialised in the fields of LED technology, Lighting, Optoelectronics and Photonics. He has been responsible of Photometric, Photonics and Optoelectronics labs, focusing, among many other activities (Spectroscopy, Materials Science…), on the design (3D-CAD, ray-tracing and CFD), development, prototyping and performance assessment of luminaires and light-engines (photometric, thermal and electric), collaborating closely with manufacturers in the Lighting field. He also has a deep knowledge of Concentration Photovoltaics especially in terms of raytracing simulations of optical concentrators and indoor/outdoor tests of optoelectronic performance. Mariano also participated in 18 R&D projects, funded through both public competitive calls (at National and EU level) and private institutions such as the Project LED4ART, devoted to the refurbishment of the Sistine Chapel Lighting system.  Mr. DAVID MONTES MONTESERIN. (male) BSc in Mechanical Engineering (2011), Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC), Barcelona. Prior to joining the Production Processes group at IRIS as Mechanical Design Engineer, he gained wide experience in product design and development, including dosing systems for the chemical industry and both industrial and domestic appliances for the water treatment sector. He has also held positions as Engineering Team Manager, applying renewable energies to industrial-sized drinking water plants among other projects.  He is specialised in design for manufacturing and is proficient in SolidWorks, design software which has taught to several companies as a freelancer. Dr. IDOIA MARTÍ ALUJA (female) is a Senior Scientist. She received her PhD in Chemistry at the Universitat Rovira i Virgili (Spain). Her thesis was focused on the establishment of novel analytical methods for the study of different processes by infrared spectroscopy and chemometrics techniques. After her thesis, she expanded her knowledge in spectroscopic techniques working as a Technician in the Spectroscopic and Kinetics Unit (SKU) at the Institut Català d'Investigació en Química (ICIQ, Spain). She was in charge of the calibration and maintenance of the instruments of the unit (UV-Vis, NIR, FTIR, FT-Raman, Circular Dichroism, Fluorescence spectra and polarimetry). Moreover, she worked as a PostDoct at the Institute of Photonic Sciences (ICFO, Spain), leading a project whose aim was to develop a new and novel infrared instrument based on a high power laser source with direct emission in the mid- to long-wave infrared for chemical microspectroscopy of biological samples. She was using chemometrics techniques to extract meaningful information from the recorded data. She also worked as Material Science Engineer at Zobele Spain, being in charge of the selection, testing and validation the most adequate raw materials, with particular focus on the interaction between chemical products (mainly perfumes, solvents and detergents) and materials.  Dr. DAVID NETTLETON. (male) Data Mining Analyst. Has a Ph.D in Artificial Intelligence from the Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, M.Sc. In Computer Software and Systems Design from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K., and B.Sc. (Hons) Computer Science from the University of Wolverhampton, U.K. Has over 20 years experience of applying data mining algorithms (including neural networks, rule induction) and statistical techniques (including ANOVA, regression, principal components) in a diversity of data analysis and modeling projects, such as medical diagnosis/prognosis, fraud detection, customer loyalty and segmentation, online user web search behaviour and data privacy. As well as commercial projects, he has conducted research and lectured at two universities. He has published a diversity of articles in specialised data analysis journals/congresses and three books. He has participated in several competitive multi-partner research projects and has a European patent application for a graph matching algorithm. His IT Industrial experience includes project management, consultancy, programming and analysis, database development and business startups. He has developed software with a diversity of programming languages, (including Java, C++ and COBOL/CICS/DB2), database systems (such as Oracle, Ingres, MySQL) and data mining systems (IBM Intelligent Miner, Clementine, Weka). In IRIS he is currently involved in two major European projects (OpenMind and Sharebox), as a data mining specialist. The work in OpenMind involves modelling a complex industrial production process 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 63 of 117 
for producing high precision medical instruments. The work in Sharebox involves building a symbiosis system for industrial collaborations between companies for the recycling of waste products using case based reasoning and agent modelling. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 1. Sensing Technology. Chapter 6. Resource Efficiency of Processing Plants. Monitoring and Improvement.  A. Rosales, O. Mc Nerney. Edited by Stefan Krämer and Sebastian Engell. Wiley-Vch. Print ISBN: 978-3-527-34074-3  in press 2. Commercial Data Mining, Processing, Analysis and Modeling for Predictive Analytics Projects, David Nettleton, Elsiever book, ISBN9780124166028, 304p 3. Towards Automatic Calibration of In-Line Machine Processes, 18th International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Manufacturing Process Modeling, D.F.Nettleton, E.Bugnicourt, C. Wasiak, A. Rosales, London, UK, July 28-29, 2016 4. Hyperspectral imaging. A.A. Gowen, E. Gaston, J. Burger (2014). In: C.P. O´Donnell, C. Fagan, P.J.Cullen (Eds.), Process Analytical Technology for the Food Industry, 199-216, Springer, ISBN 978-1-4939-0311-5. 5. Injection moulding process optimization by online material monitoring. E. Bugnicourt et al., October 2012. Technical article in Packaging connections.   Relevant product line: Cloud-enabled NIR spectroscopy platform for inline and at line process monitoring (Devices engineered for harsh environments- IP65 and optionally higher, optional ATEX DC compliance- and proprietary optical probe that maximises the interaction between the light and the sample for more accurate measurements).  Related services: Chemiometrics model development and training A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 1. Hypera®-Hyperspectral Imaging (HSI) System for on-line foreign body detection and chemical composition analysis (H2020- SMEInst, Grant Agreement no: 726572, 2016-2018). IRIS is further developing its inline HSI monitoring product line and validating it in the food industry. To date the system has been applied commercially for inline pizza quality assessment (topping distribution and absence of plastic flakes). Using HSI, not only the shape or position but also the chemical composition and hidden matter can be unveiled. Using Artificial Intelligence algorithms (chemometrics), we convert the monitored outputs into meaningful information much beyond that can be obtained with conventional vision systems. Our HSI system prevents out-of-spec processes or product recalls.  2. ProPAT- Robust and affordable process control technologies for improving standards and optimising industrial operations (H2020- SPIRE, Grant Agreement no: 637232, 2014-2018). IRIS is leading the development of a global PAT control platform integrating novel low cost smart sensors, such as MEMS-NIR spectroscopic and granulometric analysers, which together with chemometric tools and predictive software, is being validated to optimise the performance of batch and continuous processing industries. As initial target applications, the milling of minerals, ceramics, metals, mixing and granulation of pharma products and polymerization of resins are optimized both in terms of process efficiency, and output quality. 3. ShareBox- Secure Management Platform for Shared Process Resources, Grant Agreement no: 680843, Funding programme: H2020-SPIRE-06-2015. IRIS is developing the central cloud platform that integrates a number of smart modules for supporting and optimising synergies in the use of shared resources and waste valorisation between companies. Based on agent based modelling (ABM) approach, the supply-demand matching brings Industrial Symbiosis into the Industry4.0 paradigm, and allows the shift of industrial users towards the circular economy. 4. WHEYLAYER- Whey protein-coated plastic films to replace expensive polymers and increase recyclability. (Grant agreement no.: 218340-2 Completed). Followed by WHEYLAYER2- Barrier biopolymers for sustainable packaging (Grant Agreement no: 315743 FP7, R4SME, Demonstration action Completed). IRIS participated in the process upscaling and optimisation, among other via simulation and monitoring, for multilayer films with improved recyclability by design. 5. OPTIJECT- A novel spectroscopic instrument for in-line monitoring during injection moulding (FP7, R4SMEs, Grant agreement no.: 262623, 2010-2012). IRIS has implemented NIR and UV-VIS spectroscopy-based in line monitoring systems for the polymer melt stream within the nozzle of injection machines. In particular, IRIS delivered probes able to withstand outstandingly high pressure and temperatures up to 350ºC. The system was demonstrated to provide information normally only available to plastic converters via laborious off line QC tests like material humidity down to 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 64 of 117 
ppm level or polymer degradation, as well as to allow optimising colour and colourant concentration in real time. When coupled with case based reasoning models, it allows decision support for real time process optimization thereby maximizing yield and minimizing the scrap generated. IRIS is coordinator in all Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, a FTIR-ATR (Interspectrum), 2 UV-VIS (PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), an Extended-SWIR (StellarNet) and a NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as well as a SWIR Hyperspectral imager (Specim-Xenics). The associated staff are properly trained and skilled in chemometrics modelling by using a commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non-commercial chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes). Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up-to-date hardware and tools: signal generators, wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for programming microcontrollers, CNC-milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD software [SolidWorks], among others.   IRIS’ optical engineers work with ZEEMAX software for optimally designing of optical systems and to setup the designs by means of advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and related “opticalware”). Food and wet chemistry lab equipped with a DSC, a Surface Energy analyser, an HPLC, a Cobb tester, microbiological equipments, microspcope and microtome for structural analysis, migration cells, colourimeter (for colour and opacity measurement), Ford cup viscometers, water vapour permeation cells, turbidimeter, climatic chambers, manual and automatic coaters, electrospray, different drying technologies, plasma surface activation, etc.   Participant no. 2 Name (short name)/ Country Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft zur Förderung der Angewandten Forschung e. V. (FRAUNHOFER) / Germany Description of the legal entity  Fraunhofer is the leading organisation for applied research in Europe, undertaking contract research on behalf of industry, the service sector and government. At present, Fraunhofer has about eighty research units, including fifty-seven research institutes, at over forty locations in Germany. An annual turnover of about €900 million is generated by contract research by a staff of about thirteen thousand employees. Fraunhofer’s institute für Verfahrenstechnik und Verpackung (Fraunhofer-IVV) will participate in this project:  Fraunhofer’s Institute for Process Engineering and Packaging (Fraunhofer-IVV) has two hundred and twenty-one employees and an annual turnover of €18 million. The Fraunhofer-IVV develops and optimizes products and processes primarily in the area of food ingredients, functional films, product safety, food quality, biogenic raw materials as well as plastics recycling. The department ‘Recycling polymers’ at Fraunhofer-IVV has been founded in 2005 and deals with the separation of pure polymers from plastic containing waste by means of mechanical pre-treatment and solvent based technologies. The latter have been developed at Fraunhofer-IVV (CreaSolv® Process) and enable the dissolution, separation and recovery of target polymers from complex mixtures. This has been successfully exemplified in number of national and European projects (e.g. POLYSOLVE) dealing with ELV, WEEE and EPS/ETICS from construction waste.  The department ‘Material development’ at Fraunhofer-IVV has started activities in the field of vacuum web coating in 1988 as a neutral R&D partner for industry. Since then, many large projects have been successfully completed and packaging materials for food and non-food applications with constantly-improved functionalities have been developed. With respect to protein based biopolymers, they have optimized processing parameters and a strategy to gain specific fractions with defined purity. They have successfully led the whey formulation work in the WHEYLAYER project. They also have over 20 years experience in coating (lacquering and vacuum coating), extrusion of flexible polymer films and in developing corresponding multilayer structures for flexible packaging with high barrier properties (such projects as TRANSMACH, HIPROLOCO, FLEXONICS, NANOINSULATE, SUNFLOWER, SMARTONICS).  

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 65 of 117 
The pilot plants at Fraunhofer-IVV contains all relevant processes, relevant to the development, production of flexible single/multi-layered films and thereby, validation of the application of the recycled plastics for packaging applications. The relevant processes for validation of recycled plastics to be used at Fraunhofer-IVV are film extrusion, vacuum deposition, lacquering application and adhesive lamination of polymer films. Fraunhofer-IVV is specialized on gas and water vapor permeability measurements for food packaging and also for high-end applications. With respect to recycling, our facilities allow trials in extended laboratory and small-technical scale. Main tasks Fraunhofer will lead WP2, in charge of developing suitable solvent based processes for multilayer packaging and fibre reinforced composites. These will be done in the existing CreaSolv® pilot line and purity of recycled polymers will be evaluated in Fraunhofer laboratories using FTIR, DSC and XRF. Furthermore, they will contribute to designing an upscaled pilot plant. This plant will be engineered and built by LOEMI in WP4. As a process inventor Fraunhofer will largely contribute to this work package tasks. The Factory outlet test (T4.3) and demonstration trials (T4.4-4.6) using the new pilot plant wil be organized, performed and reported by Fraunhofer.  Fraunhofer-IVV will also have a strong role in WP5: Demonstration of packaging material production using recycled plastics and identification of their usage for food or non-food packaging applications. Production of single and multi-layered structures by means of extrusion plant and wet-chemical coating unit will be performed from the recycled polymers. The produced packaging materials will be characterised in terms of their functional properties and compared to those of the requirements for various packaging applications. Extrusion, co-extrusion of recycled polymers, lamination of metallized recycled PET to recycled extruded PE or PP layers by means of wet chemical lamination unit, process optimization will be the main tasks. Other tasks are water vapor and gas transmission rate measurements, adhesion strength measurements, layer thickness characterisation, and characterization of packaging materials towards food compliance and assessment reports in comparison to the packaging materials produced by using virgin plastics.  FRAUNHOFER will act as Technical manager of the project. How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project Fraunhofer-IVV has 20 years of experience in solvent based separation of plastic mixtures. Starting with laboratory scale experiments in 1996, the CreaSolv® Process can now separate most thermoplastic materials from complex waste streams and produce recycled polymers with defined virgin-like properties, whereas the applied solvent is recycled within the process completely. Thus, the recycling process encourages the circular economy approach, as most recent project results (e.g. Polysolve) have shown that product qualities of recycled polymers comply with specifications of virgin plastics, enabling a use of recycled plastics in initial applications. Having such a technical recycling concept validated, Fraunhofer-IVV provides expertise in defining and building structures for a circular economy of plastics, composites.  Fraunhofer-IVV has also an experience of more than 20 years in roll-to-roll coating (lacquering and vacuum coating), extrusion of flexible polymer films and in developing corresponding multilayer structures for flexible packaging applications with various functionalities, e.g. gas/water vapor barrier, optical properties, and enhanced adhesion, anti-microbial. Several multi-national projects have been successfully completed funded by the European Commission, such as SUSTAINPACK, WHEYLAYER, ACOSIC BIOBOARD, TRANSMACH, HIPROLOCO, FLEXONICS, OLATRONICS, NANOINSULATE, SUNFLOWER. The flexible multifunctional materials developed in these European projects were for food and non-food packaging applications, for the encapsulation of flexible thin film photovoltaics, for vacuum insulation panels for the building and the construction industry. Fraunhofer-IVV has the required expertise for validation of the recycled polymers for packaging applications; for food and non-food products. Packaging for food and pharmaceuticals is a highly regulated area for both the materials and the production environment. The barrier to entry for new players is thus large. For companies established in this market and research organisations active in this field, the hurdle for new materials is one of testing, data evaluation and documentation. As a packaging institute, Fraunhofer-IVV with specialists at its department of Product Safety and Analytics is very familiar with the EC and USA regulations for the food contact materials sector. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulates a wide variety of areas such as food and packaging, drugs and packaging, cosmetics, medical devices and most recently, pet food and packaging. The FDA regulates plastics through a number of specific regulations. There is a similar regulatory system in the EU (e.g. EU Packaging and Packaging Waste Directive 94/62/EC limits heavy metal content in packaging materials). Food packaging is covered by the general EU Framework Regulation no.1935/2004 and in particular for plastics by the EU Regulation no.10/2011. Fraunhofer-IVV has an accredited test laboratory (according to DIN EN ISO/IEC 17025), which is equipped for the complete analysis and evaluation of food contact materials for compliance with food legislation. This covers all packaging materials like for example printed and coated polymers, or extruded 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 66 of 117 
plastics. Based on the test and evaluation results, specific actions can be taken for optimization of MultiCycle process for packaging materials. Fraunhofer-IVV can provide technical support to the packaging partner to achieve the objectives of the project. CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Dr. Martin SCHLUMMER (male) – Senior Scientist in the Dept. Recycled Plastics department, holds a Ph.D. in Chemistry from University of Erlangen. He has been with Fraunhofer-IVV as a research fellow since 1999. As a responsible scientist for process development and analytical process evaluation he participated in and co-ordinated more than 20 national and international research projects and (co-)authored more than 45 publications in peer reviewed scientific journals. He will coordinate the activities of Fraunhofer and LOEMI within WP2 and WP4 as well as crosslink to WP 1, 3, 5, 6 and 7. Furthermore he will chair the Technical Committee.  Andreas MÄURER (male) – Head of Dept. Recycled Plastics department at Fraunhofer, holds a Ph.D. in Chemistry from University of Erlangen. After a two-year experience of industrial research in the paper business, he has been working for FhG-IVV, since 1994: first as a Dep. Head of the Dept. Process Engineering, then as head of Dept. Product Safety and Analysis and since 2005 as head of Dept. Recycled plasticsMäurer co-ordinated more than 30 national and international research projects and (co-)authored more than 30 publications. As main inventor of the CreaSolv® Process he will contribute to process development and plant design issues within WP 2 and WP 4 and advice application trials of recycled polymers in packaging and fibre applications.  Dr. Esra KUCUKPINAR. (female) – received her B.Sc. in Chemical Eng. from Boğaziçi University, İstanbul, in 1995 and her M.Eng. in Chemical Eng. from the Stevens Institute of Tech., New Jersey, in 1997, with a focus on polymer processing. She was employed at the Highly-filled Materials Institute, New Jersey, as a research engineer. She joined the RTD Centre of Arçelik in 1997, as a research specialist. In 2003 she received her Ph.D. in Chemical Eng. from Boğaziçi University. Since 2003, she has been employed at Fraunhofer-IVV as a senior scientist and project leader focusing on the development of multi-layered flexible barrier materials for packaging applications, from food packaging to the vacuum insulation panels, and organic electronics. She has experience of international projects funded by the Commission, from FP5 onwards. She has co-authored more than 30 publications in peer reviewed scientific journals and presented her research work in various international conferences. She will organise the extrusion and wet chemical coating trials at the pilot lines, lead the characterisation work in WP5 for the produced samples. She will be actively involved in the meetings, preparation of the presentations, deliverables, periodic progress reports.  MSc. Tanja FELL (female) – received her M.Sc. in Food processing from the University of Applied Science Fulda. She has been with Fraunhofer-IVV as a research fellow since 2011. As a responsible scientist for process development and analytical product evaluation she has specialised on the recovery of plastics including bioplastics from waste packaging. She coordinated 3 national research projects and contributed to 5 German and European R&D projects. She will contribute to process optimisation and design in WP 2 and will assist Dr. Kucukpinar in packaging applications in WP5. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content Schlummer, M.: Recycling of post-industrial and post-consumer plastics containing flame-retardants. In Papaspyrides, C.: Kiliaris, P. (Eds): Polymer Green Flame Retardants, 1st Edition. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2014. ISBN :9780444538086  Fabian Knappich, Ferdinand Hartl, Martin Schlummer, Andreas Mäurer: Complete Recycling of Composite Material Comprising Polybutylene Terephthalate and Copper. Recycling, 2, 9;  H.-C. Langowski, Permeation of Gases and Condensable Substances Through Monolayer and Multilayer Structures, in: O.G. Piringer, A.L. Baner (eds.), Plastic Packaging - Interactions with Food and Pharmaceuticals, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2008, 297–347. Special Issue on "Adhesion Aspects in Packaging", Journal of Adhesion Science and Technology, Guest-edited by Esra Kucukpinar, Horst-Christian Langowski, 26 (2012) 20-21. Kiese S., Kücükpinar E., Noller K., Langowski H.-C., Investigation of the mechanical stability of high barrier films, ICE Europe 2015, Munich, 10.03.2015 A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project INNOVIP - “Innovative multi-functional Vacuum-Insulation-Panels for use in the building sector”, EU H2020, Grant No 723441, Coord.: C. Sprengard, Germany: Both ADI and Fraunhofer -IVV are partners (2016-2019): Fraunhofer-IVV works 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 67 of 117 
on the development of high barrier multi-layered structures for vacuum insulation panels and contribute to the INNOVIP project by practical demonstration trials on the separation and material recovery from finished INNOVIP insulations.  CLOSEWEEE - “Integrated solutions for pre-processing electronic equipment, closing the loop of post-consumer high-grade plastics, and advanced recovery of critical raw materials antimony and graphite”, EU H2020, Grant No 641747, Coord.: K. Schischke, Germany: Both Fraunhofer-IVV and Vertech are partners (2014-2018): Fraunhofer-IVV works on the application of the CreaSolv® Process for the recovery of high-grade ABS and PC/ABS as well as the recovery of antimony trioxide.  DISPLAY - “Upscale of Material Recovery from Display Applications and Printed Circuit Boards”, EIT raw materials, Project No 16270, Coord.: M. Schlummer, S. Grieger, Germany: Fraunhofer is coordinating (2017-2021): Fraunhofer-IVV works on the development of recycling options for plastics in post-consumer display appliances by using the CreaSolv® Process.  PSLoop – “Polystyrene Loop”, EU LIFE, Grant No 16ENV/NL/000271, Coord.: J. Noordegraaf, The Netherlands: Fraunhofer –IVV is a key partner (2017-2021): Fraunhofer has developed the CreaSolv® Process, which is upscaled in this project for the purpose of recovering POP free recycled polystyrene from PS foams containing HBCD. FORCYCLE – “Recovery of metals from composite from metal-polymer-composites” Grant No. BAF01SoF0-65342. Coord. M. Schlummer, Germany. Fraunhofer was coordinating and LOEMI was contributing (2014-2017): Fraunhofer-IVV developed recycling processes for the recovery of polymers from polymer-metal-composites including metal plated plastics and carbon fibre reinforced plastics. The processes reached a TRL of 5.  Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work CreaSolv® pilot plant: Fraunhofer IVV runs a flexible CreaSolv® pilot line consisting of some 100-250 L vessels for different unit operations like dissolution, mechanical cleaning, extractive cleaning, product drying and solvent recovery.   In the past it was used to produce 5-100 kg samples of – amongst others - ABS, PS, PC/ABS, PP, PE, PET and PA. This line has a capacity of 5-10 kg/day and will be the base of design studies deducing optimized process parameters for a 25 kg/h plant. The output of this pilot line are intermediate polymer pellets that are offline transferred to a vacuum extrusion line which is used to parametrize a final drying of intermediate products.  Figure 1. CreaSolv® pilot installation at Fraunhofer -IVV  In MultiCycle, there will be two pilot-plant equipment, which will be used for pre-production runs to evaluate processing parameters and functional properties of recycled polymers for packaging applications:  1) Extrusion plant, 2) Wet chemical coating unit. Fraunhofer-IVV provides facilities for carrying out processing trials on a scale from a minimum of 1 kg up to several 100 kg. These are then optimized for industrial-scale production plants. These plants will allow:  - trials to be conducted using small amounts of materials   

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 68 of 117 
- small-batch production runs  - new materials or new material combinations to be tested for their processing and application properties  - optimization of the processing of new materials  - transfer of the recorded process parameters to production plants (e.g. at the packaging project partner AMCOR)  1) Extrusion Plant: Extrusion is the most important process for manufacturing of plastic films. A 5-layer and a 7-layer extrusion plant are available, which can be used to produce a wide range of multi and single-layered materials. Figure 1 below shows the picture of the 7-layer flat film extrusion plant. The extruder is a seven-layer-coextrusion unit for four different polymers. It allows the production of multi-layer film structures, the extrusion of single-layer films and the extrusion coating of film sheets as well. The film thickness is monitored in-line with a capacitive sensor. The main extruder is designed as a test extruder for measuring the pressure in the cylinder. The nozzle width is 300 mm; the width of the film can be adjusted up to 500 mm. The mass throughput is in the 1 kg/h to 15 kg/h range. The film thickness can be varied from 20 μm to 3 mm at processing speeds of up to 16 m/min. Extrusion lamination or extrusion coating is also possible.   Figure 2. 7-layer extrusion plant at Fraunhofer-IVV for the extrusion, co-extrusion of recycled plastic pellets 2) Wet chemical coating unit: A wet chemical coating machine is available, which is unique in its possibilities of applying thin adhesive layers, in drying and curing, and in sensitively treating the barrier layers until lamination (Figure 3).   Figure 3. Coating pilot line at Fraunhofer-IVV for the lamination of the extruded recycled PE-, PET-, and vacuum deposited recycled PET, to be used for packaging applications  Analytics: Fraunhofer-IVV possesses all the necessary analytical equipment for characterizing of recycled materials, model products and their application properties after the production of the packaging materials. The analytical facilities and know-how of the personnel at the Fraunhofer-IVV guarantee objective and expert characterization of recycled materials and after the production of the packaging materials, including the compliance tests for food packaging.  They have equipment for the measurement of humidity and oxygen permeation to the best tolerance levels, rheometer, DSC, Raman, SEM, AFM, mechanical properties. In addition, equipment is available for migration analysis, Headspace-GC and liquid phase chromatography for validation of the recycled plastics use in food packaging.  

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 69 of 117 
  Participant no. 3 Name (short name)/ Country CENTRE SCIENTIFIQUE & TECHNIQUE DE L'INDUSTRIE TEXTILE BELGE (CTB)/ Belgium Description of the legal entity CTB is the scientific and technical centre for the Belgian Textile industry. CTB offers a complete range of standardised testing, is a notified body for the certification of protective clothing and can deliver CE marking and testing.  The research focus of CTB is on applied research, funded by private contract as well as state and international agencies (e.g. FP6, FP7, H2020, Eureka, Era-net). Additionally, some well selected subjects for strategic research are followed, being (i) smart textiles, (ii) innovative finishing, coating and laminating formulations and technology, (iii) biomedical interactions of textiles (incl. biocidal activity, cytotoxicity), (iv) polymer formulation and extrusion processes (incl. biopolymers), (v) composites and (vi) implementation of nanotechnology. Main tasks WP3 leader, main activities in multifilament extrusion of recovered thermoplastics, upgrading of reinforcement fibres, compounding, and testing of fibres. How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project Filament extrusion: CTB has extensive experience with filament extrusion of various thermoplastic materials. Last 10 years, a strong focus has been on the processing of biopolymers, including PLA. Tailoring reinforcing fibres: CTB is very active in the coating and finishing of fibres for various applications, e.g. tailoring for use in fibre reinforced composites.  Technology innovation in direct collaboration with companies: CTB is a technical centre with a strong focus on transferring technology towards companies. It has long experience in working closely with companies to help them realize their innovation projects. CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Dr. Lien Van der Schueren, Researcher (female): Lien holds a master in Materials Engineering and obtained her PhD in Textile Engineering on the subject of chromic textile materials. At CTB she is mainly working on European and private research projects in the field of extrusion of thermoplastic polymers and fibre reinforced composites, including biobased materials.  Dr. Isabel De Schrijver, R&D Manager plastics. (female): Dr. in chemistry and active in textile and plastic processing research since 8 years. Research is focusing on processing and compatibilisation of polymer systems including nano-additives and the processing of biobased polymers.  Dr. Sofie Huysman, Researcher. (female): Sofie has a master degree in materials science and a PhD in sustainable materials management. She works at CTB as a research scientist in the group of Functional Thermoplastic Textiles, and is involved in regional and European projects on fibre reinforced composites and biobased polymers. Dr. Frederik Goethals, Researcher. (male): Researcher in the unit of “Textile Functionalisation & Surface Modification” at Centexbel. Frederik studied chemistry at Ghent University and obtained afterwards his Ph. D. in Chemistry at the same university. He has joined Centexbel in 2013 as research scientist and his areas of specialisation are innovative materials and processes for textile coatings and composites. Dr. Guy Buyle, Manager EU research of CTB. (male): Guy holds a Masters of Engineering degree and obtained his PhD in Physics on the subject of plasma treatment of surfaces. Since his start at CTB he has mainly been working on European projects, under FP6, FP7 and H2020, being strongly involved in activities like dissemination, exploitation and coordination.  List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 1. Goethals Frederik (2015), Eco-efficiently cured and halogen-free flame retardant composites, proceedings 20th ICCM conference, 19-24 July 2015, Denmark.  

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 70 of 117 
2. De Schrijver Isabel (2016), Impact of regulation on processing and recycling in the textile and plastic industry, EFRA, general assembly meeting, Belgium.  3. De Schrijver Isabel, Van der Schueren Lien (2014), SUPERTEX, Sustainable Technical Textile from Recycled Polyester, Chemical Fibers International, 1/2014, 44-46.  4. Kristel Beckers, Van der Schueren Lien (2016), High tenacity PLA yarns for bio-based self-reinforced polymer composites, Chemical Fibers International, 2/2016, 85. 5. De Schrijver Isabel, Grymonprez Wim (2015), Recycle the unrecyclable: compatibilisation of mixed plastic sources, Kunststoffenbeurs Veldhoven, The Netherlands. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 1. URBANREC New approaches for the valorisation of URBAN bulky waste into high added value RECycled products (H2020, GA N° 690103) 2. SUPERTEX Sustainable Flame Retardant Technical Textile from Recycled Polyester (CIP 2014) 3. BIO-EOL End-of life possibilities of biopolymer based products (CORNET-Eranet, 2014) 4. PLAST-i-COM: Upgrading methodology for recycling polymer blends and contaminated polymers (Traject, Flemish collective research, 2014-2018). 5. BIO4SELF Biobased self-functionalised self-reinforced composite materials based on high performance nanofibrillar PLA fibres (H2020-NMP-2015, GA no. 685614, 2016-2019). Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work - Pilot line for multifilament yarn production: FDY, POY, BCF; all polymers including high melt polymers and functionalization types (throughput 2-14 kg/hour, production speed up to 3500 m/min). - Double screw compounder - Lab to pilot scale injection moulding machines - Lab scale compression moulding - Lab and pilot lines for coating and finishing of textiles, both on yarn (1-dimensional) as fabric (2-dimensional) level. - Necessary infrastructure for physical and mechanical testing as well as chemical testing of textile fibres/filaments    Participant no. 4 Name (short name)/ Country ASOCIACION DE INVESTIGACION DE MATERIALES PLASTICOS Y CONEXAS (AIMPLAS) / Spain Description of the legal entity  AIMPLAS, Technological Institute of Plastics located in Valencia, is a private, non-profit Association with more than 550 associated companies created in 1990. AIMPLAS is formed by +125 highly skilled professional, more than 65% with a Masters, Engineering or equivalent degree in Chemistry, polymer engineering, materials engineering or equivalent, including 15 PhD.  AIMPLAS’ fields of work are related to technological research and development on thermoplastic and thermosetting plastic materials & products, its transformation processes and their recyclability and sustainability. AIMPLAS generates new knowledge and technologies that can be transferred to companies in order to help them to increase their effectiveness and competitiveness. Nowadays, AIMPLAS has participated in 100 EU projects in FP5, FP6, FP7, LIFE+, CIP-EcoInnovation H2020, among others, coordinating more 30 of them. In H2020, AIMPLAS is participating in more than 18 projects, coordinating most of them. Outstanding LIFE projects were celebrated at the Green Awards ceremony in Brussels on 30 May 2017, BREAD4PLA – with AIMPLAS as a coordinator - was honoured as one of the two most exceptional LIFE projects of the programme's 25-year history. At National and Regional levels AIMPLAS participates in around 100 projects yearly. Main tasks WP1 leader in view of broad scope plastic processing and recycling knowledge. WP3: Additives selection and regeneration and/or reprocessing of recovered materials using compounding technologies assisted by CO2. Elimination of VOCs and other contaminants. Support to composite processing upscaling in WP6. WP8: Appointment as V2020 Circular Plastics leader. 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 71 of 117 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project AIMPLAS, as RTO is focused to help companies in the plastic sector to develop new products and increase their competitiveness through innovation, has more than 20 pilot plants representing the most relevant polymer/plastics/composites production technologies present in the industry nowadays, including recycling pilot plant and has state-of-the art test facilities for chemical, optical, morphological, mechanical and physical characterisation. These pilot lines and laboratories are used by many customer’s every year allowing them to test new materials, optimize production processes and launch new products to the market, supported by AIMPLAS technical staff, resulting in more than 5000 assays, 170 technical assessments and 120 skills training actions to more than 2000 clients per year. AIMPLAS has state-of-the-art 9000 m2 facilities, including thermoplastics and thermoset pilot plants, analysis and testing laboratories (physical-mechanical, chemical, packaging, automotive and construction) and training areas CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Mrs. Eva Verdejo (Female), holds a Bachelor Degree in Chemistry from the University of Valencia. She joined the Institute in 1993, being the current Head of Department of Sustainability and Industrial Recovery of AIMPLAS. Her expertise is focused on sustainable development, materials from natural resources, biodegradable plastics and recycling. She holds large experience in proposal writing and participation/coordination of relevant national and international R+D projects related to her expertise (BIOSTRUCT, RECYTUBE, ECO-RUBBER, POLYMIX, BREAD4PLA, LIFE EXTRUCLEAN, LIFE ECOMETHYLAL, LIFE RECYPACK). Speaker at numerous seminars and conferences, author of technical articles for scientific journals and magazines, and professor in different sustainability and recovery-related courses. Mr. Miguel Angel Valera (Male), Degree in Chemical Engineering by the University of Valencia, working in the Compounding department at AIMPLAS as researcher since 2003. He is specialized in processing, blending, mixing and modification of polymers by means of the compounding process. He currently works with bio-polymers, natural fillers, wood plastic composites, nanocomposites, reinforced polymers, recycling and reactive extrusion. He has participated in R&D projects in different, like EU FP6 and FP7 (NATURFIB, PLASTIC PULP, DOLFIN, PICUS, BIOBOTTLE, TRIGGER, HYDRUS, BIOSTRUCT, CLIPP, BUGWORKERS, BRIGIT, NATURTRUCK) as researcher and/or technical coordinator in AIMPLAS. Mr. Vicent Martinez (Male), Chemical Engineer by the Universitat Politècnica de València, working as senior researcher in the Extrusion Department at AIMPLAS since 2007. He has participated in several FP7 Projects focused in biotechnologies, materials from renewable resources and sustainability (T2SME CUSTOM-IMD, NMP NATEX, R4SME HYDRUS, R4SME REFRESH, R4SME CLIPP, and DEMO-SME XXL-REFRESH). He is also a specialist in laminating and printing technologies for flexible packaging in converting industry.  Dr. Alba María Ortiz Álvarez (Female), European PhD in chemistry by the Universidad de Alcalá, Madrid (December 2012), working in AIMPLAS as PhD researcher in the chemical laboratory since 2013. She has been involved in several national and international research projects focused in different areas such as synthesis of new polymers, nanotechnology, materials from renewable resources and coatings with enhanced properties, and so on. Moreover, she has being involved in the technical work of on Food contact plastics as well as Pharmacopoeia. Before joining AIMPLAS, she worked at the Universidad de Alcalá, where she was involved in research projects. Her research focused on the design and synthesis of new enlarged-palladium complexes as recoverable catalysts by nanofiltration techniques, contributing in international peer-reviewed journals and in national and international conference papers in the field of catalysis, dendrimers and organometallic chemistry. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content K. Haag, J. Padovani, S. Fita, J.-P. Trouvé, C. Pineau, S. Hawkins, H. De Jong, M. K. Deyholos, B. Chabbert, J. Müssig, J. Beaugrand, Influence of flax fibre variety and year-to-year variability on composite properties, Industrial Crops and Products, 98, April 2017, .1-9 Signori, F., Boggioni, A., Righetti, M. C., Rondán, C. E., Bronco, S. and Ciardelli, F. (2015), Evidences of Transesterification, Chain Branching and Cross-Linking in a Biopolyester Commercial Blend upon Reaction with Dicumyl Peroxide in the Melt. Macromol. Mater. Eng., 300: 153–160. Campanella, A., Wool, R. P., Bah, M., Fita, S. and Abuobaid, A. (2013), Composites from northern red oak (Quercus robur) leaves and plant oil-based resins. J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 127: 18–26. doi: 10.1002/app.36663. EP 2463083 A2 | US 2012148824 Green aircraft interior panels and method of fabrication The Boeing Company  
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 72 of 117 
Vidal R., Moliner E., Fita S., Wonneberger M. Verdejo E., Vanfleteren F., Lapeña N., González A., Life cycle assessment of novel aircraft interior panels made from renewable or recyclable polymers with natural fiber reinforcements and non-halogenated flame retardants, Journal of Industrial Ecology, DOI 10.1111/jiec.12544 A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 1. URBANREC New approaches for the valorisation of URBAN bulky waste into high added value RECycled products (H2020, GA N° 690103). Chemical and mechanical recycling of bulky waste products containing multi-materials. 2. ECOBULK Circular Process for Eco-Designed Bulky Products and Internal Car Parts, H2020 GA 730456. Clean and separation of plastics of the lightweight fraction in fragmentation plants. 3. LIFE EXTRUCLEAN: Demonstrative Project for the removal of hazardous substances during the recycling process of polyethylene hazardous waste packages, employing supercritical carbon dioxide (sc-CO2) LIFE+  www.life-extruclean.eu/  4. AgriMax: Agri & food waste valorisation crops based on flexible multi-feedstocks biorefinery processing technologies for new high added value applications (BBI GA 720720).  5. C-SERVEES: Activating Circular Services in the Electrical and Electronic Sector (CIRC-01, in negotiation). New technologies for reuse and recycling plastics components from WEEE. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work a. Equipment for mechanical, thermal, rheological, electrical and physical tests. 
 
 
Universal Testing Machine, FTIR equipment, Rotational rheometer, DSC, Melt Flow Index, dart impact machine, Electronic microscopy, etc. b. Equipment for cleaning recycled materials.  

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 73 of 117 
 
   Tandem extrusion system with Sc-CO2 injection & intermediate melt filter. c. Equipment for processing recycled materials.  Cast sheet extrusion, compression moulding, injection moulding, etc… 
 
  Participant no. 5 Name (short name)/ Country ARKEMA FRANCE (ARKEMA)/FRANCE Description of the legal entity  Arkema is a French leading chemical company, with about 7.5 G€ of sales from products in Specialty Chemicals (long chain polyamides, fluorinated polymers, additives, molecular sieves, …), Industrial chemicals (Thiochemicals, Fluorochemicals, Hydrogen Peroxide, PMMA) and Acrylics. Specialty chemicals and monomers produced by Arkema require high purities. Arkema currently operates several plants using renewable resources, such as castor oil for its polyamides. Arkema aims to reduce its global footprint and is investigating technologies to promote the recycling of its polymers and to use recycled materials in its applications. Main tasks Arkema will provide production scraps of its polyamides and especially production scraps of polyamide composites for evaluation of the recycling technologies developed in the project (WP2, 4). Arkema’s polyamides include the biobased polyamides 10.10, Polyamide 11, partially renewable polyamides 6.10 and 10.12, but also the polyamide 12, and polyphthalamides. Arkema will also evaluate the products recovered (fibers and polymers) after the Creasolv separation, for possible reuse in same or other applications. How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project Arkema is a major producer of specialty polyamides, and the leader in biobased polyamides. Arkema will investigate how the Creasolv process can be used to recycle its polymers including polyamide composites, and how to valorize the extracted materials: both fibers and polymer. CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Jean-Luc DUBOIS, Scientific Director, (Male), Coordinator of Arkema’s research activities in areas of Catalysis, Processes, Renewables and Recycling. He started his carrier in the group 26 years ago, in the oil refining division of the elf Aquitaine group, moved to the Chemical branch (which is now in part Arkema) 21 years ago. Jean-Luc DUBOIS has been leading research in Arkema in Process Intensification and catalytic processes, and is currently organizing Arkema’s platform on polymer recycling. He is the author of more than 100 publications, and 150 patent applications. His h-index 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 74 of 117 
is above 28. Scientific production on http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4968-5728 and https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Jean-Luc_Dubois2. He is involved in the Resyntex project where he is member of the General Assembly and leads the preparation of the exploitation plan. Other researchers will be nominated in due time with the following profile: Expertise in chemical processes, knowledge on polyamide chemistry. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  Requirements for the development of a bioeconomy for chemicals, JL Dubois Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 3 (1), 11-14.  US8835661 BB, Process for the synthesis of c11 and c12 omega-aminoalkanoic acid esters comprising a nitrilaton step, Couturier Jean Luc; Dubois Jean Luc  US2014323684 AA, Amino acid preparation method comprising a step of hydroformylation of an unsaturated fatty nitrile, Carpentier Jean Francois, Couturier Jean Luc, Dubois Jean-Luc, Ternel Jeremy.  Tandem Catalytic Acrylonitrile Cross‐Metathesis and Hydrogenation of Nitriles with Ruthenium Catalysts: Direct Access to Linear α, ω‐Aminoesters from Renewables, X Miao, C Fischmeister, C Bruneau, PH Dixneuf, JL Dubois, JL Couturier, ChemSusChem 5 (8), 1410-1414 A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  Resyntex (H2020) - http://www.resyntex.eu/ RESYNTEX is a research project which aims to create a new circular economy concept for the textile and chemical industries. Using industrial symbiosis, it aims to produce secondary raw materials from unwearable textile waste.  GAMES (KIC Raw materials)-  Great Adventures with Materials: Education for a Recycling Society (GAMES).  Games is a project aiming to develop a Digital Game to educate on the challenges of recycling.  COSMIC (H2020, MSCA –ITN) - https://cosmic-etn.eu/ - COSMIC is a European Training Newtwork in which Arkema hosts 2 Early stage Researchers in its laboratories working on ultrasounds and microwaves technologies.  EuroBioRef (FP7) – 2010-2014. www.eurobioref.org BioRefinery project in which Arkema identified several routes from Castor oil to High Value Polymer (Polyamide) production.  OPTICO (FP7) – 2012-2015. Project looking at advanced process control. Arkema’s contribution is on a process to make monomers for polyamides. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work Research will be carried out in the R&D center located in Pierre-Bénite for the experimental work on Polyamide recycling. Samples of polyamides and polyamide composites will be sourced from on-going activities in the R&D center located in Serquigny, specialized on polyamide production.    Participant no. 6 Name (short name)/ Country SILON s. r. o. (SILON) / CZECH REPUBLIC Description of the legal entity  

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 75 of 117 
SILON is a limited liability company that is based on the previous traditional chemical business in the Czech Republic. Originally SILON was a registered trade mark of a polyamide fibre produced in the plant since 1960’s. Further SILON started with fibre based on other polymers and finally added compound production. At present, Fibres Division of SILON produces solely PET fibre and majority of the raw material is recycled PET. The production is performed on two-step production lines or short-spun. Still the company profits from the long-lasting tradition and know-how that is generated from strong technical cooperation with customers. Compounds division produces variety of modified polyolefin-based compounds using a reactive extrusion technology for multiple uses, among others raw material for construction purposes – water pipelines, automotive parts, food packaging. SILON is a world supplier of the key players in automotive, engineering, food industry and hygiene. Main tasks Strong role in WP6:  Compounding and possible upgrading eg. via sc-CO2 or reactive extrusion of material for further processing, modification by various materials in compounds division.  Polyester staple fibre production based on the regenerated material, assessment of suitability of raw material for standard production, technology verification, conditions of use, critical parameters assessment. How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project Core competence: Production of compounds and recycled polyester staple fibres Participant’s dissemination channels:   Automotive Interiors Expo Stuttgart 2018, 2019, 2020 Techtextil Frankfurt am Main – Silon is a long-term exhibitor INDEX Geneva 2021 – SILON is a long-term exhibitor Networks: Edana CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Jana Kadlecová (F), Ing. Ph.D. Technical key account manager: Jana is responsible for new product development, validations and approval. She is a Ph.D. graduate of Czech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Transportation and former scientific worker at CTU in Prague. She has 7 years of experience in processing various EU and national projects in interior design, vehicle safety and human-machine interaction. She will be the administrator and Team leader for SILON in SUPEFIOR. Ing. Adam Vojtovič (M): Adam is the customer support specialist at SILON. He is also doing in parallel his doctoral thesis at University in Pardubice – Faculty of Chemical Technology. His role in the project will be analyses using his chemical background. Ing. Michal Čermák, Ph.D. (M) – has an exhaustive experience in cable insulation area, automotive application. Graduate from West Bohemian University in Pilsen, faculty of Electrical engineering, post-graduate studies graduate with several periods abroad. Ing. Klára Budilová (F): Klára has 8 years of experience in new product implementation and is responsible for product processability. Her role in the project will be technology adjustments and product processability. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  Compounded materials via reactive extrusion  Use of fillers (glass, carbon and others)  Crosslinking material  Fibres for Automotive: application of hollow fiber in acoustic insulation of a vehicle  Fibre Hygiene: continuous spinning of two different linear weights for direct carding A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  SILON performs mostly industrial development which is tailor-made regarding the need of its customer. Thus, the clients receive specific product made according to the desired application   Recently, SILON has put together an R&D team (and has been hiring staff) to perform strategic projects on longer term. As an example, Dr. Kadlecová was hired. She is an author/co-author of numerous publications related to automotive industry, covering from vehicle interior functions to human-machine interaction modelling as well as practical experience with FP6, FP7 and further European and national research projects as a co-solver or 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 76 of 117 
administrator. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work  Reactive extrusion lines with multiple possibilities  Film-producing pilot line  Flammability measurement  Chlorine resistance measurement  Short-spin (one-step) lines adjusted for processing of post-consumer bottles  Long-spin (two-step) lines, possibility to use end-reactor for liquid state polycondensation, adjusted for processing of post-consumer bottles  Laboratory-scale carding and needle punch equipment, precise colour measurement  Laboratory for fibre testing  Laboratory for analytical chemistry   Participant no. 7 Name (short name)/ Country ELG Carbon Fibre Ltd. (ELG) / UK Description of the legal entity  ELG Carbon Fibre has been operating the world's first commercial scale continuous carbon fibre recycling plant since 2009. The site is fully licensed by the UK Environment Agency and has the capacity to process in excess of 2000 metric tons of carbon fibre composite waste each year. ELG owns its manufacturing plant and laboratory. All facilities are on the one site in Wolverhampton. These are independent from any other partners’ equipment. Main tasks ELG will characterise the recycled carbon fibres and will produce a hybrid nonwoven, using its nonwoven laboratory line (purely mechanical process) using the recycled carbon fibres and the recycled thermoplastic fibres (WP3 and 6). In WP4 they will be training on the pilot plant to consider a possible future uptake. ELG will also help with the safety, environmental and economic sustainability assessment, the market strategy and innovation impacts, thanks to its years of experience in the recycling and commercialisation of carbon fibres. How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project ELG Carbon Fibre has a strong expertise in the recycling of carbon fibres and the re use of those recycled fibres. With its team and resources, including product development and technical services engineers, with different areas of expertise (textile, composite, chemistry) the company can carry out full feasibility study, the production of prototypes and their complete characterization. As such they have recently delivered a solution to an American’s cup racing team, which will, thanks to ELG’s work, be able to re-use their waste for the production of the next boat generation. ELG is working under the aerospace quality standard AS9100C and conducts its development work according to this standard. CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Mathilde Poulet (female), Technical Manager, will lead ELG involvement in the project and supervise the work. She has a Meng in Technical Textile and Advanced Materials (ENSAIT, France). She previously worked at Safran Landing System (Lyon, France) in both Process and Technical department, producing carbon/carbon composite for aircraft and formula one breaking system. At ELG she oversaw the commissioning of the new nonwoven production line. Camille Seurat (female), Product Development Engineer, she has a Meng in Technical Textile and Advanced Materials (ENSAIT, France). She previously worked at Adidas in the development team and oversaw the production of hybrid material (recycled fibres and natural fibres) at the University of Durban. At ELG she oversaw the establishment of the internal testing capacity and the optimization of the recovery process. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  Stevenson, A.N.J.; “Recycling carbon fibre: state of the art and future developments”, in Proceedings of the International Conference on Textiles, Dresden 27-28 November 2016 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 77 of 117 
 Barnes, Frazer, “Recycled carbon fiber: Its time has come”, Composites World July 2016  Barnes, Frazer, “Recycling Carbon Fibre – addressing the issues of high volume supply” in Proc. CAMX (Composites and Advanced Materials Conference & Expo) Anaheim, California, 26-29 September 2016x A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  Ongoing RSSB funded project, CaFiBo. The aim of this project is to produce a recycled carbon-based bogie for Alstom trains.  Ongoing development work with the University of Nottingham and the University of Bristol regarding the production of UD tapes based on short recycled carbon fibres. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work ELG Carbon Fibre has its own laboratories and pilot area.  These have the following facilities:  lab textile conversion process to make non-woven mats  pre-pregging line adapted to impregnate non-woven textiles with resin  hydraulic heated press to mould composites  vacuum infusion equipment  ovens for post curing and vacuum bagging  test frame for mechanical property testing  wet chemistry  scanners & image analysis software for measuring fibre length distributions In addition, trials can be conducted on ELG’s manufacturing plant equipment.   Participant no. 8 Name (short name)/ Country Bond-Laminates (BONDL)/ Germany Description of the legal entity  Bond-Laminates, based in Brilon, Germany, has more than 15 years’ experience in development and manufacturing and its application development of thermoplastic composites. The innovative Tepex® material system of Bond-Laminates supports customized solutions from innovative material and parts design to efficient mass production processing and has already been successfully applied in versatile applications and markets. Material development constantly expands the range of materials and properties to address new application areas with tailored solutions. Tepex® is a high performance composite laminate system made with thermoplastic polymers. The innovative combination of continuous reinforcing fibers with thermoplastic polymers results in exceptionally high strength and rigidity, coupled with extremely low weight. Tepex® enables cost-effective parts fabrication processes suitable for mass-production, especially in combination with injection molding. Due to its versatility and outstanding property profile, Tepex® addresses the megatrends of our time: green mobility, individual properties and design, enhanced safety and durability as well as sustainable solutions for the protection of resources and the environment. Whenever lightweight design, stiffness and strength, fatigue resistance, energy absorption and functional integration are required in high volume, Tepex® is the material of choice. Since 2012, Bond-Laminates belongs to LANXESS AG, a leading specialty chemicals company, as a wholly-owned subsidiary. As a part of the High-Performance Materials business unit, Bond-Laminates complements LANXESS competences in the field of innovative lightweight materials. LANXESS has a market presence of 52 production sites in 29 countries worldwide. In 2015 LANXESS achieved net sales of EUR 7.9 billion with 16,600 employees. The core business of LANXESS is the development, manufacturing and marketing of plastics, intermediates and specialty chemicals. LANXESS is a member of the leading sustainability indices Dow Jones Sustainability Index (DJSI) World and FTSE4Good as well as the Carbon Disclosure Leadership Index (CDLI). Main tasks Bond-Laminates (BONDL) will have a big role in WP2 and WP6 but also chairing the working group on composites. In WP2, Bond-Laminates will provide post industrial waste from its different production lines, where, due to offcut during sheet cutting, several tons of glass fiber reinforced polymers (mainly PP and PA6 with continuous or long fiber reinforcement) are produced. This waste may need to be prepared for transport or converted to a form fitting the subsequent recycling steps. In WP6 Bond-Laminates will implement the recycled polymers into its production processes 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 78 of 117 
and qualify the materials for repurposing, i.e. including these recycled polymers in its products. Bond Laminates will also work on a way to implement the recycled long or short glass fibers into compounds, either via its mother company Lanxess. How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project Bond-Laminates is a leading producer of continuous fiber reinforced thermoplastic sheets for composite products of the automotive, sports, consumer electronics and industrial industries. The long-lasting relationships with different industry partners and customers as well as over 20 years of experience with this kind of composite materials have established a very good overview of the market as well as its requirements concerning composite materials. Bond-Laminates will be a valuable partner in identifying the industry’s interest in what kind of composite materials are best suited for a sustainable recycling process and subsequent business. CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Dr.-Ing. Stefan Seidel: M.Sc. in mechanical engineering, PhD in the field of polymer processing. Head of R&D for Bond-Laminates GmbH since 2016, previously employed by Bond-Laminates as a project manager in material development. Worked as a research assistant at the university of Paderborn in Germany from 2011 to 2015 after graduating M.Sc. in 2011. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content TEPEX® product group, datasheets of most common materials can be found here:  http://bond-laminates.com/downloads/data-sheets/  A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  “Innovative Textilstrukturen aus Kohlenstoff-Stapelfasern“ (InTeKS) - AiF - Projekt abgeschlossen  “Recycling von Verschnitten aus der Halbzeugkonfektion von Organoblechen” (ReCycOr) - EFRE - Projekt abgeschlossen Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work Bond-Laminates has 6 production lines capable of continuous production of Tepex materials. Equipment for water-jet cutting the sheets is used for the cutting of final part contours. Offcut from these processes can be used as recycling feed.   Participant no. 9 Name (short name)/ Country FARPLAS / FARPLAS (Turkey) Description of the legal entity  Farplas Otomotiv A.Ş. is a leading and fast growing automotive plastic trim parts such as door module, instrument panel, exterior body panel supplier company based in Turkey. Major customers in passenger vehicle are Renault, Toyota, Hyundai, Fiat-Chrysler Automobiles Group and in commercial vehicle are Mercedes-Benz, Ford, MAN and Volvo. Farplas has been founded in 1968 and it is one of the major supplier for Automotive industry both globally and nationally with 1800 employees. Farplas has strong technical capability in terms of robot and PLC programming skills. Most of the robotic design and construction operations realised by method and automation team in Farplas. All of injection moulding machines operate simultaneously with 3-axis and 6-axis robots. Industrial robot integration was completed in 2009 with 70 3-axis robots and 13 6-axis robots. Therefore, operators had a chance to develop solid background in working at same environment with industrial robots. This will enable smooth implementation of collaborative robots in its current production environment. Farplas has strong relationship with reseach institutes universities. Collaboration with Fraunhofer IAO and Fraunhofer IPA helps Farplas to reach its digital transformation goal in production and advance in R&D road map. Farplas is partner of AZL Aachen GmbH and improves its competence in lightweighting solutions for vehicles. Production technology includes injection moulding, assembly and paint pro-cesses for plastic trim parts. In last five-years, Farplas improved the competency in advanced injection moulding technology; Fiberform (composite over-moulding technology), In Mold Decoration, Mucell, Metal Insert, Wrapping, Curing On Demand (Near IR Structural Bonding) and Two- Component technologies. Main tasks WP6: Fiber filled PA or PP compounds will be used to injection mould a series of demonstrator parts for the use in automotive. Farplas will need to perform Autodesk Moldflow Filling, Packing, 3D Shrinkage and Warpage tests and Finite 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 79 of 117 
elements analysis to optimize moulding of new material. Glass filled PP compounds and glass filled continuous fiber reinforced thermoplastics will processed in injection mould and fibre form equipment. Necessary part tests will be done by Farplas. Having experience of thermoforming of Nonwoven thermoplastic door panel, Farplas will also utilize part performance of recycle nonwoven thermoplastics. WP7: Farplas inputs through processing of new materials are important for the Life Cycle Assessment Scope and system boundaries,  WP8: Farplas will collect data from process trials and test of new material and correlate them with analysis software. The learnings are important for WP8 Training and Dissemination. WP9: Market strategy & innovation impacts; Farplas a supplier for major OEMs in region which reflects an universal perspective for accurate usage of materials which is a good indication of Automotive Materials Market How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project Farplas is primarily concerned on converting the outcome of a CreaSolv to Automotive ready products;  Polymers in automotive grade  Compounds made of CreaSolv polymers and fibers,   Nonwoven composites  These materials are in the category of materials that Farplas has been processing through the years. Through collaborations with various OEMS, new approaches for new design and function expectations, research projects with Universities, consulting and workshops with global institutes has lead Farplas to be one of the leading polymer processing Tier 1’s in Turkey. CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Dr. Yavuz Emre Yağci (Male) holds a PhD(2008)  from Max Planck İnstitute in polymer science with focus on synthesis and applications of anti-freeze functionalized polyamides.  Moreover, his master thesis in Durham university comprised synthesis of biodegredable polyurethane(PU) foams from bio-sources for packaging industry. He joined automotive industry in 2010 as a R&D specialist and project manager. He expertised in various applications of polyurethane during 2010 and 2013; Optimizing low emission PU foam formulations for seats, engaging a headliner production line, formulating highly efficient laminate foams were some of them. Between 2013 and 2016, he worked on mechanically advanced polypropylene compounds, work included formulations and  line optimizations both at prototype and serial level.  Since in 2010, he works at Farplas R&D as Innovation Director with focus in lightweight and Industry 4.0 applications in automotive. He also participated in Fraunhofer Lightweight Roadmap, attending the European Automotive Research Partners Association(EARPA) task forces in Brussels and Aachen Lightweight Centre member meetings are some of his international activities in the field. Burcu Girginer (Female), received her B.Sc. in Chemical Eng. from Istanbul University, Istanbul, in 2006 and her M.Eng. in Polymer Science and Engineering from Istanbul Technical University in 2008, on polymer nanocomposite synthesis and characterization. She still studies her PhD education with the focus on “Processing-Structure-Relationship in Standard Injection and Microcellular Injection Moulding of PP Based Compounds and Nano Composites for Automotive Applications”. She has co-authored more than 10 publications in peer reviewed scientific journals and presented her research work in various international conferences. She is working in automotive industry as research and development engineer for 8 years including plastic and rubber components. She leaded several funded Collaborative (Local OEMs- Technology Partner) R&D Project such as “continuous fiber reinforced thermoplastic composite and its trim applications”; “GMT Spare Wheel Well”; “microcellular engine under part cover design and part development”. She has R&D Team Leader responsibility with 6 years experience at Farplas, R&D and Innovation Director. Sinan Yamuc (Male, Process Development Manager); Holds a BSc in Mechanical Engineering degree from Marmara University. He manages a group of production technology engineers, injection experts and Moldflow Analysts. His group completed technology instalment of various state of the art  production lines, optimization of injection molding parameters and tool start ups for all global OEMS in Turkey.  Some technologies engaged are paintshop for molded parts, Fiber Form for back injection of organosheets, İnfrared Bonding of thermoplastics, application of polyurethane-pp composites for indoor trim parts. Mert Emre Öztoksoy (Male) received his B.Sc. from Faculty of Chemistry of Kocaeli University in 2011 and his M.Sc. in Polymer Science & Technology Program at Istanbul Technical University, in 2014. He studied in a TUBITAK 1001 project called “Design of a Production Method and Development of a New Mechanically Enhanced Polypropylene Based Textile Fiber by Using Nano Cellulose Whiskers” for 1 year as a research student.  He worked as a research trainee at Leibniz-Institut für Polymerforschung Dresden for Effect of Different (Nano-)Additives on Burning Properties of Polystyrene Composites research project in 2015. He started to work at Farplas Automotive as a member of R&D Engineer in 2015. He is mainly responsible for supporting new projects about development engineering plastic materials in automotive applications. 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 80 of 117 
Burcu Çumaklar (Female) received her BSc in Chemical Engineering from Ege University. She is working in Farplas since 2012 and she is responsible from Laboratory and Receiving Inspection Division under Quality Directorship since March 2017. At Farplas, she makes material/part tests and measurements mostly inhouse. Her group is responsible from making Project or Serial tests/measurements with different standards including International and OEM specs; analysing results and preparing reports. Plastic raw material/paint tests are also responsibility of same laboratory group. Nihan Akyol (Female) received her degree for aeronautical engineering from İstanbul Technical University(2014). She has been working as a structural analyst engineer for Farplas since 2015. She has been coding since 2014. She has used her expertise in Ansys, Hyperworks and Catia for structural analysis and design optimization at various global OEM projects in Turkey. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  Farplas Process development employs Moldflow engineers to adapt new material to mold and process.  Farplas Product Development employs software engineers with Ansys Ansys, Hyperworks and Catia knowledge for structural analysis and design optimization with in regard to the properties for the selected material.  Farplas in partnership with ‘Sabancı University associate Grafen Company’ have accomplished various applications of waste based nanomaterials reinforced recycled thermoplastics. Theses work have resulted in high performance structural OEM parts and Eu İnnovation Challenge contributions. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  Farplas İnjection Molding OEM Projects: Farplas has run codesign and engineering projects for many years  Composite Battery Carrier (R&D Project): Metal replacement with composite material, One shot production, Functional integration in design, Thernoforming of Bond Laminate Organosheets  GMT: Termoforming/Flowmolding of GMT/Thermoplastic SCM’s for Automotive Body parts, Natural Fiber Reinforced Plastics Door Panel, Thermoforming of nonwoven natural fiber thermoplastics, İntegration of injecton molding to NFRP composites, First Fiberform application in Turkey the filed  OEM supported Recycle thermoplastic use in serial production trim parts Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work Farplas Plants in Sekerpinar operate various sizes and types of State of the Art Injection moulding equipment. Also, a Krauss Maffei Fiberform line probably one of the most optimized equipment operates to produce Hibrit Thermoplastic Composites.   Participant no. 10 Name (short name)/ Country TOFAS TURK OTOMOBIL FABRIKASI ANONIM SIRKETI (TOFAS) / Turkey Description of the legal entity  Turkish automotive company Tofaş, whose foundations were laid by the founder of the Koç Holding Vehbi Koç in 1968, and which has equal shareholders as Koç Holding and FCA- Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, is one of the three world-wide strategic manufacturing centers of Fiat Auto. Tofaş represents the greatest value and power in the Turkish automotive sector without any dispute. Being the second big industrial enterprise of Bursa and the leader company in "Turkish Automotive Industry”, Tofaş is increasing its competitiveness progressively with more than 8000 employees. 700 employees work in the R&D Center of TOFAS, 1 million square meters operation field, of which 350,000 square meters are the indoor area with an annual production capacity of 400,000 units. Having one of the largest production capacities in Turkey, Tofaş is the only automotive company in Turkey that manufactures both passenger car and light commercial vehicle, manufacturing for 6 global brands: Fiat, Peugeot, Citroen, Opel, Vauxhall and RAM, as part of Minicargo and the new Doblo projects, Tofaş also brings together 6 powerful global brands Fiat, Alfa Romeo, Lancia, Maserati, Ferrari and Jeep with the consumers in Turkey. TOFAS focuses on; Lightweighting, Electric Vehicle, Energy Consumption, Connectivity, ADAS, Product & Development Competitiveness, Industrial Technologies fields. The mission of Tofaş is “to increase the quality of living by offering the products and services that best fit the society’s mobility needs” and its vision is “towards a million of vehicles; to become the leading automotive company that shapes 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 81 of 117 
the customer expectations and be a source of pride”. Together with the awareness of social and environmental responsibilities, Tofaş continues to work for sustainable and profitable growth in the long term, within the framework of its’ mission and vision.  Tofaş, the leader of Turkish automotive sector, established its R&D organization in 1994. Tofaş has an ambitious R&D vision as “developing vehicles and technologies fulfilling customer satisfaction in every part of the world” so Tofaş R&D Centre is aimed at providing contribution to the profitability of Turkish society, economy and to Tofaş by developing passenger and commercial vehicles that are competitive in every field. In order to maintain this development, Tofaş created an infrastructure that can compete with Europe in the field of vehicle development. In consequence of these developments, Tofaş R&D Centre has been registered as R&D Centre by Ministry of Industry and Trade within the scope of the law on "No. 5746 Supporting Research and Development Activities" as of 2008.  2013 was a year that significant strategic decisions were taken that would carry Tofaş to the future. By planning its next 20 years; Tofaş took an investment decision worth 880 million US dollars in total for Doblo America, Doblo FL and new passenger car projects.  The Doblo America project – which Tofaş carried out with an investment of 360 million US dollars in accordance with the customer demands and regulations in North America and Canada – will provide a valuable experience opportunity for Tofaş and Turkish supplier-industry. Within the scope of the project, Tofaş is planning to export 175,000 units of vehicles between 2014 and 2021. Along with the renewal operations that would be maintained together with that project, Fiat Doblo’s lifespan will be prolonged from 2018 to 2021. In addition, Tofaş is also aiming to complete the renewal of the current Doblo model for other markets until 2015. Tofaş also made a remarkable investment on new passenger car project; amounted at 520 million US dollars. With this project, Tofaş is planning to produce 580,000 units of cars between 2015 and 2023, and to export at least one-third of those cars.   Main tasks WP6: Demonstration of Recovered materials for Automotive Application: Tofaş will perform test activities on vehicle for selected part which is produced with recyled polymer and glass fiber. These are high and low temperature tests on static vehicle position and dynamic road simulator test. How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project Tofaş and World Class Manufacturing  In line with its future perspective and sustainability principle, Tofaş is managing its activities' environmental and social effects, as well as their economic outcomes, in integration with the company policies. Tofaş has acquired a place at the highest level in the Fiat-Chrysler world in the field of World Class Manufacturing (WCM). It stands out with its highest level of points among the Fiat-Chrysler plants along with its environmentalist approach and practices. Following these works, Tofaş Bursa Plant was achieved the “Golden Level” in 2013 within the scope of WCM that is implemented in the 175 plants within the framework of FCA and implemented in the production facilities of 350 suppliers – has become one of the driving forces that enable Tofaş to go one step further in the global competition. Tofaş, whose main principle is “no pollution needs no purification”, completed the audits of Energy Management System successfully in 2013, and became the only manufacturer in Turkish automotive industry having the Energy Management System Certificate.  R&D Centre gained a significant momentum in developing R&D competency by taking the responsibility of MCV project developed for Fiat and PSA brands between 2005 and 2007. In the following years New Doblo were developed also for Opel and Vauxhall brands and this played a fundamental role in the increase of Tofaş's export by manufacturing for 5 different brands. Tofaş R&D Centre has the intellectual and industrial rights of MiniCargo and new Doblo models.  Tofaş R&D Centre, apart from Italy, is the only R&D center that provides service for Fiat's European markets with its over 500 employees, competency level, high technology and diversity of its laboratories. Increasing its annual R&D expenditure/net company turnover rate to more than 3%, Tofaş showed the success of ranking among the limited number of companies in the world with its R&D investment values and the success of being one of the top 3 companies in our country that made the most R&D expenditure.  Believing that all elements in the R&D chain must develop together so that Turkey can be a product development center, Tofaş gives great importance to co-designer development, organization of local engineering companies and the university cooperation. Tofaş pays a special interest to patenting. In 2013, Tofaş ranked on top of the national application list of The Turkish Patent Institute. Having a constant increase for the last 5 years, Tofaş patent numbers has reached to 145.  One of the pre-conditions for Turkey to become a product development center is the simultaneously development of all 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 82 of 117 
elements of R&D value chain. Therefore, Tofaş gives particular importance for developing co-designer, organization of local engineering companies and collaborations with universities. In 2011, 14 of 49 product lines that could perform domestic production and development have been certified as co-designers and 11 of them reached to the certification process in 2012. Assessment and partnership activities are being performed with engineering companies that medium and long term collaborations can be made for expanding local engineering network.  University-Industry alliance projects became important in parallel with technology development activities. Tofaş R&D has carried out totally 16 projects from its establishment in 1994 until 2006 and in addition to 75 projects between 2006-2012. Totally 91 projects have been carried out with different universities.  Plenty of projects in Tofaş R&D are being carried out with the support of the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) and European 7th Framework, in cooperation with FIAT Research Center and foreign design centers, as well as academic members of the universities. Tofaş R&D was granted to first prize in the category of “University-Industry Alliance” at 1st R&D Centers Summit organized in 2012 by Ministry of Science, Industry and Technology (BTSB). Taking charge in the projects within the scope of EU 7th Framework Program, Tofaş R&D collaborates with nearly 80 international project partners.  Vehicle electrification and lowering weights are the basis of Tofaş R&D Center’s environment-focused research. Developing the first electric light commercial vehicle in Turkey, Tofaş closely follows electric vehicle technologies in the world. Activities performed within this framework are being carried out with the target of enabling the local production of electric vehicle system and its components by integrating developed innovative solutions/applications and these technologies.  Being conscious of fuel consumption, exhaust emission and environment impact of lowering the total weight of vehicles, Tofaş carries out intense activities in this field. Activities carried out in this field concentrate on high-strength light material technologies and hybrid solutions as well as light design solutions based on section and topology optimization.  The required emissions levels for diesel and gasoline vehicles in the relevant EU regulations are fulfilled. Emission values are measured and reported periodically by the Euro 6 level measurement capable Emission Laboratory of Tofas R&D. In addition, the average, CO2 value of passenger car fleet in Europe in terms of brand 175 gr/km in 2012 is targeted to be decreased 95 gr/km in 2020 regarding to relevant EU regulations.  Customer-focused technological research activities of Tofaş proceed in the light of sciences focused on people such as anthropometry, ergonomics, demography at the center of anthropocentric design philosophy in addition to smart vehicle concepts that provides service and support to the driver in terms of comfort and safety.  Following closely the rapid improvements in the field of “ICT-Information and Communication Technologies” in the past years and caring the added value for the customers, Tofaş constantly develops itself and improves its competency through its joint R&D projects both in national and international platforms. Communication between vehicles, communication between vehicles and infrastructure, emergency call systems, practices for improving the mobility especially in urban areas, human-machine interface and information-entertainment systems are among the activities being carried out for driver/passenger/pedestrian safety and comfort.  The development of competitive structure within the framework of advanced technology-low cost principle lies behind the competency-focused technological research. Within this scope, research activities are being carried out for developing innovative solutions required today for accessing world class products and production technologies.  In product technologies field, Tofaş R&D currently focused on innovative and efficient design methods and techniques, analyze and optimizations techniques including safety, virtual/physical verifying and testing methods, advanced/new material technologies and development of new vehicle system and its components.  The researches of Tofaş R&D in production technologies are based on robotic implementations intended for improving investment and operating costs, decision support systems on mathematics basis, computer-aided process simulations and automation, innovative process systems and equipment development as well as visual automation and robotic measurement integrated quality assurance systems, developing energy efficient production and production management systems and prototype manufacturing.  Being conscious that to become a leader in the automotive industry with a cost competitive structure, it is necessary to attach particular importance to the efficient and sustainable management of energy and resources in operation process together with expanded supply chain, Tofaş includes innovation-targeted projects in these fields in its technology road map.  
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 83 of 117 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Mr. Semih Ertürk: Senior Technical Specialist in Vehicle Integration Dept. in R&D. Responsible of Composite parts in Material and Perceived Quality Dept. He has been working in various national projects. Mr. Esat Yaşar Aslan: Advanced Research Projects Responsible in Vehicle Integration Department in R&D. Responsible of National and Europen Funded projects since 2016. He has been working in various national projects. Mr. Emre Akilli:  Innovation and Advanced Development Specialist in R&D. He is responsible of European Funded Projects since 2015. He has been working in various European and national projects (e.g. IMPROVE etc.)  Mr. Gokce OzyapiI: Exterior trim design specialist in R&D. He is responsible of Exterior trim part designs since 2012. He has been working in various vehicle development projects. (e.g. Doblo, Tipo, etc.) Mr. Can Gunay: Bench test specialist in R&D, he is responsible of body and closure part structural testing since 2014. Mr. Ali Ozan Bagriyanik: Vehicle Interior Simulations Specialist in R&D. Responsible for performing the structural and thermal analyses for interior parts. He was a part of new dashboard development team in FIAT TIPO Project. Mr. Halil İbrahim OKAR: Materials engineering laboratory responsible who is follows all test activites on materials and components. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content Passenger car and light commercial vehicle, manufacturing for 6 global brands: Fiat, Peugeot, Citroen, Opel, Vauxhall and RAM  A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project TOFAS has more than 30 Local and International ongoing projects which are funded by TUBİTAK (Local) and EU (under the programs: FP7, Eureka, Era-Net, H2020, etc.)  In Horizon 2020, Tofas has 4 ongoing projects (TrustVehicle, Hi-Fi Elements, Assured, PICK PLACE)  Tofas was the first Industry Company from Turkey being coordinator in FP7 Industrial Technologies Field. (http://www.robo-partner.eu)  Other projects from EU Funding: http://www.tofas.com.tr/en/RD/Pages/Cooperation/EUProjects.aspx  Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work TOFAŞ Material Test Laboratory includes the following equipment: Gloss Meter, Datacolor Color Measuring Spectrophotometer, Ultrasonic Wall Thickness Gauge, Melt Flow Index Tester, Rockwell Hardness Tester, Scratch Hardness Tester, Tensile Test Machine with Conditioned Cabinet, Determination of Vicat Softening Temperature and Heat Deflection Temperature, Humidity Chamber, Heating Furnace, Temperature and Climatic Test Chamber, Charpy, Izod, and Tensile Impact Tester, Ozone Test Chamber, Differential Scanning Calorimeter, Thermo Gravimetric Analyzer, Stereomicroscope, Surface Roughness Tester, Xenon Weather-Ometer, Enclosed Carbon Arc Weather-Ometer, Accelerated Weathering Ultra Violet Tester, Analytical Balance.   Participant no. 11 Name (short name)/ Country GBP Metal Group SL / GBP (Spain) Description of the legal entity  BELLVER PLA GROUP aware of the need of a new paradigm for the use of resources has devoted their main activities to the valorisation; recovery and recycling of scrap metal and as well or other recyclable materials. BELLVER PLA GROUP consists of 4 companies (Bellver Pla, Trans-Recicla, Desguaces Santa Ana and Fragmentadora y Metales) strategically located throughout the province of Valencia and Zaragoza, with over 50 years’ experience in the recycling sector. BELLVER PLA GROUP is an Authorised Treatment Centre of Vehicles and a member of the Spanish Federation of Recycling (FER). When the vehicle reaches the end of their useful life, they get decontaminated and treated at our facilities. Once decontaminated they are then transported and fragmented at the shredder plant that we have in Calatayud, Zaragoza. During the whole process, all relevant paperwork and certificates are issued. BELLVER PLA GROUP has a modern and advanced classification system that allows sorting metals according to their size, as well as the recovery of other material light fractions. In BELLVER PLA GROUP over 200,000 tons of materials, both ferrous and non-ferrous, are treated every year. 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 84 of 117 
Main tasks WP1: Definition of sustainable recycling processes specifications for plastic-based multi-materials. Specifications of  dismantling approach for selected plastics parts. WP4: support MultiCycle pilot plant demonstration providing pi FRP from ELV and validating the monitoring systems to identify parts worth recycling.  How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project Since the early days BELLVER PLA GROUP have been striving for 100% recycling. To make this ambition come true, the company continuously invest in innovative processes and research in even better recycling techniques. The company, currently, possess technologies capable of separating all kinds of metals through systems such as Foucault currents, X-rays, detectors or densiometric tables. CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Mr. Rafael Bellver (M), General Manager of Bellver. He has almost forty years of professional experience within the industry of valorisation; recovery and recycling of scrap metal, having deep knowledge regarding the operation of the whole industry, transformation processes, waste management and characteristics of all material inputs as finished products for sale. He has been tightly involved in the continuous growth of the company, first operating across the Valencian Community to currently the entire Iberian Peninsula. Mr. Ramiro Navascues (M), holds a Degree in Industrial Engineering and has an extensive experience in the recycling industry. Ramiro has been working for many years in operating specialised machines and equipment in the company’s facilities. He is currently the Technical Manager of Bellver and he manages all the processes at technical level and brings experience in optimization of each one of them. He is also responsible for the development of measures that allow the company to meet legal environmental requirements. Mr. Joan Bellver (M), holds a Degree in Business Administration, being part of the third generation of the family that created the company in 1960. In 2013, Joan was in charge of the process of launching one of the first machines in Europe which are capable of mechanically separating all electrical components of the fragmented cars. He is the company’s representative within the Spanish Federation of Recycling (FER). He is also in charge of the training programme to promote environmental awareness of the plant employees. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  End-of-life vehicles (ELV): BELLVER PLA GROUP is an Authorised Treatment Centre of Vehicles for end of life vehicles collection, management and disposal with respect for the environment. The vehicles are treated in the following four steps: dismantling (security) and depollution, spare parts collection, shredding, treatment of shredder residues.  Recovery and recycling: BELLVER PLA GROUP devotes their main activities to the valorisation; recovery and recycling of scrap materials. After the shredding of ELVs, the following material families can are recovered for further processing or energy recovery: lightweight materials (plastic polymers - 85%, textile fibers - 3%, fine - 10%, metals - 2.5%), mixture of materials with apparent density greater than 0.3 gr./cm3 (metals, rubber, thermoplastic polymers, glass), ferrous materials (small materials - less than 3mm, materials with a density greater than 0.6 gr/cm3, textile materials and rest of materials such plastic polymers, thermoplastic polymers, rubber and PVC wire. All this mixture is sent to detectors with inductive sensors for the selection and segregation. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  ECOBULK.  Circular Process for Eco-Designed Bulky Products and Internal Car Parts. H2020-IND-CE-2016-17/H2020-CIRC-2016TwoStage Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work Material inspection: radioactive material detection system for the radiological inspection of all materials in the process. Material transportation: conveyor belts, rollers, material feeding equipment. Material fragmentation: shredder mill (fragmentation chamber, hammer mill, vibratory tray) to break down materials into smaller dimensions. Material separation: zigzag-shaped duct with a hopper for the separation of light non-metallic materials, magnetic drum for the magnetic separation of the ferrous metals from the rest of the fragmented material. 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 85 of 117 
    Participant no. 12 Name (short name)/ Country Amcor Group GmbH / AMCOR (Switzerland) Description of the legal entity  Amcor is a global packaging company with 200 sites in more than 40 countries. The business develops and produces flexible and rigid plastic packaging, with around 95% of sales made to food, beverage, healthcare, and tobacco packaging end markets. Amcor converts raw materials – including polymers, aluminium foil and fibre – into packaging products. At Amcor, we believe in responsible packaging that is better for people, products, and the world around us. Safety and sustainability guide how we do business. Our ongoing efforts to reduce the weight and material used in our packaging, improve efficiency of our production processes, and support recycling initiatives and infrastructure align with those values and our business goals. Amcor is a core partner in the Ellen MacArthur Foundation’s (EMF) New Plastics Economy initiative, a three-year effort to design a plastics value chain based on circular-economy principles, where plastics are intended to be used over and over. Amcor people are applying their packaging knowledge to increase the volume of packaging that can be recycled and reused, better protecting people and the environment. During 2016/17, Amcor began working on pioneering projects to develop a global definition for recycle-ready flexible packaging; evaluate chemical recycling; and map material flows and develop strategies to prevent litter and improve recycling in Asia. Amcor helped to shape and is judging entrants to the EMF’s USD 2 million innovation challenge, which was announced in May 2017. The company is part of the Ocean Conservancy’s Trash Free Seas Alliance to eliminate ocean trash, in conjunction with partners such as Nestlé Waters, Procter & Gamble, the World Wildlife Fund, and Coca-Cola. We encourage and support colleagues who volunteer during the International Coastal Cleanup each September. Through this Alliance, we are driving improved waste management practices worldwide, particularly in Southeast Asia. Amcor participates in Materials Recovery for the Future, the Reflex Consortium, and REDCycle to improve recycling opportunities for flexible film packaging. We are active members in industry bodies, including Aluminium Stewardship Initiative, the European Organization for Packaging and the Environment, Flexible Packaging Association, SAVE FOOD Initiative, and the Sustainable Packaging Coalition. In the 16th year of an ongoing partnership with the Earthwatch Institute, 15 Amcor people participated in a research expedition to Bali, Indonesia. There they observed, collected, and documented marine debris to help researchers identify its source, and to develop approaches to prevent waste from reaching beaches and oceans. The colleagues are also identifying solutions to help improve recyclability efforts. At regional levels, Amcor is a core member of two initiatives aimed at driving development of recycling options for flexible packaging: CEFLEX in Europe (also building on the U.K.-focused REFLEX project) and Materials Recovery for the Future (MRFF) in the United States. Also, in the United States, Amcor continues its involvement with the Recycling Partnership, an industry-funded public/ private program to improve residential recycling rates. In 2016/17, funds were used to implement curbside cart programs in St. Paul, Minnesota; 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 86 of 117 
Outagamie County, Wisconsin; and Athens, Ohio. Main tasks Amcor Flexibles EMEA will lead WP5: Demonstration of packaging material production using recycled plastics and identification of their usage for food or non-food packaging applications. Production of single and multi-layered structures by means of extrusion plant, thin film barrier coating and adhesive lamination technology unit will be performed from the recycled polymers. The produced packaging materials will be characterised in terms of their functional properties and compared to those of the requirements for various packaging applications. Extrusion, co-extrusion of recycled polymers, lamination of metallized / SiOx recycled PET to recycled extruded PE or PP layers by means of adhesive lamination unit, process optimization will be the main tasks. Other tasks are water vapor and gas transmission rate measurements, adhesion strength measurements, layer thickness characterisation, and characterization of packaging materials towards food compliance and assessment reports in comparison to the packaging materials produced by using virgin plastics.  Amcor Flexibles EMEA will also have a role in WP2 and 4 by proposing and providing difficult to recycle (with current mechanical recycling technology) flexible packaging samples. Amcor and the Fraunhofer IVV have already selected the following not recycling-ready structures to be evaluated:  OPET/Alu/PE, OPET/OPA/PE, OPET/Alu/PP, PETSiOx/PE, PET/metPET/PE, PET/PE-EVOH-PE, OPA/PE, Coex PA-Tie-PE and Paper/Alu/PE. How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project Amcor is the first global packaging company pledging to develop all its packaging to be recyclable or reusable by 2025, directly addressing a major environmental issue with its capability, scale and reach. At the same time, we have committed to significantly increasing our use of recycled materials and driving consistently more recycling of packaging around the world (https://www.amcor.com/blogs/amcor%E2%80%99s-2025-pledge-a-pivotal-moment-for-sustaina). Amcor has experience is using post-consumer recycled polymers and developed the industry’s first liquid laundry detergent bottle made of 100% post-consumer recycled (PCR) polyethylene terephthalate (PET) resin, the Amcor Method Laundry Detergent Bottle won Diamond awards in the Technological Advancement, Responsible Packaging and Enhanced User Experience categories. Developed by our Rigid Plastics group, this sleek, 53-ounce transparent custom container successfully answered the compatibility and colour stability challenges of using PET in the liquid laundry detergent market.    Amcor has also an extensive experience in extrusion of flexible polymer films and in developing corresponding multilayer structures for flexible packaging applications with various functionalities, e.g. gas/water vapor barrier, optical properties, and enhanced adhesion. Amcor is involved in several multi-national projects like REFLEX, MRFF, CEFLEX, The project Barrier (New Plastic Economy from the Ellen Mac Arthur Foundation). Amcor has the required expertise for validation of the recycled polymers for packaging applications; for food and non-food products. CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Dr. Isabelle JENNY (female) – Sustainability Manager at Amcor Flexibles Europe Middle East and Africa, holds a Ph.D. in Chemistry with a focus on polymer and extrusion from University Haute Alsace of Mulhouse. She has been with Amcor since 2003 as a packaging development engineer and then as sustainability manager. She is involved in the CEFLEX project were the objective is to at drive development of recycling options for flexible packaging in Europe (also building on the U.K.-focused REFLEX project). Dr. Gerald Rebitzer (male) – As Director Sustainability, Gerald Rebitzer is head of Sustainability at Amcor Flexibles. This role encompasses both environmental management and social responsibility from an operations perspective as well as working with customers and suppliers to enhance the performance of the packaging products Amcor provides to the food, home-, medical- and personal care, and pharmaceutical industries. He holds a Ph.D. in Life Cycle Management from the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne and a Masters in Environmental Engineering from the Technical University Berlin. He is editor for The International Journal of LCA and was member of the Executive Committee of the Sustainable Packaging Coalition for six years. Among other leadership roles in industry groups, Gerald is currently chairman of the steering committee of the CEFLEX project (Circular Economy for Flexible Packaging) and leads a standardization effort for recycling of flexible packaging within the New Plastics Economy Initiative of the Ellen MacArthur Foundation.  Dr. Tony Malfait (male) – Research & Analytical Director at Amcor Flexibles Europe Middle East and Africa, holds a 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 87 of 117 
Ph.D in Chemistry. Tony works 35 years in the areas of polymer processing and material characterization. In Amcor, he leads the Analytical and Pilot Centre of Excellences (COEs) combined with the central Product Safety team. The COEs are available for the R&D teams in the various market areas and are equipped with state-of-the-art tools for the development of flexible packaging. Roy Christopherson (male) - Product Development Director at Amcor Flexibles Europe Middle East and Africa, and a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. He has worked for Amcor since 2003, and within the flexible packaging industry for 32 years. He has 17 granted patent families to his name, with further under prosecution. Today he is responsible for several of the high performance markets outside of Food, such as home and personal care, along with responsibility for developments in vacuum coating and lacquer formulation for the next generation of recycling ready flexible packaging products.  Anna Perez (female) – Product Development Manager for Extruded Films development at Amcor Flexibles Europe Middle East and Africa, holds a Master Degree in Polymers, Petrochemicals and Plastic Engineering together with an Industrial Engineering background. She has been in Amcor since 2003 as a packaging development engineer for then becoming a Product Development Manager. Nowadays, she is leading the team of packaging engineers which are fully focused on the development of the extruded sealant films for a variety of flexible packaging applications. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  Amcor is the first global packaging company pledging to develop all its packaging to be recyclable or reusable by 2025 (https://www.amcor.com/blogs/amcor%E2%80%99s-2025-pledge-a-pivotal-moment-for-sustaina).  7 sustainability takeaways from packaging sorting and recycling plant visits: https://www.amcoir.com/blogs/7-sustainability-takeaways-from-plant-visits   Focusing on Flexibles – An initiative aims to prevent multi-layer packaging from becoming waste: https://ceflex.eu/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/I-PDF-Amcor-KUint_2017_08-Focusing-on-Flexibles-_EN.pdf   Recognition from ACC for PCR monofilm pouch: https://www.americanchemistry.com/Media/PressReleasesTranscripts/RelatedPDF/ACC-Names-Recipients-of-Innovation-in-Plastics-Recycling-Awards.pdf  A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  The REFLEX (Recycling of Flexible Packaging) Project under http://www.reflexproject.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/REFLEX-Summary-report.-Final-report.pdf   The CEFLEX (Circular Economy for Flexible Packaging) Project under https://ceflex.eu/   The Barrier (New plastics economy from the Ellen Mac Arthur Foundation) Project under  https://newplasticseconomy.org/   The MRFF (Material Recovery for the Future) project under https://www.materialsrecoveryforthefuture.com/  Virtuous Circle project under http://thevirtuouscircle.co.za/ and http://thevirtuouscircle.co.za/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/Virtuous-Circle-report.pdf  Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work In MultiCycle, there will be Pilot lines and Analytical Centre of Excellence, which will be used for pre-production runs to evaluate processing parameters and functional properties of recycled polymers for packaging applications. Amcor Centre of Excellence provides facilities for carrying out processing trials on a scale from a minimum of 1 kg to 1 tonne. These are then optimized for industrial-scale production plants. These plants will allow:   trials to be conducted using small amounts of materials    small-batch production runs   recycled materials or recycled material combinations to be tested for their processing and application properties   optimization of the processing of the recycled materials   transfer of the recorded process parameters to production plants 1) Extrusion Centre of Excellence Extrusion is the most important process for manufacturing of plastic films. A mono layer (blown and cast) extrusion pilot line, a 3-layer cast extrusion film pilot line, a 5-layer cast and 5-layer extrusion-coating/lamination pilot lines and a 7-layer blown film pilot line are available, which can be used to produce a wide range of multi and single-layered materials made from recycled polymers through CreaSolv technology. Figure 1a below shows the picture of the mono-layer (blown and cast) extrusion pilot lines 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 88 of 117 
 Figure 1a: Mono-layer (blown and cast) film extrusion pilot lines The mono-layer cast film extrusion pilot line (Brabender) contains of 3 different screws design, 3 heating zones, 5 pressure sensors and 1 melt pump. The width of the film can be adjusted up the 200 mm and the mass throughput from 0.2 to 8 kg/h. Cast extrusion and extrusion-lamination or extrusion-coating are possible. The mono-layer cast / blown film extrusion pilot line (Göttfert) also enable to run a die deposit evaluation, a film quality assessment in term of number of number of gels, black spots and an elongational viscosity curve’s (Rheothens). The width of the film can be adjusted up the 200 mm. Figure 1b below shows the picture of 3 and 5-layers cast film extrusion pilot line  Figure 1b: 3 and 5-layers cast film extrusion pilot line The 3 layers cast film extrusion pilot line (Collin) contains 3 extruders, until 5 layers combining system (ABC and ABCBA) and a 350 mm die width for co-extrusion. The film thickness can be varied from 10 μm to 150 microns. The 5 layers cast film extrusion pilot line contains 3 extruders, a 5 layer Cloeren combining system (ABCBA & combinations), 1 melt-pump, an 800 mm die width and a corona treatment. The film thickness can be varied from 10 to 350 microns and the max film width at 550 mm. Cast coextrusion film technology enable the encapsulation of recycled polymers (PE or PP) between virgin polymers. Figure 1c: 7-layers blown film extrusion pilot line  The 7 layers blown film pilot line contains 7 extruders, a 150 mm 7-layers Pro-PAK conical die, until 7 layers combining system (ABCDEFG) and a corona treatment. The film thickness can be varied from 30 to 220 microns and the max film width at 550 mm. This technology enables the production of high barrier coextruded film where the recycled polymers (PE or PP) is encapsulated between virgin polymers. Figure 1d below shows the picture of the 5-layers extrusion-coating pilot line 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 89 of 117 
 Figure 1d: 5-layers extrusion-coating / lamination pilot line The 5-layers extrusion-coating/lamination pilot line contains 3 extruders allowing the application of 5 layers in combination with corona treatment and in-line primering. 2) Thin Film Deposition Centre of Excellence Figure 2 below shows the picture of the High Barrier Thin Film Deposition pilot line.  Figure 2: High Barrier Thin Film Deposition Pilot Line The possible coating processes are SiOx (Ceramis process), AlOx, Al and potential further materials. The process uses a vacuum chamber, unwinding and rewinding units. The process starts with a plasma pre-treatment stage where the surface of the substrate film is cleaned and prepared for the coating process. The process uses 2 high voltage electron beam guns to evaporate the silicon oxide materials and build up a cloud above. The film substrate runs over a chilled reel, at ~ -15°C and through the temperature difference the SiOx condensate on the surface of the film. The film thickness can be varied from 6 to 175 microns and the film width from 240 to 715 mm. The applied coating thickness of the SiOx or other materials coating is in nanometre scale. 3) Adhesive Lamination Centre of Excellence Figure 3 below shows the picture of the adhesive lamination pilot line  Figure 3: Adhesive lamination Pilot Line The adhesive lamination pilot line contains: - solvent-based, water-based and solvent-free lamination technologies either by gravure or smooth roll application - Extrusion-lamination (until 5 layers) technology - Radiation curing (UV or EB) lamination technology The maximum lamination width is 600 mm and the maximum speed of the line is at 150 m/min. This pilot line will be used to laminate recycled polymers film combinations type recycled PET/ recycled PE, … 4) Packaging lines competence Centre 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 90 of 117 
Figure 4 below shows pictures of the packaging pilot lines  Figure 4: Packaging Pilot Lines  The packaging pilot lines competence centre contains 7 lines including HFFS, VFFS + Deep Drawing, Tray sealer and Vacuum chamber from Multivac. The packaging formats that can be produced are easy pack, pillow pouch, lidding for thermoformed web and lidding for pre-formed tray. Full packaging format made from recycled polymers can be produced and tested as part of the project. 5) Analytical Centre of Excellence The Analytical Centre of Excellence contains: - Product Safety testing (extraction and migration) with chromatography (LC-MS/MS, GC-MS) - Surface Analysis (SEM and LSM) - Spectroscopy (FTIR and micro-Raman) - Thermal Analysis (DSC) - Rheological (DMA, MFI, Rheotens, Cone and Plate Rheometer) - Optical (Polarizing optical microscope, Stereo Microscopy)  - Barrier (OTR, WVTR and CO2 transmission rate) - Mechanical (Puncture resistance, Stiffness, Tear, Leak test, OD, Haze, Transparency, …)   Participant no. 13 Name (short name)/ Country LÖMI GmbH / LOEMI (Germany) Description of the legal entity  The engineer-operated manufacturer LOEMI was established in 1991. Since then, it has been renowned for its high-quality and innovative process engineering systems, mainly for handling solvents. LOEMI systems are operated world-wide with exceptional customer satisfaction. Our customers' trust is demonstrated by their high brand loyalty. LOEMI sets value on manufacturing the highest quality systems in the market. Experienced engineers and technicians, permanent further development of our systems by means of research projects, continuous professional training of our employees, as well as usage of high-quality components ensure our winning margin in quality. All our systems are client-specific – they are developed and manufactured at LOEMI headquarters in Germany. For years, LOEMI has shared various research projects with renowned project partners such as Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft. At Technische Universität (TU) Braunschweig, LÖMI's own test plant is available. Our engineers transfer the new technologies gained in these research projects into productive and economical systems in a very short period of time. LOEMI has twenty-six employees and an annual turnover of €4 million. LOEMI systems are mainly used for the Recovery of Waste Organic Solvents, for Solvent Extraction in the Powder Injection Moulding industries as well as for multiple Solvent based processes, such as de-oiling, de-waxing, de-greasing, etc. Since 2018 LOEMI is a member of the austrian GAW Group. Main tasks LOEMI will lead WP4: To engineer, install and commission a CreaSolv® pilot plant at LOEMI and to demonstrate the optimal operation and yield of the pilot for recycling both composites and multilayer packaging in non-recycled plastic mixed streams. In WP2, LOEMI with support from Fraunhofer will design a plant concept including a suitable monitoring system for plastic waste composition tracking and monitoring systems to control the MultiCycle pilot plant together with IRIS. LOEMI will be supported during the tasks (WP2 and 4) by the linked third party GAW technologies GmbH in the engineering and installation of the pilot plant. 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 91 of 117 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project LOEMI has 27 years of experience in solvent based processes. Starting with systems for the recovery of organic solvents in 1991, LOEMI has along the years also developed process systems for the de-oiling of metal swarfs, for the de-binding of metal (MIM) and ceramic (CIM) injected parts (Powder Injection Moulding – PIM) and the latter for the dissolution and drying of polymers. LOEMI has broad experience in the design of explosion-proof process equipment (ATEX) for use in hazardous locations (according to European Directive 2014/34/EU). LOEMI is also an accredited company according to the EU Water Framework Directive.  LOEMI’s division ‘Recycling polymers’ started in 2010 as partner of Fraunhofer IVV in the R&D project “Poly-Ressource” and where LOEMI dealt with Thermal Separation of Solvents from Polymers (drying of polymers and recycling of used solvents). Following a business model already in place at LOEMI, the MultiCycle pilot recycling will be made available in its site for further customer trials. CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work José Manuel Dias Fonseca (male) – holds a Diploma in Electrical Engineering from University of Applied Sciences, Darmstadt. He founded LOEMI in 1991 and is Managing Partner of LOEMI. He will take responsibility for the technical design and implementation within the project. Christian Ferreira Marques (male) – holds a Diploma in Electrical Engineering from University of Applied Sciences, Darmstadt. He joined LOEMI in 2005 and is Managing Partner of LOEMI. He will be responsible for the project management and reporting. Marcel Backfisch (male) – holds a M.Sc. degree in Business Management and Engineering from Technische Universität Kaiserslautern (TUK). He joined LOEMI in 2018 and he will be responsible for project management, reporting and the technical design and implementation of the project List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content Engineering and maintenance services especially related with solvent-based processes. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  Poly-Ressource project (German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF)): After the CreaSolv®  Process demonstrated its suitability for the recycling of various plastics in earlier projects, in September 2010 the “Poly-Resource” Project was started in line with the “SME-innovative” Program of the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF). This joint research project was aimed at the collection and processing of contaminated waste plastics from shredder residues from the processing of waste electro(nic) equipment (WEEE) and end-of-live cars (ELV) in Europe and the production of recycled plastics conforming to the regulations.  FORCYCLE project (Bavarian Federal State Ministry): Recycling of metal-polymer composites. Recycling ABS, PC/ABS, PA and PBT from automotive post-industrial waste composites (metal plated parts, Carbon fibre reinforced composites, GF reinforced PBT) Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work All design, building and test equipment needed to perform the work assigned in the project.   Participant no. 14 Name (short name)/ Country Vertech Group (Vertech)/France Description of the legal entity  VERTECH GROUP is a French research-intensive SME with business focus on High-Tech Environmental Consultancy. In particular sustainability assessments of innovative and green value chains. VERTECH aims to create value by supporting and advising private and public organizations in various sectors (e.g. high-performance materials, recycling, energy and waste treatment), and regions to get from research to market. VERTECH is also present in Spain and has expansion plans to other markets besides Europe (e.g. South America). Main tasks WP7 leader: - Environmental Life cycle assessment. - Social LCA. 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 92 of 117 
- Life Cycle Costing and Economic Feasibility Assessment. - Integral Assessment of recovery processes. - Techno-economic-environmental analysis of the proposed technologies. - Provide recommendations for future upscaling and commercialization purposes. How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project Vertech Group is specialized in determining the environmental and social/socio-economic impacts of developing and implementing high-performance, green-materials. The company has vast experience in determining the sustainability of thermoplastic and thermosetting innovative plastics and composites. Vertech has also determined the Capex and Opex costs of implementing the Creasolv® technology for the recovery of thermoplastic plastics fractions from WEEE and the additives they contain.   CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Dr. Paola Castrillo - R&D Manager (Female). Paola Castrillo has a BSc. in industrial engineering, a MSc in materials engineering and a Science and Materials Engineering PhD from Carlos III University of Madrid. From 2004 to the present she has been active in the preparation, management and coordination of several European R& D projects in the areas of sustainability, circular economy, high-grade materials, energy and resources efficiency. She is the Technical Coordinator of the European projects CLOSEWEEE and FFW. Her research interests include sustainability and circularity assessments of green plastics and composites. Currently working as R&D Manager for Vertech Group. Dr. Castrillo is member of the Forum for Sustainability through Life Cycle Innovation, the Indian LCA Alliance and she contributes with the Iberoamerican Life Cycle Network.  Camilla Tomasetta – Project Engineer (female). Camilla Tomasetta obtained a PhD in Economics and Management of Technology (DREAMT) from the University of Pavia. During her PhD project on Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment, she collaborated with the LCA Working Group from the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia and with the CIRAIG research Centre. She also holds a joint master’s degree in environmental sciences with focus on Sustainable Development released by Ca’ Foscari University and Utrecht University. During and after her studies, she worked on the Life Cycle Assessment and waste field with research centres and private companies, such as Deltares and EcoInnovazione.  Antonio Barona – General Manager (male). Antonio Barona is the responsible of the overall R&D, Innovation & Business strategy of the company. He holds a Bs in Civil Engineering, M.Sc. on Materials and Innovation, M.Sc. in Project Management. Mr. Barona has more than 10 years of experience in the coordination of international research. He is member of several international academic, business and research platforms dealing with Environmental and Energy Technologies for a Sustainable Future. In terms of international research cooperation, he has not only actively participated in several project proposals but has led the project Coordination of the European projects: EE-QUARRY & S4EeB. Erasmo Cadena – Technical Manager (male) Erasmo Cadena has a PhD in Environmental Science from Universitat Autónoma de Barcelona (UAB). He holds a Msc in Enviromental Engineering.  Postdoctoral Researcher at University of Cambridge-UK and Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC), BarcelonaTech. He has experience in international research initiatives and his research interests include technical, environmental and economic analysis of new processes and high-performance products, life cycle assessment and life cycle costs analysis. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  Polymer Composites Based on a mixture of Preformed Nanosilica-Filled Poly (methylmethacrylate) Particles and a Diepoxy/Diamine Thermoset System. Journal of applied polymer science, 111, 2062-2070 (2009), ISSN: 0021-8995. P.D.Castrillo, D.Olmos, J.Gonzalez-Benito.  Colón, J., Cadena, E., Belen Colazo, A.B., Quiros, R., Sanchez, A., Font, X., Artola, A. (2015).: Environmental assessment of different waste management scenarios in Catalonia. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 95, 143–155.  P.D.Castrillo, D.Olmos, H-J Sue, J.González-Benito. Mechanical characterization and fractographic study of epoxy–kaolin polymer nanocomposites  Composite Structures, Vol 133. Pág.: 70-76 (2015). DOI: 10.1016/j.compstruct.2015.07.040 0263-8223/ 2015. Publication date: 20/07/2015 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 93 of 117 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  CLOSEWEEE-H2020: Integrated solutions for pre-processing electronic equipment, closing the loop of post-consumer high-grade plastics, and advanced recovery of critical raw materials including antimony and graphite.  ECOXY-H2020: Bio-based recyclable, reshapable and repairable (3R) fibre-reinforced EpOXY composites for automotive and construction sectors. NANOPACK-H2020: Pilot line production of functional polymer nanocomposites from natural halloysite nanotubes: demonstrating controlled release of active antimicrobials in food packaging applications. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work Software SimaPro® 8 (PRé Consultants) and Ecoinvent v.3 databases (Swiss Center for Life-Cycle Inventories, 2010). Analytical tools in accordance with ISO 14040 & 14044 standards (ISO 14042, 2000).   Participant no. 15 Name (short name)/ Country AXIA Innovation UG (AXIA)/ Germany  Description of the legal entity  Axia Innovation is a new entrance in the European consultancy reality offering integrated consulting services and is specialized in accompanying and supporting companies in all phases of business development and product’s commercialization. Located in Germany, we pride ourselves in engineering excellence, creating business opportunities for entrepreneurs, independent enterprises and academic institutions. Our company strives to offer a comprehensive approach, responding to customer needs in the most effective way, from strategic thinking to project implementation. Axia Innovation is built from the synergy between four main service lines: Project Management, Innovation Management, Knowledge Transfer, and Communication & Design. AXIA offers services and technology transfer targeting business development, coordination and implementation. This is achieved by offering full-service concept to develop projects and networks that build a sustainable European community. AXIA provides insightful, timely and focused research on Engineering solutions and services. Liaising with stakeholders, companies and public institutions in the implementation of technological innovations, AXIA is enabling them to strengthen their competitive position over the long-term. This is achieved in collaboration with well-established European Universities and Research Institutes as well as with a large network of industrial partners. AXIA provides its clients the best support tools for the success of their business initiatives and assists them in the preparation and management of strategic plans: business projects, research projects and technology transfer, under National and International support frameworks.  In particular, AXIA offers to its client the following services in the field of marketing:  Strategic Marketing Plan Creation. This includes all programs, product marketing, and integrated communications efforts to help a company or a consortium grow its business, improve revenue generation, and promote a more rapid sales cycle.  Messaging Matrixes. By laying out and plotting all products of the company and corporate positioning to make sure that our client is in the best possible spot for success.  Brand Creation & Definition. In close collaboration with our customers we help defining and creating a brand that is compelling and appeals to out customers target audiences.  Strategic Support and Counsel. Setting up growth plans, including new market and vertical identification, channel/OEM opportunity identification, key titles and prospect targets, presence in executive meetings when needed. AXIA’s team consists of PhD level scientists and engineers with high experience on working and collaborating with companies, research institutes \ and universities across Europe to solve technical impasses and create innovations that establish a competitive advantage for its clients. Main tasks AXIA will lead WP9, but its experience in concept-based optimization models, synthesis models will also support their participation in WP7 where AXIA will develop a decision support tool to screen and evaluate targeting optimal economic, environmental and energy performance of plastic recycling processes, identifying the best technological opportunities to adopt circular business model in multi-material plastic recycling. AXIA has commercial software tools available (aspen, 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 94 of 117 
gams) and offers computational tools and technology that have already been applied in research projects for evaluation, screening and integration of feedstock to plastics production/ manufacture value chains. In WP9, AXIA will assist to identify the exploitable results of the project as well as the dissemination and exploitation related activities. This will include the continuous update of PEDR and patent search as well as determination in collaboration with the IPR handling responsible (e.g. patents, industrial secrets, trademarks). They will be in continuous contact with the project coordinator as well as with other key Stakeholders, standardization bodies for test certificates in order to identify competitive emerging technologies that may possible hinder the exploitation of the project. Market trends and competition will be continuously monitored during the project. They will also overview of EU Research Policy, technology transfer/offer of results to stakeholder in both direction (technology push – offer the results to the stakeholder – and/or demand). They will have the role of Innovation & Exploitation manager. How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project AXIA has recently expanded its activities towards the computational support of developments. The team includes personnel with strong experience in process synthesis and optimization. This great step will allow the acceleration of technological practices and will give the opportunity to reduce high cost experimental processes stating environmental friendly and economically feasible techniques. Joining new emerging areas, Creative undertake work related to the development of screening tools towards the selection of optimal solutions among numerous technological possibilities towards the emerging markets of recycling materials and bio-based chemicals. CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Dr. Ioanna Deligkiozi (Female) is a Chemical Engineer that graduated from the National Technical University of Athens (NTUA), in 2007. In 2009 she gained her M.Sc. degree in the field of Science and Technology of Materials. During her postgraduate degree she has been involved in the field of advanced composite materials. Specifically, she worked in the production of hard Ni Composite Coatings, using nanosized TiO2-ZrO2 powders, with emphasis in pulls electrolysis. In 2012 she defended her Ph.D. thesis «Synthesis and characterization of new [2] rotaxanes of α-cyclodextrine with diazobenzene containing molecular dumbbells acting as Molecular Switches» in the field of supramolecular chemistry. The last five year she has worked as a senior researcher at the “Centre for Research and Technology Hellas” (CE.R.T.H./ I.RE.TE.TH). Additionally, she has been an R&D manager at the “Center for Technology Research and Innovation” (CETRI) in the division of Nanotechnology & Adv. Materials. Furthermore, she has been involved in more than 5 European research projects as senior researcher and technical manager in 8 FP7 and H2020 projects under the schemes of R4S, R4A, FOF, NMBP, PILOTS and EEB. She is an active member of the American Society of Heating, refrigerating and air conditioning (ASHRAE) SINCE 2010. She has published more than 50 scientific and technical papers in Journals and Conference. Her main scientific interests include a range of issues, many of which are correlated with the nanosized engineered materials. Finally, she is a member of the nanosafety cluster and involved in various activities related to the EC cluster initiatives such as: EEB, EFRA and Nanofutures. Dr. Alexandros Zoikis – Karathanasis (Male) has MSc degree in Materials' Science and Technology from NTUA and Ph.D. in the field of electrodeposition and construction of nanostructured materials. He defended this thesis with title: “Electrolytic codeposition of Ni-P matrix with SiC and WC particles utilizing pulse current regime: structural and mechanical characterization”. Dr. Alexandros Zoikis – Karathanasis has been involved for more than 10 years in Science, Research & Development: from technical development to coordination, project & scientific management; participating in various EC funded as well as national projects. His research interests are in the field of nanotechnology, development of nanostructured materials and coating, utilization of materials for environmental purposes etc. He had coordinated 8 FP7 & Horizon2020 projects with a total budget of more than 30.000.000 €. Dr. Alexandros Zoikis – Karathanasis has published more than 30 scientific and technical papers in Journals and Conference. Dr. Marinella Tsakalova (Female) is Chemical Engineer. She received her Diploma in Chemical Engineering from NTUA, her MPhil from University of Surrey and her PhD from NTUA in Chemical Process Engineering. Her expertise is related to valorization of biomass, synthesis and optimization of biorenewable value chains towards the production of valuable chemicals and fuels. She has been involved in R&D EU and national projects working closely with international industrial partners and institutes. Her research interests include: (a) Renewable Energy Sources, (b) Process Design and Optimization, (c) Development of decision support platform tools (d) Utilization of Biomass and Waste, (e) Innovation thinking with a strong emphasis on Circular economy (f) entrepreneurship and technology transfer. Dr. Tsakalova has strong expertise in developing models and platforms for biomass-based manufacturing systems. She has been involved with the production of a highthrouput platfrom related to emerging technologies of biorefineries screening over 80 processes. Capitilizing on extensive work on biorenewables, methodologies, knowledge and tools could be transferred to the new Multicycle project expanding and addressing similarly the complex and large problem of plastic circular valorization. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 95 of 117 
achievements relevant to the call content  Mountraki, A., Tsakalova, M., Panteli, A., Papoutsi, A.I., Kokossis, A.C., ''Integrated Waste Management in Multiproduct Biorefineries: Systems Optimization and Analysis of a Real-Life Industrial Plant '', Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research, vol.55, Issue 12, p.3478-3492, 2016  A.C. Kokossis, M. Tsakalova, K. Pyrgakis, Design of Integrated Biorefineries, Computers & Chemical Engineering, Volume 81, 4 October 2015, Pages 40–56  Tsakalova, M.; Lin TaChen; Yang AiDong; Kokossis, A. C., A decision support environment for the high-throughput model-based screening and integration of biomass processing paths, Industrial Crops and Products, Volume 75, Part B, 30 November 2015, Pages 103–113  Tsakalova, M., Lin, T.-C., Yang, A., Kokossis, A.C., ''A decision support environment for the high-throughput model-based screening and integration of biomass processing paths '', Industrial Crops and Products, vol.75, p.103-113, 2015  Tsakalova, M., Yang, A., Kokossis, A.C., ''A Systems Approach for the Holistic Screening of Second Generation Biorefinery Paths for Energy and Bio-based Products '', Computer Aided Chemical Engineering, vol.33, 2014, p.205-210  Magioglou, V., Tsakalova, M., Kokossis, A., ''Natural language modelling in process synthesis and optimization '', Computer Aided Chemical Engineering, vol.34, 2014, p.711-716  Antonis Kokossis, Aidong Yang, Marinella Tsakalova, Ta-Chen Lin, Integrated Biorefineries: Design, Analysis, and Optimization, Chapter 2: Systematic screening of multiple processing paths in biorefineries: the ABC (Accessing Biomass to Chemicals) project and its potential to build process synthesis capabilities,Published by Taylor and Francis (2012)  Tsakalova, M., Lin, T.-C., Yang, A., Kokossis, A.C., ''Implementation and initial evaluation of a decision support platform for selecting production routes of biomass-derived chemicals '', Computer Aided Chemical Engineering, vol.29, 2011, p.1470-1474 A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  MASTRO -Intelligent bulk MAterials for Smart TRanspOrt industries - (H2020-NMBP-04-2017) - (2017/12/01- 2021/05/31) – (6,002,887.50€). http://www.mastro-h2020.eu/    OACTIVE - Advanced personalised, multi-scale computer models preventing OsteoArthritis - (H2020-SC1-PM-17-2017) – (2017/11/01 – 2020/10/31) – (4,984,033.75€). http://oactive.eu/ x Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work AXIA’s offices are located in the industrial centre of Bavaria, Munich.   Participant no. 16 Name (short name)/ Country Inlecom Innovation (ILS)/ Greece Description of the legal entity  Inlecom is a European SME with offices and consultants in Brussels, London, Athens, Ireland, Spain, and Italy. Originally established in 1996, with the seminal charter of promoting innovative Information Learning and Communication Solutions, Inlecom has since expanded upon these foundational competencies over the last 20 years. INLECOM are an established leader in Digital Ecosystem Platforms & Technologies.  INLECOM Innovation is the research arm of INLECOM Group, a GR based non-profit foundation. With an international team of experts in the areas of Mobility, Business Consulting, Software Engineering Solutions and Business Analytics, INLECOM provides strategic knowledge-centric solutions to help private and public organisations use their unique capabilities to create or strengthen their competitive advantage. Core competencies include:   In Management Consulting: Business Processes Improvement and Transformation, Organisation Excellence for Supply Chain, Risks Management, Governance, Compliance, New Business Models in Supply Chain, Innovation Management & Patent Filings.   In Analytics and Integration: Business Analysis, Business Modelling, Key Performance Indicators and Analytics, B2B and B2G integration, Information Exchanges, Message Exchanges Standards, Port Community Systems, Single Windows   In Systems and Information Architectures: Public/Private/Hybrid Cloud Solution Architectures for Big Data and 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 96 of 117 
Internet of Things, Including innovative business intelligence, big data analytics, data mining.  Inlecom Innovation is dedicated to research and innovation in the mobility, transport, cloud, and big data sectors covering policy, strategy, operational processes, and ICT. Inlecom has established a unique holistic view of the ICT domain through an extensive research programme including a library of process models, domain entities, ontologies and client facing solutions. Currently INLECOM is the coordinator of five high profile H2020 projects, ICONET, CHARIOT, Track & Know, EUTRAVEL and SELIS, collectively aligned with the company’s strategy. Main tasks ILS assume the role of IP/Patent Manager with responsibility for guiding successful patent filings for the project partners. They will also oversee data management in WP10.  They will have the role of Data & IPR manager. How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project ILS is bringing specialist experience of 500 successful patent filings to the consortium. CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Dr Patrick O’Sullivan (Male) held numerous Executive and VP facing roles spanning 23 consecutive years at IBM, where he led countless projects and teams across Ireland, UK, USA, China, Japan, Israel, France, Korea, Germany and India. Throughout his 28-year career Pat has demonstrated a passion for results driven innovation that leads to new commercial products, new technologies and new high value software engineering jobs in Europe. It is in the context of this passion that he recently joined Inlecom. Prior to joining Inlecom, Pat was the CTO & Chief Scientist at IBM Ireland’s Innovation Project Office, where he was overseeing new innovation projects across IBM Ireland’s 4,000 staff. He was also recognised as an IBM STSM in 2008-2017, which was an IBM world-wide divisional banding awarded to only 12 of IBM Ireland’s senior technical leaders/managers, and which recognizes significant scientific and leadership contributions well beyond those expected of IBM’s senior managers, scientists and leaders. Throughout his career Pat has demonstrated his passion for Innovation, evidenced by over 500+ USPTO filed patents, several of which are filed in multiple countries. He also has numerous published papers, with two papers from his work winning the Smith Testimonial Prize and the Mullins Medal respectively at Engineers Ireland. Both of Pat’s MSc and PhD research projects were industry funded and won industry prizes in 1997 and 2001 respectively, and several of his patents have also won industry awards for scientific innovation, advancement and excellence. Pat is a Senior Member of the IEEE, a Chartered Engineer with the Institute of Engineers of Ireland and he holds the FEANI title of Eur Ing. He has led numerous commercialisation projects, contracts and teams over 27 years, including teams of over 135 staff in size. His work has led to numerous successful advancements, technologies, spin-ins and spin-outs. As an example, Logentries was a spin-out company from a joint funded Science Foundation Ireland funded project, the innovation in which Pat conceived and led at his lab over 4 years, and in 2015 Logentries was acquired by Rapid7 for $68m. He has a strong international profile, evidenced by 130+ written citations from senior Industry, Government and Academic leaders across USA, EMEA and APAC on his LinkedIn profile. He is frequently called upon to speak at conferences and events in Ireland and across Europe. Dr Takis Katsoulakos (Male) holds a BSc, MSc and PhD in Marine Engineering from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne and is R&D Director of INLECOM Group since 1996 responsible for the development of the KBOS platform, EU projects and commercial contracts.  From Sept 81 to Dec 96 he was with Lloyds Register of Shipping in later years as Senior Principal Surveyor and Head of Applied Information Engineering responsible software development, software assessment services and research and development including some thirty Information Technology projects many in maritime applications He served as Chairman of the Board and Executive Committee of the European Software Institute (1994-1997); Chairman of the Foundation of Enterprise Knowledge Development (1992-1994); Visiting Professor, Computing Science Dept University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology (1995-1996); Chairman of many Software Engineering conferences including the IEEE Software Standards. He has published widely. In the last 4 years he has been involved in the technical management of all the INLECOMS projects. Overall 30-year experience in coordinating EU projects. Takis is Security cleared in the UK. Georgia Tsiochantari (Female) holds a BSc in Sociology from Panteion University of Social and Political Sciences in Greece, and an MSc in Occupational Psychology from Goldsmiths University of London. She started working at INLECOM in 2014. Since then, Georgia is responsible for project administration and has also worked in various projects with the commercialisation team in dissemination and exploitation planning tasks in projects such as SELIS (H2020), EuTravel (H2020), and EcoHubs (FP7). List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content Among many more granted patent publications:  Dynamic bridge for Object Transfer, O’Sullivan et. al., Patent 9,736,195 (2017) 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 97 of 117 
 Dynamically identifying performance anti-patterns, O’Sullivan et. al., Patent App. 14/977,817  (2017)  Defining access rights to content, O’Sullivan et. al., Patent 9,654,285 (2017)   System and method for creating user-specific directory, O’Sullivan et. al., Patent 9,582,597 (2017)   Location-oriented services, O’Sullivan et. al., Patent 9,479,895 (2016) A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  iCargo Intelligent Cargo in Efficient and Sustainable Global Logistics Operations (1/11/11 - 30/10/15) http://i-cargo.eu/     CORE Consistently Optimised Resilient Secure Global Supply-Chains (1/6/14 - 31/5/18)  http://www.coreproject.eu/   SELIS: Towards a Shared European Logistics Intelligent Information Space (H2020). A recently funded H2020 project in transport and logistics to implement and support performance enhancing Environment-friendly Logistics Strategies. http://www.selisproject.eu/   CHARIOT: Cognitive Heterogeneous Architecture for Industrial IoT topic IoT-03-2017 - R&I on IoT integration and platforms. develop new concepts, a cognitive architecture, as well as methods and open tools for IoT Privacy, Security and Safety  Track and Know: Big Data for Mobility Tracking & Knowledge Extraction in Urban Areas  Big data PPP: research addressing main technology challenges of the data economy by introducing novel technologies and approaches in Big Data driven ecosystems (i.e. intelligent mobility services, autonomous, connected and shared vehicles technologies, healthcare and predictive maintenance, finance and insurance, etc.) Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work INLECOM Innovation is a Research and Innovation consultancy dedicated to advanced solutions for digital eco-systems. Supported by an international team of experts in the areas of Mobility, Business Consulting, Software Engineering Solutions and Business Analytics, INLECOM provides strategic knowledge-centric solutions and consultancy to help private and public organisations use their unique capabilities to create or strengthen their competitive advantages.   Participant no. 17 Name (short name)/ Country Bristest LBG / BRITEST (UK) Description of the legal entity   Britest Limited is a not-for-profit international SME, registered and regulated as a limited company in the UK. Britest holds a bank of intellectual property (tools and methodologies) developed through collaborative research programmes with and on behalf of its members. Britest’s worldwide membership includes industrial companies from the low-tonnage, high-added-value process sectors and leading academic institutions.  Main tasks WP8: Britest will lead the Training and Dissemination work package. Britest will play a leading role in the development of scalable training and education materials, drawing on experience gained in the SusChem Educate to Innovate project and as co-ordinator of the SPIRE-11-2017 SPRING project. Britest will also use its experience of managing communication and dissemination activities in other collaborative projects to deliver an effective stakeholder engagement activity fully supported by appropriate communication channels and a range of dissemination activities. How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project Britest is primarily concerned with the development and deployment of methodologies and tools to help process technologists (chemists, process engineers etc) develop and design new processes better, smarter and quicker.  Tools and methodologies developed by Britest via a range of collaborative activities are deployed to its member companies through a targeted training and support activity, as well as through a direct consultancy service.  A role held by Britest in previous collaborative projects (see below) has been to develop and codify generic methodological learning, and, based on this, prepare industrially-relevant dissemination and training materials to support effective commercial exploitation. Britest’s scalable approach to industrial training and its close collaboration with academia in a number of projects led to an invitation to co-ordinate the SusChem Educate to Innovate project, focused on helping academia to enhance university courses with case studies and support materials developed from EU funded innovation project outputs. They will have the role of Training & Dissemination manager. CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 98 of 117 
Dr Mark Talford (Male), Technical Director. PhD in Chemical Engineering. Chartered Engineer. Over 15 years’ experience in academia and industry developing systems approaches to support process development, scale-up and technology transfer in the polymer, nuclear, pharmaceutical and fine chemicals sectors. Held principal roles in the development of scalable training resources for both industry and academia in EU Projects IMPULSE, F3 Factory and SYNFLOW to support uptake of project outcomes. Member of the ASPIRE Chemical Process Mirror Group, advising the Process Working Group on chemicals sector challenges. Independent member of the Enterprise Ireland-funded Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Technology Centre Steering Committee. Dr. John Henderson (Male), Technical Communications Specialist. PhD in Polymer Science, Chartered Chemist, Member of the Royal Society of Chemistry, Past Member of the Institute for Knowledge Transfer. Over 25 years’ experience in industrial and collaborative R&D and knowledge transfer encompassing; product development, process transfer and scale up of specialist polymers; statistical experimental design, process improvement and process control training and consultancy in diverse sectors including bulk chemicals, speciality chemicals and polymers, pharma, food and drink, and telecommunications; technology translation and community management roles in major UK national knowledge transfer networks linking academic and industrial interests to accelerate innovation in waste minimisation and environmental sustainability; technical, communications and facilitation roles in collaborative projects at UK national and EU level including both technology (novel hydrometallurgical and natural bio-sorbent based approaches to resource recovery from metal bearing effluents) and systems level innovation. Examples of the latter include roles in maximising the exploitation and impact of EU projects: both collaborative R&D - ECO-SEE (innovative eco-building materials as part of modern energy efficient buildings systems) and CSA projects - WASTECOSMART (co-developed project Joint Action Plan to increase the innovation capacity of regional research-driven public-private-academic clusters in resource efficiency within the waste management sector). Currently work package leader for dissemination and exploitation activities in the UK AMSCI ADDoPT digital design of drug products supply chain project. Amy Peace (Female), Senior Innovation Specialist. MEng in Chemical Engineering; Chartered Engineer; RAEng Leadership Award. Over 10 years of experience in industry and public sector interface. Experienced in technology design & operation from lab R&D to large scale manufacturing (ICI, INEOS Fluor), project coordination, line management, sustainability tool development. Managed innovation and sustainable development programmes for a regional cluster organisation – Chemicals NorthWest. Project manager for several industry/ academia collaborative projects within the Britest consortium.  Project coordinator for H2020 STYLE and H2020 SPRING projects. Member of the ASPIRE Horizontal Working Group, advising ASPIRE and the EC on non-technical aspects of the SPIRE agenda. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  Britest expertise in the identification and sharing of generic learning. This expertise has been developed through over 15 years of collaborative working in a pre-competitive manner with industry partners, and underpins the regard Britest is held in as an “honest broker” in collaborative activities.  Experience in the establishment of professional communication, dissemination, and training/education, activities. This experience is based on key leadership roles in several EU projects significant industrial experience of Britest staff in this field.  Fleet S, ‘Reducing the skills shortages and competence deficits in the European advanced manufacturing industry’ DG Enterprise and Industry Public hearing. Advanced Manufacturing Technologies for Clean Production Panel Member Brussels 2013  Fleet S, Matlosz M, Educate to Innovate - A SusChem programme for building skills capacity for a sustainable European chemical sector Industrial Technologies 2012 Aarhus DKx A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  SusChem ‘Educate to Innovate’ – (2012-2013) Pilot project seeking to develop framework to exploit innovation outputs from SusChem’s Research & Innovation projects to enhance the innovation skills of future generations of scientists and engineers through the effective engagement of industry and higher education institutions (HEIs). Successful pilot stage development involving F3 Factory project outputs and selected academics from 10 member states.  EU H2020 SPIRE Project ‘SPRING’ - Setting the framework for the enhanced impact of SPIRE projects (2017-2019) – CSA of six partners representing a cross-section of SPIRE projects with the objective to increase progression towards the SPIRE goals and enhance project return on investment by addressing the needs and barriers of those who make decisions to invest in innovative technology  EU H2020 SPIRE Project ‘STYLE’ – Sustainability Toolkit for easY Lifecycle Evaluation (2014-2016) –CSA of ten partners from across the SPIRE sectors, to make recommendations on pragmatic tools for sustainability evaluations 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 99 of 117 
in industry.   EU FP7 Project ‘F3 Factory’ – Flexible, Fast and Future production processes (2009 – 2013) – led methodology development, training, dissemination and exploitation work packages  EU FP7 Project ‘SYNFLOW’ – Innovative Synthesis in Continuous Flow Processes for Sustainable Chemical Production (2010 – 2014) – led methodology development work package and key contributor to training, dissemination and exploitation work package. Ran a series of workshops to identify and deliver appropriate training for project participants Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work Britest’s offices are located in The Innovation Centre, Sci-Tech Daresbury, a science and technology park where we are co-located with a broad range of innovative companies spanning several industrial sectors.   Participant no. 18 Name (short name)/ Country Crowdhelix Ltd. (VISION2020: The HORIZONNETWORK LTD.)  (V2020) / UK Description of the legal entity  V2020: Enabling MultiCycle to deliver impact through communication, dissemination and Open Innovation V2020 is a pan-European Open Innovation Network that enables Research Technology Organisations and businesses to collaborate, innovate and grow. The network has more than 350+ member organisations from 41 countries and is present in all EU Member State countries. The network membership is reported to have won more than 2 billion euros of funding under Horizon 2020, highlighting the quality of its membership base.   The network is structured around virtual technology clusters known as Helixes. There are currently 18 live Helixes in areas such as Health, ICT, and Energy etc. The network hosts focussed collaborative events for each Helix each year where the aim is to connect organisations across Europe and promote collaboration and open innovation.    In addition to hosting and running events, V2020 also has its own technology tool called: Crowdhelix. The tool is designed so people and organisations can profile their expertise and capabilities within a Helix area. Crowdhelix is then used to help organisations post opportunities, which are matched to people’s profiles within the platform. Once a match is made the V2020 team then help to facilitate an opportunity so that it then turns into a tangible collaboration Main tasks V2020 will set up a Circular plastics Helix to act as the communication and knowledge exchange platform for this project. This will include all project partners, all relevant stakeholders from the V2020 community (70+ research technological intensive organisations and 250+ SMEs) interested in plastics and the circular economy – expertise, capability, testing, etc. The Helix will also include other aligned projects in the plastics and circular economy domains. The dissemination activities will be split into the following areas: 1: Implementation (events, communication, publications, outreach, access to capabilities, testing etc). 2: Policy; high-level brokerage, regulatory and standardisation requirements. V2020 will establish the Circular Plastics Helix as a virtual technology cluster across the V2020 network and also within the network’s match-making technology tool: Crowdhelix. Crowdhelix will be used as an additional vehicle to profile organisations and people which will enable stakeholders to test, drive through and adopt new innovations that will coming through and/or aligned to the MultiCycle project       V2020 will contribute towards the commercialisation and dissemination activities, which will be channelled through the Circular Plastics Helix. The project’s commercialisation, exploitation and IP strategy will be part of, and integrated into, the Helix activities. It will also help to form and drive new forms of untapped capability and capacity in this area. The Helix will act as the communication and dissemination hub for the project both during and after the project has ended. V2020 will continue to manage the community beyond the end of the project – promoting the project’s outputs and impacts and enabling new forms of collaboration and open innovation across the European Research Area. How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project V2020 will help MultiCycle address parts of the impact section in the project by creating and driving up a Circular Plastics Helix within the V2020 network. This establishment of a Circular Plastics Helix would be designed specifically for the project’s needs – linking to key stakeholders and addressing KPIs - and would act as a knowledge exchange vehicle for 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 100 of 117 
delivering communication and dissemination activities in the project.  The Helix design would not only involve project partners but could also be opened up to relevant RTO and business stakeholders from the V2020 network and aligned project areas to create a virtual project cluster within the network. The Helix service would be to lead on activities related to stakeholder engagement. The Helix will run far beyond the end of the MultiCycle project (as a self-promoting and sustaining Helix) not only communicating and disseminating the project’s outputs, success stories and lasting impacts, but also creating new forms of collaboration and Open Innovation across the European Research Area.   CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Abdul Rahim (M) is a founder and director of V2020: The Horizon Network (www.2020visionnetwork.eu). He has a proven track record of establishing strategic, mutually beneficial partnerships and relationships.   He is an expert in public funding and has secured several € millions for organisations and institutions. Abdul has significant links with UK and European Universities and focuses on connecting business to research institutions. He was on the board of London Metropolitan University from its formation to March 2010. He was Vice Chairman and Chair of its Finance and Human Resources Committee.  Prior to that he was on the board of University of North London and was on the joint board during the merger with London Guildhall University to form London Metropolitan University. He is currently an Advisory Board Member, Faculty of Business and Management at Regent’s University. Abdul holds a Masters in Business Administration (MBA) and is a Fellow of The Royal Society of Arts & Manufacturing. Michael Browne (M) is co-founder of V2020. Michael is also Head of European Research and Innovation at UCL. Michael has overseen the award and delivery of more than 1 billion euros of EU funded grants and has more than 15 year’s experience in managing and exploiting large-scale international collaborative projects. Michael has extensive experience in shaping and influencing policy at regional, national and EU levels.  Riam Kanso (F) is responsible for overseeing the progress of the platform and its position in the academia-industry ecosystem. Riam has a research background (Neuroscience PhD) and has worked on building academic-industry collaborations throughout her career, both in the public sector and private consultancy space. Riam has been involved in the creation and management of acceleration programmes for startups and their training and has great experience in working with mid-cap companies. Due to previous positions in academia and government, Riam has acquired significant experience and knowledge in science policy. Kimberly Cornfield (F) is responsible for overseeing the strategic development and facilitation of the V2020 helixes, and will lead the Circular Plastics Helix. She has extensive experience in planning and managing complex international collaborative research and innovation projects, across numerous research fields (including health, climate, environment, energy, and ICT), through her role as Senior Project Manager UCL. She also has extensive experience in and developing internal and external networks to facilitate international, inter-organisational and inter-disciplinary collaboration in research and innovation, through her role as Head of Proposal Management at UCL. She has industry consultancy experience in supporting SMEs in developing grant funding strategies to complement their private investment strategies. She holds a diploma in International Project Management (Finland) and an MSc Strategic Management of Projects (UCL), and holds a voluntary role as SMPAlumni Director (voluntary) at UCL, developing international alumni outreach and networking engagement. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content Crowdhelix is the technology arm of V2020. It hosts Helixes (virtual technology communities) across the V2020 network and enables organisations and people to profile themselves in the platform. Crowdhelix acts as a match-making and profiling tool for organisations. A Circular Plastics Helix will be designed and positioned within Crowdhelix which will open up MultiCycle beyond the project consortium to other V2020 member organisations (350+ organisations in 42 countries) in the area of Plastics and the circular economy. A Circular Plastics Helix will also provide a platform to run and promote events and communicate outputs across the research, innovation and policy landscape – at both implementation (events, access to expertise and facilities etc.) and high-level engagement (policy, regulatory and standardisation) levels   A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  V2020 is a partner in the Horizon 2020 project entitled: OPENiSME: http://www.openisme.eu/. The overall objective of the project is to help unlock innovation capabilities for SMEs that aspire to grow through the facilitation of new open innovation partnerships.   V2020 is a partner in ERC=ScienceSquared: https://www.sciencesquared.eu/. V2020’s role in this Horizon 2020 project to communicate and disseminate success stories from the European Research Council across its community and the broader European Research Area.   V2020 is a partner in PBNv2 https://www.h2020-pbnv2.eu/ a European Training Network, where V2020’s role is to connect researchers with businesses – both through physical and technological / V2020 enablers - to 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 101 of 117 
communicate the project and promote new forms of collaboration and open innovation  On behalf of its memberships, V2020 has over the last 4 years delivered dozens of Pan-European events enabling collaboration and open innovation in thematic areas. This year (2018) alone the network already has 10 events planned in 8 different Member States. The delivery of these mini projects help to profile and promote our members, project areas and promote collaboration.   V2020 has delivered 5 different projects for Member State Government Agencies to promote regional and national innovation capabilities across the European Research Area Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work N/A   Participant no. 19 Name (short name)/ Country International Solid Waste Association / ISWA (Austria) Description of the legal entity  The International Solid Waste Association (ISWA) is a non-profit association consisting of international waste management experts and relevant stakeholders. ISWA works to protect human health and the environment as well as to ensure sustainable resource and waste management. Part of ISWA’s major competencies lie in organizing and participating in  international networking events (annual World Congress, IFAT, ECOMONDO, COPs, and UN-Habitat), conducting educational trainings and workshops on various aspects of waste management (ca. 70+ trainings and events organized in 2017), drafting of technical reports and documents, engaging in developing economies to establish sustainable waste management practices, and the sharing of knowledge and experience in sustainable waste management and climate change mitigation. ISWA has multiple partnerships and MOUs with various international organizations including CCAC, R20, UNFCCC, UNEP, UNIDO, WHO, World Bank, and more. ISWA has an academic journal (Waste Management and Research), a magazine (Waste Management World), a bi-monthly newsletter, and 10 Technical Working Groups that can be used as tools to present, support, and disseminate the activities and results of the project. Main tasks The main tasks foreseen for ISWA in this project are in gathering and providing statistical data regarding the current status of plastic waste recycling in the EU countries where available through ISWA’s network (WP1), provide access to end of life packaging waste to the pilot recycling facility through ISWA members (WP2,4), and communicate and disseminate the project outputs through ISWA’s channels (WP8). ISWA will also be responsible for organizing 3 events with policymakers and help with producing white papers on the project outputs. ISWA has an extensive network worldwide to reach waste management professionals and organizations within its own membership, but also maintains several working relationships with other international organizations through projects and MOU’s which allow ISWA to also reach a wide audience of stakeholders and interested parties within the field of sustainability research and action.  How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project ISWA has an international network of members, stakeholders and contacts globally. Its membership consists of waste management professionals from every continent, as well as waste management companies, and also other national waste management associations. They are joined together in 10 thematic working groups as well as numerous events (including our own yearly World Congress with 1000+ attendees). ISWA has two publications, the Waste Management World magazine and the peer reviewed Waste Management & Research journal, which target respectively the professional waste management community and the research community.  ISWA has participated in H2020 projects before, and is currently also the Communications & Disseminations leader for the project EcoBulk. ISWA acknowledges that plastic recycling has a key role to play in waste management in order to prevent marine litter and make good use of resources. ISWA also maintains a busy calendar of events (70+ events organized in 2017) which include conferences, trainings, study tours and working groups on 10 different sustainability themes. Also, ISWA’s involvement with other EU projects as well as other international agencies allows for a broad view on possible project clustering and synergy opportunities. CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Aditi Ramola (Female) is a Technical Project Manager at the ISWA General Secretariat. She graduated with distinction from the Environmental Technology & International Affairs MSc joint programme offered by the Technical University of Vienna and the Diplomatic Academy of Vienna. She received the ‘Best Study Award’ from ARA Altstoff Recycling Austria AG for her exemplary academic performance. She has several years of experience in the private sector and international 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 102 of 117 
organizations such as Caterpillar Inc. and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization where she worked at the Climate Policy and Networks unit of the Department of Energy. Most recently she was involved in the successful completion of the European Commission funded project on Developing an EU Standardised Approach to Vocational Qualifications in Healthcare Waste where she was the lead of the Work Package on Implementation planning and network growth and development. Arne Ragossnig (Male) ISWA Managing Director has completed his PhD-studies in Environmental Engineering – focus: Thermal Utilization of Waste – at the University of Leoben in 2001. After several years being responsible for Sales Controlling and Sales Coordination at the international Austrian plant engineering company VA TECH he became head of the study programme Energy and Environmental Management (MSc.) in 2004 and in addition to that head of the study programme Sustainable Energy Systems (MSc.) in 2006 at University of Applied Science FH Burgenland. As managing director and head of R&D he was responsible for building up research activities at FH Burgenland. In 2012 he became Vice-Rector of FH Burgenland. In 2013 he became self-employed as is managing partner of the engineering company Ecoconsultants. As of 2018 he also is involved in the International Solid Waste Association (ISWA) as managing director. He is lecturer at various universities and associate editor of the scientific ISWA journal Waste Management & Research. Additionally, he is a member of the steering committees of several international conferences such as Recy & DepoTech taking place every second year at University of Leoben. Joachim Quoden (Male) is currently Chair of the ISWA Working Group on Legal Issue. He has extensive experience in packaging waste management, dating from 1992 when he spent 4 months in the German Federal Ministry of Environment working on packaging issues including the German Packaging Ordinance. From 1993 to 2006, Mr Quoden worked with Der Grüne Punkt - Duales System Deutschland GmbH (DSD), where he was appointed head of International Affairs in 2001. Between 2001 and 2013, he also became Secretary General and later Managing Director of PRO EUROPE, the umbrella organisation of 35 packaging recovery organisations. Since 2013, Mr Quoden acts as Managing Director of EXPRA, a new alliance of 26 PRO’s from currently more than 24 countries. Besides the above, Mr Quoden is working since 1995 as independent lawyer in Germany specializing in international EPR legislation, chairperson of ISWA’s Governance & Legal working group, member of the OECD EPR expert group and has served as an expert in ISO global standardisation project SIS/TK 165/AG 10 Packaging and Environment. Björn Appelqvist (Male) is Chair of the ISWA Working Group on Recycling and Waste Minimisation and was the Chair of the ISWA Task Force on Resource Management. He is currently the Head of Department for Waste Management and Site Solutions at Ramboll, having moved here from the City of Denmark where he worked as a Project Manager at the Technical and Environmental Administration of the City of Copenhagen, where he is concerned with waste planning, treatment technologies and development of the city’s waste management system in general. Earlier, he has been working as Development Manager at the solid waste collection company R98 in Copenhagen as well as Development Engineer at the Waste Management Department of the City of Malmö, Sweden. Andreas Bartl (Male) is the Vice-Chair of the ISWA Working Group on Recycling and Waste Minimisation and is currently an Associate Professor and Senior Scientist in the Research Group for Particle Technology, Recycling Technology and Technology Assessment at the Vienna University of Technology. He has several years of experience in fiber technology between textiles, nonwovens and paper. He is the author of several research papers and technical studies. Andreas is currently involved in research projects aiming to recycle textiles which usually consist of various polymers. One approach is to dissolve or decompose certain polymers and make the recycling of the remaining polymer(s) much easier. It is within the scope of the research to use enzymes which, for instance, selectively degrade cellulosic fibers into sugars and make the polyester ready to be recycled. ISWA is a network of experts that is structured in a core group of people at the General Secretariat that are directly employed at ISWA, complemented by a vast number of experts (eg. see the 3 CVs above) that are employed elsewhere and volunteer their time for ISWA activities. ISWA will tap upon these experts that work on a free-lance basis for ISWA and will be appointed as in-house consultants to deliver specific tasks for the project. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  ISWA Knowledge Base - http://www.iswa.org/media/publications/knowledge-base/    AcuComm db Waste Business Monitor for ISWA Members (analysis of all key players and investments in global wastes reported on a monthly basis).   Waste Management Outlooks: here and here.  EWIT Knowledge Base - http://ewit.site/knowledge-base/    ISWA Task Force on Resource Management (6 reports) - http://www.iswa.org/iswa/iswa-groups/task-forces/    ISWA Task Force on Marine Litter - http://marinelitter.iswa.org/ and report 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 103 of 117 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  Addressing Barriers to Sustainable Resource Management  Climate and Clean Air Coalition (CCAC)-City Assessment & Action Plan: Sao Paulo  Climate and Clean Air Coalition (CCAC)-City Assessment & Action Plan: Dar es Salaam  Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN) project in Cali, Colombia  EWIT Project (H2020) Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work 1. Waste Management and Research (ISWA-run Academic Journal)-Dissemination tool 2. Waste Management World (ISWA Magazine)-Dissemination tool 3. ISWA World Congresses 4. Beacon Conference on Recycling and Waste Minimization   Participant no. 20 Name (short name)/ Country International Solid Waste Association / ISWA NL (Netherlands) Description of the legal entity  The International Solid Waste Association in the Netherlands is the same as the Association in Austria, but due to the relocation of ISWA to the Netherlands a new legal entity had to be created. This legal entity is in spirit the successor entity of ISWA in Austria, so the following description is the same as the previous one since the only real difference is the statutory seat of the new association.  The International Solid Waste Association (ISWA) is a non-profit association consisting of international waste management experts and relevant stakeholders. ISWA works to protect human health and the environment as well as to ensure sustainable resource and waste management. Part of ISWA’s major competencies lie in organizing and participating in  international networking events (annual World Congress, IFAT, ECOMONDO, COPs, and UN-Habitat), conducting educational trainings and workshops on various aspects of waste management (ca. 70+ trainings and events organized in 2017), drafting of technical reports and documents, engaging in developing economies to establish sustainable waste management practices, and the sharing of knowledge and experience in sustainable waste management and climate change mitigation. ISWA has multiple partnerships and MOUs with various international organizations including CCAC, R20, UNFCCC, UNEP, UNIDO, WHO, World Bank, and more. ISWA has an academic journal (Waste Management and Research), a magazine (Waste Management World), a bi-monthly newsletter, and 10 Technical Working Groups that can be used as tools to present, support, and disseminate the activities and results of the project. Main tasks The main tasks foreseen for ISWA in this project are in gathering and providing statistical data regarding the current status of plastic waste recycling in the EU countries where available through ISWA’s network (WP1), provide access to end of life packaging waste to the pilot recycling facility through ISWA members (WP2,4), and communicate and disseminate the project outputs through ISWA’s channels (WP8). ISWA will also be responsible for organizing 3 events with policymakers and help with producing white papers on the project outputs. ISWA has an extensive network worldwide to reach waste management professionals and organizations within its own membership, but also maintains several working relationships with other international organizations through projects and MOU’s which allow ISWA to also reach a wide audience of stakeholders and interested parties within the field of sustainability research and action.  How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project ISWA has an international network of members, stakeholders and contacts globally. Its membership consists of waste management professionals from every continent, as well as waste management companies, and also other national waste management associations. They are joined together in 10 thematic working groups as well as numerous events (including our own yearly World Congress with 1000+ attendees). ISWA has two publications, the Waste Management World magazine and the peer reviewed Waste Management & Research journal, which target respectively the professional waste management community and the research community.  ISWA has participated in H2020 projects before and is currently also the Communications & Disseminations leader for the project EcoBulk. ISWA acknowledges that plastic recycling has a key role to play in waste management in order to prevent marine litter and make good use of resources. ISWA also maintains a busy calendar of events (70+ events 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 104 of 117 
organized in 2017) which include conferences, trainings, study tours and working groups on 10 different sustainability themes. Also, ISWA’s involvement with other EU projects as well as other international agencies allows for a broad view on possible project clustering and synergy opportunities. CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work Aditi Ramola (Female) is a Technical Project Manager at the ISWA General Secretariat. She graduated with distinction from the Environmental Technology & International Affairs MSc joint programme offered by the Technical University of Vienna and the Diplomatic Academy of Vienna. She received the ‘Best Study Award’ from ARA Altstoff Recycling Austria AG for her exemplary academic performance. She has several years of experience in the private sector and international organizations such as Caterpillar Inc. and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization where she worked at the Climate Policy and Networks unit of the Department of Energy. Most recently she was involved in the successful completion of the European Commission funded project on Developing an EU Standardised Approach to Vocational Qualifications in Healthcare Waste where she was the lead of the Work Package on Implementation planning and network growth and development. Arne Ragossnig (Male) ISWA Managing Director has completed his PhD-studies in Environmental Engineering – focus: Thermal Utilization of Waste – at the University of Leoben in 2001. After several years being responsible for Sales Controlling and Sales Coordination at the international Austrian plant engineering company VA TECH he became head of the study programme Energy and Environmental Management (MSc.) in 2004 and in addition to that head of the study programme Sustainable Energy Systems (MSc.) in 2006 at University of Applied Science FH Burgenland. As managing director and head of R&D he was responsible for building up research activities at FH Burgenland. In 2012 he became Vice-Rector of FH Burgenland. In 2013 he became self-employed as is managing partner of the engineering company Ecoconsultants. As of 2018 he also is involved in the International Solid Waste Association (ISWA) as managing director. He is lecturer at various universities and associate editor of the scientific ISWA journal Waste Management & Research. Additionally, he is a member of the steering committees of several international conferences such as Recy & DepoTech taking place every second year at University of Leoben. Joachim Quoden (Male) is currently Chair of the ISWA Working Group on Legal Issue. He has extensive experience in packaging waste management, dating from 1992 when he spent 4 months in the German Federal Ministry of Environment working on packaging issues including the German Packaging Ordinance. From 1993 to 2006, Mr Quoden worked with Der Grüne Punkt - Duales System Deutschland GmbH (DSD), where he was appointed head of International Affairs in 2001. Between 2001 and 2013, he also became Secretary General and later Managing Director of PRO EUROPE, the umbrella organisation of 35 packaging recovery organisations. Since 2013, Mr Quoden acts as Managing Director of EXPRA, a new alliance of 26 PRO’s from currently more than 24 countries. Besides the above, Mr Quoden is working since 1995 as independent lawyer in Germany specializing in international EPR legislation, chairperson of ISWA’s Governance & Legal working group, member of the OECD EPR expert group and has served as an expert in ISO global standardisation project SIS/TK 165/AG 10 Packaging and Environment. Björn Appelqvist (Male) is Chair of the ISWA Working Group on Recycling and Waste Minimisation and was the Chair of the ISWA Task Force on Resource Management. He is currently the Head of Department for Waste Management and Site Solutions at Ramboll, having moved here from the City of Denmark where he worked as a Project Manager at the Technical and Environmental Administration of the City of Copenhagen, where he is concerned with waste planning, treatment technologies and development of the city’s waste management system in general. Earlier, he has been working as Development Manager at the solid waste collection company R98 in Copenhagen as well as Development Engineer at the Waste Management Department of the City of Malmö, Sweden. Andreas Bartl (Male) is the Vice-Chair of the ISWA Working Group on Recycling and Waste Minimisation and is currently an Associate Professor and Senior Scientist in the Research Group for Particle Technology, Recycling Technology and Technology Assessment at the Vienna University of Technology. He has several years of experience in fiber technology between textiles, nonwovens and paper. He is the author of several research papers and technical studies. Andreas is currently involved in research projects aiming to recycle textiles which usually consist of various polymers. One approach is to dissolve or decompose certain polymers and make the recycling of the remaining polymer(s) much easier. It is within the scope of the research to use enzymes which, for instance, selectively degrade cellulosic fibers into sugars and make the polyester ready to be recycled. ISWA is a network of experts that is structured in a core group of people at the General Secretariat that are directly employed at ISWA, complemented by a vast number of experts (eg. see the 3 CVs above) that are employed elsewhere and volunteer their time for ISWA activities. ISWA will tap upon these experts that work on a free-lance basis for ISWA and will be appointed as in-house consultants to deliver specific tasks for the project. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 105 of 117 
 ISWA Knowledge Base - http://www.iswa.org/media/publications/knowledge-base/    AcuComm db Waste Business Monitor for ISWA Members (analysis of all key players and investments in global wastes reported on a monthly basis).   Waste Management Outlooks: here and here.  EWIT Knowledge Base - http://ewit.site/knowledge-base/    ISWA Task Force on Resource Management (6 reports) - http://www.iswa.org/iswa/iswa-groups/task-forces/    ISWA Task Force on Marine Litter - http://marinelitter.iswa.org/ and report A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  Addressing Barriers to Sustainable Resource Management  Climate and Clean Air Coalition (CCAC)-City Assessment & Action Plan: Sao Paulo  Climate and Clean Air Coalition (CCAC)-City Assessment & Action Plan: Dar es Salaam  Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN) project in Cali, Colombia  EWIT Project (H2020) Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work 1. Waste Management and Research (ISWA-run Academic Journal)-Dissemination tool 2. Waste Management World (ISWA Magazine)-Dissemination tool 3. ISWA World Congresses 4. Beacon Conference on Recycling and Waste Minimization   4.2. Third parties involved in the project (including use of third party resources)  Participant no. 13 LÖMI GmbH / LOEMI (Germany) Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted) N Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties Y The third party will be GAW technologies GmbH. The link of GAW with the main party LOEMI is that LOEMI is partly owned (60%) by GAW Beteiligungs GmbH since July 2018). GAW technologies GmbH is fully owned by GAW Beteiligungs GmbH. So GAW technologies GmbH and LOEMI are both members of the GAW Group.  Profile of the third party: GAW technologies GmbH (GAW) The GAW Group is a group of technology companies operating worldwide for industrial engineering and plant construction . The portfolio includes plant construction, products and industrial services, and serves five essential markets in almost every region of the world: paper, plastics, chemicals, environmental and automotive.  The operational business of the GAW Group is concentrated in the Paper & Pulp, Automotive, Chemical and Plastic Industries, Optoelectronics and Automation Divisions.  A substantial part of the worldwide production of coated paper and board is achieved using processing equipment from GAW. Global market leading automobile manufacturers rely on conveyor technology developed by GAW. Special machinery and recycling units from the GAW companies in the plastics division are successfully established throughout the world. automationX® solutions from our automation division have been steadily promoted in the areas of food, building material, process and infrastructure.  Founded in 1951, the GAW Group is today present in seventeen countries and has more than 550 employees. It achieves an annual turnover of EUR 102 million and maintains a widespread network of production facilities, service and sales offices on every continent in the world.   
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 106 of 117 
GAW technologies GmbH,  a supporting pillar of the GAW Group, serves as a guarantor of technological expertise in many industries, especially when it comes to the fully automated preparation and production of pigment, starch, chemicals, coating colour and coating compounds as well as the cleaning and recycling of process wastewater containing pigments. GAW provides process solutions ranging from development, consultancy and engineering, to logistics, supervision and commissioning, as well as training and after sales service.    Main tasks attributed in the project  In WP2, GAW technolgies will support LOEMI for the design of a plant concept. In WP4 GAW technologies will support LOEMI in the detail engineering and installation of a CreaSolv® pilot plant.  Involved staff: Christof Murnig (male) – holds a master degree (MSc) in Process Engineering from the Graz University of Technology and has 12 years of experience with international plant engineering projects. He joined GAW technologies in 2019 as Process Engineer.  
He will be responsible for project management, reporting and the technical design and implementation of the project. 
Wolfgang Schmölzer (male) – holds a Certificate in International Project management, IPMA, and has been working in the field of international plant engineering projects for two decades. He has been with GAW technologies for 14 years and is Head of Technology & Plant Design. He will take responsibility for the technical design and implementation of the project. 
 Relevant publications, products or services: Engineering services  Relevant Projects: B2B projects  Significant Infrastructure and Equipment (description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work):  Budget:  387.000 € of LOEMIs personal costs are transfered to GAW technologies. 400.000 € of LOEMIs equipment costs are transfered to GAW technologies. 5.000 € of LOEMIs travel costs are transfered to GAW technologies. 198.000 € of LOEMIs indirect costs are transfered to GAW technologies. Budget: 990.000 € Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) N If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions   Participant no. 15 AXIA Innovation UG (AXIA)/ Germany Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted) N Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties Y 
EXELISIS PC in a linked company to AXIA Innovation UG. The legal link is based on the established relationship between 
them (a framework agreement based on which EXELISIS is supporting AXIA in projects related to marketing, market search, 
extroversion activities and dissemination including organization of events) as well as on the fact that there is a legal relationship 
between them (affiliated entity). In more details, EXELISIS PC is owned by 100% of a group of shareholders that also are the 
shareholders of AXIA by 71%. Thus, EXELISIS PC is affiliated with AXIA in terms that it is under the same direct control as 
the participant (AXIA).    
 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 107 of 117 
EXELISIS is a Greek based company (SME) focusing on development of marketing strategy, market studies and analysis, 
development of marketing and dissemination material (printed material, websites, videos) as well as consultancy on business 
development and exploitation of results. EXELISIS teams consists of a mixture of business analysts, economists and engineers 
with business development background. EXELISIS expertise and activities is complementary to that of AXIA, in particular in 
providing holistic solutions for companies’ business development, business planning and marketing strategy. 
 
EXELISIS will be involved in WP 7 (8 PM), WP 8 (1 PM) and WP 9 (9 PM). 
The tasks that EXELISIS will undertake in the project are shown below: 
 Task 7.5: EXELISIS will contribute to the development of the tool, specifically in the parts related to evaluation of the sustainability in terms of economic feasibility  Task 9.1, 9.2 and 9.4: EXELISIS will contribute in the tasks by contacting market analysis and studies and assessment of the techno-economic feasibility Budget:               91,178.92 € including 4000€ in direct costs for attending meetings and dissemination materials Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) N If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions   Participant no. 19 International Solid Waste Association / ISWA (Austria) Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted) Y As explained in the profile of the main party, ISWA is a network of experts and is structured in a way that we have a core group of people at the General Secretariat that are directly employed at ISWA and then a vast number of experts that are employed elsewhere volunteer their time for ISWA activities. ISWA will tap upon these experts that work on a free-lance basis for ISWA as in house consultant where possible (examples in ISWA profile). In case some of these most adequate experts are employed by an entity and this one needs to be subcontracted, a cost has been considered for specific dissemination and policy outreach tasks for the duration of the project. Cost 15,000€ Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties Y There will be two linked third parties involved, both of which are intimately linked to ISWA, and are effectively different legal entities but in practice representing the same organisation.  ISWA GmbH One third party will be ISWA GmbH. The link of ISWA GmbH with the main party ISWA association is that ISWA GmbH is fully owned by the International Solid Waste Association (ISWA).  Profile of third party: ISWA GmbH is a limited company established in Austria. The main purpose of ISWA GmbH is to organize and implement dissemination activities such as study tours, summer schools and other events as well as the publication of the magazine waste management world. Main tasks attributed in the project  Based on her expertise Mrs. Jennifer MacDonald, employee of the ISWA GmbH will be involved in the project activities.  Jennifer MacDonald (Female) is a Technical Project Coordinator at the ISWA General Secretariat.  She has an MSc with Distinction in Environmental Technology and International Affairs from the Technical University of Vienna and the Diplomatic Academy of Vienna where she specialized in waste to energy of biomass residues. She is also the Editorial Assistant for Waste Management and Research, ISWA’s Academic Journal, the Working Group Secretary for the Working 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 108 of 117 
Group on Healthcare Waste, Working Group on Landfill, and Working Group on Recycling and Waste Minimisation, and the main coordinator for the ISWA World Congress Technical Programme.    Relevant publications 
 ISWA GmbH owns the Waste Management World Magazine Relevant Projects : 
 Addressing Barriers to Sustainable Resource Management Significant Infrastructure and Equipment (description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work): 1. Waste Management and Research (ISWA-run Academic Journal)-Dissemination tool 2. Waste Management World (ISWA Magazine)-Dissemination tool 3. ISWA World Congresses 4. Beacon Conference on Recycling and Waste Minimization Budget:  Approximately 1/3 of ISWA`s personal cost is allocated to Mrs. Jennifer MacDonald`s contribution to the dissemination efforts. Mrs. MacDonald is an employee of ISWA GmbH. Budget: € 25,068  Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) Y  RM Umweltkonsulenten GmbH (RMU) – (Third party in-kind contribution against payment) Profile of Third Party: RMU is a full service environmental consultancy with 20 years of experience, and an expertise in waste collection and recycling in general as well as plastics recycling in particular. RMU offers a full range of activities including research and innovation projects besides ordinary consulting and expert services in all aspects of waste management.    Main tasks attributed in the project RMU will support ISWA with their expertise in separate waste collection and recycling on Task 1.2, and their expertise in waste management for Task 4.2. They will also be supporting ISWA with input on general project management, and with Work Package 9 to leverage their experience with innovation and marketing.  Involved Staff Arne Ragossnig has been engaged in the waste management sector for 25 years, including in academic, private and public sector positions. He has also been an associate editor of the Academic Journal, Waste Management & Research since 2004. He now serves as editor in chief for that journal. He has worked extensively in academia, leading courses on waste management, energy and environmental management and sustainable energy systems. Relevant publications (selection) • Ragoßnig, A.M. (2017): Schulungsunterlagen für das Seminar “Sortierung und Recycling von Kunststoffen“, veranstaltet durch den Verband der österreichischen Entsorgungs¬betriebe (VOEB). • Ragoßnig, A.M. (2017): what is the real scope of waste management?, in: Waste Management & Research 35 (11): pp. 1097–1098 • Schneider, D. & Ragoßnig, A. M. (2014): Impacts and limitations of recycling. - in: Waste Management & Research 32 (7): pp. 563-564. 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 109 of 117 
• Ragoßnig, A. M., Meirhofer, M., Sommer, M. & Rixrath, D. (2013): Technische, ökonomische und ökologische Aspekte verschiedener Varianten des Stoffstromsplittings einer MBA-Schwerfraktion, In: Thomé-Kozmiensky & Pomberger (Hrsg.): Festschrift Professor Karl E. Lorber, Leoben 10/2013. • Meirhofer, M., Piringer, G., Rixrath, D., Sommer, M. & Ragoßnig A. M. (2013): Implementing an advanced waste separation step in an MBT plant: assessment of technical, economic and environmental impacts, In: Waste Management & Research, 0734242X13493958, first published on June 23, 2013 • Pomberger, R & Ragossnig, A 2014, 'Future waste - waste future' Waste management & research: Waste management and research, Bd 32, S. 89-90. • Pomberger, R, Pieber, M, Ragossnig, A & Curtis, A 2012, 'Biogenic carbon-enriched and pollutant depleted SRF from commercial and pretreated heterogeneous waste generated by NIR sensor-based sorting' Waste Management & Research: Waste Management and Research, S. 381-391. • Wolfsberger, T, Nispel, J, Sarc, R, Aldrian, A, Hermann, R, Höllen, D, Pomberger, R, Budischowsky, A & Ragossnig, A 2015, 'Landfill mining: Development of a theoretical method for a preliminary estimate of the raw material potential of landfill sites' Waste Management & Research: Waste Management and Research, Bd 33, Nr. 7, S. 671-680., 10.1177/0734242X15590473 • Wolfsberger, T, Aldrian, A, Sarc, R, Hermann, R, Höllen, D, Budischowsky, A, Zöscher, A, Ragossnig, A & Pomberger, R 2015, 'Landfill mining: Resource potential of Austrian landfills – Evaluation and quality assessment of recovered municipal solid waste by chemical analyses' Waste Management & Research: Waste Management and Research, Nr. DOI: 10.1177/0734242X15600051. Relevant Projects • Sortrec – concept planning and implementation of a new generation of a plastics sorting facility, Sortrec GmbH (daughter company of Kruschitz Plastics GmbH and Gojer Kärntner Entsorgungsdienst GmbH) (2017 – ongoing) • Plastics sorting and recycling, practicioner training course executed on behalf of VOEB (association of Austrian Private Sector Waste Managment Companies) (twice a year from 2015 onwards) • Strategic consulting in Plastics Recycling for Branter Walter GmbH (2017) Budget 2 PMs , hourly rate as defined for SME Owners / self-employed persons in Austria, € 36,41 Total Budget € 10.413,26   Participant no. 20 International Solid Waste Association / ISWA (Netherlands) Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted) Y There are no plans for subcontracting. Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties Y There will be no linked third parties involved.   Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) Y There will be several third partied contributing to the project from ISWA’s network. They each are an integral part of the association, either as past of the General Secretariat, or as chairs of working groups and other bodies within ISWA. There are 5 parties identified for contributions, with a 5PM allocation and in total a budget of € 26,304.85.  
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 110 of 117 
Aditi Ramola (ISWA Technical Director)   Aditi is the current Technical Director at the ISWA General Secretariat. She graduated with distinction from the Environmental Technology & International Affairs MSc joint program offered by the Technical University of Vienna and the Diplomatic Academy of Vienna. She received the ‘Best Study Award’ from ARA Altstoff Recycling Austria AG for her exemplary academic performance. She has several years of experience in the private sector and international organizations such as Caterpillar Inc. and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization where she worked at the Climate Policy and Networks unit of the Department of Energy. Most recently she was involved in the successful completion of the European Commission funded project on Developing an EU Standardized Approach to Vocational Qualifications in Healthcare Waste where she led the Work Package on Implementation planning and network growth and development.  Budget 2 PMs, hourly rate as defined for SME Owners / self-employed persons in Netherlands, € 36.79 Total Budget € 10,521.94   Björn Appelqvist (Chair of ISWA Scientific and Technical Committee)  Björn Appelqvist has worked in the waste management sector for more than 15 years. He was formerly Chair of the ISWA Working Group on Recycling and Waste Minimisation and was the Chair of the ISWA Task Force on Resource Management. He is currently the Head of Department for Waste Management and Site Solutions at Ramboll, having moved from the City of Denmark where he worked as a Project Manager at the Technical and Environmental Administration of the City of Copenhagen, where he is concerned with waste planning, treatment technologies and development of the city’s waste management system in general. Earlier, he had been working as Development Manager at the solid waste collection company R98 in Copenhagen as well as Development Engineer at the Waste Management Department of the City of Malmö, Sweden. Through his involvement in the International Solid Waste Association (ISWA), Björn has addressed issues such as circular economy, resource management and the effects on globalization on the waste management sector on an international level.    Budget 0.5 PMs, hourly rate as defined for SME Owners / self-employed persons in Netherlands, € 36.79 Total Budget € 2,630.49   Andreas Bartl (Vice-Chair of ISWA Working Group on Recycling and Waste Minimisation)  Andreas Bartl is currently an Associate Professor and Senior Scientist in the Research Group for Particle Technology, Recycling Technology and Technology Assessment at the Vienna University of Technology. He has several years of experience in fiber technology between textiles, nonwovens and paper. He is the author of several research papers and technical studies.  Andreas is currently involved in research projects aiming to recycle textiles which usually consist of various polymers.  One approach is to dissolve or decompose certain polymers and make the recycling of the remaining polymer(s) much easier. It is within the scope of the research to use enzymes which, for instance, selectively degrade cellulosic fibers into sugars and make the polyester ready to be recycled.  Budget 0.5 PMs, hourly rate as defined for SME Owners / self-employed persons in Netherlands, € 36.79 Total Budget € 2,630.49   Joachim Quoden (Chair of the ISWA Working Group on Legal Issues)  
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 111 of 117 
Joachim Quoden is currently Chair of the ISWA Working Group on Legal Issue. He has extensive experience in packaging waste management, dating from 1992 when he spent 4 months in the German Federal Ministry of Environment working on packaging issues including the German Packaging Ordinance. From 1993 to 2006, Mr Quoden worked with Der Grüne Punkt -Duales System Deutschland GmbH (DSD), where he was appointed head of International Affairs in 2001. Between 2001 and 2013, he also became Secretary General and later Managing Director of PRO EUROPE, the umbrella organization of 35 packaging recovery organizations. Since 2013, Mr Quoden acts as Managing Director of EXPRA, a new alliance of 26 PRO’s from currently more than 24 countries. Besides the above, Mr Quoden is working since 1995 as independent lawyer in Germany specializing in international EPR legislation, chairperson of ISWA’s Governance & Legal working group, member of the OECD EPR expert group and has served as an expert in ISO global standardization project SIS/TK 165/AG 10 Packaging and Environment. Budget 0.5 PMs, hourly rate as defined for SME Owners / self-employed persons in Netherlands, € 36.79 Total Budget € 2,630.49   RM Umweltkonsulenten GmbH (RMU) – (Third party in-kind contribution against payment) Profile of Third Party: RMU is a full-service environmental consultancy with 20 years of experience, and an expertise in waste collection and recycling in general as well as plastics recycling in particular. RMU offers a full range of activities including research and innovation projects besides ordinary consulting and expert services in all aspects of waste management.    Main tasks attributed in the project RMU will support ISWA with their expertise in separate waste collection and recycling on Task 1.2, and their expertise in waste management for Task 4.2. They will also be supporting ISWA with input on general project management, and with Work Package 9 to leverage their experience with innovation and marketing.  Involved Staff Arne Ragossnig has been engaged in the waste management sector for 25 years, including in academic, private and public sector positions. He has also been an associate editor of the Academic Journal, Waste Management & Research since 2004. He now serves as editor in chief for that journal. He has worked extensively in academia, leading courses on waste management, energy and environmental management and sustainable energy systems. Relevant publications (selection) • Ragoßnig, A.M. (2017): Schulungsunterlagen für das Seminar “Sortierung und Recycling von Kunststoffen“, veranstaltet durch den Verband der österreichischen Entsorgungs¬betriebe (VOEB). • Ragoßnig, A.M. (2017): what is the real scope of waste management?, in: Waste Management & Research 35 (11): pp. 1097–1098 • Schneider, D. & Ragoßnig, A. M. (2014): Impacts and limitations of recycling. - in: Waste Management & Research 32 (7): pp. 563-564. • Ragoßnig, A. M., Meirhofer, M., Sommer, M. & Rixrath, D. (2013): Technische, ökonomische und ökologische Aspekte verschiedener Varianten des Stoffstromsplittings einer MBA-Schwerfraktion, In: Thomé-Kozmiensky & Pomberger (Hrsg.): Festschrift Professor Karl E. Lorber, Leoben 10/2013. • Meirhofer, M., Piringer, G., Rixrath, D., Sommer, M. & Ragoßnig A. M. (2013): Implementing an advanced waste separation step in an MBT plant: assessment of technical, economic and environmental impacts, In: Waste Management & Research, 0734242X13493958, first published on June 23, 2013 • Pomberger, R & Ragossnig, A 2014, 'Future waste - waste future' Waste management & research: Waste management and research, Bd 32, S. 89-90. 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 112 of 117 
• Pomberger, R, Pieber, M, Ragossnig, A & Curtis, A 2012, 'Biogenic carbon-enriched and pollutant depleted SRF from commercial and pretreated heterogeneous waste generated by NIR sensor-based sorting' Waste Management & Research: Waste Management and Research, S. 381-391. • Wolfsberger, T, Nispel, J, Sarc, R, Aldrian, A, Hermann, R, Höllen, D, Pomberger, R, Budischowsky, A & Ragossnig, A 2015, 'Landfill mining: Development of a theoretical method for a preliminary estimate of the raw material potential of landfill sites' Waste Management & Research: Waste Management and Research, Bd 33, Nr. 7, S. 671-680., 10.1177/0734242X15590473 • Wolfsberger, T, Aldrian, A, Sarc, R, Hermann, R, Höllen, D, Budischowsky, A, Zöscher, A, Ragossnig, A & Pomberger, R 2015, 'Landfill mining: Resource potential of Austrian landfills – Evaluation and quality assessment of recovered municipal solid waste by chemical analyses' Waste Management & Research: Waste Management and Research, Nr. DOI: 10.1177/0734242X15600051. Relevant Projects • Sortrec – concept planning and implementation of a new generation of a plastics sorting facility, Sortrec GmbH (daughter company of Kruschitz Plastics GmbH and Gojer Kärntner Entsorgungsdienst GmbH) (2017 – ongoing) • Plastics sorting and recycling, practicioner training course executed on behalf of VOEB (association of Austrian Private Sector Waste Managment Companies) (twice a year from 2015 onwards) • Strategic consulting in Plastics Recycling for Branter Walter GmbH (2017) Budget 1.5 PMs, hourly rate as defined for SME Owners / self-employed persons in Netherlands, € 36.79 Total Budget € 7,891.46   
5: Ethics and Security 5.1 Ethics During the preparation of this project, in keeping with the required Ethics Appraisal Procedure, an Ethics Self-assessment was performed with the completion of the Ethical Issues Table, and this project does not involve Ethics issues. It is not expected that personal data will be handled but shall it be necessary at any point, it would be done in compliance with the GDPR to come into force in May 2018 also keeping with H2020 guidelines in terms of recruitment, informed consent, data storage, protection and destruction procedures (no personal information will be collected during surveys, which will be anonymous, not involve minors nor any audio or video recording). Although the self-assessment identified no ethics issues arising from the actual workplan itself, it is worthy of comment the measures that we are taking during the project work plan to address and mitigate any concerns that could indeed appear in the future:  Regulatory activities have been incorporated from the outset of the project with the intention of gathering data to fuel into a further safe and compliant development phase. In terms of product, we will deal with food safety regulations for packaging but also with CE and safety compliance of the MultiCycle pilot plant (ATEX Directive 2014/34/EU (Annex IX) or IECEx Scheme).   The appropriate health and safety procedures conforming to relevant local/national guidelines/legislation will be followed by staff involved in this project. In this sense, all partners follow recognised hygiene and safety rules, including chemical regulations such as REACH, which polymers are exempt from but will be duly followed when dealing with any other chemical.   The use of LCA, which identifies environmental as well as health impacts, can help identify where the maximum impact could occur providing the opportunity for process or material modifications to minimise these impacts.  Finally measures related to responsible research & innovation, spread as relevant along the work plan, are overseen in WP10. All in all, the developed processes will provide a significant environmental improvement (lowering land filling, depletion of fossil resources) resulting in very pure polymers that can be used in packaging and automotive thereby responding to growing consumers desires to make more responsible choices. Furthermore, in terms of end of life, as seen, currently only a minor share of the plastic is recycled and a far too high proportion is landfilled which, in the end, leads to direct and indirect pollution for example when plastics are blown away from their place of disposal. In fact, whereas no plastic was ever 
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 113 of 117 
designed to be disposed off in the environment, our lands and oceans are filled with millions of tonnes of plastics that will unfortunately last for hundred years, creating an ever mounting problem. So there is no doubt that developing economically profitable processes and schemes for recycling plastic-based materials will promote their collection so on the long term potentially reducing pollution by plastics. All in all, how ethical is it to continue jeopardising our future generation’s ability to access resources?
5.2 Security  The project will involve NO: • activities or results raising security issues • 'EU-classified information' as background or results.  
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 114 of 117 
ANNEX: Support letters from Advisory board 
 
Summary of AB members and respective roles: 
Name (Short name) Type Country Role Flexible packaging Europe (FPE) Association EU Support in identifying the EU-wide needs in terms of flexible packaging recycling and disseminate the project results among their members as potential users of the recycled materials Association of the European Composites Industry (EuCIA) Association EU Support in identifying the EU-wide needs in terms of composite recycling and disseminate the project results among their members as potential users of the recycled materials European Biosplastics (EUBP) Association EU Support in identifying the needs in terms of bioplastics recycling and disseminate the project results among their members as potential users of the new recycling process. Help in sourcing PLA based post industrial packaging wastes in the future exploitation. CEFLEX- A circular economy for flexible packaging Industry-wide initiative EU MultiCycle will be considered among best practices for improving collection, sorting and reprocessing infrastructure/economy that are scanned in CEFLEX for post-consumer flexible (Creasolv® is already listed and the improvements performed in MultiCycle on the same and on further steps will further help).  Zentrum für Lebensmittel und Verpackungstechnologie e.V. (ZLV) Association Germany Give access to food packer to access their aspirations and concerns in terms of recyclability of packaging materials and use of recycled materials respectively PackCluster Association Spain Support in identifying the needs in terms of packaging recycling (including as well rigid multilayer types) and disseminate the project results among their members as potential users of the recycled materials Industry Association for Food Technology and Packaging (IVLV) Association Germany Give access to food packer to access their aspirations and concerns in terms of recyclability of packaging materials and use of recycled materials respectively Asociación Nacional de Recicladores de Plástico (ANARPLA) Association Spain Give access to additional insight on the plastics available from non recyclable fractions and to a number of potential licensees for MultiCycle. Diad Group (DIAD) SME Italy Provide specifications for the recycling of sport car parts and post industrial long carbon fibres based composites for recycling trials. Potential user of r-CF in thermosetting and thermoplastic composites. Arctic Biomaterials Oy, ABM Composites (ARCTIC) SME Finland Provide specifications for the recycling technical composites based on PLA in the future exploitation and glass fibres and is potential user of r-GF and r-PLA. AEROCIRCULAR SME Belgium Interest in understanding how the developed process could be extended to end-of-life aircraft fleet management, as well as to disseminate the results and availability of compatible SRMs such as r-CFs to the aerospace industry. 
 
  
                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 115 of 117 
 
 
 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 116 of 117 
 
  

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 117 of 117 
 
 
 
 
 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 118 of 117 
 
 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 119 of 117 
 
 
 
 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 120 of 117 
 
  

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 121 of 117 
 
 
 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 122 of 117 
 
 
 
 
 
  

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 123 of 117 
 
 
 
 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 124 of 117 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                         CE-SPIRE-10-2018  
820695- MultiCycle- Part B   Page 125 of 117