4. The development of embedded deep models for regression, classification and real-time control, running on latest 
System-on-Chip (SoC) technology combining ARM processors and GPU/TPU. The aim is to provide onsite -in 
the factory floor - and online -during the manufa cturing process- measurements of physical magnitudes (e.g. 
colour, temperature) and classification of different types of categories (e.g. material composition, quality grades) 
with high flexibility, accuracy, and reliability. Moreover, these observations will be used to monitor and control 
both specific process operations and production flows. 
5. The development of an integral and scalable approach to the orchestration and big data collection of photoni c 
monitoring systems under an IoT native approach. The aim is to leverage state-of-the-art open source cloud and 

ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  5 
big data technologies to create a new set of cloud services that facilitate and boost the development, deployment 
and orchestration of new interrelated monitoring systems and complex decision s upport tools to optimise 
manufacturing production under multiple goals (e.g. maxi mum quality, lead -time, cost efficiency, waste 
reduction, energy savings). 
6. The validation and demonstration of the proposed approach in very different manufacturing scenarios: 
woodworking, steelworking and food industry. Such scenarios are representative of typical schemes of both 
continuous processes happening along a complex pr oduction line, and multi -stage piecewise manufacturing 
processes. They reflect a wide set of magnitudes and features that make the case for multimodal monitoring. 
Objective Verification Timing Milestone 
O1. Developing 
cost-effective 
snapshot HSI 
camera cores 
• Suitable for machine vision volume market 
• VGA (640-512 px) resolution 
• 350  fps 
• up to 32 spectral bands 
• Spectral bandwidth (FWHM) <10nm 
• Tag price under 10,000€ 
M18 MS3 
O2. Developing 
VIS/SWIR 
snapshot 
spectral imagers 
• Dual aperture  
• VIS/SWIR range coverage (0.4-1.7 µm) 
• Up to 64 narrow bands 
• Tag price under 15,000€ 
• Spectral bandwidth (FWHM) <15nm 
• VGA resolution 
M18 MS3 
O3. Developing 
novel 
multimodal 
monitoring 
modules 
• Colorimetry robust to lighting conditions 
• 2ΔE2000 colour differences (JND) 
• SWIR thermography independent on emissivity (2% accuracy) 
• Highly specific VIS/MWIR spectroscopic solutions combining 
versatile OLED  sensors with laser -based approaches for 
chemometric analysis of gases and food and wood chemical 
constituents 
• Classification and regression of HSI images for quality grading and 
parameter estimation   
• Segmentation of HSI images for enhanced detection of defects and 
foreign bodies 
M18 MS3 
O4. 
Orchestration of 
monitoring 
systems 
• Smart IoT monitoring/control devices in compliance with industry 
4.0 and vision standards 
• Embedded implementation classification, regression,  and 
segmentation 
• Cloud services for data ingest, aggregation, search, and 
visualization and fast model development and deployment 
M24 MS4 
O5. Integrated 
process 
optimization 
• Production modelled and parameterised 
• Data-driven analytics and decision support system working 
• Fully traceable quality control throughout the production lifecycle 
• Process optimization in terms of quality, resource efficiency and 
speed 
M30 MS5 
O6. 
Demonstration 
in operational 
environment 
• Steelworking: 15% Production performance , 10% overall 
efficiency, 1 0% quality improvement, 15% CO2 and NOx 
emissions reduction 
• Woodworking: 10% reduction on adhesive consumption, 15% 
shorten time to market, 10% resources and energy savings 
• Food: 100% quality control of production, 100% detection of 
foreign bodies, 100% detection of chocolate adulteration 
M36 MS6
1.2 Relation to the work programme  
MULTIPLE addresses the H2020 -ICT-2019-05 call for the Photonics topic, Application driven Photonics 
components, focusing on the Sensor-Based Optimization of Production Processes. The alignment of the project with 
the goals of the call can be summarised around the following five points explicitly set in the topic description. 
Broadband. MULTIPLE monitoring systems will work in a broad spectral range from 0.4 to 5 µm wavelength. 
Notably, MULTIPLE imagers will build on breakthrough snapshot hyperspectral senso rs developed by IMEC in a 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  6 
wide range that covers the full visible and SWIR ranges, from 0.4 to 1.7 µm wavelength. Mosaic filters in the 
VIS/SWIR range will provide breakthrough snapshot hyperspectral-imaging capabilities unique in the market. 
Cutting-edge OLED sensors and novel concepts on laser -based spectroscopy over an extended VIS/MWIR range 
will complete the offer of powerful spectroscopic highly specific capabilities, compliant with industrial operating 
conditions. 
Multimodal. The information carried by photons in these spectral bands will be extracted and will cater to a variety 
of models that will estimate different parameters, measures, and quality grades. From hyperspectral estimation of 
mechanical properties of wood products, m ulti-wavelength high temperature thermography in the SWIR range to 
chemical composition estimation in the MWIR, surface and volume geometry or spectrally -resolved colorimetric 
assessment in the visible, among many other measurements and characterizations t hat are relevant throughout 
production lines and production stages. 
Smart. The use of state-of-the-art machine learning technology -with an emphasis on deep convolutional networks- 
to build and train models that run embedded inside the monitoring systems e nsures the highest possible device 
intelligence, and a timely feedback to act on the process, adjusting process parameters and production flows. The 
capability to handle data at scale -relying on elastic search and advanced visualization of big data- and to easily train 
and deploy models will enable new more efficient and powerful workflows involving development engineers of 
integrators and equipment suppliers, and production engineers of manufacturing end-users.  
Cost-effective. MULTIPLE will bring cost ef fective and proven camera cores suitable for volume production that 
caters the mainstream machine vision market, led by PHF -a well-established and worldwide renowned supplier of 
cameras and camera cores for industrial applications. Camera cores with a maximum tag price of 10,000€ will ensure 
a fast adoption in a market-demanding capabilities only achievable with higher spectral specificity and coverage. The 
like can be told of OLED and laser-based spectroscopic solutions, built on inexpensive sensors. In order to make the 
final solutions truly affordable, cost effectiveness is enforced throughout the whole value chain. At the modelling 
level, MULTIPLE IoT native approach will bring services that cut down and scale development and deployment 
cost, typically the highest and most uncertain and ri sky component of any industrial innovation project budget. 
Changes in production (e.g. in materials or component features and quality grades) will be met in most cases by 
simple procedures to retrain and deploy models. 
Process integrated . By explicitly addressing the orchestration of smart monitoring systems throughout the 
production line or chain, MULTIPLE ensures that optimization is pursued at the relevant production levels. The 
creation of complex interrelated models becomes feasible, by gaining awareness on both upstream and downstream 
conditions and issues. Moreover, this approach will facilitate the identification and correction of bottlenecks, issues 
and their causes, at a much larger scale than current industrial innovation practices.
1.3 Concept and methodology  
MULTIPLE concept is based around three main pillars: i) Multimodal spectral sensors ; ii) Orchestration of 
monitoring solutions; iii) Integrated process optimisation. MULTIPLE will be implemented and assessed in three 
different application domains in steelworking, woodprocessing and food , addressing product and process 
optimisation, in real manufacturing conditions. 
1.3.1 Concept 
MULTIPLE will combine the latest advances and concepts in snapshot hyperspectral imaging, OLED and laser -
based spectroscopy, multimodal imaging, embedded processing, machine learning for classification and regression, 
and cloud -based model prototyping and deployment and analytics. The approach adopted will ensure the 
development and demonstration of a comprehensive set of novel monitoring solutions with high functionality and a 
cloud system for the orchestration of the whole monitoring network, fostering data-driven process optimization and 
innovation. The solutions proposed will feature: 
• Novel industry-grade hyperspectral imaging  SWIR camera cores . These camera cores will be cost 
effective with a tag price within reach of industry budgets, f ostering innovations in the field of product and 
process monitoring. 
• Cost-effective, integrated, and configurable dual aperture snapshot hyperspectral imager  -spanning the 
visible, NIR and SWIR ranges - that will be stressed to provide multimodal imaging capabilities -spatially 
resolved in real time- in demanding industrial settings.   
• Novel versatile and low-cost OLED sensors and laser-based spectroscopy will be applied over an extended 
range from VIS  to MWIR for low cost and highly sensitive chemometric solutions, which will reinforce 
multimodal measurement capabilities, revealing spectral signatures of chemical constituents in different 
scenarios.  
• Real-time embedded edge computing, ensuring timely feedback to control processes and production flows. 
SoC ARM and GPU/TPU processing platforms will be stressed to run classification and regression models 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  7 
in real time. 
• A scalable orchestration of monitoring systems  based on cloud microservices, cutting down modelling 
and edge deployment effort and time and enabling process innovation and optimization at scale.  
The MULTIPLE project will carry out four main blocks of activities that deal with: 
i. Multimodal spectral sensors  
ii. Orchestration of monitoring solutions 
iii. Integrated process optimisation 
iv. Demonstration 
  Multimodal spectral sensors 
HSI SWIR camera cores 
Spectral imaging is an imaging technique that captures and processes multiple narrow band images over a  spectral 
range. It enables detailed analysis and identification of objects as they contain unique information at different 
wavelengths. There are three main methods of acquiring hyperspectral imaging data: spatial scanning, spectral 
scanning, and snapshot imaging. Snapshot sensors/cameras collect the entire 3D datacube in a single shot without 
scanning. As a result, they are free of scanning artefacts, far more robust and compact, and benefit from higher optical 
efficiency.  
A prominent architecture with t he potential to be compact is the spectrally resolving detector arrays (SRDA) also 
called snapshot mosaic cameras. IMEC's snapshot mosaic sensor technology is a unique compact and low cost 
solution, capable of real-time spectral imaging data acquisition. 
After the commercial success of the snapshot HSI CMOS sensor in the visible range, IMEC has been working in 
translating the technology to the SWIR range by applying a tailored variant with InGaAs. As a result, IMEC has 
come with a cost effective and high performance FPA solution for HSI imaging in the SWIR range. MULTIPLE will 
integrate this SWIR HSI FPA in a new camera core following the strong standards of PHOTONFOCUS camera 
platforms and featuring all the preprocessing functionalities for noise reduction and correction and efficient data 
transmission that have made PHOTONFOCUS cameras a success in the market of industrial cameras.   
MULTIPLE will integrate this sensor technology in a new cost effective and high throughput camera core featuring 
the high quality and robust image pre-processing and interconnectivity that can be found in any commercial camera 
core marketed by PHOTONFOCUS, one of the main world suppliers of industrial vision cameras. All the necessary 
developments will be put in place to ensure the required cost effectiveness, robustness and connectivity, in order to 
meet the demanding requirements of industrial machine vision volume market.  
Dual aperture VIS/SWIR snapshot hyperspectral imaging 
Over the last decades, computational imaging 
technology has become a key part of most 
consumer cameras in any format. Since the first 
models featuring multi -exposure HDR and 
stitching-based panoramas, more and more 
smartphone cameras are embracing dual 
aperture and even multi -aperture approaches to 
boost camera performance. This technology has 
been also used in multispectral imaging, mostly 
combining several sub -bands of the spectral 
range of CMOS sensors.  
Exploiting a dual aperture approach -one 
aperture for the visible range and the other for the SWIR range - and embedded capabilities for computational 
imaging, MULTIPLE will build a new camera capable of snapshot computational imaging in a broad spectral range, 
from 0.4 to 1.7 µm wavelength. Following this approach, optical performance -a key factor of HSI performance- may 
be easily and flexibly optimized for each aperture. Moreover, this will be possible with off -the-shelf and compact 
optical components, at a fairly low-cost. This is key to keep the final imager cost effective and compact, unlike bulky 
and expensive prism-based optics. 
Therefore, MULTIPLE will bring a compact and cost effective broadband dual aperture camera, capable of snapshot 
hyperspectral imaging in the VIS/SWIR range. 
Spectroscopic analysers 
Spectrometric technology for chemometric analysis has gained popularity thanks to its non -destructive nature and 
Figure 2. Multimodal spectral sensing. 

ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  8 
the capability to provide highly specific and accurate measurements, quickly and onsite. However, the SWIR and 
MWIR range are still syno nyms of either sensitivity issues or expensive equipment. MULTIPLE will combine a 
recent breakthrough in tunable OLED sensors with highly specific laser-based spectroscopic schemes to a variety of 
chemometric analysis in the VIS/MWIR range (0.4 µm - 5 µm), from gas concentration measurement to the detection 
and concentration measurement of constituents in food and wood products. 
Overall, MULTIPLE puts forward a complete set of cost effective and compact multimodal monitoring systems, 
capable to probe the very specific information carried by photons in different spectral bands spanning a broad range 
from 0.5µm to 5 µm wavelength. 
  Orchestration of monitoring solutions 
In order to manage the big amount of data from the spectral sensors proposed and to stress the most of their potential, 
MULTIPLE will develop smart photonic -IoT native- monitoring devices. These edge devices will implement novel 
real-time processing pipelines based on Deep Learning, enabling processing of high dimensionality data like 
hyperspectral datacubes  for different operations in the manufacturing industrial environment, with minimal 
engineering intervention. 
Each monitoring system will be equipped with an AI 
capable edge computing device based on latest 
system-on-chip boards (e.g. SoC ARM/GPU/FPGA), 
providing functionalities for data collection, pre -
processing, AI inference, control and ubiquitous 
communications. 
Communication with other monitoring solutions, field 
devices or production management applications and 
services will be provided through standards defined in 
Industry 4.0 (RAMI4.0 model 2). e.g. the adoption of 
OPC-UA3 will allow machine-readable, semantically 
unambiguous self -description of properties and 
capabilities, together with secure machine -to-
machine communication and data exchange.  
The embedded system will use the extracted information to make decisions, e.g. actuating over the field devices in 
closed-loop control, or to feed the production management services only with a meaningful and relevant stream of 
features. The core of the processing pipeline will rely on an AI inference engine enabling the deployment of high 
performance deep neural models using seamless cloud se rvices. Th is approach will  foster the re -configurability 
capabilities of the monitoring system reducing the engineering efforts when facing a new inspection problem, 
replacing the need of custom algorithm re-programming and the big challenge of manual feature extraction by simply 
training and deploying a new deep model. 
Going beyond current machine vision and spectral monitoring solutions -which are focused on monitoring a specific 
operation at a specific point-, AI models will be trained to recognize anomalies in data, and continuously improve 
the performance. Moreover, the increased capability of data generation (e.g. hyperspectral imaging sensors) and deep 
learning requires mechani sms for supporting scalable data management (i.e. data ingest, analysis, and storage), 
demanding flexible cloud architectures for a fast development and retraining of models. 
 
2 https://www.plattform-i40.de/I40/Redaktion/EN/Downloads/Publikation/hm-2018-manufacturing.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=2 
3 https://opcfoundation.org/about/opc-technologies/opc-ua/ 
Figure 3. Smart photonic IoT MULTIPLE monitoring devices. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  9 
 
Figure 4. MULTIPLE cloud-based service oriented architecture supporting the orchestration of monitoring solutions and fast development of 
deep models. 
Based on a micro-services architecture in the cloud and existing open source platforms, MULTIPLE pursues: 
• Providing a scalable data warehouse to ingest, store, and manage (i.e. search and analysis) heterogeneous 
photonic multimodal data and other production data, and the capability for real-time detection of anomalies.  
• Enabling the fast development of deep models  and inter -related models combi ning data from different 
monitoring devices, and production floor observations (i.e. annotations). 
• Providing the infrastructure to seamless deploy such deep learning models in the edge computing devices 
in an industrial environment for a granular monitoring and control of production. 
  Integrated process optimisation 
MULTIPLE will establish an integrated production optimization 
framework allowing flexible control of the production line, applying 
real-time control at specific critical points (e.g. PID controller at 
machine level, automated production flow rerouting based on quality 
checks), as well as monitoring the overall production efficiency 
providing meaningful information (e.g. energy/material 
consumption, costs) for decision making and feedback to update 
production models and KPIs (Figure 5). 
Relying on the information and data collected and stored in  the 
scalable cloud data warehouse -raw and real -time data processed 
from the photonic monitoring solutions developed in MULTIPLE, 
together with other data coming from different sources already 
present in the factories (e.g. PLCs, SCADA, ERP)- and the power of 
the open source Elastic Search Engine and cloud micro -services, 
MULTIPLE will provide effective tools to analyse data and compute 
KPI and enable product quality and consumption traceability. 
Such solution will facilitate to locate fault sources providing 
decision support feedback for adjustment and correction, reduci ng 
intervention times, and alerting production managers. The integrated 
system will apply big data a nalytics to have a better understanding 
of complex production processes involved in the production lines. 
This will improve the accuracy of the simplified models used for real 
time control and finding more accurate, but complex, deep models, 
or re-defining KPIs. 
 Demonstration 
PRODUCTION OPTIMISATION OF STEELWORKING PROCESSES (LDL):  
MULTIPLE will deploy and run a demonstration in a modern rolling mill production plant of LDL located at the 
Bayonne harbour (France). It produces a variety of steel plates incl uding normalized fine -grain steels, weather -
resistant and tempered steel used in heavy construction (e.g. wind farms, shipbuilding), mechanical engineering and 
pressure vessels applications. Currently the mill produces plates with 8-150 mm thickness, 1850-2500 mm width and 
up to a maximum length of 24 m. The process on the LDL factory has three steps:  
i. Reheating the feedstock. Steel labs are reheated in a gas -fired furnace of 30m long where the temperature 
changes from room temperature up to around 1150ºC. This stage makes the steel softer and more malleable. 
Figure 5. Integrated process optimization layout. 

ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  10 
Reheating sequence requires different configurations depending on the specific steel quality and differs from 
one batch to another.  
ii. Reversible rolling mill stand. The slabs are pushed in a stand that consists of two cylindrical steel rolls, where 
the steel is passed back and forth several times. In each rolling pass, the c ross section of the steel slab is 
reduced, and the product is elongated by controlling the distance between the cylindrical steel rolls. The final 
thickness of the steel plate is proportional to the number of passes carried out during the rolling process that 
depends on the mechanical characteristics of the respective steel quality at the rolling temperature.  
iii. Cool down. The steel plate is cooled to ambient temperature at a controlled cooling rates in order to ensure 
the final characteristics of the steel p late. In every step of the process, the quality of the feedstock, the raw 
material, is taken into account to achieve the required quality of the final steel product.  
The reheating furnace represents approx. 70 -80% of the total energy consumption of the pl ant, and the fuel 
consumption of the furnace up to 15% of the operational cost of a rolling process. Reduction of reheating costs is one 
of the major challenges in rolling mills. Currently, the reheating furnace in LDL is controlled based on predefined 
recipes defined by the operators (oxygen/fuel ratio, temperature ramps, holding time, etc.) which must respond to 
changes in product size and mix. Finding the optimal heating conditions is hard due to unexpected variabilities in the 
input material composition. Besides, reheating the steel to a uniform temperature is critical to that deformation does 
not occur. Variations of the steel slab temperature along the rolling mill stand due to production delays and/or low 
reheating temperature due to unexpected variat ions also requires dynamic adaptation of the loads and the rolling 
sequence.  
MULTIPLE will improve the online 
monitoring capabilities inside the 
reheating furnace and during the reversible 
rolling mill. Novel accurate and robust 
multi-gas analyser will be deployed to 
provide in real time measurements of gas 
constituents at several locations inside the 
furnace and chimney. Hyperspectral 
SWIR imaging will provide temperature 
maps of  the steel slab and furnace walls 
independent on emissivity even in the 
presence of dust and steam. These 
measurements, combined with other 
sensors data (e.g. steel chemical composition, geometry, fuel pressure and rate), will be used to optimize the operation 
point of the furnace and automatically adjust the reheating sequences and loads at the rolling mill, avoiding scraps 
and defected parts, and ensuring the end product quality (Figure 6). 
KPI MULTIPLE improvement Justification 
Improved performance Improvement in overall 
efficiency: 10% 
Increase performance of the global plant thanks to an 
integrated optimization of the reheating and rolling 
processes4. 
Production 
performance 
Reduction in delays due to low 
temperature of the steel: 15% 
Improved heating strategy to get the right temperature 
of the rolling slabs  by using multispectral SWIR 
imaging at different stages and integration with the 
control system 
Energy and resource 
consumption 
Energy savings in reheating 
furnace: 10% 
Automatic set point calculation and real -time control 
for each production rate and quality mix . Online 
analysis of fuel content and integration with PLC. Use 
of gas analysers at the furnace outlet and chimney to 
establish optimum energy balance. Reduction of the 
excess air, prevention of leakages and heat losses from 
walls and doors with thermography. 
Waste or by -products 
production Quality improvement: 10% 
Improved heating strategy of slabs leading to reduced 
scrap. Detection of detrimental defects with HSI 
cameras at the earliest stages before further processing 
and semi-product reallocation. 
 
4 Kilinç, E., Kaya, D. et al. “An Energy Efficiency Analysis of an Industrial Reheating Furnace and an Implementation of 
Efficiency Enhancements Methods”. Energy Exploration & Exploitation 2014, 32(6), 989–1003. 
Figure 6. Rolling mill production line. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  11 
CO2, NOx emissions 15% reduction 
More efficient heating returns and improvements in 
stoichiometric ratio . Online analysis of fuel content 
and combustion with a multi -gas analyser and 
integration with the control system. 
PRODUCTION OPTIMISATION FOR WOODWORKING AND FURNITURE (ROYO): 
ROYO is a leading bathroom’s furniture company with headquarters in Valencia (Spain), and presence in Poland, 
Mexico, the United States and India. Currently they produce more than one million pieces of furniture every year.  
The overall production process is summarised in the figure below: 
 
 
• Sizing: Input material (particle boards -chipboard, OSB, LSL-, fibre boards -MDF-, wood-based panels – 
plywood, LVL-) is cut to achieve the required shapes and sizes 
• Drilling: Making blind and through holes to connect furniture parts 
• Edge-Banding: The wood-based panel is covered by gluing a nobilitated layer (paper, plastic, etc.) increasing 
durability and giving aesthetic appearance 
• Sanding: Belt-sanding is used to decorate th e panel surface via selective abrasion which allows to obtain 
diverse patterns like honeycomb, etching, etc. 
• Painting and lacquering: Applying coloured wood finishes that dry by solvent evaporation or a curing process 
• Assembly and packaging:  Each component is being assembled according to design. All joints are glued 
together, wiped dry, coated and inspected before being packed. 
The vision of ROYO is to create products that can be used globally, but with local needs also considered. This implies 
the need to strive for flexible production and lot-size-one approach, which in turn calls for ensuring that production 
quality is constantly monitored in order to avoid defects that can be easily propagated throughout the process chain 
with consequent great damage in terms of:  i) unwanted production delays reducing customers satisfaction , ii) raw 
material waste affecting the overall process environmental sustainability, iii) worker’s time used unproductively with 
consequent economic damage for the company. In addition, one of the major concerns is to control the carcinogenic 
formaldehyde emissions during the manufacturing process and in the final prod uct, mainly due to the use of 
adhesives, e.g. urea and melamine glues. Monitoring formaldehyde emissions inline is of high interest to reduce the 
time required for laboratory analytical methods, while ensuring a safety working environment and final product s in 
compliance with the European regulation.  
MULTIPLE will optimize the production by integrating a flexible and end -to-end quality control system, enabling 
the quality traceability from input material to the final product (e.g. applying VIS/SWIR HSI for  estimating the 
moisture content, elasticity and density of the input material, analysing geometry defects, size and position of holes 
during drilling, or detecting excess of glue and applying colorimetry during painting and lacquering). The extracted 
information will be used to apply closed loop control strategies in some machines improving performance, and for 
re-routing defected components reducing material waste.  In addition, MULTIPLE will deployed a real time inline 
gas analyser for measuring formaldehyde emissions. 
KPI MULTIPLE Improvement Justification 
Improved 
performance 
Improvement in overall 
efficiency: 10% 
Increase performance of the global plant thanks to an 
integrated end -to-end quality control system  based on 
multi-spectral vision and deep neural networks. 
Production 
performance Shorten time to market: 15% 
More accurate and flexible monitoring and quality control 
system able to cope with new product variations . Faster 
deployment of new models thanks to an edge/cloud 
infrastructure and integration of new monitoring nodes by 
plug-and-play. 
Energy and resource 
consumption Resource consumption: 10% 
Optimizing and controlling the operation setpoints of the 
machines, reducing the use of material (e.g. polyurethane 
glue), while reducing risks for workers (formaldehyde 
emissions) 
Waste or by-products 
production Quality improvement: 10% 
Avoiding scraps and re -routing defected products . 
Increase the overall defect detection efficiency with an 
improved m ulti-spectral vision system empowered by 
deep learning.       
Figure 7. Wood furniture manufacturing production line. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  12 
Formaldehyde 
emissions 10% reduction 
More efficient application of adhesives. Integration of an 
online gas analyser for monitoring formaldehyde 
emissions and multi-spectral vision to control the proper 
adhesive application. 
QUALITY CONTROL FOR FOOD INDUSTRY (JOTIS)  
The third use-case of MULTIPLE is found in the dairy food industry. MULTIPLE will be deployed and demonstrated 
in a chocolate production line. JOTIS facilities in Athens occupy 30000sq. m. and have the most modern mechanical 
equipment in Europe, producing baby foods, powder mixes for baking and cooking, chocolates, syrups and chilled 
desserts. The company R&D and Total Quality Directorate incorporates 4 laboratories: Rapid QC analysis lab, 
Microbiological lab, Chemical lab and R&D lab. J OTIS aims to continuously create innovative products based on 
natural raw materials, and to ensure they are always of the highest quality. The process for the production of chocolate 
include the following steps: 
 
Figure 8. Steps in the chocolate production lines and current quality checks. 
• Mixing blending raw materials 
• Refining: the stage where the cocoa mass is pressed between cylinders in order to reduce the particle size.  
• Conching: The process of stirring or mixing the chocolate for an extended period of time. It is the stage 
where the chocolate improves its flavour and texture: 
- Reduce the moisture content 
- Allow volatile oils and other ingredients to evaporate 
- Reduce the acidity of the chocolate through the evaporation of acetic acid 
- Round off the particulates within the chocolate through the use of friction 
- Develop the flavour more fully by allowing the flavour components to permeate th e cocoa butter more 
fully 
• Tempering: The stage at which the chocolate is cooled in order to form the desired crystal size and then 
heated back in order to maintain the formed crystals. 
• Cooling-Formatting: The chocolate is moulded.  
• Metal detector: The moulded chocolate goes through a metal detector for detection of any metal impurities 
The main aim of JOTIS is to provide the highest end product quality and ensure that the product is within the 
specifications (e.g. fat, sugar content, color), independently on the variations of the raw material (e.g. cocoa) due to 
e.g. to different suppliers or poor growing weather conditions, while reducing waste. Key factors to be controlled 
that can cause quality losses are: fats, proteins, particle size, viscosity, t empering, colour of the final product, 
detection of unwanted bodies (metals mostly), hom ogeneity of the final product, e.g. in case the product contains 
nuts (even distribution of nuts in the chocolate bar). 
MULTIPLE will deploy an integrated online solution to monitor and control different key parameters of the chocolate 
production at different stages, complementing the quality checks (QCs) currently done at laboratory, and optimizing 
the process parameters ensuring the final quality of the product independent of raw material variations. HSI and NIR 
spectroscopy will be applied to estimate e.g. fat content and type, protein content, crystallisation or final colour. 
KPI Multiple Improvement Justification 
Production performance Increase overall efficiency: 10% 
Overall process optimization, reliable and 
accurate control, faster decision making thanks 
to real-time and accurate information 
Improved quality control 
performance 
Increase the detection of products 
non-compliance with quality 
specifications: 20% 
Continuously on -line quality checks . 
Integration of new on -line QC points based on 
HSI and NIR spectroscopy for faster decision 
making. 
Waste or by-products Reduction of waste production: 10% 
On-line quality control and material re-routing. 
Integration of new on -line QC points based on 
HSI and NIR spectroscopy for faster decision 
making. 
 
 

ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  13 
1.3.2 Positioning of the Project with Regards to Technology Readiness Level (TRL) 
Technology Current TRL Expected TRL 
SWIR snapshot hyperspectral imagers  TRL 5/6 TRL 7/8 
IMEC has developed and demonstrated snapshot HSI in the SWIR range using an InGaAs sensor. A first camera 
core for demonstration has been built and is being tested in relevant conditions with real samples and hyperspectral 
image analysis software, making the case for a TRL 5/6.  In MULTIPLE, a new industrial grade and cost effective 
read-out electronics will be developed for this sensor, providing robust advanced preprocessing and noise 
reduction. Therefore, an InGaAs-based snapshot HSI SWIR camera core will be developed and demonstrated 
in challenging tasks within three different industrial scenarios under operational environment conditions (TRL7). 
Since it will be fully integrated in PHOTONFOCUS industrial grade and widely supported imaging SDK, this 
camera core will be almost complete and qualified (TRL7/8). 
 VIS/SWIR snapshot hyperspectral imagers TRL 5 TRL 7 
As CMOS-based HSI camera cores are already commercially available, the maturity of the InGaAs HSI core 
together with the need of integrating both sensors in a dual aperture approach limit the current maturity of the 
VIS/SWIR snapshot HSI imager  to TRL5, as its interest and applicability in all the cases addressed has been 
validated in relevant environment with fairly close technologies. By the end of MULTIPLE, it will be demonstrated 
in real production plants under operational environment conditions (TRL7). 
OLED-based and laser-based spectroscopic analysers TRL 4/5 TRL 6/7 
As the operation of OLED-based sensors  has been demonstrated and validated in lab conditions for the 
spectroscopic tasks proposed, and  laser-based approaches to spectroscopic analysis  that have demonstrated 
increased specificity and sensitivity, these technologies can be fairly regarded as validated in between a lab and a 
relevant environment (TRL4/5) for any of the application cases considered in MULTIPLE, in which other existing 
spectroscopic approaches have been at the least validated in the lab. MULTIPLE will bring this spectroscopic 
technologies to high performance and cost effective in situ spectroscopic solutions, demonstrated in a relevant 
environment, in some case under operational conditions (TRL6/7). 
HSI-ready cloud/edge computing and data-driven optimization TRL 5 TRL 7 
Edge-platforms featuring SoC ARM and GPU/TPU/FPGA and capable to run high performance deep learning 
models for images analysis are off-the-shelf components, and big data and cloud open source software technologies 
used for the creation of the data warehouse and the model prototyping and deployment pipelines (e.g. TensorfFlow, 
Elastic Search, Kibana) have been already used in production conditions in the context of multi -camera video 
surveillance. The maturity limit is set by the validation in relevant conditions of machine learning models for the 
analysis of HSI images in all the applications considered (TRL 5). By the end of MULTIPLE, a cloud /edge 
computing and data -driven optimization platform  capable of analysing HSI  datacubes and optimize 
production at different levels will be demonstrated under operational environment conditions (TRL 7). 
1.3.3 Linked national and international innovation activities 
MULTIPLE is rooted in a strong background of research and innovation of the different partners of the consortium. 
Knowledge acquired in previous EU AM-based funded projects will be taken as a starting point: 
Photonics & Embedded processing 
MULTIPLE is built on previous technology developments on photonics and embedded processing researched on 
previous ICT -26 RIA projects (SEERS, I -ALLOW and MIREGAS). In this regard, cost -effective embedded 
imaging systems developed in these projects will be further developed and assessed in MULTIPLE  prototype in 
real manufacturing conditions (TRL 7). 
• SEERS (H2020-ICT-26-2014, GA 645114) led by AIMEN, proposes a breakthrough approach to multispectral 
imaging in a broad band of the infrared domain (0.7 -14 µm wavelength) endowed with embedded image 
processing for image reconstruction, cognitive image fusion, video pre-processing and event-driven operation. 
• I-ALLOW (H2020-ICT-26-2014, GA 645262) led by IMEC, aims the development of  a cost-effective multi-
spectral imaging and processing system for infrastructure monitoring in different light conditions (in day time, 
night time) and in all-weather conditions. 
• MIREGAS (H2020-ICT-26-2014, GA 644192) partnered by AIROPTIC, addresses the development of a cost 
effective programmable multi-wavelength Mid-IR source for gas sensing. 
• MIRPHAB (H2020-ICT-28-2015, GA 688265), partnered by IMEC, TEMATYS and EPIC, establish a pilot 
line to serve the growing needs of European industry in the field of analytical micro-sensors providing a reliable 
supply of mid -infrared (MIR) photonic components for companies incl. in particular SMEs already active in 
analytical MIR sensing. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  14 
• EXIST (H2020-EU.2.1.1.7. - ECSEL, GA 662222)  led by IMEC, will research new technologies for CMOS 
image sensors that are needed in the next generation of several application domai ns (i.e. agri -food, 
manufacturing, healthcare, security and gas detection).  
• HYPERA (H2020-SMEINST-2-2016-2017, GA 726572) led by IRIS, addresses the development of a novel and 
disruptive combination of Shortwave Infrared Hyperspectral Imaging (SWIR -HSI) i n reflectance with Near 
Infrared Multispectral Imaging (NIR -MSI) in reflectance/transmittance and chemometric software for on -line 
foreign body detection and chemical composition analysis. 
• WIDELASE (FP7-STREP-2012, GA 318798), partnered by AIROPTIC, aims the development of  a new 
generation of lasers for sensing, detection and monitoring of hazardous organic substances. 
Photonics & Data Analytics 
• FORTISSIMO 2  (H2020-FoF-09-2015, GA 680481) through CyPLAM experiment, partnered by AIMEN, 
addresses a Cloud-based-HPC optimisation tool applied to Additive Manufacturing, based on an image -based 
coaxial monitoring of the melt pool. 
• 5G-SOLUTIONS (H2020-ICT, GA 856691), partnered by IRIS will show how 5G allows to have data 
processing in the cloud for hyperspectral imaging data generated in the production plants of P&G and GLANBIA. 
• PHySIS (H2020-COMPET-06-2014, GA 640174), partnered by IMEC will develop, test, and evaluate novel 
signal processing technologies for real-time processing of hyperspectral data cubes.  
• VISUM (H2020-SMEINST, GA 731043), led by VISUM LTD (EX. IRIS), developed an IR spectroscopy cloud-
enabled platform for the rapid, easy integration and customization of real-time monitoring systems for improved 
process control, product quality and safety in the food and pharmaceutical industries. 
Digital Platforms & Orchestration 
• ZBREAK (H2020- FOF-09-2017, GA 768869), led by AIMEN, addresses the development of a Predictive 
Digital Platform applied for improved m aintenance models wrapped around physical systems for Zero -
unexpected-Breakdowns and increased operating life of Factories. 
• BOOST (H2020-ICT-2017-1, GA 780732), partnered by IMEC, aims the development of a Large Scale Pilot 
actions for demonstrating an open standardised and transformative shared data-driven Factory 4.0 model through 
10 lighthouse factories. 
• AMABLE (H2020-FOF-12-2017, GA 768775), partnered by AIMEN, aims the uptake of AM technologies by 
SMEs/mid-caps leading to the development of innovative business and service models and new value -chain 
models in a fully digital environment. 
Photonics & Production Optimisation 
• MAShES (FoF-01-2014, GA 637081) led by AIMEN proposes a compact, snapshot, and multispectral imaging 
system in the VIS/MWIR spectral range for embedded real -time control and high speed monitoring of laser -
based manufacturing process es, focussing on an accurate measurement of temperature distribution, 3D seam 
profile and 2D melt pool geometry and surface texture dynamics, and process speed. 
• ProPAT (SPIRE-01-2014, GA 637232) led by IRIS, aims the development of novel MEMS-NIR spectroscopic 
and granulometric analysers , as well as smart sensors for measuring composition, particle size , local bulk 
properties and process parameters for optimising industrial operations, integrate them into a versatile global 
control platform. 
• iCspec (SPIRE-01-2014, GA 636930), partnered by AIROPTIC, addresses the development of compact, robust 
and maintenance -free sensors for fast in -line multi -species chemical composition measurements for process  
analytics of many technically relevant gases such as hydrocarbons. 
• REEMAIN (FP7-2013-NMP-ICT-FOF, GA 608977), partnered by SCM, combines cutting edge knowledge 
from production processes, energy simulation software tools, energy and resource planning to de velop and 
demonstrate a methodology and platform likely to boost the efficiency of both energy and material resources. 
• FACTORY ECOMATION (FoF.NMP.2012-1, GA 314805), partnered by SCM , develops breakthrough 
innovations for cost-effective, highly productive, energy-efficient and near-zero-emissions production systems, 
by means of development of a comprehensive sensing, monitoring and data evaluation system within the factory. 
• TINTIN (Spanish National project, 2015), partnered by RUSSULA and AIMEN, addresses the development of 
tools and technologies focused on control and autonomous reconfiguration of manufacturing systems involved 
in laminating hot product. 
 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  15 
1.3.4 Methodology 
MULTIPLE requires a multidisciplinary approach that involves activities which range from development of photonic 
solutions all the way to the pilot implementation and demonstration of the innovation action results. The project has 
a proposed duration of 36 months (3 years) and is divided in 5 phases covering the following activities: 
 PHASE I: Industrial needs. Applications driven 
monitoring requirements specifications for production 
optimization. Within these activities, which will be 
performed at the initial phase of the project the 
consortium will investigate all requirements from the 
selected industrial cases. The activities will lead to the 
extraction of solid specifications which will then be 
translated into tangible project results.  
PHASE II: R&D activities focused on the development 
of multimodal spectral sensing prototypes matching the 
specifications and providing cost-effective solutions for 
monitoring relevant product and process parameters for 
production optimization. This wi ll include the 
optoelectronic integration of state -of-art detectors, 
optical arrangements and embedded processing units, 
and the development and implementation of real -time multimodal processing algorithms based on AI models to 
extract meaningful informati on for the optimization of the processes. Scalable data storage scheme and micro -
services supporting AI model development will be also implemented. At the end of PHASE II smart broadband 
multimodal photonic sensing solutions will be integrated and validated in real industrial settings.  
PHASE III: R&D focused on the development of tools for production optimization. This phase will develop tools for 
exploiting the meaningful data obtained with the photonic sensing prototypes for providing feedback for proces s 
optimization and production management. At the end of this phase, the complete MULTIPLE concept will be ready 
and integrated in industrial settings.  
PHASE IV: Complete demonstration of MULTIPLE approach in real operational conditions. The demonstration 
activities will be focused on the assessment of MULTIPLE for optimizing the production process in terms of speed, 
product quality and resource efficienc y in three operational environments covering piecewise and continuous 
processes.  
PHASE V: Project Management, Dissemination and Exploitation activities. This phase runs the whole duration of 
the project. The project management will keep track of all the i nvolved activities and take actions when needed to 
ensure the smooth progress of R&D and demonstration activities. The project will run dissemination activities for 
making the developed technologies known to wider audiences. The project focuses on providing results that are ready 
for further market uptake. The consortium will undertake, from the beginning of the project, activities for including 
the results in the portfolio of the involved companies.
1.4 Ambition 
1.4.1 Advances beyond the state of the art 
Multimodal monitoring and process optimization in industry, a case for spectral sensing and imaging 
Steelworking. Almost the 80% of the total energy consumption of the rolling mill plant is due to the reheating furnace. 
In situ and real-time monitoring of gas constituents inside the furnace offers the opportunity to optimise its efficiency 
through a closed loop control that minimizes the fuel waste and avoids unsafe CO levels and O2 levels that threat 
product quality. With this aim temperature measurements of the furnace and steel slab are also necessary to properly 
adapt the loads and heating sequences. Borescope thermal cameras offer spatially resolved temperature maps of the 
furnace and slab. The main limitation is the uncertainties in the measurements due to differ ences on material 
emissivity, presence of dust or steam, and the overall cost. UV (CCD), NIR and SWIR imagers have been applied to 
detect different defects and check quality in hot steel slabs5,6,7,8. MULTIPLE will develop a multi-gas analyser based 
on Mid-IR tunable laser spectroscopy for standoff detection of gas constituents inside the reheating furnace. Besides 
MULTIPLE will develop a cost-effective robust computer vision and thermography system based on snapshot SWIR 
 
5 A. O. M. Luiz et al., Automatic detection of surface defects on rolled steel using Computer Vision and Artifi cial Neural Networks, IECON 
2010 - 36th Annual Conference on IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, Glendale, AZ, 2010, pp. 1081-1086. 
6 Alkapov et al. Automatic Visible Defect Detection and Classification System Prototype Development for Iron-and-Steel Works, GloSIC 2018. 
7 Maoxiang Chu, et al., Multi-class classification for steel surface defects based on machine learning with quantile hyper -spheres, 
Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems, 2017. 
8 Sen Wang, et al., Panoramic Crack Detection for Steel Beam Based on Structured Random Forests, IEEE, vol. 6, pp. 16432-16444, 2018. 
Figure 9. Overall MULTIPLE methodology. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  16 
HSI will be able to estimate temperature maps independent on emissivity in an extended temperature range ( 400-
1500ºC) and to estimate the speed of the steel slab using advanced optical flow techniques and detect surface defects. 
The use of SWIR will provide more texture information enhancing the robustness and accuracy. The following table 
provides a summary on these characteristics and the envisaged monitoring technology. 
Magnitude/feature Accuracy Production stage(s) Envisaged technology 
Gas concentration of 
CO/CO2/O2 and NOx 
CO, CO2, O2, NO and 
NO2 within ± 0.1 ppm on 1 
meter basis and the 
accuracy of 2% of the 
measured value. Response 
time will be in order of 
0.05 second 
Reheating furnace (pre -
heating, heating soak 
zone, chimney) 
Laser-based IR 
Spectroscopy 
Temperature 400-1500ºC with 2% 
accuracy 
Reheating furnace 
Rolling mill SWIR HIS 
Speed of steel slab 0.05 m/s Rolling mill SWIR+ PWC-Net9  
Oxidation, impurities and 
defects 
LDL’s panoply of defects Reheating furnace  
Rolling mill SWIR 
Woodworking. Single batch, zero defect, and full quality control -including healthy related standards - require to 
monitor a number of chemical, mechanical, and aesthetic characteristics and magnitudes, from raw chipboa rds to 
final wood components. Notably, formaldehyde -a highly carcinogenic substance - is likely to surge from pressed 
wood products made with adhesives, e.g. resins or urea 10. Class E1 rules (European standards EN717 and EN120: 
E1, E2, E311) apply to panels for domestic use (furniture) requiring an average release of less than 2.5mg/m 2H and 
concentration lower than 0.1ppm. While MWIR spectrometry has demonstrated the capability to measure air 
concentration of formaldehyde, NIR spectroscopy and VIS -SWIR HSI have emerged as an operative approach for 
the on-line estimation of mechanical properties of wood (e.g. elasticity, density, moisture content), the detection of 
defects, or the assessment of colour. The following table provides a summary on these character istics and the 
envisaged monitoring technology. 
Magnitude/feature Accuracy Production stage(s) Envisaged technology 
Formaldehyde detection 0.01ppm MDF production 
(Lacquering/Assembly) 
 Laser-based MIRS12 
Elasticity (MOE) 2.5 GPa Sizing VIS/SWIR HSI & NIR 
Spectroscopy13,14 
Density Ultralight/Light/Sta
ndard/Heavy 
Sizing VIS/SWIR HSI & NIR 
Spectroscopy15,16 
Moisture  2% Sizing SWIR HSI17 
Colour 2∆E2000 Drilling / Lacquering VIS HSI18 
Defects on drills, surf aces, edges 
(excess of glue, irregularities) 
ROYO’s panoply of 
defect 
Drilling  
Lacquering 
VIS/SWIR HSI19 
Food processing. In food production, quality control is a very critical process. Regarding food safety, adulteration 
or the presence of foreign bodies are very sensitive aspects. Otherwise, controlling the different parameters that affect 
 
9 Sun, Deqing, et al., Pwc-net: CNNs for optical flow using pyramid, warping, and cost volume,  In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8934-8943. 2018. 
10 George I. Mantanis, et al., Adhesive systems used in the European particleboard, MDF and OSBindustries,  Wood Material Science & 
Engineering 
11 Harald Schwab, Rainer Marutzky, Bettina Meyer, “European Regulations for Formaldehyde” 
12 Mateusz Straszewski, et al., Application of tunable laser formaldehyde analyzer for real time process control and emission monitoring in 
wood panel industry, FLAIR 2018 
13 L. R. Schimleck et al., Comparison of Methods for Estimating Mechanical Properties of Wood by NIR Spectroscopy, Journal of Spectroscopy, 
vol. 2018, Article ID 4823285, 10 pages, 2018. 
14 Liang, H. et al., Non-Destructive Methodology to Determine Modulus of Elasticity in Static Bending of Quercus mongolica Using Near -
Infrared Spectroscopy. Sensors 2018, 18, 1963. 
15 Fernandes, A, et al. (2012). Measurement of intra-ring wood density by means of imaging VIS/NIR spectroscopy, 67(1), pp. 59-65.   
16 Santos, A. et.al, Estimation of wood basic density of Acacia melanoxylon (r. br.) by near infrared spectroscopy. J. Near Infrared Spectrosc. 
2012, 20, 267–274. 
17 Olena Myronycheva, et. al, Hyperspectral Imaging Surface Analysis for Dried and Thermally Modified Wood: An Exploratory Study, Journal 
of Spectroscopy, vol. 2018, Article ID 7423501, 10 pages, 2018 
18 Chlebda, Damian et al., Assessment of hyperspectral imaging system for colour measurement.  Spectrochimica Acta Part A: Molecular and 
Biomolecular Spectroscopy. 185. 10.1016/j.saa.2017.05.037. 
19 Ostertag, Edwin et al., (2009). Hyperspectral imaging of wood surfaces: monitoring of the adhesive distribution. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  17 
sensory quality are very important  to ensure consumer satisfaction.  Currently, quality control in a chocolate 
production line like the one at JOTIS is mostly statistical and done by analysing samples off line. Samples are 
collected during the production at critical control points and they  are measured in the lab using analytical methods. 
Even after this control, about 1% of the total production is off spec (e.g. low gloss, undetected foreign bodies, uneven 
distribution of almonds). Monitoring the different parameters of interest will be deployed and tested in the successive 
steps of chocolate production from raw materials mixing (e .g. fat type and content but also possibly proteins and 
sugars), melting, chocolate tempering and final bars moulding. Further than existing literature on HSI, the ability to 
unveil not only the compositional distribution, but also that of the crystallinity (already shown locally by NIR) will 
be tested. Other parameters than can be calibrated using the deployed techniques will be tracked such as the 
homogeneity of the distribution of nuts, colour, or the presence of foreign bodies. The following table provides a 
summary on these characteristics and the envisaged monitoring technology. Although they will be tested in a 
chocolate processing and bar manufacturing line, they are generally relevant for other products too. 
Magnitude/feature Accuracy Production stage(s) Envisaged technology 
Fat content and type ± 0.2% (on the % of fat) Melting NIR (in melt probe)20,21 
Viscosity  ± 400 cP at 40οC Conching  NIR22 or MEMS viscosity 
sensor (in melt probe) 
Crystallisation Distribution and 
concentration of crystals 
Tempering NIR23/ HSI (possibly with 
novel polarisation 
enhancement) 
Homogeneity and foreign 
body detection 
Even distribution of 
almonds, Non currently 
detected foreign bodies 
(hair, nuts in case the 
chocolate is supposed to 
be nut free) 
Final product conveying 
prior to packaging 
HSI24 
Colour and Gloss 2∆E2000 Final product VIS his 
Spectral imaging and sensing in industrial applications 
The affordability of CMOS technology and the advances on image processing algorithms during the 90’s and early 
2000’s fuelled the widespread use of machine vision systems in industrial monitoring, real time control, and quality 
control applications. A variety of techniques (keypoint detection, photogrammetric measurement, laser scanning, or 
point cloud alignment, among many othe rs) enabled advanced metrology and quality checking applications to 
flourish. CMOS and CCD technology also made possib le the appearance of low cost spectrometers in the visible 
range. 
However, a major limitation of CMOS technology is that it is not sensiti ve beyond the 1000 nm wavelength limit, 
when many interesting things can only be viewed in the next micron wavelength range. Alternative imagers based 
on hybrid technology like InGaAs present a much higher tag prize and do not cover the visible range. And the spectral 
range is getting more and more important as the capability to be sensitive to different material properties seems more 
and more within reach. Other emerging approaches based on quantum-dots (QD) 25,26,27 aim to open new opportunities 
in the visible and thermal infrared spectral regions. These devices are capable of providing low-cost high performance 
detection across the Vis-SWIR spectral range without the need of the hybridization step require by traditional SWIR 
detectors. However, from a performance standpoint the achievable quantum efficiencies in the SWIR range provided 
by first available cameras28 (~15%) still far from those provided by InGaAs (>70%).  
 
20  https://www.fossanalytics.com/media/files/documents/brochuresanddatasheets/segments/cocao-and-
chocolate/cocoa_and_chocolate_brochure_gb.pdf 
21 J. Čopíková et al., Application of Near Infrared Spectroscopy in Chocolate Analysis, Chemicke Listy 97(7):571-575, 2003 
22 Zeng et al, In-line measurement of tempered cocoa butter and chocolate by means of near-infrared Spectroscopy, Article in Journal of the 
American Oil Chemists' Society · June 1999 
23 Svenstrup et al., Rapid instrumental methods and chemometrics for the determination of pre-crystallization in chocolate Gitte, International 
Journal of Food Science and Technology 2005, 40, 953–962 
24  Zhang et al., Multivariate Curve Resolution Applied to Hyperspectral Imaging Analysis of Chocolate Samples, Applied Spectroscopy, Vol 
69, Issue 8, 2015 
25 Hafiz, S.B., Scimeca, M., Sahu, A. et al. “Colloidal quantum dots for thermal infrared sensing and imaging”, Nano 
Convergence (2019) 
26 Goossens, Stijn & Navickaite, Gabriele et al. “Image sensor array based on graphene -CMOS integration”. Nature Photonics. 
11 (2017). 
27 Ethan J. D. Klem, Chris Gregory, Dorota Temple, and Jay Lewis "PbS colloidal quantum dot photodiodes for low-cost SWIR 
sensing", Proc. SPIE 9451, Infrared Technology and Applications XLI, 945104 (4 June 2015);  
28 www.swirvisionsystems.com/ 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  18 
NIR spectroscopy is a well-established technique for inline composition monitoring. It is indeed highly sensitive to 
the chemical signature of a wide range of materials, especially organic ones. Using advanced data analysis approaches 
(chemometrics or even more sophisticated Artificial intelligence algo rithms such as neural networks) to treat the 
resulting spectra, it can predict fine multiparametric information on the concentration of the substances of interest. It 
is also sensitive to the morphology of particles. As opposed to conventional QC tests, it  does not require sample 
preparation and is virtually instantaneous, allowing saving both labour and process time compared to when resorting 
to conventional control procedures. 
Hyperspectral imaging (HSI) has emerged during the last decade as a hot research topic, as it combines the power of 
digital imaging and spectroscopy. Every pixel in a hyperspectral image provides local spectral information across a 
large number of narrow bands. That is, instead of collecting a single spectrum, this technique records a hyperspectral 
image (HSI) of the sample, providing not only the local chemical composition, but also its distribution. 
Until recently, HSI was mainly characterised by pushbroom  scanning systems, while snapshot imagers were only 
available for multispectral imaging with a few spectral bands. While multispectral approaches were useful to gain 
contrast in certain situations and determine specific measurements (e.g. NDVI), the higher spectral resolution of HSI 
has allowed much finer analysis relevant in industrial operations. This has proved to be useful for the development 
of advanced monitoring and control methods in industrial processes, like food processing 29,30,31,32,33 or wood 
processing34,35,36. However, push broom technology presents a major issue: images are acquired sequentially -line by 
line- which takes time, and they need to be reconstructed before being processed. Therefore, it is prone to limitations 
and robustness issues regarding product speed, product vibrations or displacements in any direction other than the 
scanning one. This has motivated a number of works on the mitigation of spatial and spectral blur in the reconstructed 
images. However, denoising approaches only  mitigate the problem and in real world cases line scanning means 
robustness issues, higher equipment complexity and cost and setup cost.  
This is why so many research efforts in optics have been devoted to the problem of delivering snapshot spectral 
imaging systems with a significant increase in the number of bands37.  
In MULTIPLE, we propose an ensemble of new monitoring systems built on breakthrough sensors and snapshot 
mosaic filters that make a leap in spectral range, spectral sensitivity and selectivi ty. We will also address the 
development of different models (eg. chemometric models, deep learning for image analysis) to finally provide the 
decision support for process optimization. The big potential of this approach is comparable to the challenge pose d 
by the volume and complexity of the data generated in the form of spectral datacubes. In this regard, we address the 
management of data as an orchestration problem and we will put in place embedded processing, cloud, and big data 
technology to provide an efficient and scalable solution. 
Snapshot hyperspectral imaging 
IMEC has developed a unique integrated hyperspectral filter/imager technology, where the spectral filters are 
monolithically deposited/integrated on top of CMOS image sensors at wafer level 38. This is achieved using a set of 
CMOS compatible production steps, like deposition, patterning and etching, which allows pixel level accuracies in 
filter alignment. The spectral filters designs are based on the Fabry -Pérot principle, which enables the de sign and 
fabrication of ranges of optimized filters at various wavelengths with flexible/customizable layout (covering different 
groups of pixels or depositing filters per pixel) and spectral bandwidth. 
 
 
29 Mahesh, S., et al, Hyperspectral imaging to classify and monitor quality of agricultural materials, Journal of Stored Products Research 61 
(2015): 17-26. 
30 Ravikanth, L. et al., Extraction of spectral information from hyperspectral data and application of hyperspectral imaging for food and 
agricultural products, Food and bioprocess technology 10, 2017 
31 Su, Wen-Hao, et al., Non-destructive and rapid evaluation of staple foods quality by using spectroscopic techniques: a review,  Critical 
reviews in food science and nutrition 57, no. 5 (2017): 1039-1051. 
32 El-Mesery, et al., Applications of Non-destructive Technologies for Agricultural and Food Products Quality Inspection,  Sensors 19, no. 4 
(2019): 846. 
33 Su, Wen-Hao, et al., Evaluation of spectral imaging for inspection of adulterants in terms of common whea t flour, cassava flour and corn 
flour in organic Avatar wheat (Triticum spp.) flour. Journal of Food Engineering 200 (2017): 59-69. 
34 Tsuchikawa, S. et al., A review of recent application of near infrared spectroscopy to wood science and technology, Journal of Wood Science 
61, no. 3 (2015) 
35 Mancini, M., et al., Near infrared spectroscopy for the discrimination between different residues of the wood processing industry in the 
pellet sector, Fuel 217 (2018): 650-655. 
36 Ma, Te, et al., Non-destructive evaluation of wood stiffness and fiber coarseness, derived from SilviScan data, via near infrared hyperspectral 
imaging, Journal of Near Infrared Spectroscopy 26, no. 6 (2018): 398-405. 
37 Hagen, Nathan A., and Michael W. Kudenov. Review of snapshot spectral imaging technologies, Optical Engineering 52, no. 9 (2013). 
38 Bert Geelen, Nicolaas Tack, Andy Lambrechts, A compact snapshot multispectral imager with a monolithically integrated per -pixel filter 
mosaic, Proc. SPIE 8974, Advanced Fabrication Technologies for Micro/Nano Optics and Photonics VII, 89740L (7 March 2014); 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  19 
      
Figure 10. Snapshot multispectral data acquisition concepts. 
Unlike grating or linear filters, in our approach, imagers can be covered with only selected spectral bands in a certain 
range instead of the complete spectral range. The result is a compact & fast hyperspectral imager made with low-cost 
CMOS process technology. 
Similarly, for InGaAs based detectors, IMEC has developed a novel hybrid integration approach, the optical filters, 
processed on glass substrates, are integrated directly  on top of the InGaAs detector with high accuracy and 
parallelism, and minimum gap between filters and Focal Plane Array to limit cross -talk. The high vertical and 
horizontal alignment accuracy of this method allows for different filter arrangements, covering group of pixels, like 
the line-scan implementation, or even per-pixel mosaic snapshot sensors39. 
 
 
Figure 11. Monolithic integration of spectral filters on CMOS-based imager wafers (a); Hybrid integration of filters on glass substrates with 
InGaAs detector and readout electronics (b). 
An overview of current prototypes based on this technology can be found in the table below.  
  
 
39 P. Gonzalez, et al., An extremely compact and high-speed line-scan hyperspectral imager covering the SWIR range, Proc. SPIE 10656 Image 
Sensing Technologies: Materials, Devices, Systems, and Applications V, 106560L (14 May 2018); 
a) b) 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  20 
Sensor SNm4x4 VIS SNm4x4 
REDNIR 
SNm5x5 
NIR 
SNm2x2 
RGB+NIR LS150+ Cardinal640 
Technology CMOS CMOS CMOS CMOS CMOS InGaAs 
#Bands 16 16 25 4 150+ by specific 
filter 
Spectral 
range (nm) 450-630 nm 600-875 nm 660-975 nm RGB+NIR 470-900 nm 1000-1700nm 
Detector 
resolution 
(pxl) 
2048 x 1088 2048 x 1088 2048 x 1088 2048 x 1088 2048 x length 
of scan 640-512 px 
Temporal 
resolution 340 fps 340 fps 340 fps 340 fps 1360 lines / 
sec 350 fps 
Furthermore, all these sensors have also been prototyped by integrating them at camera level (as small as 4x4x4cm) 
and to further demonstrate the capabilities of each camera, a fully functional system level including illumination and 
acquisition software. The mosaic-based cameras can provide hyperspectral data at video rate, with a maximum speed 
of 340 fps, ideal for high-speed video data acquisition. This technology is being already commercialized by 
PHOTONFOCUS, with a mosaic snapshot imager based on a CM OSIS CMV 2000 image sensor. Compared to 
competing technologies, snapshot HSI is orders of magnitude cheaper and more compact. 
 
Figure 12. Classification example using IMEC SWIR Snapshot HSI sensor. 
In MULTIPLE, the ambition is twofold: firstly, we will develop a cost effective Snapshot SWIR camera core based 
on InGaAs sensors suitable for industrial vision volume market and second ly we will combine it with an existing 
CMOS core to build a dual aperture integrated camera. This will push the state of the art in spectral sensors, bringing 
a unique snapshot HSI imager in a broad spectral range from VIS to SWIR (0.4µm to 1.7µm wavelength). 
Dual-aperture spectral imaging 
In traditional single-aperture spectral cameras, the final image is formed based on the interactions of light with optics, 
spectral filters (e.g. beam splitter, grating, interferometer) and the FPA. In this sense, the spectral range is limited by 
the sensibility of the detector technology, and the increased spectral resolution goes in detriment of the spatial 
resolution, dynamic range, sensitivity and SNR40. In contrast, multi-aperture imaging systems combine several optic 
and sensor configurations in the same device, acquiring an intermediate representations of the scene, that are 
combined using image processing and computational imaging to provide a final image with the information acquired 
from different configurations41. Thus, it enables the possibility to combine very different detector technologies in a 
single device, covering very different spectral bands. Interesting advantages of multi -aperture spect ral imaging 
approaches are: reduction of the longitudinal chromatic aberration (defocus), possibility to improve the dynamic 
range, increased light throughput and SNR, compactness. On the other hand, this pose challenges regarding image 
registration and reconstruction.  
 
40 Aggarwal, M., & Ahuja, N. (2004). Split aperture imaging for high dynamic range. International Journal of Computer Vision, 58(1), 7-17 
41 Green, P. et al.”Multi-aperture photography”. In ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 2007 (Vol. 26, No. 3, p. 68). ACM. 

ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  21 
 
Figure 13. SEERS camera prototype with up to 8 apertures from VIS to LWIR. From left to right: NIR, VIS, LWIR registered image 
samples, overlaid with boat detections exploiting all the spectral bands. 
SEERS project (GA 645114) coordinated by AIMEN, has recently developed modular, compact and cost -effective 
snapshot multi-spectral imaging cameras combining different detector technologies in the infrared (0.4 -14). The 
solution combines monolithic uncooled detec tors, CMOS, CMOS -based microbolometers and PbSe FPAs with a 
multi-aperture optical arrangement, and embedded processing capabilities to perform computational imaging and 
reconstruction in real-time42. 
MULTIPLE will develop a dual-band aperture camera integrating CMOS and InGaAs detector with filters -on-chip 
in a single extremely compact HSI machine vision device sensible from the VIS to SWIR range. 
OLED-based spectrometers 
SENORICS developed patented optical spectroscopic sensor solutions for detecting visible and near -infrared light 
which are low cost as they can be mass produced as being obtained through printing electronics and OLED 43 
technologies. OLED technology uses an optical microcavity to increase the typically negligible external quantum 
efficiency in the spectral region of charge-transfer absorption by more than 40 times, yielding values over 20%. The 
broad spectral tunability 
is achieved via a simple 
variation of the cavity 
thickness, making this 
innovative device 
principle highly suitable 
for integrated low -cost 
spectroscopic 
photodetectors.  
SENORICS sensors 
capture light from 
400nm to 1700nm, 
therefore can cover 
from the VIS  to the 
SWIR spectrum within one integrated chip.  The monolithic sensors are robust and can work without optical elements 
like gratings, they are customizable regarding pixel count, wavelengths covered, etc.  Competing technologies are 
either too expensive (InGaAs) or not accurate enough (Si). MULTIPLE will apply OLED sensors to develop novel 
low cost spectroscopic analysers with maximum sensitivity and selectivity. 
Laser-based IR spectroscopy 
Commercially available tunable laser analysers incorporating NIR and Mid-IR sources have been proven to be field-
compatible for several years. AIROPTIC manufactures various types of in -situ and extractive laser based analysers 
of gases (O2, CO, CO2, NO, NO2, HCl, NH3, HF, H2O, CH4, C2H2, C2H4, C2H6, C3H8, C4H10 and many others) 
in multitude of various industrial applications. The general advantages of using a tuneable laser spectrometer for 
emission monitoring and process control in wood-based panel industry are the following:  
▪ Short response time (a few seconds) vs. laboratory method. 
▪ High sensitivity and dynamic range – covers range from single ppb to ppm level. 
▪ High selectivity – measures accurately regardless of the gas matrix composition. 
▪ Low maintenance – low cost of ownership.  
 
42 Méndez-Rial, R. et al. A high-speed MWIR uncooled multi-aperture snapshot spectral imager for IR surveillance and monitoring . In 2016 
IEEE International Conference on Imaging Systems and Techniques (IST) (pp. 206-210). 
43 Siegmund, Bernhard et al. Organic narrowband near-infrared photodetectors based on intermolecular charge-transfer absorption. Nature 
Communications. 2017. 
Figure 14. Senorics miniaturized spectrometer chips based on OLED technology. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  22 
▪ Suitable for in-situ monitoring without a need for sample preparation or collection.  
▪ Auto-calibration feature – built-in reference cell.  
Today, almost all in -situ tunable laser -based analysers 
utilize DFB semiconductor lasers, which can only be 
tuned over a very limited wavelength range by 
temperature or current variation. Therefore, these 
devices are not suitable for the detection of multiple gas 
species. Semiconductor lasers with a wide tuning range 
in the Mid -IR are available, but they use free -space 
external cavities, which make the lasers bulky, c ostly 
and sensitive to shock and vibrations. This is a severe 
drawback in applications where several gas components 
have to be monitored simultaneously. Due to this 
limitation, it is presently necessary to install multiple 
tuneable laser analysers in parallel sample streams. This 
approach is inefficient, costly and requires installation of 
several flanges in the process, which often is not 
possible. To overcome this drawback, AIROPTIC has 
developed a multi-laser in-situ analyser platform -using 
extended Wavelength Modulation absorption Spectroscopy (WMS) -, which has the capability to analyse several 
components in one gas sample stream.  
In MULTIPLE, AIROPTIC will apply this principle can be used for multiple in-situ gas detection in steel works for 
optimization of combustion measuring CO/O2/CH4/CO2 as well as NOx. Based on a recent work in formaldehyde 
detection44 , AIROPTIC will design a very sensitive extractive type analyser for end product qualification in furniture 
production, with a sensitivity below 1 part per-billion (<1 ppb) (Figure 15). 
Machine learning for spectral and HSI analysis, moving to deep learning 
To take all the power of onsite and on -line spectroscopy, complex and flexible analytic methods should be put in 
place. In practice, this has meant a rapidly increasing use of machine learning in combination with spectrometry 
during the last decade, revealing so useful in many industrial problems, like those addressed in MULTIPLE45,46,47,48,49. 
In recent years, the sweeping success of deep CNNs pipelines for image analysis has resulted in breakthrough 
advances in image segmentation50, object recognition51,52 and the estimation of a variety of parameters and semantic 
attributes relevant in very different application fields53. The automatic learning of the best features to solve a problem 
-without the classic need and burden of hand crafting their extraction- certainly offers very interesting opportunities 
in complex industrial applications. However, industrial vision systems are still lagging behind. In the best case, 
mainstream software packages are just starting to make available a very limited use of pre -trained CNNs, in their 
most recent versions54.  
In the context of HSI, the use of 3D-CNN networks has provided state-of-the-art results in segmentation tasks55. This 
type of architectures is compatible with the best performing deep models currently found in the PASCAL VOC 
challenge56. 
 
44 Joanna J., Messung der Formaldehydabgabe in der Holzwerkstoffproduktion in Echtzeit mithilfe eines Laseranalysator GasEye HCHO 
XXXI-st International Scientific Conference  WOOD MATERIAL OF THE XXI-ST CENTURY, Rogow, 12-14 November (2017) 
45 Su, W. et. al, Non-destructive and rapid evaluation of staple foods quality by using spectroscopic techniques: a review,  Critical reviews in 
food science and nutrition 57, no. 5 (2017): 1039-1051. 
46 El-Mesery, Hany S., et al., Applications of Non-destructive Technologies for Agricultural and Food Products Quality Inspection,  Sensors 
19, no. 4 (2019): 846. 
47 You, Hanjong, et al., Classification of food powders using handheld NIR spectrometer, in 2017 9th ICUFN, pp. 732-734. IEEE, 2017. 
48 Gupta, O. et al., Machine learning approaches for large scale classification of produce, Scientific reports 8, no. 1 (2018): 5226. 
49 Gewali, U. et al., Machine learning based hyperspectral image analysis: a survey, arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08701 (2018). 
50 http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk:8080/leaderboard/displaylb.php?challengeid=11&compid=6 
51 http://image-net.org/challenges/LSVRC/2017/results 
52 http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk:8080/leaderboard/displaylb.php?challengeid=11&compid=4 
53 Liu, W., et al., A survey of deep neural network architectures and their applications, Neurocomputing, 234, 11-26. 
54 https://www.mvtec.com/products/halcon/newest-features/ 
55 Chen, Yushi, et. al., Deep feature extraction and classification of hyperspectral images based on convolutional ne ural networks, IEEE 
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 54, no. 10 (2016): 6232-6251. 
56 http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk:8080/leaderboard/displaylb.php?challengeid=11&compid=6 
Figure 15. Proposal of the multi gas system for insitu detection of 
several species in steel works. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  23 
 
 
Figure 16. Examples of deep 3D CNN HIS processing architectures. 
The main issue of deep learning approaches is that they require large datasets 57 annotated with the categories of 
interest or with a limited number of custom categories trained through transfer learning techniques 58.  The scarcity 
of HSI annotated data in most industrial applications is hence a clear barrier for adoption. However, cloud technology 
and IoT approaches bring a unique opportunity for the development of pipelines for automatic annotation of spectral 
images and measurements. Moreover, the use of visual semantic embeddings59,60 and more elaborated zero shot and 
few shot learning schemes61,62,63 has opened very interesting avenues to explore in industrial applications of spectral 
imaging. 
In this regard, the deployment of orchestrated sets of multimodal monitoring systems with embedded processing and 
cloud services for the sear ch and analytics of data may be expected to facilitate the creation of datasets annotated 
with relevant manufacturing parameters, removing these barriers. 
And even though the most extended models require a large number of annotated images, costly and lengthy to gather 
and do not offer a satisfactory solution for learning new concepts rapidly from little data64, the use of visual semantic 
embeddings65,66 and more elaborated zero shot and few shot learning schemes 67,68,69 has opened very interesting 
avenues to explore in industrial applications of spectral imaging. 
Based on the extensive expertise in industrial machine vision and recent developments of deep models by AIMEN 
and ABRAIA, MULTIPLE will test, select, and combine the best architectures of deep networks for the problems at 
hand, taking into account the specificities of the analysis required, together with the robustness and speed 
requirements. The data currently available in the factory will be used for the automatic and semi-automatic annotation 
of acquired HSI data, i.e. for the creation of large datasets.  
Embedded processing for real time monitoring and control 
Traditional machine vision systems have separate camera modules and processing units, e.g. industrial PC, connected 
with PLCs through fieldbuses for enabling automation and closed loop control. However, the rapid growth of data 
volume imposes increasingly challenging requirements on computational power and scalability, which together with 
the need of low latency for time critical process control, is moving the computational power as close as possible to 
the sensors edge. Current edge devices are able to col lect and process data, interoperate with other devices, be 
controlled remotely, and make decisions that were impossible for a sensor alone70. 
 
57 Deng, J. et al. “Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database”. CVPR 2009 
58 Yosinski, J. et al. "How transferable are features in DNNs?" Advances in neural information processing systems. 2014. 
59 Frome, Andrea, et al. "Devise: A deep visual-semantic embedding model." Advances in neural information processing systems . 2013. 
60 Akata, Zeynep, et al. "Label-embedding for image classification." IEEE PAMI (2016): 1425-1438. 
61 Vinyals, O., et al. "Matching networks for one shot learning." Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2016. 
62 Romera-Paredes, Bernardino, and Philip Torr. "An embarrassingly simple approach to zero-shot learning." ICML 2015. 
63 Xian, Yongqin, et al. "Zero-shot learning-A comprehensive evaluation of the good, the bad and the ugly." IEEE PAMI 2018 
64 Vinyals, O., et al. Matching networks for one shot learning, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2016. 
65 Frome, Andrea, et al. Devise: A deep visual-semantic embedding model, Advances in neural information processing systems. 2013. 
66 Akata, Zeynep, et al. Label-embedding for image classification, IEEE PAMI (2016): 1425-1438. 
67 Vinyals, O., et al. Matching networks for one shot learning, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2016. 
68 Romera-Paredes, Bernardino, et al., An embarrassingly simple approach to zero-shot learning, ICML 2015. 
69 Xian, Yongqin, et al. Zero-shot learning-A comprehensive evaluation of the good, the bad and the ugly, IEEE PAMI 2018 
70 Yuan Ai, et al., Edge computing technologies for Internet of Things: a primer, Digital Communications a nd Networks, Volume 4, Issue 2, 

ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  24 
Embedded real -time multimodal analysis, image segmentation and classification algorithms for industrial 
applications, has been implemented in specific embedded boards (DSP, FPGA) with successful results 71. However, 
the irruption of Deep Learning 72 and the increased amount and more in -depth data provided by spectral sensors is 
changing the field. Deep Learning provides more accurate and robust results regarding almost any application, whilst 
reducing the time to deploy or update the processing for new inspection tasks, i.e. by replacing the AI model with a 
“non-programming” approach.  
The new heterogeneous architectures combining powerful CPUs with GPU/TPU/FPGA in a system-on-chip (SoC) 6 
make possible the embedded deployment of these models. Even so, the high computational cost of CNNs usually 
requires accuracy trade-offs in order to grant is applicability in real -time. This is especially true when dealing with 
3D data, e.g. hyperspectral imagery, where 3D CNN have shown to increased performance over solutions applying 
spectral analysis on a pixel by pixel basis73,74,75. Novel RT approaches apply dimensionality reduction pre-processing 
steps, whilst other use simplified network architectures to reduce complexity76. However, the development of novel 
efficient Deep Learning processing pipelines for embedded real-time hyperspectral data analysis is still needed. 
 
Figure 17. SoC systems for IoT embedded devices demanding AI inference capabilities. From left to right: Nvidia Jetson Xavier77, Xilinx 
Ultrascale+78, Coral edge TPU SoC79. 
Building on the expertise of AIMEN in the development of computational imagers with embedded platforms80,81,82,83, 
MULTIPLE will develop smart monitoring edge IoT solutions combining state of the art photonic sensors with the 
latest heterogeneous SoC boards able to deploy AI neural models. A n off-the-shelf heterogeneous embedded SoC 
hardware architecture (e.g. Jetson Xavier) will be selected tailored to the needs of each specific sensor, finding an 
optimal trade-off among performance, power consumption and cost. MULTIPLE will develop novel re al-time 
capable Deep Learning processing pipelines and artificial network architectures for hyperspectral image analysis, 
including efficient pre -processing, regression, segmentation, and classification tasks. The embedded system will 
allow concurrent processing, communication and real-time closed loop control. 
Cloud-based development and deployment of monitoring systems 
The performance of every machine learning model -from linear regression to CNNs- is bound by the training data, 
i.e. the dataset it is learning. While deep neural networks allow to model complex non-linear relations and are capable 
to capture high-level semantics at a new scale, they require large datasets for training.  
Therefore, a proper and systematic gathering and management of data is essential for data-driven workflows built on 
state-of-the-art machine learning. In this regard, there are several aspects to address, namely: 
• Search and analytics functions 
 
2018, Pages 77-86. 
71 Bhowmik et al. Embedded vision systems: A review of the literature, in 14th Int. Symposium on Applied Reconfigurable Computing 2018. 
72 He, K., et al., Delving Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassing Human-Level Performance on ImageNet Classification, in IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. 
Vis., pp. 1026–1034 (2015) 
73 Li, Ying et al., (2017). Spectral–Spatial Classification of Hyperspectral Imagery with 3D Convolutional Neural Network. Remote Sensing.  
74 Al-Sarayreh, Mahmoud  et al., Deep Spectral -spatial Features of Snapshot Hyperspectral Images for Red -meat Classification,  2018 
International Conference on Image and Vision Computing New Zealand (IVCNZ) (2018): 1-6 
75 He, Mingyi et al., (2017). Multi-scale 3D deep convolutional  neural network for hyperspectral image classification.  3904-3908. 
10.1109/ICIP.2017.8297014. 
76 Shuaifeng Z. et al., Toward real-time 3D object recognition: A lightweight volumetric CNN framework using multitask learning, Computers 
& Graphics, Volume 71, 2018, Pages 199-207 
77 https://developer.nvidia.com/embedded/buy/jetson-agx-xavier 
78 https://coral.withgoogle.com/products/dev-board/ 
79 https://www.xilinx.com/products/technology/ultrascale-mpsoc.html 
80 Méndez-Rial, Roi, et al., MWIR infrared gating imaging with uncooled PbSe FPAs for surveillance applications, in Unconventional Optical 
Imaging, vol. 10677, p. 106772R. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2018. 
81 https://www.clamir.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/CLAMIR-datasheet.pdf 
82 Garcia-Diaz, Anton, Roi Mendez-Rial, et al., Embedded IR Multi Aperture Imaging for Surveillance Applications (2017) 
83 Méndez-Rial, Roi, et al., Embedded video rate super-resolution in the infrared with a low -cost multi-aperture camera, in Unconventional 
Optical Imaging, vol. 10677, p. 1067705. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2018. 

ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  25 
• Data annotation and augmentation 
• Model training 
• Model deployment 
An effective approach for search and analytics operations on big data sets should be scalable and efficient, capable 
to run in real time. Elastic Search, an open source84 JSON-based search and analytics engine provides a distributed, 
multitenant-capable full-text search and has pushed the state-of-the-art bringing horizontal scalability and very high 
reliability. Complemented with Kibana85 -a HTTP web interface for data visualization- and Beats and Logstash  for 
data ingest, it renders a really powerful engine  -completely open source- for data exploration and management (i.e. 
data search and analytics). 
A common problem of deep learning is the need of powerful tools for model development, training, validation, and 
deployment of any model. In this regard, we will adopt TensorFlow86 as end-to-end open source platform for machine 
learning. It has a comprehensive, flexible ecosystem of tools, libraries and resources that lets easily build and deploy 
ML powered applications. It facilitates training and deploying models in the cloud, on-premise, in the browser, or in 
embedded devices. It features adapted versions of the framework (TensorFlow Lite, Tensorflow JS) that are adequate 
for edge-computing devices and allow running models trained in the cloud in embedded devices, overcoming library 
version compatibility issues. 
Building on current cloud services for media asset management and image and video processing with deep learning 
models available at ABRAIA87,88 and the extensive expertise of the team in industrial applications 89,90, MULTIPLE 
will build a new cloud service capable to manage hyperspectral images and spectral data besides other relevant 
information on the process to easily create and deploy deep models. It will leverage on Elastic Search, Kibana, and 
Tensorflow. Moreover, the service will facilitate the selection of the best deep learning architectures for each specific 
use case, taking also into account the restrictions of the embedded platform used. 
Inspired by the success of the engineering workflow of traditional machine vision systems -with specific development 
environments91 and vision libraries- , MULTIPLE will build a platform for the seamless development of deep learning 
models, harnessing the power of embedded computing platforms and cloud data and model management. Th e 
diversity and representativity of the three scenarios selected makes the case for a successful and comprehensive 
approach. 
1.4.2 Innovation Potential 
Innovation readiness: 
The innovation resulting from 
MULTIPLE project comprises: 
different sensing VIS -SWIR 
hyperspectral solutions to provide 
multimodal monitoring capabilities 
(spatially resolved in real time) to be 
embedded into the production 
processes, including a cloud solution 
for orchestration of interrelated 
monitoring systems and complex 
decision suppo rt tools and the 
necessary deep models for regression, 
classification and real -time control, 
resulting into an integral photonic 
process monitoring, quality assurance 
and process optimization solution. 
These developments will enable the adoption of a real smart monitoring into EU manufacturing industry enabling 
highly efficient production lines and, thus, increasing the competitiveness of the European production industry and 
significantly contributing to its digitization. During the project, these solutions will be developed and demonstrated 
 
84 https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch 
85 https://github.com/elastic/kibana 
86 https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow 
87 https://abraia.me/docs/api/ 
88 Jorge Rodríguez Araújo, et al., Transfer learning for image tagging in fast fashion workflows, WGML 2018 
89 Rodríguez-Araújo, Jorge, et al., OpenLMD, multimodal monitoring and control  of LMD processing,  In High -Power Laser Materials 
Processing: Applications, Diagnostics, and Systems VI, SPIE Photonics West, 2017. 
90 https://openlmd.github.io/ 
91 https://www.mvtec.com/products/halcon/work-with-halcon/hdevelop/ 
Figure 18. Evolution path beyond MULTIPLE project. 
Actual system proven in 
operational environment
System complete and 
qualified
System demonstrationin 
operational environment
TRL7 TRL9
RTOs + SENORICS + 
AIROPTIC + IRIS + PHF +  
ABRAIA+  TiO2+MRA + 
SCM+ IRIS + RUSSULA +
(End-Users)
SENORICS + AIROPTIC + 
IRIS + PHF +  ABRAIA+ 
TiO2+MRA + SCM+ IRIS + 
RUSSULA + 
END-USERS
Time to market -3/5 years
Performance 
& design 
tuning
MUL TIPLE 
Prototypes
Robustness & 
cost-efficiency
Pre-
production
solutions
Robustness & 
cost-efficiency
& certification
β-
MUL TIPLE 
solutions
Market-
ready
solutions
RTOs + SENORICS + 
AIROPTIC + IRIS + PHF +  
ABRAIA+ TiO2+MRA + 
SCM+ IRIS + RUSSULA +
(End-Users)
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  26 
in a relevant industrial environment for 3 different sectors (steel production, wood & furniture and food ) and 
production concept (from continuous production to piecewise manufacturing) delivering highly efficient proces ses 
and manufactured products (TRL7). Namely, solutions will be demonstrated by assessing the compliance of the 
MULTIPLE-enabled manufacturing process and products with the end-user requirements (WP6). Once this phase is 
fulfilled, and beyond MULTIPLE project, an evolution of the solutions is devised based on Figure 18 dataflow.  
At initial stages, contribution of RTOs will be required in combination with the effort of the T echnology Providers 
(TPs) and support of technology integrators and users. In close -to-market stages, the main role will be given to 
industry partners and the solutions will be finally tuned for each targeted application. 
All involved companies have a long track in the market and a deep knowledge and understanding of the innovation 
and commercialisation process as they have participated regularly in design and development of new products and 
services (detailed capabilities and expertise in section 4.1). In this sense, the involvement of market leaders and key 
players on providing solutions to industry like PHF, SCM, RUSSULA, IRIS or MRA  & TiO2 (Grupo ALAVA) 
ensures a strong position for market uptake. Similarly, the early involvement of major manufacturers l ike ROYO, 
LDL or JOTIS also reinforces position in market uptake. Complementarily, EPIC and TEMATYS will bring in their 
expertise in technology transfer and networking capabilities to create awareness in target markets.  
Activities to progress TRL to a mar ket-ready status will require the mobilisation of financial resources. The initial 
approach of industrial partners is based on a mix comprising at least 15% own funds, ~50% in soft loans and bank 
loans (pre -production) and 35% from national innovation prog rammes. Synergies with ESIF will be sought, 
alignment with S3 of the relevant regions is ensured since advanced manufacturing and digital transformation are 
supported. Complementarily, support by EEN will be considered for advice on available funding and g uidance or 
coaching. These options will be further defined in the Exploitation Plan, where a financing plan will be included. 
Innovation management: 
During the innovation process described, some risks may be eventually faced. Several measures have been 
considered: 
Table 1. Market and Technical risks beyond MULTIPLE project 
Risk Mitigation measures 
Unmet industrial 
needs 
Industrial needs will be considered since the start and will go on during the whole project 
(WP1, WP5 & WP6). Participation of key industrial actors in the value chain in the project 
development (TPs and TUs) ensure the quality and pertinence of the input provided. 
Endangered IP A dedicated body, Innovation Board (IB) integrated by experts on business skills and IPR 
(Intellectual Property Rights) issues, will set IP protection/disclosure strategy. 
IPR conflicts 
among partners 
A clear framework regarding results ownership and access rights will be defined in the 
Consortium Agreement. The IB will oversee this type of situation to find suitable agreements. 
Endangered 
freedom-to-
operate 
Regular surveillance will be made on IP landscape for early detection of possible conflicts 
(WP7) and, if needed decisions and agreements made (open innovation agreement, cross -
licensing, etc.) 
Endangered 
market position 
Technology Watch activities on competing technologies will be done in WP7. Relevant 
findings will be positioned against MULTIPLE solutions and marketing strategy revised 
accordingly. 
Availability of 
financial 
resources 
In WP7, partners will work on defining a financial plan for the activities beyond the project 
to mobilise and ensure the necessary resources. 
Modification of 
regulations and/ 
or standards 
Regular surveillance on Regulations and Standards for early detection of possible conflicts 
with project developments. Specific activities in WP7 will address policy -makers while 
involvement of relevant market players (PHF, TiO2, MRA, SCM, IRIS, RUSSULA, L DL, 
ROYO, JOTIS, etc.) ensure that a communication flow can be opened with relevant policy -
makers in different sectors and standardisation organisations, through the participation of 
EPIC. 
Market Potential: 
MULTIPLE scalable monitoring and optimisation solution, comprising several photonic sensing technologies 
from OLED-based sensors and laser-based analysers to multimodal monitoring solutions for real -time (RT) 
monitoring through the implementation of RT embedded multimodal monitoring systems supported by cloud 
services for the overall orchestration of high dimensional monitoring systems and process optimisation 
decision supporting tools for continuous production and piecewise manufacturing, both, tackling the customized 
demand of different representative cases of the wide manufacturing industry (steelworking, woodworking & furniture 
and food sector). MULTIPLE enables automated, zero-defects, flexible, rapid and cost-effective manufacturing 
of products for the whole manufacturing sector highl y positive impacting the  EU production industry 
competitiveness and its digitization. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  27 
Market opportunity. Due to new horizons in manufacturing opened by Industry 4.0, phenomenal cost efficiency, 
better product quality and increased worker safety is expect ed, leading to a tremendous growth of the Industry 4.0 
market, which is one of the fastest growing areas for digital technologies92. Digitisation of products and services can 
add more than €110bn of annual revenue for industry in EU until 2020. North America and Europe regions would 
dominate the industry 4.0 market by the 2018-2024 forecasted period93. However, the main risk for EU companies 
comes from China, which is one of the countries that stand to gain the most from automating and digitizing labour -
intensive manufacturing processes. In order 
to keep EU manufacturing industry at the 
forefront of the technology and 
competitiveness it is crucial to keep the 
investment on R&D, specially focused on 
digitization. 
The photonics sector is of utmost 
importance in materializing the Industry 
4.0 concept and the digitization of the EU  
manufacturing base. Photonic is important 
in itself; with a global market of €447bn in 
2015 the sector is growing twice as fast as the 
global GDP. Seen on a European level 
photonics outgrows GDP by even 3.5 times. 
Europe is the second largest producer of 
photonics products behind China with around 
300,000 people employed directly in the photonics sector. EU Photonics holds the 35% of the global market share 
for Optical Measurement & Image processing.94.  
The sub-segment of optical measurement includes a large variety of systems and components, mainly for industrial 
applications. The major products in terms of market volume are photonic sensors (binary sensors), spectrometers, 
semiconductor measurement systems, and geometrical measuring systems. Market growth during the last decade was 
supported by many sub-segments, including spectrometers95. 
As of 2017, the photonic sensors market was valued at USD10.5bn and is expected to reach a value of USD 23.18bn 
by 2023, registering a CAGR of about 14.11% during 2018-202396. Photonic sensors are capable of providing highly 
accurate results in harsh environments, which cannot be achieved using conventional sensors. Thus , based on these 
factors the impact of this driver is expected to increase in future 97. Specifically, silicon photonics is an evolving 
branch of photonics that offers a clear advantage over electric conductors used in semiconductors. These are used in 
high-speed transmission systems. The market is expected to invest heavily for the mass adoption of this technology, 
which will be a key aspect in the development of high -performance computing and improve performance and 
efficiency. Thus, the emergence of silicon-based photonics is driving the growth of the market96.  
The major products in terms of market volume are photonic sensors (binary sensors), spectrometers, semiconductor 
measurement systems, and geometrical measuring systems. Market growth during the last decade was supported by 
many sub-segments, i.e. spectrometers98. High price of spectrophotometer is a major restraining factor for the market 
growth99. MULTIPLE-enabled laser-based spectroscopy is built on uncooled inexpensive MWIR sensors , ensuring 
customised cost-effective solutions. 
Laser-based gas analyzers have proven technologies that have different capabilities to cater to critical process 
industries. However, the market growth depends on key purchase influencers such as total cost of ownership, ease of 
operation and maintenance, and so forth. Given these conditions, laser-based spectroscopy analysers will expectedly 
gain the market share at the expense of traditional analyzers such as Zirconia and Paramagnetic based analyzers100. 
The su b-segment of imaging and  image processing, the most important tasks of image processing systems in 
industrial manufacturing are production monitoring and control as well as quality assurance. The global machine 
vision market size was valued at USD9.95 bn i n 2017. Increasing demand for quality inspection and automation in 
different industrial verticals is estimated to drive the market. These systems particularly assist in supervising work 
 
92 Markets&Markets. Industry 4.0 Market - Global Forecast to 2022 
93 Zion Market Research. Global Industry 4.0 Market Zion Market Research 
94 PHOTONICS21. Jobs and Growth in EU – Realizing the Potential of Photonics. PPP Impact report 2017 
95 PHOTONICS21. Market Research Study Photonics 2017 
96 Mordor Intelligence. Photonic Sensors Market. 2019-2024 
97 AlliedMarketResearch. Photonic Sensors Market. 
98 PHOTONICS21. Market Research Study Photonics 2017 
99 Coherent Markt Insights. Spectrophotometer Market. 2018-2026 
100 Frost&Sullivan. Frost Perspectives: Laser Based Gas Analyzers: An Emerging Technology Witnessing Significant Growth Prospect. 2017 
Figure 19. Average Growth rate of EU Photonics segments in the period 2011-
2015 vs Average EU GDP &IPI Growth as well as vs Average World GDP 
Growth. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  28 
environments. It offers features such as robotic guidance, automatic i nspection, and process control in industrial 
applications101. In MULTIPLE, we propose an ensemble of new monitoring systems built on breakthrough OLED 
sensors and snapshot mosaic filters that make a leap in spectral range, spectral sensitivity and selectivity, and dynamic 
range monolithic uncooled CMOS cameras.  
Hyperspectral imaging (HSI) combines the power of digital imaging and spectroscopy . As such, the use of 
hyperspectral cameras goes far beyond the standard camera-based vision systems more widely spread in the industry. 
Hyperspectral imaging offers several advantages, such as higher specificity and granularity, higher image acquisition 
speed as compared to other spectral imagers, and non-invasive imaging102. Technological advancements in the design 
of the sensors and cameras also support the growth of the hyperspectral imaging market. The manufacturing of the 
compact, lightweight, and low-cost peripheral devices that are used in industrial applications is propelling the market. 
However, a major hindrance to the growth of market is the relative complexity in analysing and processing excessive 
amounts of imaging data gathered using hyperspectral imaging system. Moreover, the high cost of cameras is another 
challenge for the market growth, which can  be overcome by advancements in technologies 103. The global 
hyperspectral imaging systems market was valued at USD 129.3 million in 2015 and is projected to  reach 
USD232.8Mn by 2021, at a CAGR of 10.4% from 2016 to 2021104. Specifically, hyperspectral cameras segment led 
the global hyperspectral imaging systems market in  2015. This segment was valued at USD79.9 Mn in 2015 and is 
projected to reach USD151.6Mn by 2021, at a CAGR of 11.3% during the forecast period104. 
The market shares of the Photonics producing countries have changed substantially during the last decade. While 
China gained market share, Japan, Europe, and Taiwan lost share. Europe lost market share during the last four years 
mainly due to three reasons; (i) the increased competition from China, (ii) the decrease of the value of the euro versus 
the currencies of most of the other Photonics producing countries (except Japan), (iii) the comparably low economic 
growth rate in Europe versus other regions. market share losses of Europe to China mainly concern photovoltaics, 
but also communication and lighting. Minor market share losses to China are also observed in production technology 
and for optical components. However, Europe’s highly dynamic photonics industry is already the world’s 
innovation and market leader in many of the products and services that will power the digital economy of the 21st 
century. Some 5,000 technology-intensive companies (many of them SMEs) directly employ over 300,000 people105. 
A global market share of 15.5% leaves Europe second only to China. Photonics is a fiercely competitive global 
market and expecting to triple annual European production to more than €200bn by 2030 is realistic – provided EU 
can stay at the forefront of photonics innovation. The photonic sensors are used in multiple applications, since these 
devices are able to provide accurate cost-effective image sensing solutions as compared to conventional sensors106.  
MULTIPLE solutions will largely impact on several crucial manufacturing sectors for the EU economy, starting 
from the Photonic sector and generating spill -over effects over the large manufacturing industry, with a first round 
of impact over the sector depicted in Table 2 and firstly validating and adopting MULTIPLE solutions.  
The EU continuous process ing industries as well as the piecewise manufacturing sector are facing the continuous 
struggle to keep a leading role in the worldwide competition . Innovation and competitiveness are therefore at the 
heart of the Commission’s agenda and, as MULTIPLE stand on the brink of a new industrial revolution. MULTIPLE 
is committed to supporting the transformation of EU industry107. 
Continuous production system involves a continuous or almost continuous physical flow of materials. It makes use 
of special purpose machines and produces standardized items in large quantities (i.e steel, petrochemical, cement, 
sugar and fertilizer industries, etc.). Process industry is facing several challenges, including competitiveness, energy 
and resource efficiency, as well as safety that require a radical change in the control and optimization of its own 
processes along the whole value chain , from the extraction of natural resources to the end -of-life management of 
products. The implementation of virtual dynamic factories connected in real -time to plant operation is another 
concept that will radically change the way to operate plants by providing on -line information, control, monitoring 
and optimization o f critical processes. A common challenge in industrial processes is the harsh environment, and 
various sensing strategies have been proposed to cope with this difficulty, including the use of remote sensors, robust 
embedded sensors, as well as disposable s ensors. In order to realize these changes, more precise information 
about processes is required, and therefore better sensing capabilities108. 
MULTIPLE will tackle a representative use -case for continuous production onto a backbone of the EU 
 
101 GrandViewResearch. Machine Vision Market 2018-2025. 
102 Markets&Markets. Hyperspectral Imaging System Market 2017-2023. 
103 Global Market Insights. Hyperspectral Imaging market size 2018-2024 
104 MicroMarketMonitor. Hyperspectral imaging systems market. Global forecast to 2021. 
105 PHOTONICS21. Europe’s age of light!. Photonics21 vision paper. 2017 
106 Allied Market Research. Photonic Sensors Market 
107 https://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry_en   
108 ACREO. Novel sensors and research results for industrial harsh environment processes. 2015 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  29 
manufacturing industry, the Steelworking sector. With some 500 production sites across 23 Member States, 
employing around 330,000 workers, steel is not just a truly European industry but is also the basis of most major EU 
industries, notably construction and automobile. The EU is the second largest producer of steel in the world, although 
far behind China 109. Today’s increasing quality standards and higher energy costs demand more accurate and 
consistent temperature control in the steel making process 110. Reducing energy con sumption due to an optimal 
temperature delivery a t the furnace stage will create important economical savings for manufacturers (e nergy 
constitutes a significant portion of the cost of steel production, from 20% to 40%111112), greatly impacting the global 
industry competitiveness and generating a positive spillover effect on the downstream industries. Moreover, the 
multispectral data will allow obtaining the spectral signature of the rolled material, which will provide information 
of its composition and properties revealing the materials that compound the billet. This would provide the option to 
perform a quality control of future casts or infer certain properties of a casting from its spectrum only, heavily 
impacting over the clients’ confidence onto the potential acquire products.  Through-process quality control and 
process optimisation on rolling industry has been set a key need 113. MULTIPLE will deploy its developed solution 
onto a rolling plant of a steel lamination factory as a proof-of-concept of the steelworking sector.  
Moreover, MULTIPLE will demonstrate a representative use-case implantation for piecewise manufacturing onto a 
relevant EU manufacturing industry, the wood and furniture manufacturing industry. One quarter of the world’s 
furniture is produced in the EU. In 2010, about 940,000 European workers were employed in approximately 130,000 
firms. In the same year, the sector’s production amounted to more than €83bn with a value added of nearly €29bn114. 
Germany, Italy, Poland and France ranked among the top 10 furniture manufacturers worldwide and held a combined 
share of 17% of world production and almost 60% of EU production. The furniture sector stands to benefit from the 
EU Flagship Initiative on Industrial Policy in the Globalization Age launched within the Europe 2020 strategy 
Furniture retailers are increasingly aware of the complex consumer decision making process that makes up the buying 
journey when it comes to large ticket items115. While online continues to grow in importance (representing the 24% 
of total sales116), consumers combine online research with shop visits on their way from research and consideration 
through to buying. When talking about online s elling channels, customers confidence is o f utmost importance and 
thus, guaranteeing the whole finished product bunch quality is vital to be globally competitive. Moreover, i n the 
bathroom furniture sector, it is all about holistic interior design  demanding high-quality modular bathroom 
furniture117 (increasing the retailer’s pressure over finished products quality). 
MULTIPLE will deploy an  overall monitoring system tackling key bathroom furniture manufacturing parameters 
through the whole production process (from formaldehyde detection to elasticity , density, color and superficial 
defects), increasing product reliability and final quality and, thus, bringing to end -users adopting MULTIPLE 
solutions an advantage over their competitors. 
Finally, MULTIPLE will be demonstrated on a 3rd Use-Case onto the food sector, a strategic sector for EU and 
photonics. Europe is the world’s largest exporter of agricultural and food products, with the sector responsible for 
7% of all jobs and 6% of European GDP 118. From precision farming to food processing, Europe is th e technology 
leader and will therefore play a central role in meeting EU challenges 119. Photonics will help supply safe, nutritious 
and affordable food for all and establish a sustainable value chain from farm to fork. By using ever more precise 
sensors and measuring devices, farmers, food processors and ordinary consumers will be able to monitor and certify 
the safety, quality, content and even the origin of food – anytime and anywhere. Machine vision is to gain 
considerable momentum in the food sector over  the coming years owing to its abilities such as improved detection 
of objects, enhanced analysis, monitoring tolerance, and accurate component measuring 101. Within the whole food 
sector, MULTIPLE will demonstrate its advantages onto the chocolate manufacturing (which is a relevant sector). 
The global Cocoa & Chocolate market is valued at USD49 bn in 2018 is expected to reach USD68.7 bn by the end 
of 2025, growing at a CAGR of 4.2% during 2019-2025120. 
MULTIPLE will deploy an overall monitoring system tackling key chocolate manufacturing parameters through the 
whole production process (from fat content and type to viscosity, tempering gradient or chocolate crystallisation), 
increasing chocolate reliability and quality and, thus, enabling the production of a high -quality chocolate enabling 
 
109 European Commission. Industry in Europe. Facts&Figures on competitiveness & innovation. 2017 
110 Solutions for steel applications. Lumasensinc 
111 Saving One Barrel of Oil per Ton (SOBOT). American Iron and Steel Institute 
112 The State-of-the-Art Clean Technologies for Steelmaking Handbook, Asia Pacific Partnership for Clean Development and Climate 
113 Metal Magazine. Issue 02-2018. The Impact of Industry 4.0 on Long Rolling 
114 Centre for European Policy Studies. The EU furniture market situation and a possible furniture products initiative. 2014 
115 Furniture Retail Market Trends and Statistics. 2017 
116 Pragma Consulting. https://kinandcarta.com/  
117 Cambista. The bathroom industry is booming. 2018 
118 EC “The EU’s common agricultural policy (CAP): For our food, for our countryside, for our environment”. 2014 
119 PPP Photonics21. Europe´s age of light! How photonics will power growth and innovation 
120 MarketWatch. Global Cocoa & Chocolate Market. 2019 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  30 
better production parameters control, detection of foreign bodies and enabling adaptation to different consumers 
tastes, which is the main growth driver for the sector (mainly from Asia Pacific countries)121. 
Implementation of highly advanced smart broadband multimodal photonic sensing solutions  operating in the 
spectral range for improving production process through the monitoring of relevant process and product parameters 
is of utmost importance for EU industry. MULTIPLE approach fo cusses on cost-effective process-integrated 
solutions that are optimized in terms of speed, quality, and resource efficiency while addressing embedded pre-
processing and suitably interpreting the acquired raw data for the optimization of the processes . Moreover, the 
overall multimodal orchestrated approach proposed is a game -changer in several sectors where zero defect 
manufacturing and right-first-time production is needed for keeping competitive, heavily impacting on those 
sectors firstly tackled by MULTIPLE: i) Steelworking; ii) Woodworking & furniture, and; iii) Food sector. 
Table 2. Market size and growth forecast for the initial applications of MULTIPLE. 
Market Market Size CAGR Segments of interest 
Steelworking 
The global steel demand exceeded 1.71 million tons in 
2016 and expected to reach USD 1.01122 trillion by 2025. 
North America & Europe are expected to remain 
dominant yet mature steel-consuming regions, 
+2.6% CAGR 
(2017 to 
2025)122  
Steel production and 
transformation 
Woodworking 
& furniture 
The global furniture market size is expected to reach 
USD 718.3 billion by 2025123. APAC was the leading 
region for the global wooden furniture market in 2017 
+5% CAGR 
(2018-2022)124 
Furniture and wood 
piecewise 
manufacturing 
Food 
The global Food retail market will reach USD 8.5 trillion 
by 2020125. Europe is the second largest market for food 
retail due to the presence of the large number of branded 
stores and discounters such as Aldi, Carrefour, Auchan 
and Tesco which offer fresh and branded products. 
+6.1% CAGR 
(2014-2020) 
Food processor and 
retailers. 
Complementarily to the analysis of the market opportunities and trends, an analysis of the IP landscape has been 
made on the main developments of the project, modular production modules, integration and digital infrastructure, 
and monitoring and control sy stems, in order to guarantee the project´s results Freedom -to-Operate. While 
patents from 3rd parties are quite significant in terms of application of NIR to wood monitoring, they are not directly 
relevant to the project as they do not deal with HSI and even less so with integrative solutions with novel sensors as 
planned in the project, in an orchestrated manner. The case of chocolate monitoring is also quite free from IP 
regarding NIR/HSI in general and even more with our advanced approach  and the same fo r the steel sector . Main 
findings show that existing patents refer to inventions based in methods using MULTIPLE solutions is strong and 
clearly enforced by already MULTIPLE partners protected IP as shown on following table: 
Table 3. Partners’ FTO-relevant IPR 
Patent Nª Owners Title Key Protect 
EP18198458 IRIS 
An integrated optical system for 
the examination of sample 
materials 
Illumination system maximising signal to 
noise ratio of NIR systems especially useful 
for handheld and in line integration 
EP19382101 IRIS 
Device for detecting foreign 
matter in an edible substance or in 
a container containing the edible 
substance and method employing 
the device 
Overall imaging device that provides a cost-
effective solution for target foreign  body 
detection 
EP2669660 AIROPTIC 
method and apparatus for remote 
detection of alcohol vapors in the 
atmosphere 
Signal processing schemes 
N.A. (Under 
Aplicattion) SCM Use of thermography in belt 
sanding quality control 
Use of thermography in belt sanding quality 
control for the woodworking sector 
US2018359438 IMEC Hyperspectral imager for snapshot 
and line-scan modes 
Sensor for acquiring an image of an object 
US2018204863 IMEC 
Image sensor, an imaging device, 
an imaging system and a method 
for spectral imaging 
Image sensor for spectral imaging 
US2009201507 AIROPTIC Wavelength modulation 
spectroscopy method and system 
A method and system for measuring the 
concentration of a gas component in a gas 
 
121 Chocolate Industry Analysis 2018 - Cost & Trends 
122 GrandViewResearch. Global Steel Market Size. 2017 
123 GrandViewResearch. Furniture Market Size. 2018 
124 Technavio. Global Wooden Furniture Market 2018-2022. 
125 Persistence Market Research. Food Retail Market. 2015 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  31 
sample 
US2007176079 PHF 
Optoelectronic detector with 
multiple readout nodes and its use 
thereof 
Invention which discloses an optoelectronic 
detector for sensing light characteristics 
US2003136915 PHF 
Photodetector and method for 
detecting radiation 
A photoelectric semiconductor light -
detection system with programmable 
dynamic performance for radiation detection 
PCT/EP2016/06925 SENORICS126 
Method for detecting and 
converting infrared 
electromagnetic radiation 
The invention relates to a method for the 
detection of infrared electromagnetic 
radiation, particularly an organic infrared 
detector for (near) infrared detection. 
WO2016055047A1 SENORICS126 
Apparatus for spectrometrically 
capturing light with a photodiode 
which is monolithically integrated 
in the layer structure of a 
wavelength-selective filter 
Important for developing a new 
spectrometer based on OLED detectors 
WO2016055048A1 SENORICS126 
Optical filter element for devices 
for converting spectral 
information into location 
information 
Important for developing a new 
spectrometer based on OLED detectors 
MULTIPLE consortium brings needed and committed parties covering the whole solution value-chain (Figure 20): 
 
Figure 20. MULTIPLE value chain. 
2 Impact
2.1 Expected Impacts 
2.1.1 Expected Impacts according to the work programme 
The MULTIPLE project expected impacts according to work programme topic “ICT-05-2019: Application driven 
Photonics components ” and specifically to the Innovation Action “ Sensor-Based Optimization of Production 
Processes” are presented in this section. 
Increased competitiveness of the European production industry and significant contribution to the digitization 
of European industry 
Strengthening market positioning and competitiveness of the MULTIPLE industrial partners . Firstly, 
industrial partners will be commercialising unique photonic solutions (SENORICS, IRIS, PHF, SCM, RUSSULA, 
AIROPTIC, ABRAIA and MRA) that  can significantly improve competi tiveness of relevant industries ( steel 
production, wood & furniture and food ) by, respectively, creating new market opportunities for integral photonic 
process monitoring, quality assurance and process optimization solutions , and by enabling the cost-efficient and 
flexible fabrication of better -performing products with reduced cost and resource consumption (materials and 
energy), both  continuous and piecewise manufacturing processes . That is the case of industrial equipment 
manufacturers and integrators (SCM, RUSSULA and IRIS) and the End-Users (LDL, ROYO and JOTIS) who will 
benefit from market opportunities described in section 1.4.2  due to the production lines improvement depicted on 
section 1 (reduction of energy and raw materials consumption, higher production throughput due to diminished 
rejections and reworked pieces and reduced lead -time), leading to relevant increase on units s old and market share 
acquisition. A first market application for all industrial partners is depicted in the table below (estimations provided 
by the companies based on their own expansion plans, time frame 5 years, starting once the solutions are market -
 
126 Patented by Technische Universität Dresden granting SENORICS exploitation exclusive license. 
OLED-based sensor
Snapshot
spectral
filtering
Camera cores
MULTIPLE scalable monitoring and 
optimisation solution
Technology Providers
Bathroom
furniture
Early Adopters
Steel heavy 
plates
Chocolate 
production
Technology Integrators
Integration and optimisation
Laser-based IR spectrometry for chemometrics
HSI & 
Spectorscop
y solutions
Novel photonic sensing and imaging
developments
Monitoring solutions orchestration and process optimisation
tools development
Woodworking sector
Steelworking
sector
Food and food
processing sector
Cloud services and 
microservices
Fast model development and 
deployment
Edge 
computing 
devices
Real-time 
embedded 
multimodal 
data 
processing

ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  32 
ready) demonstrating the impact of the project in the Consortium and clearly impacting over its competitiveness on 
the global market, increasing its turnover within 5 years of the MULTIPLE results commercialization estimated on 
almost €139M and 147 jobs generated: 
Table 4. First Market uptake of MULTIPLE Results 
 Product or service Market(s) addressed Estimated 
units sold 
Turnover 
(€) 
Job 
creation 
IRIS 
1. MULTIPLE scalable 
monitoring and optimisation 
solution integration and 
deployment for the food sector, as 
well as support for the wood one. 
 
2. Turn key Line scan HSI or 
single band (Hypera systems) and 
NIR solutions for inline 
monitoring. 
Food and food processing 
industries (beyond the project 
the pharmaceutical sector 
will be tackled) 
 
Food and woodworking and 
furniture sector. 
82 
 
 
 
 
327 
1,148,000 € 
 
 
 
 
1,635,000 € 6 job 
PHF Multimodal imaging solutions 
(CMOS cameras) for real -time 
monitoring 
Manufacturing industries 
(steel, wood and food 
industries) 
565 5,650,000 5 jobs 
SCM 
1. MULTIPLE scalable 
monitoring and optimisation 
solution integration and 
deployment for the wood and 
furniture sector 
 
2. SCM machines incorporating 
photonic embedded quality 
solutions 
Wood and furniture sector 
(beyond the project plastic, 
glass and other sectors will be 
tackled) 
 
Wood sector demanding 
drilling, edge -banding, 
sanding machinery or 
retrofitting existing 
machinery  
88 
 
 
 
 
1705 
1,320,000 
 
 
 
 
33,615,000 
35 jobs 
RUSSULA 
MULTIPLE scalable monitoring 
and optimisation solution 
integration and deployment for 
the steelworking sector 
Steelworking sector 72 1,152,000 3 jobs 
AIROPTIC 
1. Multicomponent in -situ 
analyser for optimization of 
combustion   
2. Integrated control of wood 
production. 
3. Multicomponent in -situ 
analyser for miscellaneous 
chemical processes. 
4. Multicomponent extractive 
analyser for miscellaneous 
chemical processes.  
1. Steel industry 
 
 
2. Wood industry. 
 
3. Chemical industry 
 
 
4. Chemical industry 
 
 
296 
 
 
240 
 
185 
 
 
485 
 
 
6,549,000 
 
 
4,248,000 
 
4,425,000 
 
 
12,283,500 
 
 
50 jobs 
ABRAIA 
Cloud micro services 
Manufacturing industries 
(steel, wood and food 
industries) 
207* 3,105,000 5 jobs 
SENORICS 
Improved OLED-based sensor to 
be integrated on VIS/NIR/SWIR 
spectroscopy solution 
Spectroscopy manufacturers 830 830,000 5 jobs 
ALAVA***** 
MULTIPLE scalable monitoring 
and optimisation solution 
Monitoring systems 
integrators and providers 242 54,610,000 25 jobs 
LDL 
Improved heavy plates references 
optimally-produced 
Offshore wind energy sector, 
naval, construction, 
industrial equipment, etc. 
+5% 
turnover** 1,500,000 3 jobs 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  33 
ROYO 
Improved bathroom furniture 
references Bathroom furniture market +10% 
turnover*** 2,500,000 6 jobs 
JOTIS 
Improved JOTIS chocolate 
references optimally-produced Food retailers +1,5% 
turnover**** 5,325,000 4 jobs 
* Number of cloud infrastructure adapted and service provided for a 4-years period. 
**+25,000 tonnes of heavy plates demand lead by cost competitive product (reduction of energy and raw material consumption 
and produced scrap and rejections). 
***+50,.000 units sold due to increase demand lead by production efficiency and cost reduction. 
****+1,5% of company turnover increment due to the market share acquisition regarding high-quality produced chocolate. 
***** First market uptake expectations fo r the Grupo ALAVA companies together (MRA & TiO2), they both will be 
commercialising the MULTIPLE results, each of them attending different client and geographical markets (where they are 
already present) based on each own expansion strategy. 
Beyond this first application, the industrial partners will further exploit MULTIPLE results in the markets already 
identified in section 1.4.2. New applications will be considered on the basis of the MULTIPLE project results through 
the engagement of new technology adopters which benefits from the MULTIPLE results. 
Reinforcing Europe’s industrial competitiveness and leadership in photonics and beyond. Photonics play a dual 
role in the industrial sector: as a fast -growing and highly innovative sector itself, and as an enabling technology to 
help all other sectors of manufacturing compete successfully with their global rivals. In this framework, MULTIPLE 
addresses keystones of industrial competitiveness: 
1. Improved business opportunities and value creation in Europe by rei nforced cooperation along the value 
chain;  
2. Measurable productivity and quality increase in manufacturing of parts, and sustained breakthrough 
innovations in high -added-value products fabricated in Europe in key sectors (steel production, wood & 
furniture and food) and helping in the overall industry digitisation process. 
MULTIPLE will strengthen EU photonics manufacturing base . Nowadays EU has a leading position in photonic 
production technology (equipment for laser materials processing) and in optical mea surement & image processing 
(mainly for industrial applications as components of monitoring and control systems), holding 50% and 35%, 
respectively, of global market 127. However, this position is continuously at stake by the advance of China, US and 
Japan. Moreover, cost-efficiency, flexibility, high productivity and quality attained thanks to MULTIPLE solutions 
will allow laser, optical measurement and image processing equipment, companies in Europe to compete glob 
ally through a breakthrough technology in manufacturing, thus benefiting from business opportunities in fast 
growing markets as presented in section 1.4.2. 
MULTIPLE has also the potential reinforcing competitiveness and leadership of other industries . Photonics is a 
driver to competitiveness of at least 10% of the EU economy since they are in the backbone of key manufacturing 
sectors (i.e., steel production, wood & furniture and food industries) 128. Namely, laser-based IR, NIR spectrometry 
and multimodal imaging s olutions are key photonic ingredients for the 4 th industrial revolution by enabling 
automated, zero-defects, flexible, rapid and cost-effective fabrication. In this context, broadening the spectrum of 
application laser, sensing and imaging measurement tech nologies are of paramount importance for EU 
industry and to do so, Photonics community is focused on the development of advanced online sensors, 3D machine 
vision and imaging (process monitoring, quality control and high precision and interruption-free production process), 
IR (reducing cost -intensive downtime through less equipment breakdowns) and optical computing (AI and deep 
learning for optimisation process)129. MULTIPLE will develop solutions for manufacturing process, resulting in 
an orchestrated high dimensional monitoring and process optimisation solution, thus e nabling onsite and 
online process control (cost-effective spectral sensor solutions, deep models) and quality assurance and process 
optimization (cloud services boosting new interrelated monit oring systems and complex decision support tools).  
Moreover, such solutions will provide cost efficiency (downtime and inventory reduction, improved production 
quality and thus, reducing scrap and rejections ), waste reduction, energy savings and improved p roductivity 
(zero-defects, reduced lead -time). Therefore, thanks to MULTIPLE results, EU industry  (firstly validated on  
steelworking, wood & furniture or food industries, but easily transferable to other manufacturing sectors), will gain 
a strong position to benefit from market opportunities like those considered in section 1.4.2 . In this context, 
MULTIPLE has the potential for a relevant impact in EU manufacturing industry at large.  
 
127 PPP Photonics21. Market Research Study PHOTONICS 2017. 
128 The leverage effect of Photonics Technologies: the European Perspective. Photonics21. 
129 PPP Photonics21. Europe’s age of light! How photonics will power growth and innovation. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  34 
An estimation is shown in terms growth and jobs 
in the table on the right (including the impact over 
the Photonic sector itself), due to the increased 
competitive gained through the adoption of 
MULTIPLE solutions. Global market size based 
on the projections included in section 1.4.2 (as 
close-to-market value when MULTIPLE 
solutions are adopted). Attainable market 
estimation is based on the potential of 
MULTIPLE solution to enable EU industry to 
provide products addressing relevant market needs (section 1.4.2). 
MULTIPLE will, therefore, significantly contribute to safeguard value and job creation, especially high -skilled 
and high added -value jobs, always linked to production activities and support reshoring of EU in dustry. The 
main drivers for reshoring are “production costs, quality and flexibility improvement, access to skills and knowledge, 
risk reduction and market access”130,131, all of them directly linked to MULTIPLE objectives and impacts. Moreover, 
keeping EU manufacturing industry at the forefront thanks to photonics is key for Industry 4.0 approach and, thus, 
contributes to safeguard the future of the EU manufacturing sector (30M jobs directly and twice indirectly, and to 
80% of total EU export), specially for SMEs (photonics sector is largely based on SMEs, more than 5,000 photonics 
SMEs in Europe 94), therefore, creating proportionally more jobs than would typically be seen in a sector made up 
primarily of big companies. 
2.1.2 Other Expected Impacts 
Enhanced innovation capacity 
MULTIPLE solutions and the knowledge and know-how developed during the project, will set the foundations to 
further innovate in photonics, laser-based and IR spectral sensing, deep models and cloud computing. Firstly, 
partners will gain capacities to: 
▪ Develop spectral sensor solutions by novel hyperspectral imaging and laser based spectral sensing concepts. 
▪ Develop embedded deep models for regression, classification and real-time control, on latest SoC technology. 
▪ Develop a multiple-spectral-band photonic monitoring system to sense production process at different stages and 
in different scenarios: steelworking, woodworking and food industry. 
All in an open innovation framework that will allow SMEs involved in the project (ABRAIA, IRIS, AIROPTIC , 
SENORICS and PHF) to operate within a streamlined, market -oriented approach supported by major industrial 
partners and RTOs. This idea is developed through specific technology transfer and training activities ( WP7). The 
project will also impact the innovation capacity beyond the consortium: 
▪ Availability to EU industry of novel photonic multispectral sensing, AI and cloud computing technologies, 
flexible and adaptable to their specific needs (materials and processes), and with an established methodology 
allowing rapid, robust, flexible, efficient and secure manufacturing process monitoring and optimisation. Enabled 
freedom-of-design will boost product innovation. 
▪ Availability to EU academic and industry of unique  knowledge, methodology and tools to streamline R&I 
activities in monitoring and production optimisation . The MULTIPLE technolog ies through multiple-spectral-
band photonic monitoring and process optimisation models, will greatly improve the efficiency, productivity and 
sustainability of industrial processes and innovative products.  
Technology transfer and outreach activities to make the project results ava ilable to EU industry and academia are 
considered in the dissemination and communication plan (section 2.2) to ensure this impact. 
Better jobs and new skills 
Jobs created in relation to photonics applications require a skilled workforce, normally with know ledge on physics 
and engineering, materials and manufacturing processes, design and modelling and ICT tools. This skilled workforce 
is open to most of the innovative technologies and products, as well as open to innovation activities in all companies 
throughout EU industry132,133. The transition to laser-based and IR spectral sensing, deep models, digital value chains 
and other technologies that underpin Industry 4.0 will require many new kinds of specialists covering everything 
from product design to product approval and certification. Replacing conventional machinery with intelligent systems 
will also require the training of workers affected by this transition105. 
 
130 Emerging trends in global AM: challenges, opportunities and policy responses. United Nations Industrial Development Organization. 
131 Stentoft et al, 2016 
132 COM(2010) 682 final An Agenda for new skills and jobs: A European contribution towards full employment 
133 A Skilled Workforce for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth. https://www.oecd.org/g20/summits/toronto/G20-Skills-Strategy.pdf  
Table 5. MULTIPLE impact on EU Industry Growth and Jobs 
Target 
market
Global Market 
Value (M$)
Current 
EU share
Job 
Creation
Photonic 928.510 17,0% 1,2% 11.142 37.069
Steel  1.010.000 18,5% 0,2% 2.020 36.334
Wood & 
Furniture 718.300 25,0% 0,5% 3.592 13.467
Food 8.500.000 17,3% 0,1% 4.250 16.642
21.004 103.512
*Ratio for Job caluclation based on turnover per employee in Europe (source: Eurostat)
Attainable additional 
market share (M$)
TOTAL:
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  35 
MULTIPLE will contribute to high quality job creation in the photonics and manufacturing industry and 
beyond in high -tech sectors oriented to the development of ICT tools (IoT and Cloud ). In a ddition, in WP7 
training content and activities will be carried out  to ensure that developed knowledge and technologies are 
transferred to industrial partners and their workforce. Training activities and contents for students and/or post -doc 
and professionals will be developed and open seminars targeting stakeholders (industry, education, standardization 
bodies, certification entities, etc.) will also be organised. These activities are important to address the reality of an 
aging workforce that may be not so familiar with these technologies.  
Promotion of women participation in photonic and manufacturing industry  will also be attained. In line with 
Women in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) Initiative and She Figures 2018 134, 
participation of female scientists and engineers in this project have been promoted. Moreover, involvement of women 
in the R&I and industry decision- making roles will be encouraged considering gender aspects in any dissemination 
and communication activity, as well as by specific activities targeting women. 
Leveraging private investment 
MULTIPLE project has a relevant industrial core comprising 4 high-tech SMEs and 6 major industrial companies 
which are very much interested in the results to be obtained and therefore are committed to bring them to the market. 
Indeed, it is highly relevant the involvement of major manufacturers ROYO, JOTIS and LDL, in the project showing 
their interest and commitment with the project results for fully implement then within their manufacturing processes. 
Effort and investment will be needed to take project results from TRL7 to TRL9. Normally, this would require an 
investment at least equal to the budget mobilised for the project . It is also relevant that industrial partners 
participating in MULTIPLE project will be only partially funded by the EC (30% of their budget will consist on own 
funds). Considering markets’ demand for photonic monitorin g solutions and  the competitiveness of MULTIPLE 
solutions, also relevant investments can be expected by equipment manufacturers aiming to integrate MULTIPLE 
solutions in their systems, as well as by End-Users implementing MULTIPLE multimodal solutions for monitoring 
and optimisation of their manufacturing production lines, increasing the private investment leverage by MULTIPLE.  
Contribution to standards 
Standards contribute to remove technical barriers to trade, leading to new markets and economic growth f or 
industry135. They also facilitate technology transfer and they contribute to ensure safety of products. Interaction with 
standardisation organisations and contributions (under the leadership of EPIC and TEMATYS as industry/market 
representatives and experts, respectively) to the ongoing and near future standardisation are considered in WP7 as 
key action to ensure compatibility and interoperability with what already exists, thus booting market acceptance. A 
first assessment on current standardisation activ ities and committees was performed and, MUTLIPLE, aims to 
contribute to ongoing and future standardisation developments at CEN and ISO level. In this sense, MULTIPLE 
brings the ideal partner, EPIC, representing the whole EU photonics industry interests in standardisation (ISO, 
CEN/CENELEC136) and linking MULTIPLE outputs with standardisation activities. Main contribution is expected 
with current RAMI 4.0 (the reference model for Industry 4.0) architecture. 
Environmental impact 
MULTIPLE objectives and corresponding proposed work packages and tasks are aligned with EU environmental 
challenges, contributing to sustainable production: 
Boosting resources (energy and materials) efficiency, emissions and waste reduction and circular economy . 
MULTIPLE will enable the introduction of integrated photonic monitoring of manufacturing processes  into new 
applications in key EU industrial sectors (steelworking, woodworking or food industry), leading to smart industrial 
processes that will contribute significantly to more efficient use of resources  and meeting environmental  
challenges137 138. Zero-defects manufacturing approach  enabled by MULTIPLE through integration of intelligent, 
autonomous, self–adaptive, self-powered and cost-effective sensors and actuators for process monitoring, control and 
quality management and process adaption by self -learning, quality and process data -based modelling of process 
behaviour will lead to significant quality enhancement and resource efficiency139. 
Smart applications like MULTIPLE solutions will help to exploit energy efficiency potential as they can provide 
transparency about energy consumption patterns (through sensing) and help to optimize a company’s energy  
management (through regression and deep models) contributing to stabilize the energy system by either consuming 
and storing energy (in case of energy surplus) or on the opposite by reducing their consumption (in case of energy 
 
134 http://publications.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/c118ea10-58fa-4173-a2c4-65c746918c20 
135JRC study: How will standards facilitate new prod. systems in the context of EU innovation and comp. in 2025?. EU, 2015 
136 ISO/TC39-Machine Tools; ISO/TC39 SC10-Safety; ISO/TC184 SC1- Physical device control 
137 A Photonics Private Public Partnership in Horizon2020. Photonics21. 
138 Photonics Roadmap 2018 update. PhotonicsNL, Dutch Optics Centre, Photon Delta and partners. 
139 Factories 4.0 and Beyond. EFFRA 2016. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  36 
shortage) on demand enhancing carbon footprint reduction140. MULTIPLE will result in up to 10% reduction in 
energy consumption. 
MULTIPLE results will also address GHG emissions problem, via implementation of smart technologies like sensors 
and data analytics 141. Sensing improve efficiency gains resulting in reduction of company electrical demand, and 
these savings result, likewise, in lowering carbon dioxide emissions142. MULTIPLE will reduce by up to an 15% 
of CO2 and NOx emissions. 
MULTIPLE photonics technologies will lead the change from worldwide trend of ‘take -make-use-waste’ model to 
circular economy . Advanced measuring will contribute to increased performance of production p rocesses, 
reduction of waste , ‘first time right’ and inherently reusable production products 138 through ultrahigh-resolution 
cameras, 3D imaging, optic al sensors or augmented reality. IR sensors will detect moisture content in chocolate 
processing ensuring quality and reducing scrap 139, 143. MULTIPLE will reduce by up to a 10% waste and scrap 
due to manufacturing process quality improvement. 
Societal impacts 
Enhancing life quality of European citizens. MULTIPLE embraces the opportunity to tackle climate change, one 
of the main concern of EU citizens (92% of EU citizens see it as a serious problem and 74% a very serious problem144), 
through the reduction of energy demand, use of resources on key polluting sectors145, i.e. industry (accounts for 16% 
of total EU GHG emissions) and energy supply (principal source of GHG emissions in the EU with a 25% of total). 
Moreover, the reduction of GHG emission to the atmosphere contributes to improve air quality within the EU and 
worldwide. Estimates of the health impacts  attributable to exposure to air polluti on indicate that PM2.5 146 
concentrations in 2013 were responsible for about 467,000 premature deaths due to long-term exposure in EU147. 
Furthermore, thanks to early anomaly detections, MULTIPLE will enhance the safety of the food chain by enabling 
a more comprehensive detection of foreign bodies (vs. only metals nowadays) in the food products, as well as possibly 
avoiding cases of adulteration. 
Regions and countries benefiting from highly productive industrial capacities developed at DIMOFAC will generate 
skilled jobs with decent salaries , thus contributing to European social cohesion . Increased efficiency will give 
more people access to products at lower costs and therefore support standards of living and well-being. 
Contribution to the attainment of the objectives of EU Policies 
MULTIPLE fully responds to the key focus area in LEIT¨-ICT Programme, i.e. Digitising and transforming European 
Industry and services. Moreover, by contributing to previous mentioned challenge, MULTIPLE will also support the 
realisation of EU policies which are in the core of Horizon 2020 programme: Europe 2020 (intelligent, sustainable 
and inclusive growth), an EU Industry for Growth and Economic Recovery (promoting industry growth up to 20% 
of the GDP), Digitising EU Industry (digital technologies for a more competitive industry), Energy Package (energy 
efficiency to attain 20% by 2020), Roadmap to a Resource Efficient Europe (by 2020, waste is managed as a resource 
and market and policy incentives that reward business investments in efficiency are in place) KETs for growth and 
jobs ( exploiting the leverage effect of photonics and advanced manufacturing in the growth of industry and in 
producing solutions to respond to societal challenges).  Furthermore, by the alignment of MULT IPLE results with 
Green Photonics, contribution is expected to Raw Materials Initiative and Circular Economy Package (use of 
recyclable materials and less precious and critical materials, zero -defect manufacturing). In addition , MULTIPLE 
results will enable technologies to realise the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) defined by UN and adopted 
by the EU in terms of Clean energy (SDG 7), decent work and economic growth (SDG8), sustainable industrialisation 
and innovation (SDG 9), responsible consumption and production (SDG 12) and climate action (SDG 13). 
2.1.3 Barriers and framework conditions 
▪ Technology qualification. Innovation leads to the development of new technologies that involve novel designs, 
concepts or applications not covered by existing rules, normative standards and industry practices. MULTIPLE 
solutions provide a, fast, accurate and robust process monitoring, including embedded processing and machine 
learning for process optimisation. Such solutions will be developed within the framewor k of needs and 
requirements defined by industry as set in WP1, 2, 3, 4 & 5 and compliance will be demonstrated in WP6. 
▪ Regulations & standards . Industry standards and requirements need to be met by MULTIPLE solution and 
 
140 Accelerating clean energy through Industry 4.0. Manufacturing the next revolution. UN Industrial Development Organization. 2017 
141 M Rokonuzzaman. Industry 4.0 to drive Sustainable Development Goals: Part II. 2018. 
142 Could IoT Help Combat Climate Change? TechNative. 2017. 
143 The health of photonics. An Institute of Physics Report. 2018. 
144 European Commission. Citizen support for climate action. https://ec.europa.eu/clima/citizens/support_en  
145 European Environment Agency 
146 Particular matter with a diameter of 2.5 µm or less 
147 Air quality in Europe — 2016 report. European Environment Agency report nº28/2016. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  37 
produced products, not to hamper the exploitation of project results. An early consideration of industry standards 
and requirements to be met by MULTIPLE, as well as by the resulting components, is included in the project 
(WP1). Relevant industrial partners facilitate this activity. Demonstr ation activities in WP6 will ensure that 
industry requirements are met. WP7 activity includes the interaction with standardisation organisations and 
contributions to standards. 
▪ Obstacles to innovation deployment . Availability of financial resources for inv estments in technology are 
limited, even more restricted in the case of SMEs. In the development of the MULTIPLE solutions, cost -
efficiency is considered from the early idea and as part of the overall strategy in the work plan, concurrently 
considering productivity, investment and operation costs when assessing the technology path to be followed  
(benchmarking activities, T6.4, are planned assessing MULTIPLE -developed solutions performance when 
compared to market -ready solutions). In addition, easiness of de ployment in terms of integration in existing 
manufacturing facilities has also been considered by developing easily plug-in solutions while working from an 
early stage with key technology vendor/provider (MRA & TiO2, Grupo ALAVA) and integrators (SCM, IRIS 
and RUSSULA). Additionally, the uptake of any  new technology requires knowledge acquisition (involved 
production staff) and, therefore, MULTIPLE will release training materials to both partners´ staff and 
stakeholders (WP7).
2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
2.2.1 Exploitation Plan  
A draft of the Exploitation Plan of Project’s results (EP) is presented in this section, to be further developed and 
updated during the project (WP7) considering the information gathered from research and validation activities, as 
well as inputs collected from all stakeholders in the framework of the dissemination and communication activities. 
Key Exploitable Results in MULTIPLE. The innovations to be generated during the project have been identified 
and categorized into those related with:  i) the knowledge and fundamental principles, ii) MULTIPLE solutions 
(system & subsystems); iii) improved processes enabled by the new manufacturing solutions implemented at the 
End-Users facilities. 
i) Knowledge and fundamental principles: 
▪ Principles and fundamentals of optoelectronic systems based on spectral sensors . Knowledge on development 
multimodal monitoring modules  and performing multispectral measurements and parameters detection 
(including image processing and analysis algorithms for inline r eal-time (RT) control of manufacturing 
processes). 
▪ Principles and knowledge for orchestration of monitoring systems, including data treatment and visualization 
and model development. 
▪ Knowledge on process optimization.  Know-how and expertise on manufacturin g process modelling and 
parametrization, data analytics and decision support tools for quality control and self-optimisation. 
▪ Principles for integration and industrial deployment of monitoring and control manufacturing solutions . 
Expertise in system integration and End-User cases process parameters and production lines configuration. 
ii) MULTIPLE solutions: 
▪ MULTIPLE scalable monitoring and optimisation solution  (Key Exploitable Result, KER) : An overall 
orchestrated optimisation solution for complex manufact uring chains based on novel spectral sensing 
solutions for monitoring and control in manufacturing production lines. This overall solution integrates different 
stand-alone solutions (other exploitable results, OERs) for monitoring in industry such as : i) multimodal 
imaging solutions  for real time  and robust monitoring; ii) an  embedded monitoring system  relying on 
embedded deep models for regression, classification and real-time control, running on latest SoC technology 
combining ARM processors, GPUs and/or FPGAs (aiming onsite and online measurements of physical 
magnitudes and classification of different types of categories with high flexibility, accuracy, and reliability); 
Novel and cost -effective spectral sensor solution s on iii) laser-based IR spectrometry and iv) NIR 
spectroscopy for chemometrics ; v) Orchestrated of the photonic monitoring systems in order to provide 
decision support tools for optimization of the production processes based on cloud and big data technologies 
providing cloud services and microservices. 
iii) MULTIPLE improved processes: Only a few specific applications demonstrated in the project (from bathroom 
furniture to steel-roll heavy plates or food products) are considered, although on the basis of the solutions developed, 
many other productions lines for process manufacturing can be implemented. 
Planned key exploitable results, exploitation team and expected key areas of application . Results related to 
knowledge and fundamental principles will be used in new research and innovation activities developed by the RTOs 
(AIMEN and IMEC) with participation of industrial partners. Complementarily, industrial partners will exploit these 
results as integrated knowledge in the MULTIPLE solutions.  
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  38 
▪ Principles and fundamentals of optoelectronic systems based on spectral sensors and on system orchestration  
will be used in R&I activities to further develop the MULTIPLE scalable monitoring solutions and novel spectral 
sensor solutions. 
▪ Knowledge on process optimisation and principles for integration and industrial deployment of monitoring and 
control manufacturing solutions will be a key input in R&I activities to improve productivity of the different 
production lines to be deployed on further applications and scenarios. 
Applicability of Key and Other Exploitable Results (KER and OER) of the project is depicted in the table below: 
Table 6. MULTIPLE exploitable results 
Project 
Result 
Developed 
by Exploited by Targeted Industries 
KER1: MULTIPLE 
scalable monitoring 
and optimisation 
solution 
IMEC/PHF/SCM/ 
AIROPTIC/ 
SENORICS/ TiO2/ 
MRA/ABRAIA/ 
AIMEN/ IRIS/ 
RUSSULA 
Lead User: MRA/TiO2 
Early adopter: 
SCM/RUSSULA/IRIS 
Industry technology integrators and 
manufacturing industries (woodworking, 
steelworking and food processing) involving 
both continuous process or piecewise 
manufacturing. 
OER1: Snapshot 
VIS/SWIR HSI imagers 
PHF/IMEC/ 
SENORICS 
Lead User: PHF 
Early adopter: MRA/TiO2 
Manufacturing integrators, machinery 
manufacturers and suppliers of turnkey OEM 
monitoring equipment. 
OER2: Laser-based IR 
analysers AIROPTIC/AIMEN Lead User: AIROPTIC 
Early adopter: MRA/TiO2 
Manufacturing integrators, machinery 
manufacturers and manufacturing industry 
(End-Users). 
OER3: Multimodal 
monitoring systems 
IRIS/AIMEN/ 
SENORICS  
Lead User: IRIS 
Early adopter: MRA/TiO2 
Manufacturing integrators, machinery 
manufacturers and manufacturing industry 
(End-Users). 
OER4: Cloud and edge 
computing platform and 
service 
ABRAIA / AIMEN Lead User: ABRAIA 
Early adopter: MRA/TiO2 
Manufacturing integrators, machinery 
manufacturers, suppliers of turnkey OEM 
monitoring equipment and manufacturing 
industry (End-Users) 
Exploitation Strategy. 
Consortium industrial partners have shown their commitment with the project (and their envisaged results) not as a 
one-off project but rather as the new path for growth and income generation. Two different roles have been identified 
according to their position within the exploitation strategy and the benefits they will achieve: Lead Users and Early 
Adopters. Under Table 7 and Table 8 is depicted for each industrial partner their particular Exploitation Strategy 
regarding their profile, positioning and the arising business opportunity.  
Table 7. Exploitation by Lead Users  
Partner Profile Exploitation Strategy Business Opp. 
AIROPTIC 
[SME, PL] 
It designs, produces and markets of 
advanced laser based real time gas 
analyzers for industrial process control, 
environmental monitoring and safety 
and security applications . In 2013 we 
have introduced GasEye (high 
performance tunable diode laser gas 
analyzer) based on its p roprietary laser-
based technology. It cove rs the entire 
chain of the product development 
through the system production 
Improved product : Improved gas 
analyzers optimized for industrial 
continuous and piecewise 
manufacturing End -User cases and for 
orchestration within a multimodal 
scalable monitori ng and optimization 
solution. 
Enter on new markets  due to 
optimized solution for 
steelworking, working and 
food sectors and, also increase 
market share on those already 
present due to combined MIR 
and NIR sources will greatly 
expanding the market for laser 
based sensing 
SENORICS 
[SME, GE] 
Senorics develops customizable sensor 
solutions for VIS and NIR spectroscopy  
based on unique novel OLED cost -
effective detectors and sensors with 
unique properties. SENORICS has been 
awarded the LOPEC Start -up 
competition: Most Impactful 
Technology 
Improved product : Improved OLED -
based sensor to be integrated on a  NIR  
spectroscopy. 
Enter on new markets  due to 
novel and cost -effective 
solution for spectroscopy 
manufacuturers 
PHF 
[SME, CH] 
It is a renowned high -tech company 
designing and producing innovative and 
powerful CMOS Sensors and cameras as 
well as FPGA programming and 
software primarily for the Machine 
Vision Industry and interfacing 
industries. It’s leading (CMOS) imagers 
New product:  InGaAs camera for 
snapshot spectral imaging  
 
New product: Dual aperture VIS-SWIR 
HSI camera. 
Increase market share  due to 
offering more competitive 
solutions in markets where the 
company is already a global 
leader. 

ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  39 
and cameras are used globally in 3D 
inspection and measurement, 
spectroscopy, process monitoring and 
defect analysis, motion analysis and 
quality inspection. 
ABRAIA 
[SME ES] 
Start-up technological enterprise 
focused on cloud services and 
microservices applied to deep leranign 
for image processing. 
New service: Cloud services and 
microservices optimized for optical 
monitoring orchestrated systems data 
acquisition and management 
Enter on new markets  due to 
an optimized solution for 
monitoring solutions for 
manufacturing industry (firstly 
for project sectors). 
IRIS 
[SME ES] 
Advanced engineering SME company 
specialised in the manufacture and 
integration of Process Analytical 
Technology (PAT) -based real -time 
quality monitoring solutions for the 
process industries and IoT systems for 
smart manufacturing 
New product. IRIS expects to extend its 
product line mainly comprising 
proprietary state-of-the-art IR analysers 
(integrating InGaAs array sensor) for 
at-line and in -line process monitoring. 
In particular IRIS is keen to set 
agreements with PhotonFocus for the 
integration of snapshot HSI to its 
solutions but also to expand the wave 
range of the Visum NIR products to 
cover VIS-SWIR in a single instrument  
 
New product: Extend NIR 
spectrometres family products 
incorporating OLED -based 
miniaturized detectors  in the VIS -
SWIR range. 
 
New product and service: MULTIPLE 
scalable monitoring and optimisation 
solution integration and deployment for 
the food sector and implementation and 
process optimisation services for 
customers 
Increase market share on food 
sector commercializing better 
performing solutions. 
TiO2 
[SME, ES] 
MRA 
[SME, PT] 
They are the company leader in high -
tech solutions. Their mission is to offer 
its clients a wide offer of products and 
systems based on cutting -edge 
technologies for related areas to Industry
4.0 Solutions, Sensors and 
Measurement, Communication, 
Predictive Maintenance, Monitoring, 
Test, Computer Vision or Thermography 
for multiple sectors 
New product. MULTIPLE scalable 
monitoring and optimisation solution 
for integrators and manufacturing 
industries 
 
Increase market  share 
commercializing cutting edge 
technological and improved 
performance solution. MRA 
will focus on Portuguese 
market and clients, whether 
Spain and EU market will be 
attended through TiO2 
SCM 
[LE IT] 
A technological world leader in 
processing wood and other materials. 
SCM Group coordinates, supports and 
develops a system of industrial 
excellence in 3 large highly specialized 
production centres employing more than 
4.000 workers and operating in all 5 
continents. Since 1952, a leading 
producer of machinery and systems, as 
well as service provider, for the 
woodworking industry.  
New product and service: MULTIPLE 
scalable monitoring and optimisation 
solution integration and deployment for 
the woodworking sector and 
implementation and process 
optimisation services for customers. 
Increase market  share on 
woodworking sector 
commercializing better 
performing solutions. 
RUSSULA 
[LE ES] 
Russula is a global engineering company, 
with more than 30 years of experience  
serving the largest steel producers in 
more than 30 countries. It develops 
engineering solutions to help steel 
producers around the world become high-
performance businesses  focusing on 
improving operational performance and 
production parameters. 
New product and service: MULTIPLE 
scalable monitoring and optimisation 
solution integration and deployment for 
the steelworking sector and 
implementation and process 
optimisation services for customers. 
Increase market  share on 
steelworking sector 
commercializing better 
performing solutions. 
Table 8. Exploitation by Early adopters  
Partner Profile Exploitation Strategy Business Opportunity 
ROYO 
[LE ES] 
Global leader on bathroom furniture 
production marketing on more than 60 
countries, including Spain, Poland, 
Improved product: Improved bathroom 
furniture references due to improved 
piecewise production process reducing 
Increase market share due to 
offering more competitive 
solutions in markets where the 

ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  40 
México, USA or India. More than 
1,000,000 units sold per year 
rejected pieces, production time and 
cost and, thus, leading to an optimally-
produced furniture piece. 
company is already present 
LDL 
[LE FR] 
LDL stands for flexible production of 
heavy plates designed while also 
providing excellent customer service. 
LDL represents a new generation of 
steel-re-rollers due to the use of the 
highest achievable level of automation. 
Improved product: Improved heavy 
plates references optimally-produced 
due to improved continuous production 
process reducing rejected pieces, 
production time and cost. 
Increase market share due to 
offering more competitive 
heavy plates (and also 
guaranteeing higher quality) 
in markets where the company 
is already present and entering 
on new international markets. 
JOTIS 
[LE GR] 
Greek company founded on 1930 
devoted to provide innovative food 
products based on natural raw materials, 
and to ensure they are always of the 
highest quality. JOTIS exports their 
products to the 5 continents becoming a 
global player. 
Improved product : Improved JOTIS 
chocolate references optimally -
produced due to improved continuous 
production process guaranteeing 
optimum chocolate process parameters 
(temperature, particle size, etc.). Will be 
later on deployed in other food 
production lines. 
Increase market share due to 
offering high-quality 
chocolate-based products in 
markets where the company is 
already present and entering 
on new international markets. 
Business supporting services-provider partners (EPIC and TEMATYS) will benefit from participation through the 
know-how and knowledge achieved and by better positioning themselves on the EU and international markets as key 
players in the advanced manufacturing sector, widening opportunities for offering services and gaining clients, 
market share and increasing turnover. 
RTOs (AIMEN and IMEC) benefit by including the IP generated through the project in their IP portfolio to exploit 
it through licensing. In addition, knowledge gained will be used in new R&I activities and integrated in the education 
and training curricula. 
Integrated Exploitation Strategy . The exploitation of project results will comprise the commercialisation of 
solutions and support services for full benefit from business opportunities by addressing target mar ket segment’s 
needs. Path to deliver innovation to market, as well as risks identified in this process and corresponding mitigation 
measures have been included in section 1.4.2, where market analysis and MULTIPLE positioning is presented. 
The MULTIPLE scalable global solution will be commercialised by Grupo ALAVA (TiO2 & MRA) as a global 
solution provider  (whether each of them focused on different geographical markets) . MRA & TiO2  will 
commercialise the whole system comprising all subsystems & technologies developed by partners and accounted as 
OERs under Table 6. Based on partners’ experience, integration of subsystems is a not-desirable strategy for potential 
end-customers. To limit their risks, they are showing mainly interest into overall working systems, and they prefer 
to work with a main-contractor for delivery of an overall working system, including all sub-systems and supporting 
tools. In this context, MRA or TiO2 act as system-integrator while the rest of technology developers act as suppliers 
(to be further analysed in the Exploitation Plan and agreements among partners fostered). As previously defined each 
project partner will be owner of project results developed (solely or jointly, according to the work plan and the Table 
6) and the exploitation will be in accordance to that principle. MRA or TiO2 must acquire the products developed by 
project partners to commercialise/integrate the whole  MULTIPLE scalable monitoring and optimization solution 
(guaranteeing no-IPR collision among partners).  
MRA will be act as provider for the industry integrators: RUSSULA, SCM and IRIS. When integrating the solution 
on real industry facilities, integrators will need to implement their knowledge on specific process optimisation and 
on controlling the processes.  It may be implanted in existing manufacturing facilities  integrating current 
infrastructures or it will be implanted on totally new production lines. Industry integrators (RUSSULA, SCM and 
IRIS), will acquire (at fair and beneficial conditions) the MULTIPLE solution and deploy and manage it to optimise 
manufacturer production lines increasing their technology portfolio and solutions to be offered to the industry. 
IRIS will be focused on integration of monitoring and optimization solution and architecture for the Food and food 
processing sector within the project and on the pharmaceutical sector beyond it, whether SCM will tackle the 
MULTIPLE solution integration and implantation work for the woodworking and furniture manufacturing sector and 
on the plastics, stone or glass sectors beyond the project. In the other hand, RUSSULA will be focused on integration 
on steel working facilities aiming o ptimisation of the production process, which is its core business. Agreement 
between MRA & TiO2  and RUSSULA, SCM & IRIS are established for mutual prescription and boosting 
commercialization opportunities and clients reach. All industry integrators (RUSSUL A, SCM and IRIS) will 
integrate and deploy the MULTIPLE overall solution at the End-Users (ROYO, LDL and JOTIS) facilities improving 
their current processes,  increasing speed, quality and resource efficiency at their selected production lines. It is 
important to point out that End-Users are relevant players within their sectors and, thus, play a crucial role as early-
adopters, smoothing the market uptake of MULTIPLE-developed solutions. 
Lead-Users or Technology Developers ( SENORICS, AIROPTIC, ABRAIA, PHF) will act as suppliers of their 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  41 
generated results (imaging and sensing solutions and orchestration and optimisation tools ranging a wide spectrum 
of photonic technologies) to MULTIPLE overall solution to MULTIPLE integrators or to potential industry E nd-
Users aiming to acquire specific simple and stand -alone solutions. IRIS will also commercialise the new NIR 
spectroscopy developed with the OLED-based sensor as a stand-alone solution. 
Complementarily, industrial partners will be granted licences by the  RTOs (AIMEN and IMEC) to use their 
generated IP in the exploitation of the project results in their applications, terms will include remuneration based on 
sales. 
Business Model. A draft business model Canvas (Figure 21) has been developed and will be further refined (WP7) 
based on discussions with partners, key stakeholders and potential customers. ‘Lean Start Up’148 methodologies will 
be used to build the prototype business (including test and learn process) to ensure exploitation maximisation. On the 
Canvas, it is represented the common features for KER1exploitation. Specific business models for MULTIPLE 
subsystems, technologies and tools (OERs) fit in current partners business models avoiding the need to develop new 
business models. 
 
Figure 21. A draft Business Model Canvas for MULTIPLE scalable monitoring and optimisation solutions. 
Consortium partners are committed to engage key stakeholders through all available channels. MULTIPLE model is 
a business-to-business (B2B) model of a medium cost and specialised equipment and thus, personal assistance and 
contact shall be made in order to materialise potential sales. In this sense, the direct sales force, highly experienced, 
of KER1 exploitator, MRA and TiO2, will benefit from Grupo ALAVA huge sales force and will also benefit from 
the industry integrators customer base.  Grupo Alava is already commercialising photonic solutions from the 
technological partners of the consortium (PHF, IRIS, etc.). SCM, IRIS and RUSSULA (relevant players within their 
industrial domains) are a key asset due their strong relationship with industry and End-Users (potential clients). The 
involvement of different partners with a very different field of expertise, will deliver great opportunities for direct 
commercialisation through the exploitation of synergies and potential mutual prescription, benefiti ng from their 
marketing and sales network. Indeed, MULTIPLE benefits from having onboard a photonic market expect and 
commercialisation consultant, like TEMATYS, helping on defining the best suited exploitation strategy for the 
projects results. Moreover, relying on the integration of solutions from global key players like PHF will boost market 
acceptance and client willingness to pay. In addition, MULTIPLE will benefit from current partners positioning 
within the EU market and fostering synergies with rela ted projects. MULTIPLE partners will take opportunity of 
reaching potential customers through sectorial events, trade fairs and demonstration activities ( showrooms, open-
door days, etc.) as well as specialised publications in that sense the involvement of a partner like EPIC will trigger 
dissemination and client confidence. 
In addition to conventional and previously mentioned channels, professionals in the maintenance and asset 
 
148 The Lean Start Up, http://theleanstartup.com 

ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  42 
management sectors, such as EFNMS 149 and GFMAM150, will be also contacted. In most cases, it will be offered a 
revenue-sharing model (e.g. % in any sale they make) in return of gaining access to different markets. Federations, 
associations and clusters have a multiplier effect and leveraging penetration of MULTIPLE systems and solutions. 
Financial projections . Based on mentioned strategy and partners´ experience, the initial selling -price for 
MULTIPLE solutions have been set (including subsystems and tools) with a sufficient profit level (ranging from 
30% for KER1 to 35% for OER2&3 , usually the profit level could be more than 40% in high technology level 
developments) representing a great business opportunity for all partners and remaining costs -competitive products 
(remaining largely cost-effective solutions when compared with market available solutions). Financial projections 
on the commercialisation of KER and OERs for 5 years (once commercialisation beings) is depicted under Figure 
22. The number of units sold is in accordance with market evolution (already assessed on section 1.4.2). MULTIPLE 
is envisioning to generate €54.6M turnover and €17M of profit. The needed investment to further development steps 
(commercialisation roadmap) of MULTIPLE solutions would be about €7.4M (moving from TRL7 to 9 involves 
important qualification and marketing costs) and, thus, the Payback time will be within 4 years and an estimated ROI 
of 126,2%. 
  
Figure 22. MULTIPLE project exploitable results commercialisation financial projections.  
 
Figure 23. From left to right annual profit and turnover, cumulative profit and turnover evolution and yearly evolution of ROI. 
Knowledge Management and Protection. The knowledge management will rely on the Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) and the Innovation Board (IB), more details in section 3.2. The participation of the relevant industrial complete 
value chain, represented in MULTIPLE consortium, provides an import ant perspective for this task. A Consortium 
Agreement (CA) will be elaborated to manage (amongst other things) issues related to IPR (ownership of results, 
 
149 http://www.efnms.eu/  
150 http://www.gfmam.org/  
KEY EXPLOITABLE PROJECT RESULT Partner Item Price 
(€)
Profit/Item 
(%) Sales (units) Sales (€) Profit (€) Sales (units) Sales (€) Profit (€)
KER1: MULTIPLE scalable monitoring and 
optimisation solution MRA/TiO2 160.000 €        30% 4 640.000 €           192.000 €           14 2.240.000 €        672.000 €           
OER1: Snapshot VIS/SWIR HSI imagers PHF 10.000 €         30% 15 150.000 €           45.000 €            30 300.000 €           90.000 €            
OER2: Laser-based IR analysers AIROPTIC 20.000 €         35% 10 200.000 €           70.000 €            20 400.000 €           140.000 €           
OER3: Multimodal imaging systems IRIS 5.000 €           35% 12 60.000 €            21.000 €            25 125.000 €           43.750 €            
OER4: Cloud and edge computing platform and 
service ABRAIA 15.000 €         30% 5 75.000 €            22.500 €            12 180.000 €           54.000 €            
46 1.125.000 €     350.500 €        101 3.245.000 €     999.750 €        
46 1.125.000 €     350.500 €        147 4.370.000 €     1.350.250 €     
7.049.500 €-     6.049.750 €-     
-95% -82%
KEY EXPLOITABLE PROJECT RESULT Partner Item Price 
(€)
Profit/Item 
(%) Sales (units) Sales (€) Profit (€) Sales (units) Sales (€) Profit (€)
KER1: MULTIPLE scalable monitoring and 
optimisation solution MRA/TiO2 160.000 €        30% 39 6.240.000 €        1.872.000 €        70 11.200.000 €      3.360.000 €        
OER1: Snapshot VIS/SWIR HSI imagers PHF 10.000 €         30% 90 900.000 €           270.000 €           180 1.800.000 €        540.000 €           
OER2: Laser-based IR analysers AIROPTIC 20.000 €         35% 40 800.000 €           280.000 €           75 1.500.000 €        525.000 €           
OER3: Multimodal imaging systems IRIS 5.000 €           35% 50 250.000 €           87.500 €            90 450.000 €           157.500 €           
OER4: Cloud and edge computing platform and 
service ABRAIA 15.000 €         30% 35 525.000 €           157.500 €           55 825.000 €           247.500 €           
254 8.715.000 €     2.667.000 €     470 15.775.000 €   4.830.000 €     
401 13.085.000 €   4.017.250 €     871 28.860.000 €   8.847.250 €     
3.382.750 €-     1.447.250 €     
-46% 20%
KEY EXPLOITABLE PROJECT RESULT Partner Item Price 
(€)
Profit/Item 
(%) Sales (units) Sales (€) Profit (€) Sales (units) Sales (€) Profit (€)
KER1: MULTIPLE scalable monitoring and 
optimisation solution MRA/TiO2 160.000 €        30% 115 18.400.000 €      5.520.000 €        242 38.720.000 €      11.616.000 €      
OER1: Snapshot VIS/SWIR HSI imagers PHF 10.000 €         30% 250 2.500.000 €        750.000 €           565 5.650.000 €        1.695.000 €        
OER2: Laser-based IR analysers AIROPTIC 20.000 €         35% 130 2.600.000 €        910.000 €           275 5.500.000 €        1.925.000 €        
OER3: Multimodal imaging systems IRIS 5.000 €           35% 150 750.000 €           262.500 €           327 1.635.000 €        572.250 €           
OER4: Cloud and edge computing platform and 
service ABRAIA 15.000 €         30% 100 1.500.000 €        450.000 €           207 3.105.000 €        931.500 €           
745 25.750.000 €   7.892.500 €     1616 54.610.000 €   16.739.750 €   
1616 54.610.000 €   16.739.750 €   
9.339.750 €     9.339.750 €     
126% 126,21%
Cummulative
Balance (Cummulative Profit - Initial investment)
ROI
Total by year
Commercialisation year (beyond the project) Year 5 MULTIPLE EXPLOITATION (in 5 years)
Total by year
Cummulative
Balance (Cummulative Profit - Initial investment)
ROI
Year 3 Year 4Commercialisation year (beyond the project)
Total by year
Cummulative
Balance (Cummulative Profit - Initial investment)
ROI
Year 1 Year 2Commercialisation year (beyond the project)

ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  43 
access rights or dissemination). The principles for knowledge management, to be included in the CA, are: 
Provisions regarding Background. Further to what it is already established in articles 24 and 25 of Grant Agreement 
(GA), the following provisions have been defined to be included in the CA: (1) Access to Background for the project 
implementation will be on a royalty-free basis; (2) Access to Background for exploiting project’s results will be on 
fair and reasonable conditions. Access rights to background for exploitation of project’s results will be revised during 
the project, since this will depend on the technologies finally implemented in the results (several to be studied during 
the project, some to be dismissed). The review's conclusions will be included in the subsequent versions of the 
Exploitation Plan (EP) to be elaborated in WP7. If access rights to the partners' Background were eventually needed, 
they shall be granted and, if applicable, the final version of the EP will include the description and costs of these 
conditions. The most relevant knowledge and know -how necessary to achieve the pro ject results are listed in table 
below well as the partners providing such background. A written agreement including all background needed or the 
project implementation and results exploitation will be included in the CA. 
Table 9. Relevant partners´ background  
Project Output Background 
Principles and 
fundamentals of 
optoelectronic 
systems based on 
spectral sensors 
IRIS – Know-how in terms of monitoring systems, especially embedding optical systems 
and  chemiometrics . Knowledge on optics used in the NIR systems implemented in the 
project 
AIMEN – Embedded RT image processing control & inspection  
SENORICS- OLED-based detectors and sensors developments for spectroscopy including 
filtering. 
AIROPTIC – know-how in gas analyzer design including signal processing, optics, 
spectroscopy, electronics, firmware, software. 
IMEC – Knowledge on snapshot spectral filtering design for hyperspec tral images (Patent 
US2018359438). 
PHF - Expertise in CMOS image sensor design including operation modes such as ROI 
tracking, multi-exposure, non-destructive read out modes. Real time image pre -processing 
technologies in FPGA’s or DSP’s. 
SCM- Use of thermography in belt sanding quality control 
Principles and 
knowledge for 
orchestration of 
monitoring 
systems 
ABRAIA – Expertise on developing and deployment of cloud services for media asset 
management and image and video processing with deep learning models 
AIMEN – Real-time capable Deep Learning processing pipelines and artificial network 
architectures for machine vision 
PHF – Knowledge on integration different sensing technologies within their CMOs camara 
solution for multiple applications. Software -defined camera platforms and image pre -
processing IP’s. 
IRIS – Knowledge on integration of Process Analytical Technology (PAT) 
TiO2 & MRA – Expertise on IoT solutions development and photonic devices integration 
and orchestration for industry applications. 
Knowledge on 
process 
optimization 
IRIS – Knowledge on artificial intelligence techniques application for industrial monitoring. 
SCM - Patent pending for an own sanding diagnosis systems. 
AIMEN -Use of deep learning and principal component analysis for predictive control. 
ABRAIA – Knowledge on builing platform for the seamless development of deep learning 
models and cloud data and model management 
TiO2 - Elastic Search engine to provide data visualization and analytics as core of the 
business intelligence 
Principles for 
integration and 
industrial 
deployment of 
monitoring and 
control 
manufacturing 
solutions 
AIMEN - Expertise in development of real -time closed-loop control based on high speed 
SWIR/MWIR sensors, in an embedded configuration using FPGA. 
AIROPTIC - Expertise in manufacturing of laser -based spectrometers for industrial 
applications in power, wood, chemical, petrochemical, steel working and food industries. 
IRIS – Knowledge on integration monitoring systems in production lines, as well as of 
chemiometrics (cost effective imaging system for target foreign body detection). 
SCM – Knowledge and patents on integration of vision scanning systems for drilling within 
the woodworking sector. Own solution allowing to analyze the panels after the edging 
process to detect and identify defects so as to increase the quality of the finished product.  
RUSSULA – Knowledge on steelworking sector production processes optimisation and 
equipment integration. 
LDL – Production processes requirements and quality control specifications for continuous 
steel heavy plates production. 
ROYO – Production processes requirements and quality control specifications for bathroom 
furniture piecewise production. 
JOTIS - Production processes requirements and quality control specifications for chocolate 
continuous production according to EU food regulations. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  44 
Provisions regarding Project’s Results.  
The following procedures shall be considered in 
the CA further to the GA provisions in Articles 26 
to 31: (1) Protection. Partners will have a proactive 
policy to protect IP arising from this project as it is 
envisaged in Table 10. Software developments 
(software), when not considered in patents, will be 
protected by copyright. Moreover, industrial 
design and trademark schemes will also be used, 
when necessary, to complement product protection 
in the market. Copyright will protect any written 
material produced. Know-how generated, when it 
cannot be protected by any of the mentioned 
mechanisms, will be then protected by trade secret 
implementing the necessa ry measures to ensure such protection. For joint applications agreements will be signed 
beforehand to manage the protective measures. (2) Dissemination: The Consortium will have a proactive policy to 
disseminate the project results (see 2.3.2 and WP7), wit h prior notice of any dissemination activity to all partners 
with sufficient information on the results to be disseminated. The research partners will aim for fast and open access 
publication and are provided with dedicated budgets to publish according to the “Gold Model” standard, (publication 
with immediate, free of charge open access). If for certain reasons the “Gold Model” cannot apply (e.g. dissemination 
budget reserved for open access journals exhausted), the open access will be given according to the “Green Model” 
(e.g. the publication is made available in a repository located in project website), possibly after an embargo period.  
Open Access to research data will be provided according to the Data Management Plan. (3) Access Rights to Results: 
access for carrying out the project work will be on a royalty-free basis, while for exploitation will be granted on fair 
and reasonable conditions. Access Rights for internal research, education or training will be granted on a royalty-free 
basis. Other provisions on access rights will be defined in the CA.  
Open Access and Open Research Data : MULTIPLE consortium will ensure open access to peer review scientific 
publications. Furthermore, the MULTIPLE consortium will seek for opportunities to provide open access to not peer-
reviewed scientific publications, such as monographs, conference proceedings, etc. In addition, MULTIPLE Project 
will participate in the Open Research Data Pilot according to Article 29.3 of the GA. The project will collect different 
types of data: product & process parameters, industrial specifications, designs, testing procedures and results, models 
and modelling procedures, KPI, market data, life cycle cost produced data or personal data. The research data to be 
opened include KPI validation data, market data, results presented in the deposited scientific publications, known as 
“underlying data”. The quality and performance data of the end -users and research data related to industry results 
will be considered confidential as otherwise their competitive position for exploiting such results will be endangered. 
Personal data of people involved in project activities will be managed according to EU/ national Data Regulations. 
Peer-review publications, open research data and cost analysis data will be made accessible for at least 5 years after 
the end of the project within partners’ own internal servers, the project website and/or on a public repository 
(preferred option will be ZENODO´s repository through the creation of a dedicated community for the MULTIPLE 
project). Data Management Plan (DMP) will be further elaborated during the project (D7.2), including detailing data 
that will be generated, whether and how it will be exploited or made accessible (following H2020 guidelines151,152). 
2.2.2 Plan for Dissemination and Communication 
A first draft of the Dissemination and Communication Plan (D&CP) is presented, and it will be further developed 
during the project (WP7). While the Dissemination is focussed on the public disclosure of MULTIPLE results to 
specific target groups, Communication aimed on promoting the project itself and its impacts. 
(a). Dissemination 
 
151 Guidelines on FAIR Data Management in Horizon 2020, v3.0, 7/16 
152 Guidelines Rules on Open Access to Scientific Publications and Open Access to Research Data in H2020, v3.2., 3/17 
Table 10. MULTIPLE Results Protection strategy 

ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  45 
Dissemination objectives. The main objectives 
of the Dissemination are: (O1) to raise 
awareness and interest of potential users on the 
project results; (O2) to potentiate interaction 
with stakeholders and potential users to obtain 
key feedback to enhance exploitation 
opportunities; (O3) transfer of knowledge  
among the partners (O4) effective acquisition of 
new skills by users; (O5) ensure a broad 
applicability of the project results taking into 
consideration regulations and standards; (O6) to 
foster MULTIPLE technology solutions wider 
acceptance by EU manufacturing industry. 
Dissemination milestones. 
In the very initial phase of the project, dissemination will be focused in presenting the project to raise awareness 
among stakeholders (all target audiences). Following the generation of research output dissemina tion will be more 
focused to the scientific community, standardization organisations and key industry representatives. As the project 
progresses, dissemination will focus on presenting results related to MULTIPLE solutions (the whole solution and 
each of t he subsystems and special tools) through specific outreach activities to all audiences. By the end of the 
project, the focus will also be oriented towards relevant industrial demonstration. 
Although during the whole project transfer activities among the partners will occur, specific actions are planned by 
the end of the project based on all the results obtained. Similarly, training activities will also be specifically addressed 
at the end of the project and beyond. 
Dissemination activities, audience, messages, timing and KPIs are shown on the following table: 
Table 11. MULTIPLE Dissemination plan 
Activities153 Audience154 Key message Time 
planning KPI dissemination 
Project website & Social Media, 
MULTIPLE community, press releases, 
media appearance (OP) 
ALL (O1) 
Proj. obj., activities, 
partners, public 
docs, videos 
M36 +5,000 web visits, +200 
followers 
Project in partners' websites and/or social 
media (OP) IND (O1) Project objectives M36 ~2,000 persons reached 
Project brochure/leaflet/didactic 
materials (PD) ALL (O1) 
Proj. obj., activities, 
partners, public 
docs. 
M36 ~3,000 readers 
Internal seminars (PD) PP (O3) 
Technical 
background, keys to 
use MULTIPLE 
solutions 
With 
project 
meetings 
At least 2 seminars 
Online/offline/in-house training (E) IND, HLE 
(O4) 
Results, knowledge 
and fundamentals.  
Beyond 
the project 
~20 university students/ 
PhD 
~25 trainees 
MULTIPLE workshops (E) IND, SH, 
SO(O1,2,5) 
Results, main 
process features  
M36 
onwards ~ 100 attendees 
Scientific Articles Physics/ Optics 
Journals: Applied Optics, Journal of Applied 
physics, Journal of Optical Society of 
America, Optics Express, ACS Photonics, 
Nano Letters, Applied Physics Letters, 
Journ. of Soft Eng. & Applications, etc. 
(PP) 
SC (O1) 
Results, specifically 
knowledge and 
fundamentals 
M12 
onwards 
8+ scientific articles  
~2000 readers 
Presentations/lectures/posters in photonics 
congresses/ conferences: ISA, OSA 
Advanced photonics, CLEO, Photonic West, 
SPP Conference, Sensor+Test, ACHEMA, 
etc. (PD) 
SC (O1&2) 
Project contents, 
developments and 
results. 
2021/2022 
and 
beyond 
2+ PPTP & 3+ posters 
~400 researchers 
 
153 Activity type: Project Documentation (PD), Project Publication (PP), Online Presence (OP), Events (E) 
154 Audience: project partners (PP), Industry (IND), Scientific Community (SC), Stakeholders (SH), Standardization Organisation (SO), High-
level education (HLE). 
Figure 24. MULTIPLE dissemination & communication toolkit. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  46 
Networking and Clustering EU-funded 
projects and initiatives in photonics and in 
monitoring and optimisation (E) 
SC (O1&2) 
Project contents, 
developments and 
results. 
M12 
onwards 
2+ clustering activities 
10+ project contacted. 
Organisation of parallel project events 
(Photonics West, Photonics Europe, 
OFC, PIC international, VISION, etc.) 
SC (O1&2),  
IND (O1, 2 
&6) 
Project contents, 
developments, 
results of the 
solution 
2021/2022 
and 
beyond the 
project 
2+ events reaching 
150+ researchers & 
industrials 
Technical articles in Photonics and 
Industry Journals: Photonics Spectra,  
Optik&Photonik, EuroPhotonics, 
Spectroscopy online,  Industrial 
Photonics, Journal of Lasers, Optics & 
Photonics, CIRP Journal of Manufacturing 
Science and Technology, Journal of Applied 
Metalworking, European Journal of Wood 
and Wood Products , Journal of Food 
Processing, etc. (PP) 
SC (O1) 
IND 
(O1&6) 
Project contents, 
developments, main 
process features and 
results. 
M12 
onwards 
3+ articles 
~2000 readers 
Open Access Repository (PP) 
SC, SO, 
HLE 
(O5&O6) 
Project public 
datasets, results and 
information 
M12 
onwards ~25 downloads 
Participation in industrial events, fairs 
and workshops: Image Sensors Europe. 
LASER World of PHOTONICS, 
Photonics West,  LIGNA Trade Fair , 
FoodTec, Advanced Factories, VISION, 
Photonics West, etc.) (E) 
IND, SH 
(O1,2&6) 
Broad MULTIPLE 
solutions. 
Presentation to 
industry and 
stakeholders. 
Booths presenting 
posters and project 
dossiers  
2021/2022 
and 
beyond the 
project 
Participation on 6+ 
industrial 
events/fairs/workshops. 
~5,000 attendees 
Liaison and collaboration with 
standardization organisations (ISO, 
CENELEC and IEC) (PD) 
SO (O5) 
Information sharing 
and workshop 
participation 
M12 
onwards 
1+ liaison with relevant 
ISO/CEN-CENELEC 
TC 
Presentations in events promoted by EU 
Initiatives, platforms, and association 
(Photonics21, EFFRA  I4MS, SAE, 
Manufuture, EFIC, EUROFER, 
ORGALIM. EFFoST, PFP, SECPHO, 
etc.) (E) 
IND, SH 
(O1,2&6) 
Project contents, 
developments and 
results. 
M12 
onwards 
4+ presentations 
2+ posters. 
~700 attendees 
Promote MULTIPLE results through 
Enterprise Europe Network (PP) 
IND  
(O1, 2 &6) 
Results and main 
features of 
MULTIPLE 
M22 
onwards 2+ dossiers 
(b). Communication  
Communication Objectives (why communicate?):  
The main objectives of the Communication are: (O1) to involve young minds into the development of photonic 
sensing solutions and technologies and, specifically, related to the obtaining of monitoring and optimisation solutions 
for the manufacturing sector , and their importance and impact onto the economy and society; (O2) to help on 
promoting gender equality and integrating the gender dimension in research and innovation activities as well as 
promoting new gender-neutral career opportunities derived from project results; (O3) to achieve societal endorsement 
linked to research on new and key technologies due to their potential for contributing to overcome main societal 
challenges; (O4) to involve industry potentially open to the adoption of MULTIPLE technology and solutions and 
achieve their support to the project and to future initiatives linked with developing and improving photonic 
monitoring solutions for production lines approach; (O5) to contribute to the mobilisation of the European Research 
Area for th e adoption of MULTIPLE-generated knowledge and the development of new technologies and uses 
enabling the full potential of the MULTIPLE technology solutions; (O6) to  raise awareness among EC, Public 
Authorities and Policy Makers to foster cooperation in spreading the benefits of digital and intelligent manufacturing 
and contributing to regulatory process. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  47 
Communication Strategy (how to communicate?). 
MULTIPLE will deploy a 360 degrees 
Communication Strategy , combining online and 
offline channels, content marketing strategies & 
tools, growth hacking techniques, analytics tools, 
media relations, advertising campaigns, agreements 
with top events and associations and work with 
stakeholders. This 360° approach is v isualized in 
Figure 25. 
To reach the communication objectives, at 
qualitative and quantitative level, MUTLIPLE 
consortium will focus on low -cost alternatives to 
traditional marketing, e.g. using social media, viral 
marketing instead of buying advertising through 
more traditional media. 
Communication Material.  Communication materials (presentations, brochures, newsletters, didactic -oriented 
materials, etc.), regularly updated, will be developed to disseminate the project, including a Communication Kit 
(narrative text, photographs, slides and any other suitable co mmunication material, complemented with copyright 
licenses for the EC and Photonics21). MULTIPLE will be the project brand. 
Communication plan (what, when, to whom and where communicate?). 
Table 12. MULTIPLE communication plan 
Audience Key message Activities Time KPIs 
Young Minds Impact on youth daily 
life 
Short video for schools, visits, 
didactic materials, etc. 
M8 
onwards 
Reaching at least 
200 students 
Public in 
general 
Impact on job creation, 
energy efficiency, 
environ. & life quality 
Press releases, articles, presentation 
on Radio & TV, web & docs, social 
media 
M1 
onwards 
+30,000 people 
reached 
Women Career opportunities in 
manufacturing derived 
from project results 
Participation in the EU Platform of 
Women in Science, EU Assoc. of 
Women in STEM, etc. 
M12 
onwards 
Involvement in 
at least 3 
activities 
Stakeholders  Project results and its 
impact beyond 
manufacturing industry. 
Authorities and Ind. events, 
including when possible 
Standardiz.&Certification. 
M12 
onwards 
+3 presentations. 
European 
Research Area 
The MULTIPLE project 
results and its impact 
Project information in CORDIS and 
own & external means  
M12 
onwards 
+3 CORDIS/ EC 
publications 
EC, 
Authorities & 
Policy Makers 
Impacts on industry and 
citizens and existing 
limiting barriers 
Presentation, Ad -hoc briefings & 
fact sheets in EC, Auth. & Policy 
Makers events 
M1 
onwards 
+2 policy & 
engaging events 
Communication Requirements 
This project is funded by one of the calls under the Photonics Public Private Partnership (PPP). All communication 
activities related to the project will acknowledge the context of the Photonics PPP, for example by stating that the 
project is an initiative of the Photonics Public Private Partnership. 
Specifically, for workshops, press releases, presentations etc, the EU emblem and Photonics21 logo will be displayed 
prominently together with the text "Photonics Public Private Partnership". The link www.photonics21.org will also 
be included. When communicating on Twitter or other social media about project activit ies, #Photonics will be 
included together with @Photonics21 and @PhotonicsEU. 
The consortium will issue a press release at project launch, additional press releases whenever the project has reached 
a significant milestone or exceptional scientific, economic or societal impact is expected, and a final press release at 
project end. 
A communication kit about the project (as a minimum a narrative text, photographs, slides possibly complemented 
by a video and any other suitable communication material, accompanied w ith copyright licences for the European 
Commission and for Photonics21) will be prepared and delivered at the end of project month 3 at the latest . The 
communication kit will target audiences beyond the project’s own community, including the broader public  and 
potential end -users, and focus on expected outcomes and related socio -economic benefits for the EU. The 
communication kit will be updated at mid-term and at project end to reflect project progress achieved. 
The communication activities will involve pu blic relations experts to ensure the pertinence of messages to target 
audiences and high outreach at both national and EU level through the use of the relevant national and EU -wide 
media channels (e.g. newspapers and broadcast). 
Figure 25. MULTIPLE Communication Strategy. 
ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  48 
Project communications such as project press releases, workshops announcements, websites, brochures will respect 
the principle of fair visibility for all partners. If the logo of any individual beneficiary is included, then the logos of 
all beneficiaries will be included.  
 
3 Implementation
3.1 Work plan   
3.1.1 Overall structure of the work plan 
The work plan has been designed 
to develop and deploy a 
multimodal spectral sensors and 
orchestrated deep models fo r 
integrated process optimisation. 
MULTIPLE is organised in 8 
Work Packages (WP), being 
WP1 to WP6 technical WPs. In 
addition, WP7 is dedicated to 
dissemination and exploitation 
and WP8 is dedicated to Project 
Management. The strategy 
proposed to achieve t he main 
goals of the project is based on 
the completion of the 
aforementioned eight work 
packages. 
WP1, Requirements, specifications and data collection:  This WP focuses on develop a detailed definition of the 
requirements and specifications and will elaborate a multimodal data collection for development and benchmarking. 
It is structured in three different tasks. T1.1, Industrial use case requirements and specifications , will provide a 
detailed definition of the end-users requirements. T1.2, System architecture, will provide the definition of the overall 
MULTIPLE system architecture. T1.3, Data collection , will collect multimodal imaging and spectral data for the 
development of the MULTIPLE system. 
WP2, Multimodal spectral sensing:  WP2 focuses on the development of a set of multimodal sensing solutions to 
monitor and estimate relevant product and process parameters. It is structured in four different tasks. T2.1, Snapshot 
spectral imagers, will develop custom mosaic filters and mask for a VGA InGaAs detect or. T2.2, InGaAs-based 
camera cores, will design the InGaAs image sensor readout module electronics to be compatible with PHF’s camera 
core. T2.3, Dual Band VIS-SWIR HSI imager, will develop a dual-aperture HSI broadband camera covering the VIS 
and SWIR ra nge. T2.4, Spectrometers , will develop cost -effective versatile spectrometers tailored to the three 
demonstration applications. 
WP3, Multispectral measurements and parameters estimation:  This WP focuses on the development of 
algorithms and models for produ ct and process parameters based on the data provided by WP2. It is structured in 
four different tasks. T3.1, Chemometric models for spectroscopy, will develop neural network and analytical models 
for robust estimation of gas concentration ratios for different compounds using the laser -based IR spectroscopy 
supplied by T2.3. T3.2, Thermal modelling and colorimetry, will provide the measurements of emissivity independent 
thermal imaging inside the furnace of the steelworks and colorimetry in the food and woodworking cases. T3.3, HSI 
segmentation and classification,  will develop algorithms and models for segmentation and classification of HSI 
suitable for real-time processing. T3.4, HSI regression, will develop regression models exploiting VIS -SWIR HSI 
datacubes. 
WP4, Smart edge computing:  This WP focuses on the development of smart edge computing devices with AI 
embedded processing capabilities. It is structured in four different tasks. T4.1, Edge computing devices, will develop 
edge computing devices for managing the HSI and spectrometers developed in WP2. T4.2, Data warehouse,  will 
provide the cloud data warehouse suited to the spectral data. T4.3, Real-time embedded multimodal data processing, 
Figure 26. Interdependences of the Work Packages. 

ICT-05-2019  
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  49 
will provide smart standalone IoT photonic monitoring and control solutions. T4.4, Fast model prototyping and 
deployment platform, will provide a cloud deployment platform for fast and scalable model prototypin g that will 
ensure smooth model compatibility from cloud to edge computing devices, addressing too the implementation of a 
graphical interface for data annotation. 
WP5: Integration and production optimisation:  WP5 is a transversal work package focused on t he system 
integration of MULTIPLE, and the production optimisation. It is structured in three different tasks. T5.1, Multimodal 
monitoring system integration , is a long -term task devoted to the integration of the different subsystems that 
compounds MULTIPLE. T5.2, On-line optimisation, will develop close-loop control for process optimization in 
steelworking and woodworking, and on-line quality control for chocolate production and woodworking.  . T5.3, Data-
driven production optimisation, will develop the reporting and decision system to support Business Intelligence based 
on KPIs and data analytics, process flow control and anomaly detection.  
WP6: Industrial demonstration: This WP is the final technical WP. The one who involves the complete project 
evaluation and demonstration in real industry tasks. The execution of this work package will be focused on checking 
the capabilities of the MULTIPLE system in three different relevant scenarios such as woodworking, food processing 
and steel-working, where the Tech nology Readiness Levels (TRL) expected in MULTIPLE will be checked.  In 
addition, this WP involves the benchmarking task. 
WP7: Exploitation and dissemination: WP7 involves the development of the different dissemination, training and 
knowledge management ac tivities that will be identified and integrated into a Dissemination and Communication 
Plan and Exploitation plan. Besides, this work package also involves the development of the technology transfer 
activities. 
WP8: Project management: WP8 involves the management activities (overall project management, legal, financial, 
commercial and policy issues) and to manage the technical (time, resource, competence and budget risks) and 
strategies tasks. 
 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  50 
3.1.2 Work plan timing 
 
 
 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
WP 1 Requirements, specifications and data collection RUSSULA 1 24
T1.1 Industrial use case requirements and specifications ROYO 1 3
T1.2 System architecture RUSSULA 1 3
T1.3 Data collection SCM 3 24
WP 2 Multimodal spectral sensing IMEC 1 18
T2.1 Snapshot spectral filtering IMEC 1 18
T2.1 InGaAs-based camera cores PHF 1 18
T2.3 Dual band VIS-SWIR HSI imager PHF 6 18
T2.4 Spectrometers AIROPTIC 3 18
WP 3 Multispectral measurements and parameters estimation IRIS 10 21
T3.1 Chemometrics models for spectroscopy AIROPTIC 10 21
T3.2 Thermal modelling and colorimetry AIMEN 10 21
T3.3 HSI segmentation and classification AIMEN 10 21
T3.4 HSI regression IRIS 10 21
WP 4 Smart edge computing AIMEN 4 24
T4.1 Edge computing devices AIMEN 4 12
T4.2 Data warehouse ABRAIA 7 12
T4.3 Real-time embedded multimodal data processing AIMEN 13 24
T4.4 Fast model prototyping and deployment platform ABRAIA 13 24
WP 5 Integration and production optimization RUSSULA 6 28
T5.1 Multimodal monitoring system integration IRIS 6 27
T5.2 On-line optimization RUSSULA 19 28
T5.3 Data-driven production optimization TiO2 19 28
WP 6 Industrial demonstration SCM 28 36
T6.1 Rolling mill production line demo LDL 28 36
T6.2 Furniture manufacturing demo ROYO 28 36
T6.3 Chocolate production line demo JOTIS 28 36
T6.4 Benchmarking SCM 31 36
WP 7 Exploitation and dissemination EPIC 1 36
T7.1 Dissemination and communication EPIC 1 36
T7.2 Exploitation and IP management TEMATYS 1 36
T7.3 Technology transfer activities EPIC 1 36
WP 8 Project management AIMEN 1 36
T8.1 Project coordination AIMEN 1 36
T8.2 Project monitoring and risk management AIMEN 1 36
T8.3 Strategic management of the project AIMEN 1 36
                                                                         Milestones: M1 M2 M3 M4 M5 M6
3rd yearDescription Lead Start End 1st year 2nd year
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  51 
3.1.3 List of Figures 
 
Figure 27. Real-time semantic segmentation processing pipeline. 
 
 
Figure 28. Example of 3D-CNN hyperspectral image pixel regression architecture 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 30. Tensorflow 2.0 schematic framework overview for training and 
deployment. 
Figure 29. Basic concept of scalable data warehouse based on state-of-the-art 
open-source technology 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  52
3.2 Management structure and procedures 
3.2.1 Management structure 
a. Project Steering Committee (PSC). The PSC consists of one senior staff representing each partner of the project 
and is chaired by the Coordinator. The PSC is the highest decision -making body of the Consortium  and will be 
responsible for determining the long -term strategy and orientation of MULTIPLE and taking major strategic 
decisions on  matters affecting the project (changes to Annexes 1 and 2 of the Grant Agr eement, IPR issues, 
suspension or termination, etc.) or the consortium (change of coordinator, entry or withdrawal of a partner). The PSC 
will meet at least twice every year. 
b.  Project Coordinator (PC). AIMEN will act as 
the PC and will be the legal entity acting as the 
intermediary between the consortium and the 
EC/Agency. The experience and commitment of 
AIMEN will ensure the success of project 
management. AIMEN has been invol ved in 54 
international R&D&I projects, 34 of them under 
the EU R&D Framework Programmes, acting as 
coordinator in 16 of such projects. The PC will be 
responsible for the management of technical, 
financial and legal issues of the project according 
to the p rovisions in the GA, the CA and the 
decisions of the PSC. Namely, the PC will 
coordinate the execution of the activities in the 
work plan and the allocation of resources, while 
monitoring the effective and efficient 
implementation of the project against th e plan. 
The PC will also be responsible for the compliance with contractual obligations with the EC/Agency, including 
elaboration and submission of reports and deliverables (including financial statements and related certifications). 
Moreover, the PC will manage the communication flow within the consortium and with any external organisation. 
In addition, the PC will perform functions such as EC financial contribution management, arranging meetings and 
provision of minutes or maintenance of project procedures. Moreover, AIMEN will appoint a Scientific Manager and 
an Administrative Manager that will comprise the Management Team that  will be responsible for the day -to-day 
management of the project. Within AIMEN, support will be provid ed from its own Project Man agement Office, 
which deals with the financial, legal and administrative aspects of all R&D&I projects. 
c. Work Package Teams (WPT). In the WPT, representatives of all partners involved in a Work Package (WP) will 
discuss, coordinate and take decisions to eff ectively carry out the WP activities according to the established work 
plan and the decisions of the PSC. Each WPT will be led by a Work Package Leader (WPL) who is responsible for 
coordinating the activities conducted within the WP, while monitoring the e ffective and efficient implementation 
against the work plan. In addition, the WPL will be responsible for informing the PC on the tasks progress and on 
any relevant issue affecting the WP, as well as for the communication flow within the WP. Complementarily, Task 
Leaders (TL) will be appointed to ensure expected outputs from the tasks a re coherent, can be met in time 
(effectiveness), and within funding constraints (efficacy). The TL will inform the WPL about the tasks progress.  
Each WPT shall meet at least every three months, beginning at the WP start date according to the work plan. The  
corresponding WPL will chair these meetings. 
Figure 32. MULTIPLE Management Structure 
Figure 31. Open source Kibana allows supporting easily configurable 
and intuitive dashboards for the visualization of data and KPIs 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  53 
d. Innovation Board (IB). The IB 
will work on smoothing the pathway 
to innovation by identifying any 
possible barriers and proposing 
actions to the PSC in order to 
maximise the opportunities for the 
exploitation of the outcomes of 
MULTIPLE project across the value 
chain. The IB will also conduct the 
efforts in relation to the activities to 
be developed in WP7. 
The IB shall consist of the WP7 
Leader -who will chair the IB -, the 
PC (as representative of the PSC), 
the Exploitation Manager (representative of the leader of Task 7.2). These representatives will be appointed based 
on their skills and expertise on business development, IPR issues and dissem ination and communication activities. 
The IB will be in charge of activities summarized on Figure 33. 
The IB will continuously collaborate with all partners, establishing dedicated task groups when necessary (i.e task 
groups on business plan elaboration for different project results). Collaboration with the QCG to ensure quality of 
publications is expected. Collaboration with experts from the Common E xploitation Booster will be foster if 
opportunity arises. 
The IB and task groups will primarily work on a remote basis and will organise face-to-face workshops or seminars, 
in parallel to PSC meetings, to engage all partners in their activities and to prom ote discussions among them on 
relevant issues (IP protection strategy, dissemination or exploitation strategy, etc.). 
e. Quality Control Group (QCG). The QCG will support the PC in monitoring and ensuring the quality of the project 
outputs, i.e. deliverables and publications. The QCG will comprise up to 5 members - selected within the partners’ 
staff and appointed by the PSC- with adequate background and experience to judge scientific excellence and quality 
of such outputs. In case the QCG does not find deliver ables or publications on an appropriate quality level, 
recommendations for adjustments will be given to the responsible of the output. In case of a conflict between them, 
decision shall be made by the PSC. The work of the QCG will be organized on a remotely basis. 
3.2.2 Management procedures 
An efficient set -up of management, 
monitoring and control procedures has 
been defined comprising: Consortium 
cooperation, Communication, 
Monitoring and reporting and Decision 
making mechanism. 
Decision making mechanism.  
Primarily, decisions in the consortium 
bodies (PSC, WPT, IB) should be made 
by consensus. If discussions do not lead 
to an agreement and consensus, the case 
will be decided upon voting. Each 
consortium body member will have one 
vote, 2/3 majority of the votes cast will 
be sufficient. 
In order to enable an agile decision -
making process ready to cope with a wide range of issues, the decision-making process has been established. In the 
unlikely case of irreconcilable differences that cannot be resolved by the PSC, the issue will be addressed following 
the procedure defined in the CA under Settlement of Conflicts provisions. 
3.2.3 Appropriateness of the management structure and procedures 
The management structure and procedures have been defined to guarantee the participation of all partners in strategic 
decisions through the PSC while maintaining sufficient agility in the day-to-day activities by adequate delegation of 
operative decisions, always in the strategic framework defined by PSC. Additionally, management activities have 
been distributed considering the different levels in the structure, empowering the WPL to assume a leading role in 
the technical management that will effectively support the PC in charge of the overall coordination. Quality of project 
Figure 33. Innovation Board activities 
Regular meetings for information 
exchange, problem solving and 
reaching collective decisions. 
Agenda         Minutes       Action List
Within the Consortium - All 
information (minutes, reports, etc.) 
will be communicated to the PC who 
will channel it to the other partners.
Outreach - Dissemination and 
Communication Plan
Partners- project status, planning, 
decisions of the PSC, etc..
External entities – project, results, 
impact, etc. 
Internal internet-based 
communication platform
Dissemination and 
communication toolkit
Systematic monitoring based on 
milestones and deliverables - by WPL at 
WP level and by PC at project level - to 
provide overview on technical progress & 
financial flows. PC reports to PSC who 
takes decisions to ensure achievement of 
project objectives.
Internal six-month reporting -
technical progress, results obtained, 
compliance with work-plan & costs 
incurred – All partners to PC
Reporting to EC - periodic/final 
reports & cost statements. PC with 
input from WPL and partners
Six-month Project status  EC reports
reports overview
Monitoring
& reporting
Cooperation
Communication
PSC meetings - every six months. 
WPT meetings - every 3 months. 
Separate meetings hold on demand
Figure 34. Management procedures 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  54 
outputs will be ensured thanks to the QCG. Furthermore, in order to foster the innovation activities a dedicated body, 
the IB, has been created dealing with all issues related to protection, dissemination and exploitation of project results.  
Further to the management structure and procedures herein defined, a CA will be agreed among the partners setting 
the provision regarding project governance, IPR management, confidentiality or manag ement of EU Grant among 
others.  
3.2.4 Innovation Management 
Innovation management comprises both to obtain the necessary information on and from the market and to effectively 
use this information in the project to achieve the proposed objectives, including the successful exploitation of the 
results.  
To keep an active surveillance of the market one body has been defined, the IB. Additionally, the IB will be in charge 
of managing the knowledge created in the project, identifying the barriers in the market up -take of project results 
(IPR issues, standards, market assessment) and defining the necessary actions to overcome them and successfully 
bring results to market, including Exploitation and Dissemination and communication Plan. 
The PSC adequately supported and advised by the IB is entitled to make a decision on modifications of the project 
plan, allocation of resources or IPR issues. 
Furthermore, activities above mentioned have been considered in the project work plan, specifically under the WP7.
3.3 Consortium as a whole  
The MULTIPLE consortium has been built 
upon the application -driven approach to 
ensure the wide industrial impact of the 
MULTIPLE results. The Figure 35 shows the 
collaborative project approach among 
countries and organizations (SMEs, Large 
Enterprises, RTOs and EU associations and 
consultants) ensuring the exploitation and 
deployment of the project results at the EU at 
large. The project is organized upon  the 
common roots: novel photonic sensing and 
imaging solutions development, monitoring 
solutions orchestration and cloud services and 
process simulation tools and, finally 
deployment and validation at manufacturing 
facilities at the steelworking, woodwork ing 
and food sectors.  
The partners compose an inter -complemented consortium, capable of achieving the project objectives and results 
addressed in the project, with a certain overlapping of competences and expertise. MULTIPLE will bring an 
opportunity to put together all this expertise for the deployment of photonic monitoring and optimisation solutions 
at EU manufacturing industries, greatly improving its competitiveness. 
SENORICS, IMEC, AIROPTIC and PHF have specific knowledge for developing novel multimo dal hyperspectral 
sensing solutions. IRIS provides expertise and knowledge on photonic solutions integration. Upon this ground 
knowledge, AIMEN and ABRAIA will complement photonic monitoring solutions through orchestration integrating 
smart edge computing and real -time embedded multimodal data processing and fast models and cloud services, 
respectively. MRA & TiO2 (Grupo ALAVA) as photonic devices integrator and commercialisation for industry 
implantation will integrate all MULTIPLE photonic developments in to a scalable and orchestrated monitoring and 
optimising solution. Process optimization and integration between different technologies for industrial deployment 
relies on the role of experienced partners like IRIS, SCM and RUSSULA. The presence of three En d-Users, highly 
relevant onto their markets (LDL at Steelworking, ROYO at woodworking and JOTIS at food sectors) ensures a 
wider uptake of the project results by industry. It is also relevant the implication of the photonics community through 
EPIC, selected partner to coordinate the dissemination, communication and training activities. TEMATYS will lead 
exploitation and IP management of project results. Moreover, the consortium gathers relevant connections and links 
with the major photonic stakeholders, inc luding standardization and certification committees and the relevant 
European forums and platforms (Photonics 21, EFFRA, LIM, Photonics West, etc.) to ensure the project results 
widespread. 
 
Figure 35. MULTIPLE consortium 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  55 
4 Members of the consortium
4.1 Participants 
 
Partner 1 Asociacion de Investigacion Metalurgica del Noroeste – (AIMEN), Spain 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: 1 AIMEN 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the tasks 
in the proposal 
Description of the entity 
AIMEN is a Non-Profit association constituted by 100 companies, which supplies technological support to more 
than 400 companies dedicated to industrial or commercial activity related to metallurgy, automotive sector, civil 
construction, mechanics, shipbuilding, chemicals, foundry, machinery, ceramics, food, cement, wood and its by -
products, plastics, engineering, assembly and others. AIMEN promotes and undertakes research, as well as 
improves manufacturing technologies in these sectors. 
Located in the Northwest of Spain, AIMEN is a highly -professionalized organisation with more than 230 
employees specialised in Materials Science, Manufacturing Process Engineering, Control Engineering, and Laser 
Processing. Its mission is to improve competitiveness and technology know-how of Manufacturing Industry. 
In this project, AIMEN will contribute with its competence in the field of monitoring and embedded control 
systems design, Real-Time process control, hardware design, software processing, online control systems design 
and data analytics of process data in manufacturing. Its interdisciplinary team of engineers and physicists provides 
competencies in the fields of sensors design, embedded control and software processing. 
AIMEN has active presence in the main European and National technology platforms and initiatives related with 
photonics and manufacturing technologies, specifically in PHOTONICS21 (related to the Photonic21 cPP P), 
EFFRA (related to Factories of the Future PPP), and EU Platforms like EUCOG. AIMEN has an active role in 
these initiatives and has contributed to the definition of R&D&I priorities at European or national level, including 
the RIS3-Galicia strategy. AIM EN is also present in other national and international expert panels, consulting 
committees, groups and societies like SECPhO (Southern European Cluster in Photonics and Optics as well in the 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), Intern ational Institute of Welding (IIW), EARTO, the 
European Laser Institute (ELI), and several sectorial industry clusters (automotive, shipbuilding, metalworking). 
Moreover, AIMEN is leading a Regional Digital Innovation Hub on digital transformation for manu facturing: 
http://www.galacticadih.eu/   
Headquarters: Laser Applications Centre 
Polígono Industrial de Cataboi SUR-PPI-2 (Sector 2) Parcela 3 
36418 O Porriño (Pontevedra) 
Telf: +34 986 344 000 
www.aimen.es 
Role in the project and in the WPs  
AIMEN is the project coordinator and WP4 leader devoted to the development of Smart edge computing. In WP1 
will help the end -users to define the industrial requirements and specifications for the industrial demonstrations 
(Task 1.1), will participate in the definition of the MULTIPLE system architecture (Task 1.2), and will define data 
needs and receive data collected on Task 1.3. AIMEN will be involved on the development of models for the 
multispectral measurement and parameters estimations, leading task T3.2 (Thermal modelling and colorimetry) 
and T3.3 (Geometry and kinematics) a collaborating with IRIS on T3.1 (chemometrics) and T3.4 (Quality grading). 
AIMEN in WP5 will collaborate to the End -Users demonstrators process optimization and on WP6 MULTIPLE 
implantation and validation at real industrial facilities. Finally, AIMEN will collaborate in the overall 
Dissemination & Communication strategy and on the Exploitation and technology transfer activities in the WP7. 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  56 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Roi Méndez (male),   
He received the degrees of MSc in telecom engineering and MSc in applied mathematics from University of Vigo 
(UV), Spain, in 2008 and 2009. He obtained his Ph.D. in signal and image processing in 2012, UV. He was a 
postdoctoral researcher at the Fraunhofer Institute for High Frequency Physics and R adar Techniques (FHR), 
Germany (2012-2014), and in the Signal Processing for Communication Croup (GPSC) at UV (2014 -1016). He 
has held visiting research positions at Geoscience Research Center (GFZ), Potsdam, Germany (2011) and 
University of Texas at Austin (2015). He is currently with the Robotics and Control Unit in AIMEN. His interests 
include image and signal processing, hyperspectral imaging, and real time processing. 
Adrián Pallas (male), 
Adrián Pallas Fernández (M): M.Sc. in Computer Vision at University Rey Juan Carlos (URJC) in 2017. Obtained 
his B.Sc. in Computer Science at University of A Coruña (UDC) in 2015, while coursing his M.Sc. he started 
working at Geomni (Verysk Analytics) in detection and 3D reconstruction of buildings on large scale aerial images 
with 3D vision techniques. In November 2016, he joined the Robotics and Control department of AIMEN 
Technology Center as R&D Computer Vision Engineer, where he is researching on Computer Vision and Machine 
Learning for industrial and environment al applications. He is taking part in several national and EU projects 
focused in 3D Vision, Multispectral Imaging and Deep Learning. 
Manuel Álvarez (male), 
M.Sc. in Engineering, graduated in Electronics Engineering in 2006 at Vigo University. Professional development 
at Vigo University (focused on mobile robots applications), in automation sector, and in R&D center. Since 2010 
he is employed at the AIMEN Technology Centre. Extensive experience in the field of PLC’s, robotic and vision 
systems, process control, system integration, automation processes, application programming and development of 
industrial projects. At this time, he is involved in several R&D projects related to robotics, machine vision and 
process automation. He has participated in several S panish and European projects involving vision systems and 
integration of robotized processes, dealing with robotics, hardware design, and software development. In recent 
years he has presented several papers in international conferences (IECON, ETFA, etc.)  focused on machine 
vision, robotics applications and automation systems. 
Additional personnel of the Robotics & Control, Advanced Manufacturing Processes and Flexible Production 
Processes and Systems will collaborate in the project. 
Personnel of the International Project Management Office of AIMEN will give support for project management, 
as well as from the Innovation Management area and the marketing department. 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
Publications:  
• Garcia-Diaz, A., Mendez-Rial, R., Preciado, M., Souto, Á., & Harvey, A. (2017, June). Embedded IR multi 
aperture imaging for surveillance applications. In Applied Industrial Optics: Spectroscopy, Imaging and 
Metrology (pp. ATh1A-2). Optical Society of America. 
• Souto-López, Á., García-Díaz, A., & Méndez-Rial, R. (2018, May). Temperature imaging in the MWIR range 
independent of emissivity. In Optical Sensing and Detection V (Vol. 10680, p. 1068005). International Society 
for Optics and Photonics.  
• Méndez-Rial, R., López, Á. S., & García-Díaz, A. (2018, May). Embedded video rate super-resolution in the 
infrared with a low-cost multi-aperture camera. In Unconventional Optical Imaging (Vol. 10677, p. 1067705). 
International Society for Optics and Photonics. 
• R. Méndez-Rial, V. Panadeiro, C. González, A. Pallas. Real-time arc welding process monitoring using Deep 
Learning on an IoT OPC UA device. Machine Learning Prague Conference. February 2019. 
• Lapido, Y. L., Rodriguez-Araújo, J., García-Díaz, A., Castro, G., Vidal, F., Romero, P., & Vergara, G. (2015, 
July). Cognitive high-speed defect detection and classification in MWIR images of laser welding. In Industrial 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  57 
Laser Applications Symposium (ILAS 2015) (Vol. 9657, p. 96570B). International Society for Optics and 
Photonics. 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
# Project/Activities Type Objective Role of your organization 
1 SEERS H2020-
ICT-26-
2014 
Snapshot spectral imagers for cost effective 
IR Surveillance. Developing of a highly 
competitive system for IR multispectral 
sensing and intelligent surveillance of a wide 
variety of critical infrastructures. 
Coordinator 
2 MAShES H2020-
FoF-01-
2014 
Multimodal spectrAl control of laSer 
processing with cognitivE  abilities. 
Development of a breakthrough compact 
imaging system for Real -Time closed -loop 
control of laser processing, built on a novel 
multispectral optics and multisensory 
arrangement in the VIS-MWIR spectrum. 
Coordinator 
3 Z-BREAK H2020-
FOF-
09-2017 
Strategies and Predictive Maintenance models 
wrapped around physical systems for Zero -
unexpected-Breakdowns and increased 
operating life of Factories. 
Coordinator 
4 PHENOMENON H2020- 
ICT-30-
2017 
Laser Manufacturing of 3D nanostructured 
optics using Advanced Photochemistry . 
Development and validat ion of optical 
structures by direct laser writing. 
Coordinator 
5 LASHARE FP7 Development of a robust assessment 
framework for innovative laser equipment 
paving the way for new manufacturing 
applications. 
Partner-Development of an 
IR monitor system for RT -
closed loop control by 
measuring the thermal 
emission of the weld pool. 
 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
The AIMEN team gathers experience in: data gathering, embedded processing, pattern recognition, machine 
learning and condition monitoring. To accomplish with project activities and tasks, the most relevant technical 
AIMEN capacities are rela ted with sensing technologies and Real -Time embedded processing. AIMEN owns a 
laboratory of CPS and embedded systems for electronics design (FPGA, GPU, ARM) and software development 
(VHDL, CUDA, C++) applied to condition monitoring, real-time signal processing and pattern recognition. 
Robotics and Control Unit provides high -end knowledge in the design and development of factory automation 
solutions applied to different manufacturing systems. In the case of the Robotics and Control Unit the main 
infrastructures available for the proper development of this project are:  
• A Laboratory for Industrial Robotics with several manipulators (from ABB, KUKA, MOTOMAN) that could 
be easily integrated with different systems and tools to test different pilot applications in to laboratory 
environment. 
• A laboratory equipment for the development of innovative sensors and embedded systems. 
• Machine vision laboratory including different vision systems and vision software. 
  
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  58 
Partner 2 Abraia Software S.L.– (ABRAIA), Spain 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: 2 ABRAIA 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the tasks 
in the proposal 
Description of the entity 
ABRAIA is a recently founded SME that develops tools and offers cloud services involving imaging, artificial 
intelligence, and visual perception technology. It also provides consultancy services to design and deploy image 
and video creation, processing, and optimization pipelines.  
 
The company is currently working for INDITEX -the largest apparel company in the world -, monitoring, 
improving, and automating their media processing and delivery workflows in zara.com, dealing with a flow of 
several hundreds of thousands of images and thousands of videos a year.  
 
ABRAIA offers a SaaS (Software as a Service) that is available through API Rest as well as plugins for CMS 
(Content Management Systems). ABRAIA’s cloud services transform and manage digital media assets, using own 
developed deep learning and visual perception models as core technology. 
 
ABRAIA has received the IEBT recognition (technology-based initiative) by the Galician government. 
 
Role in the project and in the WPs  
ABRAIA contribution will be mostly done in WP4 and WP5, being in charge of the cloud infrastructure and 
services that support the Data Warehouse and the fast prototyping and deployment of deep neural models for HSI 
image and data analysis. 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Key personnel 
Antón García Díaz (male), Founder. 
PhD. Currently researching novel solutions to cloud -based image and media processing, using deep learning 
models. Before founding ABRAIA, he spent over a decade researching novel imaging concepts and visual 
perception models for computer and machine vision applications. In this role, he has developed and deployed novel 
commercial products in industrial applications. He participated in H2020 and FP7 projects involving imaging and 
vision both as coordinator (MAShES, SEERS, CARLoS) and member of the research team ( FORTISSIMO 2, 
LASHARE, AMABLE). Active in the dissemination of technology trends and research results among 
professionals (e.g. program Committee member of OSA Applied and Industrial Optics topical meeting 2018 and 
2019, collaborator of freecodecamp.org). He has authored papers in major conferences and journals in recent years 
(e.g. IEEE PAMI, SPIE Photonics West; invited speaker to Imaging and Applied Optics OSA conference 2017 
and invited talk paper at SPIE Photonics Europe 2018). Reviewer for different p eer-reviewed journals and 
conferences (e.g. Pattern Recognition Letters, Journal of Vision, Pattern Analysis and Applications). 
Jorge Rodríguez Araújo (male), Founder. 
M.Sc. in Industrial Electronics Engineering.  Currently developing and deploying cloud se rvices for media 
optimization and management. As an engineer, he has played a main role in the development of embedded imaging 
and image analysis products for innovative industrial applications, in close collaboration with industrial partners. 
He has been eager contributor to open source software in the field (e.g. openlmd) . Before starting ABRAIA, he 
has been involved in national and European research projects (MAShES, FORTISSIMO, LASHARE, ALAS, 
REPTILE) dealing with software development for cloud-based image processing, and machine learning for closed 
loop process control and process automation. 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  59 
Additional engineering personnel of ABRAIA will collaborate in the project dealing with tasks related to HSI 
image analysis using deep models, and web services development. 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
Publications:  
• Leboran, Victor, Anton Garcia-Diaz, Xosé R. Fdez-Vidal, and Xosé M. Pardo. "Dynamic whitening saliency." 
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 39, no. 5 (2017): 893-907. 
• Jorge Rodríguez Araújo, Antón Garcia Díaz. “Transfer learning for image tagging in fast fashion workflows” 
WGML 2018 
• Rodríguez-Araújo, Jorge, and Antón García -Díaz. "OpenLMD, multimodal monitoring and control of LMD 
processing." In High -Power Laser Materials Processing: Applications, Diagnostics, and Systems VI, vol. 
10097, p. 100970B. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2017 
• Méndez-Rial, Roi, Álvaro Souto López, and Antón García -Díaz. "Embedded video rate super -resolution in 
the infrared with a low -cost multi -aperture camera." In Unconventional Optical Imaging, vol. 10677, p. 
1067705. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2018. 
• SaaS for on -the-fly and cloud -based image  and video analysis, transformation and optimization based on 
visual perception models. (https://abraia.me/docs/), and API REST and connectors to our service s with 
different CMS platforms (Wordpress, Prestashop). 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 
• ABRAIA is currently doing research in cloud -based deep learning for image and media analysis and 
processing applied to the management of digital assets (e.g. improved flexible search, automatic image and 
video tagging). In this regard, we have different own developed prototypes for metric-based ranking, learning 
and recognition of visual semantic embeddings, and object segmentation. 
• The team at ABRAIA has been recently leading the development of open source solutions for embedded and 
cloud-based process monitoring for laser processing applications https://openlmd.github.io/ 
 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
 
Algorithms and cloud services and microservices for the management of media and the automatic processing of 
images and videos using deep learning models. Image and video management and optimization technology to 
support web and cloud collaborative workflows. 
 
 
  
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  60 
Partner 3 Iris Technology Solutions, S. L. – (IRIS), Spain 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: 3 IRIS 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the tasks 
in the proposal 
Company profile 
IRIS Technology Group (http://www.iristechnologygroup.com/) is an advanced engineering Group that was 
established in Barcelona in 2007. Since 2011, it also operates from Dublin (Ireland) whereas the Barcelona office 
is referred to as IRIS Technology Soluti ons S.L. It specializes in the manufacture and integration of Process 
Analytical Technology (PAT) -based real -time quality monitoring solutions for the process industries and IoT 
systems for smart manufacturing, predominantly targeted at the food, pharmaceutical and chemical industries. In 
particular, our product line comprises proprietary state -of-the-art IR analyzers for at -line and in -line process 
monitoring.  
On the one hand, our solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics in the fields o f MEMs, Near 
Infrared Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral Imaging, and Raman. On the other hand, we leverage ICTs, whereby we 
apply Machine learning, Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining techniques for predictive and active control, as 
well as for decision support systems. In addition to photonics-based analyzers, we also work with IoT sensors for 
enabling equipment and machinery for smart manufacturing and transitioning industry to the Industry4.0 
paradigm. Our solutions are cloud-based for mobility, remote monitoring and multi-site applications.  
Our Innovation Division which is governed by an Innovation Committee comprising Senior Management, and an 
Innovation Unit for managing and executing the companies innovation roadmap, has 3 core strategic lines, for 
shaping the Factory of the Future: 
1. New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process optimization 
2. ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms) 
3. Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorization 
In addition to running an internal R&D program, as well as carrying our various joint private projects with industry 
partners, our Innovation Division is highly experienced in working in collaborative R&D projects in H2020 (both 
as coordinators and partners), principally in the SPIRE, FoF, and BBI programs. The company was established in 
2007 and currently employs 60+ staff with a turnover of € 5 M. It is equipped with engineering workshops (3), 
food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 
9001:2008 certified and also is certified under UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i. We are also 
certified by the local (Catalonian) government as a provider of technological R&D services (Tecnio Certification). 
IRIS is a member of the following sectorial networks: SPIRE, SPIE and SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial 
collectives such as Smart Space (association of companies and organizations that specialize in the ‘smartification’ 
of industry). 
IRIS has a matrix of multidisciplinary knowledge groups in the company with strong expertise in engineering and 
science. With its team and resources, including electronics, mechatronics, mechanical, optical, indust rial design 
engineers, as well as specialists in system engineering, application programming and web development etc. the 
group can carry out full system design and engineering, including electronic design and assembly, firmware and 
software development, electrical harnesses and interconnections, mechanical design for enclosure and prototype 
integration, as well as installation, validation and industrialization of prototypes and equipment in production 
plants. As such they have recently delivered advanced p lastic sorting devices. In addition to this broad cross -
disciplinary engineering team, IRIS’ research team consists of data scientists, chemometricians, chemists and 
physicists, among others, who have the expertise to validate the technologies developed. 
IRIS will support WP2-3 where they will design the suitable NIR system for the processes under consideration as 
well as their chemometrics calibration but also in WP6 for the integration and validation of the different systems 
in the production lines. Finally, they will contribute to the project dissemination and plan an outmost exploitation 
of their results.  
Role in the project 
In the IRIS will support WP2 -3 where they will design the suitable NIR system for the processes under 
consideration as well as the ir chemometrics calibration but also in WP6 for the integration and validation of the 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  61 
different systems in the production lines. Finally, they will contribute to the project dissemination and plan an 
outmost exploitation of their results. 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Key personnel 
Dr. Ing. ELODIE BUGNICOURT (female), Project manager and Leader of the innovation unit.  
She has obtained a Masters in Material Science & Engineering (2002), PhD in Polymers and Composite Materials 
(2005), both from National Institute of Applied Science (I NSA), Lyon, France. He also coordinated several 
European projects in the fields of bio -based packaging materials development, process monitoring, surface 
treatment. Previous industry experience: Arkema, Wacker Chemie, Ashland. 
Dr. IDOIA MARTÍ ALUJA (female), Senior Scientist specialized in chemometric analysis.  
She received her PhD in Chemistry at the Universitat Rovira i Virgili (Spain) and then worked in the Spectroscopic 
and Kinetics Unit (SKU) at the Institut Català d'Investigació en Química (ICIQ, Spa in) and at the Institute of 
Photonic Sciences (ICFO, Spain), and at Zobele Spain. 
Dr. DAVID NETTLETON. (male), Data Mining Analyst.  
He has obtained a Ph.D in Artificial Intelligence from the Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, 
M.Sc. In Computer Software and Systems Design from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K., and B.Sc. 
(Hons) Computer Science from the University of Wolverhampton, U.K. Has over 20 years’ experience of applying 
data mining algorithms (including neural networks, rule induction) and statistical techniques (including ANOVA, 
regression, principal components) in a diversity of data analysis and modeling projects, such as medical 
diagnosis/prognosis, fraud detection, customer loyalty and segmentation, online user web search behavior and data 
privacy. As well as commercial projects, he has conducted research and lectured at two universities. He has 
published a diversity of articles in specialized data analysis journals/congresses and three books. He has 
participated in several competitive multi -partner research projects and has a European patent application for a 
graph matching algorithm.  
JOSE ANTONIO IBARRA FUSTE (male), Scrum Master.  
He has a PhD. in Signal Theory and Communications, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Spain (2014), Thesis 
title: “Design Rules and Optimization of Electro-Optics Modulators Based on Coplanar Waveguides”; the project 
dealt with the development of new models to design high speed electro-optical modulators based in LiNbO3, where 
a novel software to design and optimize these modulators was created. Master’s degree in Telecommunication 
Systems from Universidad de Oriente, Cuba (2005).Telecommunication Engineer Degree from Universidad de 
Oriente, Cuba (2003). Author of several papers in jou rnals of high international impact. Experienced in optical 
communication softwares as Virtual Photonic (VPI), OptSim, and in electromagnetic structures simulators as High 
Frequency Structural Simulator (HFSS) and ADS. Experience for more than 5 years in ma ny programming 
languages. 
DR. TIMOTHY KEHOE (male), VISUMPalm Product Manager and Technical Lead at Dublin Facilities.  
He has received a PhD in Engineering, University College Cork, Ireland - developed an IR photometric 
measurement system for thermal diffusivity in anisotropic materials. Masters in Optoelectronics, Queens 
University Belfast. 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
# Product/services Objective Role of your 
organization 
1 Relevant product lines: Monitoring 
devices for real-time quality control. 
-VisumPALM: NIR technology for incoming 
material quality control and detection of 
adulteration.   
-VisumNIR: In-Line NIR monitoring for product 
standardization and increase of production 
efficiency.   
-Hypera: Hyperspectral imaging solutions for the 
industry 
Development and 
commercialization 
of devices 
 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  62 
-Services: Chemiometrics model development 
and training 
2 EP18198458, 03/10/2018, Rosales 
Alejandro, Kehoe Timothy, Garrick 
Meabh 
An integrated optical system for the examination 
of sample materials 
Property owner 
3 EP19382101,14/02/2019, Alejandro 
Rosales, Adrián Manotas, Joan Puig 
Device for detecting foreign matter in an edible 
substance or in a container containing the edible 
substance and method employing the device 
Property owner 
4 Rosales, O. Mc Nerney. Edited by 
Stefan Krämer and Sebastian Engell. 
Wiley-Vch. Print ISBN: 978-3-527-
34074-3. 
Sensing Technology. Chapter 6. Resource 
Efficiency of Processing Plants. Monitoring and 
Improvement 
Publication 
Owner 
5 A.A. Gowen, E. Gaston, J. Burger 
(2014). C.P. O´Donnell, C. Fagan, 
P.J.Cullen (Eds.), Process Analytical 
Technology for the Food Industry, 
199-216, Springer, ISBN 978 -1-
4939-0311-5. 
Hyperspectral imaging Publication 
Owner. 
 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
# Project/Activities Objective Role of your 
organization 
1 Visum. SMEI -Phase 2, 
GA 731043. 
Cloud-enabled IR spectroscopy platform for the rapid 
integration and customization of affordable, real-time 
chemical monitoring solutions for food and 
pharmaceutical industries. 
Partner 
2 Hypera. H2020 - SMEInst, 
2016-2017. 
Affordable hyperspectral Imaging System for on-line 
foreign body detection and chemical composition 
analysis 
Partner-
Coordinator 
3 ProPAT. SPIRE, GA 
637232 
Robust and affordable process control technologies 
for improving standards and optimizing industrial 
operations 
Partner-
Coordinator 
4 SPECTRAFISH. FP7, G A 
605399 
Hyperspectral imaging technology for the quality 
inspection of fish products. 
Partner-
Coordinator 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, a FTIR -ATR (Interspectrum), 2 UV -VIS 
(PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), an Extended -SWIR (StellarNet) and a NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as 
well as a SWIR Hyperspectral imager (Specim -Xenics). The associated staff are properly trained and skilled in 
chemometrics modelling by using a commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non -
commercial chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes). 
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up -to-date hardware and tools: 
signal generators, wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for 
programming microcontrollers, CNC -milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyp ing, and CAD 
software [SolidWorks], among others. 
Our optical engineers work with ZEEMAX software for optimally designing of optical systems and to setup the 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  63 
designs by means of advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light 
sources and related “opticalware”). 
Food and wet chemistry lab equipped with a DSC, a Surface Energy analyzer, an HPLC, a Cobb tester, 
microbiological equipments, microscope and microtome for structural analysis, migration cells, colorimete r (for 
color and opacity measurement), Ford cup viscometers, water vapor permeation cells, turbidimeter, climatic 
chambers, manual and automatic coaters, electrospray, different drying technologies, plasma surface activation, 
etc. 
With a patent -pending optical design, IRIS’ VISUM InLine NIR analyzer that has been developed to be easily 
integrated in production lines, e.g. in pipes, on belts, or in reactors via a customized interfacing with the process. 
Specific optical fibers probes can also be used for in  situ process monitoring as has been proved for controlling 
melt plastic streams during injection. It integrates miniaturized MEMS -NIR spectroscopic sensors which can be 
customized with different wavelength ranges depending on the requirements of each appli cation (conventional 
VISUM InLine unit uses the SWIR spectral region 900 -1700nm). It allows fast and continuous quality control 
(QC) of a wide variety of products and materials. It helps analyzing the impact of the process on the product’s 
critical quality  parameters and can provide early warning for corrective actions or be coupled with sorting 
processes to automatically classify products, reject those out of specifications, etc. Moreover, the VISUM Cloud 
leverages the Internet-of-Things towards the Industry 4.0 paradigm. 
  
Figure 36. Visum InLine device, examples for integration on a belt (left) or in a pipe (right) 
Within IRIS’ portfolio, HYPERA is an HSI system with a novel combination of imaging cameras in the VIS- NIR 
and/or SWIR-spectral ranges coupled with powerful chemometrics and artificial intelligence data processing tools 
to maximise its resolution and pene tration within the sample matrix. HYPERA is designed as a robust industrial 
equipment suitable for integration into existing processing lines, most typically above a belt where the materials 
to analyse are fed. Like VISUM, it is thought to be used for automatic QC in critical points along the process line 
and product classification. 
 
Figure 37. Hypera device 
  

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  64 
Partner 4 Interuniversitair Micro-Electronica Centrum – (IMEC), Belgium  
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: 4 IMEC 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the tasks 
in the proposal 
Company profile  
IIMEC, founded in 1984, is a world -leading independent Research Institute in nanoelectronics and 
nanotechnology. Its research focuses on the next generations of chips and systems, and on the enabling 
technologies for ambient intelligence. IMEC’s research br idges the gap between fundamental research at 
universities and technology development in industry. With headquarters in Belgium, IMEC has research centers 
in the Netherlands (so called Holst Centre in collaboration with TNO), China, Taiwan, India, USA and Japan. Its 
staff of around 3500 people includes more than 700 industrial residents, visiting scientists & PhD students. Also, 
IMEC has ongoing collaboration with over 600 companies and over 200 universities. In 2016, its estimated revenue 
(P&L) was more than 500M€.  
At its Headquarters in Leuven, IMEC has 3 cleanrooms that run a semi-industrial operation, 24 hours a day, 7 days 
a week, all year round. The 300mm pilot line is used for R&D on (sub -)22nm process technology. This line is 
being extended for the next-generation of 450mm wafers. A new biolab, new solar cell labs, and the Intel 
Exascience Lab have been opened. In the 200mm cleanroom, heterogeneous integration is being explored which 
supports manufacturing with added functionality, such as sensors, actuators, and MEMS and NEMS. This activity 
is called the CMORE offering. IMEC has an ISO9001 quality certification.  
Research and Development at IMEC is organized under the following seven domains and platforms:  
• Core CMOS: new processing technologies, materials, devices, and integration and design methods to 
create future chips and systems.  
• Sensor technology: hyperspectral sensors and ion detectors 
• Flexible technology: thin film electronics and displays on flexible substrates 
• Networking: broad spectrum wireless networking chips 
• Digital privacy and security: data encryption and cloud solutions 
• Software and data management: machine learning and IoT 
• Application domains: smart health, smart cities, smart industries, smart energy, smart mobility 
 
Role in the project 
Specifically, for the proposed project, IMEC offers an in-house developed integrated spectral filter technology to 
be directly deposited on commercially available or custom developed imagers. IM EC leverages experience from 
and builds on its existing image sensor manufacturing platform for the development and low -volume production 
of customer specific specialty imagers. The base line technology is a 0.13 μm CMOS platform including a pinned 
photodiode module processed on 200 mm Si wafers. This detailed imager knowledge is combined with the large 
flexibility in terms of processes deviating from standard CMOS such as custom filter layers, special (epi) 
substrates, pixel trench isolation, stitching, backside illumination and others. In developing CMOS Image Sensors, 
IMEC has more than 15 year of experience for various applications, including space.  
The project team proposed offers all guarantees for the successful completion of the work from both the technical 
and from the management points of view. The IMEC technical and project management team is formed by 
experienced people coming from a combined imager, hyperspectral systems and process technology backgrounds, 
with demonstrated experience in EU and ESA R&I projects. With a track record of more than 100 running projects, 
IMEC ensures a mature and professional effort in achieving project results. 
 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Key personnel 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  65 
Dr. Andy Lambrechts (male), Function: Program Manger-Integrated Imaging team 
PhD in Electronics from University of Leuven in 2009. Function: Program Manger & Team Leader of the 
Integrated Imaging team, with a focus on integrated hyperspectral imaging. Other responsibilities include lens free 
microscopy, micro mirror based lenses, d iffractive optics. Doctoral Researcher on embedded computing, with a 
focus on energy efficient processor architectures for mobile devices and their compiler technology. Researcher in 
the hyperspectral imaging team at imec since 2009, responsible for buildi ng this activity building on imec’s 
expertise in image sensor, image processing and IC process technology. Senior researcher in the hyperspectral 
imaging team of imec since 2011, operating as the daily activity lead for hyperspectral projects and the 
development of IMEC’s first integrated hyperspectral image sensor and camera system.  
Dr. Murali Jayapala (male), Principal Member of Technical Staff-Integrated Imaging team 
PhD in Electronics from University of Leuven in 2005. Principal Member of Technical Staff in the Integrated 
Imaging team, with a focus on integrated hyperspectral imaging. Other responsibilities include lens free 
microscopy, micro mirror based lenses, diffractive optics. Senior researcher in hyperspectral imaging team since 
2010, responsible to build this activity together with the team. Exploring & coupling imec’s silicon processing 
facilities/capabilities with imaging systems. Hyperspectral application de velopment & exploration for IMEC’s 
hyperspectral technology. Establishing industrial contacts for industrial bi -lateral collaboration. Exploring & 
coupling IMEC’s silicon processing facilities/capabilities with micro mirror based zoom lens application for 
compact camera systems. 
Dr. Klaas Tack (male), Principal Member of Technical Staff-Integrated Imaging team 
PhD. degree in Electronics from the University of Leuven in 2006. Principal Member of Technical Staff in the 
Integrated Imaging team, with a focus on  integrated hyperspectral imaging. He started his career at imec as a 
doctoral Researcher from 2001 until 2006 and researcher from 2006 until 2009 on embedded computing, with a 
focus on content management for 3D graphics rendering on mobile devices. Since 2009, he is a researcher in the 
integrated imaging team of imec, responsible for starting the activity on hyperspectral imaging together with Andy 
Lambrechts. His responsibilities in the team are:  Responsible for the design of the HSI sensor prototypes , 
Responsible for building the full system demonstrator  and Responsible for building the testing infrastructure for 
the HSI sensor. 
 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
# Product/services Objective Role of your organization 
1 B. Geelen, K. Tack, and 
A. Lambrechts 
A compact snapshot multispectral 
imager with a monolithically 
integrated, per-pixel filter mosaic 
Proc. SPIE 8974, Advanced Fabrication 
Technologies for Micro/Nano Optics and 
Photonics VII, 89740L (March 7, 2014) 
2 B. Geelen, M. Jayapala, 
K. Tack and A. 
Lambrechts 
Low-complexity image processing 
for a high -throughput low-latency 
snapshot multispectral imager with 
integrated tiled filters 
Proc. SPIE 8743, May 2013. 
3 M. Jayapala, A. 
Lambrechts, K. Tack, B. 
Geelen, B. Masschelein 
and P. Soussan 
Monolithic Integration of Flexible 
Spectral Filters with CMOS Image 
Sensors at Wafer Level for Lo w 
Cost Hyperspectral Imaging 
International Image Sensors Workshop 
(IISW), Jun 2013 
4 B. Geelen, K. Tack, and 
A. Lambrechts 
A snapshot multispectral imager 
with integrated tiled filters and 
optical duplication 
Proc. SPIE 8613, Advanced Fabrication 
Technologies for Micro/Nano Optics and 
Photonics VI, 861314 (March 5, 2013) 
5 K. Tack, A. Lambrechts, 
P. Soussan, and L. 
A compact, high -speed and low -
cost hyperspectral imager 
Proc. SPIE 8266, Silicon Photonics VII, 
82660Q (February 9, 2012) 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  66 
 
 
Haspeslagh 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
# Project/Activities Type Objective Role of your organization 
1 I-ALLOW H2020-ICT-
2014-1 
Imaging analysis in all lighting and off 
weather conditions. Develop and 
demonstrate a low cost imaging solution 
based on a novel multifunctional approach 
camera system integrated with a high 
performance processing unit addressing a 
vast variety of outdoor scenarios for safety 
and security applications. 
Partner-Hyperspectral filter 
deposition 
2 RESYNTEX WASTE-1-
2014 
A new circular economy concept: from 
textile waste towards chemical and textile 
industries feedstock. Designing, 
developing and demonstrating a new high 
environmental impact industrial 
symbiosis between the unwearable blends 
(wool, cotton, polymers – representing 
93% of all components) of textile waste 
and the chemical industry. 
Partner-Evaluation the use 
of hyperspectral cameras i n 
textile sorting. 
 
3 PHYSIS EC H2020 -
COMPET-
06-2014 
Sparse Signal Processing Technologies 
for HyperSpectral Systems. Investigate 
extensions of compressive signal 
representations and sparsity -enforcing 
recovery technologies for the acquisition, 
compression, restoration, and 
understanding of hyperspectral data. 
Partner 
4 CHIEM ESA Compact Hyperspectral Imager 
Engineering Model. Design a Compact 
Hyperspectral Instrument and to complete 
the end-to-end performance analysis. 
Partner- Improvement of the 
Linear Variable Filter 
(LVF) design to increase its 
performance, match 
requirements and increase 
the usability of the 
instrument. 
5 Bilateral 
development of 
spectrally 
resolved linear 
detector array for 
fuel quality 
monitoring 
Flanders 
Government 
Bilateral development of spectrally 
resolved linear detector array for fuel 
quality monitoring 
Partner 
 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
Significant infrastructure  
• 5200 m2 ultra-clean processing area in cleanroom I  
• 3200 m2 ultra-clean processing area in cleanroom II  
• 1,750 m2 class 1 silicon pilot line (200 mm pilot line),  
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  67 
• 6,710 m2 computer room and utilities  
• 16,400 m2 offices and supporting laboratory space  
• 810 m2 cafeteria and training facilities  
• ISO 9001 qualification  
• Pilot lines  
• 200 mm silicon pilot line  
• solar cell pilot line  
• MCM-D pilot line  
• 300 mm silicon pilot line  
Advanced Vision Lab  
• State of the art, hyperspectral cameras & illumination setups  
• Compute infrastructure (desktops, servers & imaging software)  
• Optical benches, sensor calibration and characterization equipment 
 
 
  
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  68 
Partner 5 Airoptic Spolka Z Ograniczona Odpowiedzialnoscia – (AIROPTIC), Poland 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: 5 AIROPTIC 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the tasks 
in the proposal 
Company Profile 
AIROPTIC Sp. z o.o. is an ISO 9001:2015 certified SME founded in 2010. AIROPTIC offers high performance 
laser analyzers for process control and emission monitoring as well as safety and security monitoring and has a 
global network of distributors. AIROPTIC provides in-situ, extractive and open path systems configuration and 
today have pioneered in -situ detection multi-gas  technology utilizing multiple Mid -IR DFB lasers. The people 
behind AIROPTIC have been involved in the developing of tunable diod e laser gas monitoring instrumentation 
and spectrometers for more than two decades, including the development of a wide range of gas monitoring 
instruments for applications in industrial process analytics and in medical analysis. A substantial focus and 
resources are put on R&D activities concerning development of novel analyzer products. AIROPTIC has 
participated in several international and national research projects which allowed the company to gain substantial 
experience in the field of novel Mid-IR sources for gas sensing applications. 
Role in the project 
In the MULTIPLE Project AIROPTIC will participate in the design of architecture and data collection systems 
during T1.2 and T1.3 of WP1. In WP2, during T2.3, AIROPTIC will be dedicated to development o f multi-gas 
analyzer technology for real time gas analysis in steel industry and wood based panel industry as well as carrying 
out the field tests at two facilities (WP6). In WP3, the company will AIROPTIC will develop neural network 
models and analytical models for robust estimation of gas concentration ratios of different compounds. During 
WP4, AIROPTIC will support T4.1 and T4.2 as partners in charge of the development of the edge computing 
devices and the monitoring models producing data. In T4.3,the co mpany will participate the optimization of the 
chemometric algorithms. During WP5 AIRPOTIC will support multimodal monitoring system integration will all 
the partners. 
 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Key personnel 
Dr. Pawel Kluczynski (male), CEO.  
He has obtained his master’s degree in physics from Poznan University (Poland) in 1997 and his Ph.D. degree 
from Umea University (Sweden) in 2002 both in a field of applied laser spectroscopy. He started his research on  
tunable laser spectroscopy in 1997 developing theoretical models for wavelength modulation spectroscopy. In 
2001-2010 he has been working with design and architecture of tunable laser gas analyzers at Siemens including 
spectroscopy, optics and signal processing schemes. He founded AIROPTIC in 2010 and has been the CEO of the 
company since 2010. He is an author of more than 20 scientific papers and has been cited above 650 times (without 
self-citations). His H -index is 12. He is also an author  of 14 granted patents in the field of tunable la ser 
spectroscopy and inventor of several pending applications in the field of gas analyzers. 
Dr. Małgorzata Pokrzywa (female), Project Manager. 
She is responsible for the control and coordination of substantive tasks in R&D and commercial projects. She has 
profound experience (2001 -2013) and scientific achievements in the field of genetic engineering and modeling 
human diseases using transgenic organisms and cell cultures. She is experienced in pre -clinical phase of drug 
development. She has experience in conducting and coordinating international projects, including supervision of 
R&D work and R&D staff, i.e. graduate students, PhD students and technical staff. She has been involved in 
interdisciplinary projects to develop implementation solutions Besides sh e has education in management and 
entrepreneurship. She graduated from a mentoring program Mentor4Reserach - Commercialization of scientific 
achievements for scientists organized by IVA. She has been involved in managing FP7 WideLase, H2020 
programmes iCSPEC and MIREGAS as well as 2 national grants, SENSE and HydroC, all devoted to development 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  69 
of laser based spectrometers for process analytics applications. 
Mr. Krzysztof Siembab (male), Electrical Engineering Manager. 
He has obtained his Master of Science 2 010, from Automatics and Robotics, Poznan university  of Technology, 
Poznan, Poland and he works as an electronics engineering department manager at AIROPTIC. . He and his team 
are  involved in design of electronics hardware an firmware as well as development of signal processing schemes 
and algorithms for the laser analyzers. He is an author of 7 scientific  papers and has been participated in various 
national research projects with main focus on signal processing schemes and embedded system design for various 
industrial applications. He has been working towards his PhD in of   He has been involved in H2020 programmes 
iCSPEC and MIREGAS as well as 2 national grants, SENSE and HydroC, both devoted to development of laser 
based spectrometers for process analytics applications. 
Mr. Mateusz Straszewski (male), Spectroscopic Applications Manager 
He has received Master of Science 2014, Technical Physics, University of Technology , Poznan, Poland. He is 
responsible for development of spectroscopic applications, calibration and verifications techniques at AIROPTIC. 
He has also been working towards his PhD in a field of optical design. He has been involved in H2020 programmes 
iCSPEC and MIREGAS as well as 2 national grants, SENSE and HydroC, bothh devoted to development of laser 
based spectrometers for process analytics applications. 
 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
 
 
# Product/services Objective Role of your organization 
1 GasEye Cross Duct CO GasEye CO is a high performance in -situ carbon 
monoxide analyzer. Suitable for safety 
applications and process control. 24/7 continuous 
operation. No sample preparation. No zero drift. 
No field calibration. Low cost of ownership. 
Owner 
2 GasEye Cross Duct 
HCHO 
GasEye HCHO is the world’s first in -situ 
formaldehyde vapor analyzer. Suitable for 
emission monitoring and process control. 24/7 
continuous operation. No sample preparation. No 
zero drift. No field calibration. Low cost of 
ownership. 
Owner 
3 GasEye Cross Duct NH3 
HT 
GasEye NH3 HT is a high performance in -situ 
ammonia analyzer. Suitable for DeNOX 
processes and process control. 24/7 continuous 
operation. No sample preparation. No zero drift. 
No field calibration. Low cost of ownership. 
Owner 
4 GasEye Open Path Tunable laser analyzers for air quality monitoring Owner 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 
# Project/Activities Type Objective Role of your organization 
1 iCspec RIA In-line Cascade Laser Spectrometer for 
Process Control 
Partner – Technology provider 
2 H2020- RIA Programmable multi -wavelength Mid -IR Partner – Technology provider 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  70 
MIREGAS  source for gas sensing 
3 WideLase STREP Monolithic Widely Tunable Interband 
Cascade Lasers for Safety and Security 
Partner – Technology provider 
4 SensHy STREP Photonic sensing of hydrocarbons based 
on innovative mid infrared lasers 
Subcontractor 
 
 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
 
Accreditations 
• Quality Management System 
o ISO 9001: 2015  
• Confirmation of Conformity to European standards for emission control 
o EN 14181:2015  
o EN 15267-3:2007 
 
 
  
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  71 
Partner 6 SCM – (SCM), Italy 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: 6 SCM 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the tasks 
in the proposal 
Company profile  
SCM Group is an industrial group which is leader in the creation, production and distribution of technologically 
advanced solutions to process a vast range of materials (wood, glass, stone, plastic, metals and composite 
materials) with specialist brands fo r specific technologies and centers of excellence expert in industrial 
components, present in all 5 continents for almost 70 years. SCM employs roughly 4.000 people and has an annual 
turnover (including subsidiaries) of about 750M Euros.  
SCM Group designs  systems integrating different technologies and advanced production plants, both for the 
woodworking sector and for complementary sectors. The SCM Group stand out in its reference market for the 
ability to supply high tech solutions for the entire production process.  
SCM Group has roughly 500 engineers involved in R&D activities, and 400 registered patents. Every year SCM 
Group invests at least 7% of its turnover in research and development, technology and know-how.  
Recently, SCM group has re -arranged its business organization, in particular the R&D department, by shifting 
some operations concerned research projects to CSR Consorzio Studi e Ricerche Srl. Therefore, in order to 
implement the activities foreseen in the project SCM Group needs the support of its linked third party CSR Consor-
zio Studi e Ricerche Srl, which will provide high qualified research competences and all the necessary equipment. 
 
Role in the project 
SCM will preside over the furniture manufacturing use case, in collaboration with ROYO. More specifically SCM 
will lead the data collection task (T1.3) within WP1, as well as strongly contributing to WP5 (Production 
Optimization) with particular emphasis on furniture manufacturing. Finally, SCM will lead the Integrati on task 
(T6.1) in the Demonstration WP (WP6), and will strongly contribute to T6.3 (Demonstration in woodworking). 
 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Key personnel 
Enrico Callegati (Male), Innovation funding manager. 
Graduated in International Studies with specialization in Intellectual Property Management. He had his first 
experience at the Italian Institute of Industrial Promotion, designing and implementing public funding instruments 
to support manufacturing innovation. After working for 8 years as an expert of public funding for research and 
innovation in the Italian innovation company CRI T (a network of large manufacturers from Northern Italy 
including Ferrari, ALSTOM, FIAT Group), he entered in the SCM staff in 2018 with the role of Innovation 
Funding Manager. He has a long experience in managing and coordinating financed projects both in National and 
European (Fp7, H2020, etc.) context. 
Federico Ratti (Male), Technical & Innovation manager. 
Coordinates the whole product development with effort on the new modular product platform. He has 20+ years 
of experience in product/process design and process optimization. 
Michele Mazza (Male), Director of CSR R&D laboratory. 
He has 30 years of experience in Machine design and construction, CFD modelling, Acoustic and vibration. He 
also developed several working tools for wood manufacturing process. 
 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  72 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
 
# Product/services… Objective Role of your organization 
1 Drilling Machines The SCM drilling machines are the products 
of continuing in -house development 
complementing the sum of the finest skills 
and know -how acquired when Morbidelli 
joined the SCM Group. This brand, with its 
rich tradition, is known today as a model 
name. 
Research & Development 
and Manufacturer 
 
 
2 Edge-Banding Machines The widest range of production technologies 
for customers operating in the furniture and 
housing fields, either industrial giants or 
small workshops. 
Research & Development 
and Manufacturer 
3 Belt-Sanding Machines The SCM wide-belt sanders are the products 
of continuing in -house development 
complementing the sum of the finest skills 
and know -how acquired when DMC joined 
the SCM Group. This brand, with its rich 
tradition, is known today as a model name. 
Research & Development 
and Manufacturer 
 
 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
# Project/Activities Type Objective Role of your organization 
1 SYMBIOPTIMA EU-H2020-
RIA 
SPIRE-6 
action 
Human-mimetic approach to the 
integrated monitoring, management 
and optimization of a symbiotic 
cluster of smart production units. 
Role: sustainability assessment of 
industrial symbiosis flows. 
http://www.symbioptima.eu/ 
Partner- Sustainability 
assessment of industrial 
symbiosis flows. 
2 FACTORY 
ECOMATION  
EU-FP7- CP-
IP 
FP7-2012-
NMP-ICT-
FoF 
Factory ECO -friendly, energy 
efficient technologies and adaptive 
automation solutions. 
Partner- Administrative 
coordination 
3 CTC EU-FP7 
 
Advanced control and supervision 
techniques for a highly automated 
shop-floor to realize “close -to-the-
customer” woodworking mini -
factories. 
 
Partner-Control solution 
developer. (technical 
coordination) 
4 INCLUSIVE EU-H2020-
RIA 
Smart and adaptive interfaces for 
INCLUSIVE work environment 
Partner 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  73 
FOF-2016 
 
 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
 
CSR Lab is a structure owned 100% by SCM Group with many acknowledgements and certifications. It is 
registered to the Italian register of highly qualified laboratories provided by MIUR (Ministry of Education and 
Scientific Research) authorized to carry out research of an applicative n ature in favor of small and medium 
industries. CSR can provide acoustic and dust tests and has all necessary equipment in order to work on the study, 
development and modelling of innovative components in the woodworking machinery sector. 
Moreover, SCM owns a 8.000 m2., laid out to maximize the customer's product awareness. The machines are on 
permanent show for demonstration purposes, where potential customers can view the equipment before they make 
a purchase commitment. The showroom contains some of the m ost sophisticated CNC technology in the 
woodworking and panel processing industry. The SCM showroom will host the dissemination events dedicated to 
woodworking in the MULTIPLE project. 
 
  
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  74 
Partner 7 Royo – (ROYO), Spain 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: 7 ROYO 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the tasks 
in the proposal 
Company profile of the group 
Royo Group International Bathroom (RGIB) is one of the leading European companies in the field of bathroom 
furniture and shower. RGIB results from the union of two leaders who teamed up to win in this equation: they join 
the trajectory and experience of Royo G roup and the financial strength that, as a platform for growth and 
consolidation, is provided by HIG. 
Company profile of the unit involved in the project 
Royo Group is a company born in Valencia and is a leader in Spain, Poland and Mexico, as well as being the third 
largest European group in its sector. Royo Group is an international company specializing in bathroom furniture 
and shower equipment, which has 900 employees in its plants in Quart de Poblet (Valencia), Poland and Mexico 
City and is in an international consolidation phase. Currently, Royo Group produces more than one million pieces 
of furniture every year. 
 
Role in the project 
The tasks of ROYO in the project will focus on the validation of MULTIPLE’s multimodal solution performance 
in its woodworking facilities during WP6. In WP1 will define industrial use case requirements and specifications. 
 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Key personnel 
César Taboas (male), Chief Technology and Innovation officer  
Mechanical engineering in the Polytechnic University of Valencia in 1996. He did a master’s in quality 
management in 1997 and a MBA in 2006. He also coursed the Executive development program from IESE. He 
has worked as a process engineer at Ford for two years and later he became production manager in ROYO Group 
for ten years. Nowadays he is the Chief Technology and Innovation officer at ROYO. During his professional 
experience, he has coordinated various CDTI and H2020 projects that have been developed in ROYO Group. 
César Martín (male), Designer  
Design engineering in the Jaume I Univertiy of Castellón in 2014. He also had the opportunity to study at the 
Polytechnic University of Turin for one year, with an ERASMUS scholarship. He has worked at ROYO from 2015 
in the product development department. Nowadays is designer in the Innovation and design department. He has 
working on the last H2020 project of ROYO like end user with César Taboas. 
 
3. List of up to 5 re levant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
 
# Product/services… Objective Role of your organization 
1 Royo Click System First bath furniture with 15-munites no -tool 
assembly. 
Owner 
 
  

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  75 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 
# Project/Activities Type Objective Role of your 
organization 
1 TELLME EU- FP7  Development and improving learning 
and training in smaller manufacturing 
environments with the use of 
technologies. The aim is to bring 
innovative training methods to SME 
manufacturers so they can better 
supply the needs of their markets, 
which include larger industries. 
Subcontractor 
2 NEW LINE OF 
POLYLAMINATE 
COATING 
CDTI New line of polylaminate coating Partner 
3 OPTIMIZATION OF 
THE PRODUCTION 
PROCESS OF 
BATHROOM 
FURNITURE 
THROUGH 
SENSORIZATION 
CDTI  Optimization of the production 
process of bathroom furniture through 
sensorization 
Partner 
4 SAIN4 IVACE and 
FEDER 
program 
The objective of the project is to 
increase the efficiency of the main 
manufacturing processes, through the 
construction of an Advanced 
Management System that will support 
in the decision making for continuous 
improvement of availability, 
performance and quality 
Partner 
5 HUMAN H2020- Define and demonstrate workplaces 
where automation and human workers 
operate in harmony to impro ve the 
productivity, quality, performance of 
the factory as well as the worker 
satisfaction and safety. 
Partner-
Development of 
tools demonstration 
in furniture 
manufacturing. 
 
 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
 
ROYO brings the facilities of one or more of its production lines, considering the workers involved in the different 
tasks of the whole process and the corresponding physical equipment and the activities performed at each point of 
the production chain. 
 
  
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  76 
Partner 8 Photonfocus. AG. – (PHF), Switzerland 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: 8 PHF 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the tasks 
in the proposal 
Company profile  
Photonfocus was founded in 2001 as Spinoff from the Swiss research centre CSEM. Since its foundation, the 
company is focused exclusively on CMOS vision technology. Photonfocus develops high speed HDR CMOS 
image sensors with multi tap outputs and global shutter, based on its own patented LinLog® technology. With the 
LinLog® CMOS image sensors and third-party Low-Light CMOS image sensors, Photonfocus industrial CMOS 
cameras cover a wide application field in machine vision and in optical metrology. Offering its customers a wide 
range of cameras to fulfil the needs of the most deman ding needs in ultra-low light, HDR, hyperspectral, SWIR 
and high speed imaging. 
Photonfocus AG headquarters is located in Lachen SZ (Switzerland) which consists in 4 offices of total 950 square 
meters respectively for the design of all camera parts (softwa re, firmware & hardware including mechanics) and 
to mount and test the cameras. 
Role in the project 
Photonfocus will develop the camera electronic and cameras for the project in WP2. A SWIR HSI sensor will be 
implemented in the SWIR camera platform from Photonfocus. This sensor solution will be combined with a 
VIS/NIR HSI sensor which is available as standard Photonfocus product in a two-aperture camera for hyperspectral 
imaging. 
In the working packages WP3 to WP6 Photonfocus will support the other project partners in the system integration. 
PHF will participate as project partner on the overall project management and dissemination and exploitation wp7. 
 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Key personnel 
Daniel Hofmann (male), Head of Software  
Daniel Hofmann is Head of Software at Photonfocus (Switzerland) and CEO of Soluciones de procesado  de 
imagen, SL (Spain). He received his degree in Electrical Engineering in 2005 from the University of Applied 
Sciences Rapperswil, Switzerland. From 1999 to 2001 he worked as Electronic technician at Feller AG in Horgen, 
Switzerland. Since 2005 he is wor king at Photonfocus AG in Lachen (Switzerland) first as software developer 
then as Head of Software. He is co -founder and CEO of Soluciones de procesado de imagen, SL in Barcelona 
(Spain) since 2015.  
Daniel Gubser (male), Junior Designer Software. 
Daniel Gubser joined Photonfocus in 2017 as a junior software developer after he graduated in electrical 
engineering at University of Applied Science Rapperswil, Switzerland. He is active in the field of embedded 
software development. 
Reto Lienhardt (male), Head of Firmware. 
Reto Lienhardt received his degree in Electrical Engineering in 1998 from the University of Applied Science 
Rapperswil, Switzerland. Before he started his work at Photonfocus, he had been working 2 years as an HW/SW 
development engineer at Mik rap and 6 years as a digital design engineer in the ASIC & FPGA design centre 
Memec Design. He joined the Photonfocus team in 2008 and worked as an FPGA engineer. In 2016 he was 
promoted to Head of Firmware. Reto Lienhardt is responsible for the Firmware d esign team and the FPGA 
development. 
Cyril Arnould (male), Electrical Engineer 
Cyril Arnould is member of the FPGA development team at Photonfocus AG. After getting his Master of Science 
in Electrical Engineering and Information Technology at ETH Zurich in 2015, he joined Photonfocus AG later in 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  77 
the same year to start gaining his first experiences working in the field. 
Ulf Muehl (male), Mechanic Engineer  
Ulf Muehl has a long track record in designing camera bodies for professional cameras in SINAR. Since 2003 he 
supported Photonfocus in the design of camera cases. In 2018 the business of SINAR was transferred to Leica in 
Germany. Since this time, he is with Photonfocus and member of the Photonfocus hardware team. 
Marc Nyffenegger (male), (FAE, Support) 
Marc Nyffenegger is member of the Software development team at Photonfocus AG. After getting his Master of 
Science in Electrical Engineering and Information Technology in 2015, he joined Photonfocus AG. Starting with 
embedded software development and software development he focusses on the support of customers in the 
applications.  
Dr. Peter Mario Schwider (male), CTO, Head of Hardware 
He is cofounder of Photonfocus  AG in 2001. As CTO he is responsible for the CMOS sensor and camera 
developments. He studied physics in Berlin and Karlsruhe. In 1995 he founded an engineering office working in 
the field of machine vision system design and developing high -speed vision pr ocessors and CCD cameras for 
industrial and medical applications. In 1998 he joined the CSEM SA Zürich, where he was responsible for the 
initial operation of CMOS sensors and the design of test equipment’s and cameras. 
 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publicatio ns, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
Publications 
• P. M. Schwider, Following the CMOS Track, Optik@Photonik 4/2016, pp. 40-43 
# Product/services… Objective Role of your organization 
1 HyperSpectral SDK Hyperspectral sensors are designed to work in a 
specific spectral range. IMEC HSI sensors are 
calibrated with previous knowledge of the filters 
used in order to compensate the possible errors 
or mismatches due to the filter effect. The SDK 
is able to parse the information of the XML 
calibration file provided by IMEC and use it for 
the spectral correction. Spectral correction 
recomposes a raw spectrum into a corrected 
spectrum, removing higher-order and cross-talk 
signals from the spectrum and avoiding spectral 
contributions from unwanted bands. Once the 
spectral correction is applied to the reflectance 
hypercube, the available bands change in 
frequency and number. 
Developer with IMEC 
2 2D Cameras CMOS area scan cameras for standard 
applications in machine vision and optical 
metrology. 
Developer with IMEC 
3 3D Cameras High speed CMOS cameras with internal sub -
pixel calculation of the laser line position for 
laser triangulation setups. 
Developer with IMEC 
4 HyperSpectral Cameras High speed CMOS cameras for hyperspectral 
imaging. 
Developer 
5 LineScan CMOS line scan cameras based on high speed 
CMOS area scan sensors.  
Developer 
 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  78 
 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 
Photonfocus has many experiences in machine vision and has a large customer basis. Photonfocus HDR cameras 
and 3D cameras for laser triangulation are widely used in metal industry and in wood industry. In food industry 
3D cameras are used in sorting and packaging applications. The Photonfocus HDR sensors are often used in the 
welding applications. Photonfocus was member of the HQ Tubes project (Grant Nr. 222289) “High-quality Tube 
and Pipe Production by Hybrid Laser-Arc Welding”. 
 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
 
AEON Camera Calibrator model ACC2 for EMVA1288 measurements in VIS and NIR. Largest sensor diagonal 
80mm, lens mounts: CS -, C-, F - and M72 -Mount. For SWIR sensors an additional test unit for the Camera 
Calibrator with 1050nm, 1300 and 1550nm wavelength with smaller diagonal is available. 
Photonfocus has several scanner setups which are used in 3D scanning applications and to ch eck high -speed 
cameras. These units are equipped with state of the art trigger units and shaft encoders with extraordinary high 
resolution. This will enable a detailed testing of the HSI cameras in the laboratory. 
 
  
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  79 
Partner 9 Russula – (RUSSULA), Spain 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: 9 RUSSULA 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the tasks 
in the proposal 
Company profile  
RUSSULA is a global engineering company serving the largest steel producers in more than 30 countries. 
Developing engineering solutions to help steel producers around the world become high-performance businesses. 
Since its founding, RUSSULA has supported the modernization of the industry during all economic cycles by 
deliv-ering practical, cost-effective solutions. Our core values are to understand our clients’ needs and to deliver 
the best engineering service. 
RUSSULA has different solutions for Rolling Mills plants: automation and control systems, electrical and 
mechanical equipment, optimization and tracking for process. As part of the steelmaking process, RUSSULA has 
expertise for control and building in reheating furnaces, melt shops and water treatment plants. 
The RUSSULA automation solution is a unique combination of long product process and electrical system 
knowledge to ensure our technology solutions increase mill productivity, provide consistent production and 
premium product quality. 
RUSSULA’s system makes possible to roll products with ease, taking advantage of today's latest advancements 
in rolling process technology in combination of RUSSULA R&D. 
Role in the project 
In MULTIPLE, RUSSULA will d esign system architecture and the production modelling and parametrization 
during WP1 and WP5, respectively. 
 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Key personnel 
Jose Ramón González (male), Electric department chief. 
M.Sc. in Industrial Engineering (electronics). Experience of more than 25 years in steelmaking process control, 
drives and electrical supervision. His developments are also focused on designing new human/machine interfaces 
and special interest in new communication protocols. A wide experience in PLC and high -level programing for 
control process and production managing. 
Luciano Guerra (male), R&D director. 
M.Sc. in Industrial Engineering (electronics). Experience of more than 13 years in pro -cess control and 
optimization for steelmaking process. His actual role is focused on being the technological look -out of the 
company. Researches on applications of artificial vision and robotics for the steel plants. 
 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
Publications 
• WIPO Patent Application WO/2016/118422: FIORUCCI, Keith. Coil forming laying head system and 
method of using. U.S. Application No US2016/013656, 2016.  
• FERNÁNDEZ, Silvia; SÁNCHEZ, Daniel. Using automation to improve productivity and quality in long 
products mills. Steel Times International, 2012, vol. 36, no 8, p. 13.  
• RIZEK, A. Schultz; VIEIRA, FC Dutra. A high-speed wire-rod mill for Votorantim Metals. Steel Times  
• International, 2011, vol. 35, no 3, p. 46.  
• Steel’s Eco-friendly Water Treatment Plant – May 17, 2016 - AISTech USA  

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  80 
• Improving Rolling Mill Quality and Productivity through Modern Techniques in Automation and 
Operational Control - May 16, 2016 - AISTech USA  
# Product/services Objective Role of your 
organization 
1 Rolling Mill Control The RUSSULA automation team has a unique 
combination of long product process knowledge and 
electrical system knowledge to ensure our technology 
solutions increase mill productivity, provide consistent 
production and premium product quality. Our high 
customer retention rate is our best indication of superior 
technology performance 
Owner 
2 Reheat Furnace Control Our expertise in reheat furnaces automation has exceeded 
our clients’ expectations in fuel efficiency optimization 
and scale reduction. Since the compan y founding, we 
have automated new and existing, analog and digital 
reheat furnaces for all kinds of products 
Owner 
3 High Speed Data 
Acquisition Systems 
(HSDA) systems 
Designed to capture and record signals from the process, 
providing a real time status of your process, keeping track 
and storing signal data for days, months or even years. 
Owner 
4 Roll Pass Design he perfect fusion of art and technology that ensures 
flexibility, stability and quality in your rolling mill. 
Owner 
 
 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 
# Project/Activities Type Objective Role of your 
organization 
1 New integrated 
technologies for 
configuration and control 
of rolling mills 
Program CDTI - 
FEDER INN-
TERCONECTA 
New integrated technologies for 
configuration and control of rolling 
mills 
Coordinator 
partner 
2 FLEXITREN Program CDTI - 
FEDER INN -
TERCONECTA 
New Adaptive Design of the Hot 
Rolling Process for the Flexible 
Manufacturing of Corrugated and 
Wire Products 
Partner 
3 Design of a pre -heating 
process free of scale for 
continuous rolling mills of 
long products 
Program CDTI - 
FEDER INN -
TERCONECTA 
Design of a pre-heating process free of 
scale for continuous rolling mills of 
long products 
Partner 
4 Simplified modeling of 
combustion phenomena in 
billet furnaces 
RUSSULA 
Chair of Re -
search Studies, 
University of 
Vigo 
Simplified modeling of combustion 
phenomena in billet furnaces 
Own project 
 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  81 
 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
 
RUSSULA has offices all around the globe, offering an immediate and personalized attention to all our customers.  
Depending on your current equipment configuration and preferences we propose the best combination of equip -
ment to upgrade your rolling mill.  
• Deep knowledge of the most widely used OEM automation platform  
• Flexibility to work simultaneously with different brands  
• Standard hardware  
• Easy integration with existing systems  
• Same know-how applied to all platforms  
• Open standard programming  
We use standard, non-proprietary hardware in all our system designs to ensure multi -sourced, long-term service, 
and enhancement capabilities.  
 
  
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  82 
Partner 10 Laminoirs des Landes– (LDL), France 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: 10 LDL 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the tasks 
in the proposal 
Company profile  
LDL factory site is located directly across the Bayonne harbor on the Bay of Biscay in Aquitaine, in the historic 
region of Gascony in Southwest France. LDL rolls heavy plates and deliver reliable results that meet international 
quality standards and the demands of the European market, producing 500,000 tons of heavy plates/year. 
Their flexible solutions meet the individual needs of the customers and the requirements of many industries, such 
as construction, steel fabrication, wind energy, shipbuilding and mechanical engineering. 
The latest European roll ing factory is a greenfield project in Tarnos, France. The rolling plant commenced 
operations in the first quarter of 2018 with the production of heavy plates (Quarto). LDL stands for flexible 
production designed to meet customer needs, while also providin g excellent customer service. This is matched 
with fast, continuous and reliable deliveries of heavy plates. LDL represents a new generation of steel -rerollers, 
integrating the business partners into the value chain using the most achievable level of autom ation. As an 
industrial fabricator processing the heavy plates, the clients will benefit from an innovative business partner. 
Role in the project 
The tasks of LDL in the project will focus on the validation of MULTIPLE’s multimodal solution performance in 
its steelworking facilities. 
 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Key personnel 
Inazio Fachado (Male), Site director. 
BTS M.A.I Mécanique Automatisme Industriel. 
Yann Duclos (Male), Maintenance methods technician. 
MSc International Logistics. 
 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
 
# Product/services Objective Role of your organization 
1 Steel heavy plates -On-and offshore wind structures. 
-Construction and infrastructure projects. 
-Heavy machinery and yellow goods. 
-Shipbuilding and offshore platforms. 
-Pressure equipment. 
-Mechanical engineering. 
Manufacturer 
2 Different steel grades -Structural steels for general purposes. 
-For pressure vessels, boilers, pipes and 
Manufacturer 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  83 
tubes. 
-Steel for shipbuilding. 
 
 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 
 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
 
Plate mill with production of 500.000 tons per year of heavy quarto steel plates with the next characteristics:  
• Thickness : 8-150 mm  
• Width: max 3400 mm  
• Length : commercial 6 and 12 meters , max 24  
LDL has the next infrastructure to meet the demands of the market:  
• Reheating Furnace: The heavy plate mill is composed of pusher type reheating furnace with 80 ton/h 
capacity, working on three rows of slabs with max length 3150mm each. The furnace is complete of slab 
charging device pusher type and discharging system with independent trolleys. The slab dimensions  
o Thickness 200-250-300mm / Width 850-2000-2500 mm /Weight 30 ton  
• Discaling System: Slabs discaling system composed of discaling box equipped with heavy pressure noz -
zles and high pressure water pumps (200-250 bar).  
• Rolling line 1: stand ‘4HI’, back up rolls :1600 mm dia x 3600 mm barrel length, work rolls ; 950 mm dia 
x 3600 mm barrel length, separating force : 4000 ton Thickness adjusting system by hydraulic screw downs 
with automatic control (HAGC) Stand is equipped in the entry and the exit with side guides and slab turner 
devices.  
• Rolling Line 2: Composed by:  
o Hot Plate Leveller Back Up type with separating force 1500 Ton complete of mechanical screw 
downs and hydraulic caps. On Line Plate Oxicut  located at the entry of cooling bed complete of 
thickness measuring system and plate marking device.  
o Cooling bed “Walking Beam “ type overall dimensions: 26x30 meters.  
o Out Of Line Plate Oxicut + Plasma.  
 
  
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  84 
Partner 11 European Photonics Industry Consortium– (EPIC), France 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: 11 EPIC 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the tasks 
in the proposal 
Company profile  
The European Photonics Industry Consortium (EPIC) is an association with 420 leading industry members from 
the photonics value chain. It is a non -profit, industry driven, small enterprise registered in France and operating 
from offices in Brussels and Eindhoven, where it can leverage its close ties to other connected organizations such 
as SEMI and Digital Europe. EPIC members encompass the entire value chain from LED lighting, PV solar energy, 
Silicon photonics, Optical components, Lasers, Sensors, Displays, Projectors,  Optic fibers, and other photonic 
related technologies. EPIC fosters a vibrant photonics ecosystem by maintaining a strong network and acting as a 
catalyst and facilitator for technological and commercial advancement. EPIC works closely with related industries, 
universities, and public authorities to build a more competitive photonics industrial sector, capable of both 
economic and technological growth in a highly competitive world-wide marketplace. 
Role in the project 
The role of EPIC in this project is th e dissemination and communication and the technology transfer activities. 
The development of a dissemination plan includes the design of different dissemination tools such as a project 
website, social media channels (Linkedin, Twitter, Youtube…), a general  visual entity and production of flyers, 
banners and other communication material. Dissemination activities include the organization of international 
training events & workshops, participation in targeted congresses, press -releases, publication of articles  in 
international journals, aimed at lowering the barrier to entry for all users from all sectors. The second EPIC’s role 
is the design of activities to transfer MULTIPLE results to other potential end-users.  
 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Key personnel 
Dr. Ana Gonzalez (female), Project leader. 
Her expertise relies on the development of systems based on integrated photonic circuits, packaging and assembly, 
and the investigation of applications such as chemical/biological sensing and Datacom. In addition, she has been 
involved in several technology transfer and business development processes. She received her Bachelor’s degree 
in Chemistry from the University Autonomous of Barcelona (UAB) and her PhD degree from the Catalan Institute 
of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (ICN2). 
Dr. Jose Pozo (male), Director of technology and innovation. 
He holds a PhD in Electrical Engineering from the University of Bristol (UK), and a M.Sc. and B.Eng. in Telecom 
Engineering from universities in Spain and Belgium. He has 15 years’ worth of experience in phot onics 
technology, strong market knowledge, and a large network within the industrial and academic photonics landscape. 
He is a member of the board of the IEEE Photonics Society, Benelux.  
Dr. Elena Beletkaia (female), Project leader. 
She has a vast experience in multiple micro- and spectroscopic techniques. She expertise relies on investigation of 
application of the non-invasive spectroscopic/multiphoton methods for biomedical applications, e.g. intraoperative 
resection margins assessment during tutor excis ions. She graduated from Lomonosov Moscow State University 
(MSU) specializing in biophysics and acquired her PhD in Leiden University in Physics of life science. 
Mr. Carlos Lee (male), General Director. 
He has a BBA in Finance and an MBA in Leadership & Ch ange Management from United Business Institutes 
(Belgium). Recognized as one of the most energetic and pragmatic sector leaders in the industry. He has a firm 
grip on the technological aspects of the photonics sector, with over 20 year’s senior management experience. His 
background and core skills are in business, finance and organizational leadership, and it is this which makes him 
a key driver in the business exploitation of photonics technology. He maintains personal relations with several 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  85 
hundred indust ry leaders and is capable of assembling ad hoc teams to evaluate and pursue project business 
opportunities as they arise. Prior to heading EPIC, he was a key player of SEMI Europe (an association of micro- 
and nano-electronics industries), having spent fifteen years in roles covering outreach, standardization, technology 
roadmaps, and organizational development. 
Ms. Auri Ripoll (female), Marketing manager. 
She received a bachelor’s degree in Biology from the University of Barcelona and a master’s in marketi ng 
management from EAE Business School. She started her career as a scientific professional working for over nine 
years in several companies. She has worked as a marketing manager in a chemical distribution company where 
she was responsible for the marketing strategy, including the branding and digital marketing, where she developed 
online advertisement and social networks campaigns. Auri has also organized the participation of companies in 
international exhibitions. 
 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications,  and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
 
# Product/services Objective Role of your organization 
1 Europe Drives Fiber Sensor 
Development for Industrial Applis 
Communication 
Dissemination 
Research & Development. Published in 
EuroPhotonics, 2018 
2 The Merits of Single -Mode vs. 
Multimode Fiber Optics 
Communication 
Dissemination 
Research & Development. Published in 
EuroPhotonics, 2018 
3 Photonic Design, Verification, and 
Implementation 
Photonic technologies Research & Development. Published in 
Optik&Photonik, 2018. 
4 Integration of Photonic Systems Photonic technologies Research & Development. Published in 
Optik&Photonik, 2018. 
5 The Worldwide Market for Lasers Photonic technologies Research & Development. Laser 
Technik Journal, 2018 
 
 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 
# Project/ 
Activities 
Type Objective Role of your organization 
1 “InPulse” H2020-IA Indium-Phosphide Pilot Line for up -scaled, 
low-barrier, self-sustained, PIC ecosystem. 
Dissemination and 
Communication and 
Business Plan Activities 
2 “PASSION” H2020-RIA Development of application driven photonic 
technologies supporting an innovative 
transceiver and nodes in metro connections. 
Support all the activities 
regarding the exploitation 
and the dissemination of the 
results. 
3 “PIXAPP” H2020-IA Creation of a packaging pilot that have the 
potential to bring the photonic methods and 
technologies to mass markets in 
Communications, Healthcare and Security 
Support all the activities 
regarding the exploitation 
and the dissemination of the 
results. 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  86 
sectors. 
4 “MIRPHAB” H2020-IA All-services integrated Pilot Line for the 
development of MID-IR photonics sensors in 
Europe, a single -access point to the best 
technology provided by a consortium of 
leading companies in the field of photonics. 
Support all the activities 
regarding the exploitation 
and the dissemination of the 
results. 
5 “PICS4ALL” H2020- 
CSA 
Stimulation of new business for open access 
InP photonic integrated circuit. 
Support all the activities 
regarding the e xploitation 
and the dissemination of the 
results. 
 
 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
 
Tools 
• A highly dynamic LinkedIn profile in top 1% most viewed profiles. 
• An extensive network of over 4500 personal contacts. 
• Management of 15 LinkedIn groups related to photonics (www.epic-assoc.com/linkedin). 
• A channel on YouTube with videos cumulating 20.000 views (www.youtube.com/user/CarlosLeeEPIC) 
 
  
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  87 
Partner 12 Tematys – (TEMATYS), France 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: 12 TEMATYS 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the tasks 
in the proposal 
Company profile  
TEMATYS is an independent SME dedicated to studies and strategy in Optics, Photonics, Sensors, Imaging, 
Materials engineering and their application markets. The company has developed a special expertise in Technology 
Transfer, R&D valorization and marketing of 
emerging technologies coming from Research 
Organizations, but also from private industrial 
groups, SME and start-ups. 
TEMATYS provides studies and sourcing services 
to end -users in application markets (life science, 
security, aerospace…). TEMATYS also provides 
strategic views on optical, photonic and sensor 
markets for clusters and public agencies. TEMATYS 
clients are Companies and start -ups, Research 
Organizations and Public institutions. TEMATYS has more than 150 customers in 18 Countries (Europe, US, 
Asia …).At critical steps of the product development process, TEMATYS provides services far beyond market 
studies. Tematys helps understand the end -user requirements and design products that will meet closely the 
demand. 
 
Along with custom studies and missions, TEMATYS publishes Market Reports on Optics or Sensors technologies 
and their applications. 
 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  88 
Role in the project 
In the project TEMATYS will use its expertise to take a role in WP7. In this WP, TEMATYS will collaborate with 
EPIC for the Dissemina tion and Exploitation of the project. TEMATYS will be Task Leader for: Task 7.2 - 
Exploitation and IP management. 
 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Key personnel 
Dr. Thierry Robin (Male), Founder and Partner. 
He has over 20 years’ experience in both technical innovation and marketing of emerging technologies, running 
more than fifty projects in optics, photonics and sensors with prominent players in Security, Healthcare and 
Industry. He graduated from the Ecole  Polytechnique, Paris (France). He holds a master’s degree from Ecole 
Normale Supérieure, Paris (France) and a PhD from the Physics Center of Ecole Polytechnique. 
Jacques Cochard (Male), Founder and Partner. 
After a degree received from the Ecole des Mines of Nancy (France), he started his career as a consultant for the 
European Commission. In 2000, he joined Opticsvalley, the photonics cluster of Paris as Project Manager. In 2004, 
he became Senior Consultant at Tykya before being one of the founders of TEMATYS. Jacques has run more than 
70 marketing and technological studies for photonics companies (Cilas, Genoptics / JobinYvon Horiba…), 
photonics clusters and R&D laboratories (CEA, CNRS, Paris VI Pierre & Maris Curie, GeorgiaTech, Institute of 
telecom Paris…). Jacques has published more than 20 articles in business press dedicated to laser and photonics 
(laser focus world, Biophotonics, Optik & Photonik…) 
Benoît d’Humières (Male), Gerente, 
Benoît d’Humières graduated in Physics and Chemistry from the ESPCI -Paristech and the University P. & M. 
Curie of Paris. He is an expert in Optics, Electronics and Instrumentation for industrial and research applications. 
In 1991, after some years of research at the University of Florida, he became an innovation consultant. He has run 
many marketing and technological studies for companies of any size and Research institutions. Benoît teaches also 
the marketing of technologies at the Institut d’Optique-Graduate School. 
 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
 
# Product/services… Objective Role of your organization 
1 Hyperspectral and 
Multispectral Imaging: 
Applications and Market 
Trends, T. Robin. 
Application and market research  Market research. EPIC Meeting at VISION 
(Stuttgart), November 2018. 
2 Application of 
Multispectral Imaging in 
Industry, Biology and 
beyond, T. Robin 
Application and market research  Market research. CHII (Graz), June 2018. 
3 Spectral Imaging 
Market and 
Applications, T. Robin. 
Application and market research  Market research. SPIE DCS (Orlando), 
April 2018. 
4 Spectral imaging 
spreads into new 
industrial and on -field 
applications, C. Bouyé, 
B. d'Humières. 
Application and market research  Market research. Proc. SPIE 10539, 
Photonic Instrumentation Engineering V, 
February 2018. 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  89 
5 Spectral Imaging: Ready 
for on-field and industry 
4.0, C. Bouyé, B. 
d'Humières 
Application and market research  Market research. Novus Light, December 
2017. 
 
 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 
# Project/ 
Activities 
Type Objective Role of your organization 
1 “MIR-BOSE” H2020-
RIA 
Mid-and far-IR optoelectronic devices based 
on Bose-Einstein condensation 
Partner-Exploitation tasks 
2 “MIRPHAB” H2020-
IA 
All-services integrated Pilot Line for the 
development of MID-IR photonics sensors in 
Europe, a single -access point to the best 
technology provided by a consortium of 
leading companies in the field of photonics. 
Partner-Exploitation tasks 
3 “C3PO” H2020-
RIA 
Advanced concept for laser uplink/downlink 
CommuniCation with Space Objects. 
Partner-Exploitation tasks 
4 “COM’TONIQ” FR-
ANR 
Ultra high data rate quasi -optic phoTONIC -
based COMmunications. 
Partner-Exploitation tasks 
5 COST Action 
NQO 
H2020 The Action aims at promoting and 
coordinating forefront research in nanoscale 
quantum optics (NQO) 
Subcontractor-Providing 
market perspectives and 
feedback from end-users 
6 FET-OPEN 
PETACom 
(Petahertz 
Optoelectronics) 
H2020 PETACom proposes to create a new paradigm 
in ultrafast electronics. 
Subcontractor-Providing 
market perspectives and 
feedback from end-users 
 
 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
  
 
  
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  90 
Partner 13 Yiotis SA – (JOTIS), Greece 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: 13 JOTIS 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the tasks 
in the proposal 
Company profile  
JOTIS S.A. is a food industry. Products manufactured in its Athens -based facilities include baby foods, powder 
mixes for baking and cooking, chocolates, syrups and chilled desserts. Its large product range results to a wide 
plastic packaging material range necessary for the production of its finished products, along with strong know how 
in area such as Process Science, Structural Design and Material Science.  
The company was founded in 1930 and today occupies 315 employees, exports to the 5 continents, has an annual 
turnover exceeding 70 M€ and, thus, is included among large enterprises according to pertinent EU legislation. 
The company’s financial data display a highly respected Greek food industry as annual turnover is increasing and 
gross profit averages more than 50% of the annual turnover. Exports account for approximately 3.5%. The 
company’s staff is highly educated and constantly trained. Disciplines employed lie in the field of Chemistry, 
Agricultural Engineering, Food Technology and Chemical Engineering. It must be noted that JOTIS annual R&D 
expenditures account for 3% of the company’s annual turnover, indicating the company’s orientation towards 
research. For the past 20 years, JOTIS S.A. has participated in more than 30 Nation al and European Research 
Programs mostly as coordinator. The company’s organizational scheme combines with its highly educated 
workforce ensure the necessary administrative and technical support of any large-scale project. 
Role in the project 
The tasks of JOTIS in the project will focus on the validation of MULTIPLE’s multimodal solution performance 
in its food processing facilities. 
 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Key personnel 
Dr. Ladikos Dimitrios (male), Ph. D, R&D and Quality Assurance Director of JOTIS S.A. 
He received his PhD in Food Biochemistry/Science from Procter Department of fo od Science, Leeds University 
and he joined JOTIS in 1989 as head of R&D Department. During period 1991-1996 he served the Greek National 
Supreme Chemical Council as a member of the opinion committee on food legislation approvals. As a member of 
the Board of Directors, he is actively participating in the company’s formulating decisions on innovation strategy 
and he is overviewing research in the development of novel food products, patents application, participation in EU 
or National Funded Research programs and innovation partnerships. 
Tavantzis George (male) Msc. Head of Reasearch & Innovation Department of JOTIS S.A. 
He graduated in 2006 as a “Chemical Engineer” from National Technical University of Athens and received his 
Master of Science in “Engineering Business Management” from the University of Warwick in 2009. He joined the 
company’s Research and Development Department and is currently employed in the fields of Development and 
Improving Production Lines, Waste Management, Auditing. His res earch activity in the fields of Dairy Products 
and High Hydrostatic Pressure Technology resulted to a number of publications and participation to various 
conferences. He has attended numerous training seminars focused on Food Engineering, Waste Treatment a nd 
Food Legislation. 
Antoniou John (male), Food Scientist for the Research & Innovation Department of JOTIS S.A. 
Ph.D, graduated in 2006 as a “Food scientist & Technologist” from Agricultural University of Athens, Greece. 
His Ms.c Degree was specialized in Food Engineering and received from Food Technology and Human Nutrition 
Department of Agricultural University of Athens, Greece (2008). His Doctorate Degree was received in 2014 from 
Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China and specialized in Food Science & Techno logy and resulted in a number of 
scientific publications (13) and participation to various conferences. 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  91 
Katerina Pissaridi (female), PhD. Research Project Supervisor. 
She is a Chemical Engineer, graduated in 2007 from the National Technical University of A thens (NTUA). She 
holds a PhD (2012) in biomaterials from NTUA. 
 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
 
# Product/services Objective Role of your organization 
1 Development of nano-
emulsifiers 
Manufacturing of in new Vegetable Cream and 
Glaze Coating 
Owner 
2 Using the Stevia 
rebaudiana plant in 
manufacturing 
process. 
Production of high added value products, with 
applications in the food industry 
Owner 
 
 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 
# Project/Activities Type Objective Role of your 
organization 
1 LIFE13 ENV 
FOODPRINT 
LIFE Development of an integrated strategy for reducing 
the carbon footprint in the food industry sector 
Coordinator 
2 RETEX I RETEX I Equipment for dealing with industrial waste and 
scrap (RETEX I) 
Partner 
3 SYNERGASIA 
09 
SYNERGASIA 
09 
Development of novel bioprocesses towards 
exploiting Food Industry's Residues for Biofuel 
Production 
Partner 
 
 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
 
In terms of the company’s available lab and research equipment it should be noted that the company has an 
Independent Research Institute in a surface area of 1305 m 2, equipped with state-of-the-art analytical equipment 
towards carrying out quality control of its raw mater ials, packaging materials and finished products. The 
laboratories are equipped with high resolution instruments covering a wide range of analytical measurements 
including spectrometric, chromatographic and combined techniques such as ICP -MS, GC-MS/MS, LC-MS/MS, 
GC-MS/ECD and HPLC towards performing migration studies from packaging materials to food and 
determination of heavy metals. 
 
  
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  92 
Partner 14 Senorics GMBH I.G– (SENORICS), Germany 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: 14 SENORICS 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the tasks 
in the proposal 
Company profile  
SENORICS is a start-up originating from the University of Technology Dresden commercializing an optical sensor 
solution for near -infrared (NIR) spectroscopy and imaging based on organic electronics. This proprietary 
technology allows small, robust, wavelength selective and fully customizable detectors and imaging arrays 
enabling NIR-spectroscopy and NIR-imaging on a chip level. Thus, SENORICS can deliver unique solutions for 
a multitude of measurement and detection problems in industrial applications. Examples are determining 
ingredients or compositions of raw materials, consumables or end products in the foo d, chemistry, packaging or 
automotive industry and many other branches. 
 
Role in the project 
In the MULTIPLE project, SENORICS will participate in the WP1 through task 1.2 for design a system 
architecture. In WP2, the company will perform the development of cost -effective versatile spectrometers 
specifically tailored to the target applications. In WP5 will participate with all the partners in multi modal 
monitoring system integration. 
 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Key personnel 
Dr. Robert Brueckner (male), CTO bei Senorics. 
He studied in Physics with competences in electronic engineering and semiconductor physics and received his 
Diploma in Physics specialized in Optoelectronics and Photonics. Optical microcavities as now utilized for 
Senorics main technology have been investigated in detail in 2009. In 2013, Robert achieved his PhD in Physics 
(summa cum laude) on metal organic microcavities: the basis of electrically contacting a cavity device. Between 
2012-2016 He led the Organic and Polymerpath of the excellence cluster of TU Dresden (cfaed) and in 2016 
received the Carl-Zeiss-Award for Young Researchers for the outstanding publication performance. 
Dr. Matthias Jahnel (male), Head of Production. 
In 2008, Matthias received his diploma degree in electrical engineering from Univer sity of Applied Sciences 
Lausitz and in 2012 the master’s degree in physics from Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus. From 
2008 to 2016 he performed as leading technologist & researcher at Fraunhofer Society working on 2008: 
Conceptual design and development of production plan, Development of semiconductor process technology 
(lithography, evaporation, sputtering, etching), Integration of OLED and OPD to silicon backplane (CMOS) and 
Upscaling to manufacturing level. In 2016 he obtained his PhD degre e in physics with the topic Organic 
photosensors with spectral adaptation and the development of organic devices for narrow-band light detection and 
light emission. 
 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used d atasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
Publications 
• Nature Communications 8, 15421 (2017); https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms15421  
• Patent: PCT/EP2016/069256 
# Product/services… Objective Role of your 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  93 
organization 
1 Design and manufacturing 
optical spectroscopic sensor 
solutions for industrial 
applications 
Quality control and process monitoring. Provider 
2 Customized sensors, 
corresponding software and 
calibration models 
Sensoring and measuring key parameters of client 
production process 
Provider 
3 Developing of proprietary 
new sensor technology 
Detecting visible and near-infrared light. Provider 
4 Senorics miniaturized 
spectrometer chip 
Near-infrared spectroscopy to measure Ingr edients %: 
water, sugar, cotton, carbs, protein, alcohol, plastics, cotton 
and drugs. 
Owner 
 
 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 
# Project Type Objective Role of your 
organization 
1 ORGADETECT 
H2020-EU.1.1. 
ERC Combining (OPBTs) with the novel photodetector technology 
invented in TU Dresden to create photodetectors as well as 
fully integrated chip -sized NIR -spectrometers with high 
detectivity, high resolution, and with all the advantages of 
organic electronics su ch as flexibility and low cost mass 
production. 
Coordinator 
2 PLASMONIR BMBF Organic infrared detectors with in -cavity inflated plasmonic 
wave length 
Coordinator 
 
 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
 
SENORICS has access to a manufacturing tool for producing detectors and imaging chips based on the proprietary 
SENORICS technology. A long-term cooperation and permission for use contract with the owner of the tool exists. 
 
  
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  94 
Partner 15 MRA Instrumentação para Medição Registo e Análises, S.A.– (MRA), Portugal 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: 15 MRA 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the tasks 
in the proposal 
Company profile of the group 
Grupo Álava is an entirely privately owned group which has been providing high technology solutions in the 
Testing, Measurement, Communications, Security, Defense and Preventive Mainte nance fields since it was first 
founded in 1973.The group offers consultancy, engineering, distribution, training and technical services, providing 
turn-key projects for several sectors including Aerospace, Automotive, Security, Defense, Communications and  
Finance, as well as Testing and Research Centers, Universities, Public Services and Industry in general. With a 
team of over 175 professional (70% of whom have an engineering degree) and a turnover of more than € 40 million, 
Grupo Alava Ingenieros has experienced an average annual growth of 15% throughout the last decade thanks the 
its ability to adapt to the specific needs of its customers and its responsible attitude towards supplies and services 
carried out, all of which is backed by - solid internation al partnerships - in-house resources for integration, 
installation and after-sales technical service. 
Company profile of the unit involved in the project 
MRA Instrumentaçao (MRA), which is placed in Portugal, is a company leader in high -tech solutions. MRA 
belongs to Alava Group. Its mission is to offer its clients a wide offer of products and systems based on cutting -
edge technologies for related areas to Industry 4.0 Solut ions, Sensors and Measurement, Communication, 
Predictive Maintenance, Monitoring, Test, Computer Vision or Thermography for multiple sectors. Additionally, 
MRA Instrumentaçao provides high added-value services such as: 
• End-to-end projects management. 
• Technological integration and technical advising. 
• Predictive maintenance of assets. 
• Specialized technical consultancy. 
Thanks to the combined offer of products and services, MRA can propose comprehensive approaches to the needs 
of its clients, covering the whole aspects of the projects: diagnostic, design, implementation, monitoring, training 
and technical after-sales services. Thanks to its wide product portfolio, MRA is present in most of the sectors of 
the industry, including the process industries. MRA has signed more than 50 distribution agreements with world-
class companies. With more than 45 years of experience, MRA has carried out more than 350 international projects 
around the World. In them, MRA has demonstrated solid technical manageme nt capabilities and financial 
solvency. MRA based its business strategy in implementing continuous innovations to its product portfolio and 
incorporating to it the latest technologies. Thanks to its R&D strategy, MRA was awarded in 2016 as “Innovative 
SME” as part of Alava Group. 
Role in the project 
MRA will collaborate in WP1 (Requirements, specifications and data collection), WP4(Smart edge computing), 
WP5(Integration and production optimization), WP6 (Integration and industrial demonstration), WP7(Exploitation 
and dissemination) and WP8 associated to project management. 
 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Key personnel 
Rafael Ramos(male) senior manager at MRA Instrumentaçao 
He brings more than 20 years of experience coordinating technical and commercial teams. He demonstrates 
wide experience in the development of projects in the area of recording interactions, quality management and 
Speech Analytics. He developed several project s in the Security Telecommunications Recording Area. In 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  95 
addition, he also managed the coordination of the technical teams in the implementation, training and 
maintenance of the developed solutions.  
Pedro Rebelo (male) Key account manager at MRA Instrumentaçao 
He brings more than 18 year of experience as sales engineer, corporate development, research and 
development and product engineer.  
Nelson Dias (male) Key account manager at MRA Instrumentaçao, 
He brings more than 17 year of experience as product engineer. He has a wide experience working on signal 
processing, digital signal processors, numerical analysis, sensors, automotive engineering and electronics. 
 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
 
# Product/services Objective Role of your 
organisation 
1 Sales and Installation 
Services of Sensors 
and Data Capture 
Systems 
Wide product portfolio that covers from OEM applications to 
high-precision application to measure magnitudes as: shifting, 
velocity, acceleration, torque, pressure, flow, temperature, 
humidity, etc. Great variety of data capture and analysis systems 
together with calibration equipment. 
Owner 
2 Sales and Installation 
Services of Vibrations 
Equipment and service to data capture and monitor vibrations on 
industrial equipment, real -time and post -processing analysis of 
the measured signal. 
Owner 
3 Sales and Installation 
Services of Non-
destructive Tests 
Making possible to contactless examine the quality of industrial 
products with technologies such as: active thermography; X-rays; 
shearography; objects digitalizations with laser technologies; or 
deformation analysis using video-correlation technologies. 
Owner 
4 Sales and Installation 
Services of Vision 
Technologies 
Ad-hoc design and implementation of computer vision solutions 
for industrial applications. Distribution of wide range of cameras 
for industrial purposes: computer vision c ameras; high speed 
cameras; multi -spectral and hiper -spectral cameras; or 
thermography cameras. 
Owner 
5 Predictive 
Maintenance Services 
Monitoring of industrial equipment by highly trained technical 
experts, using cutting-edge measuring technologies and analysis 
software. The objective of this service is to foresee problems on 
the machines through a preventive diagnosis. As a result, 
reliability on the plant is increased, while improving the security 
and availability of the assets avoiding unexpected breakdowns. 
Owner 
 
 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 
# Project 
/Activities 
Type Objective Role of your 
organisation 
1 FANDANGO  CDTI-CIEN Advance Fabrication of Automotive components using Partner 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  96 
trustworthy and secure digital twins. FANDANGO Project 
explores Digital Twins as the hybridation of models or 
virtual simulations with real data captured from the assets, 
processes or products with the goa l of standardize data 
exchange; improve digital twin abilities through machine 
vision and other technologies; and manage data reliability 
and data ownership. 
2 ESCAPHIB CDTI-CIEN Structures and Systems for a Hybrid Propulsion Passenger 
Aircraft) its ultimate goal aims the research of four new key 
blocks of electrical technology to be tested on a hybrid 
aircraft demonstrator (E -FAN X) developed by the 
AIRBUS Group. The development of these new blocks will 
focus on the high power cooling system, the intake and 
exhaust of a high power generation system, the battery 
protection system and the development of new 
configurations in tail cones, leading to the validation and 
verification of t hese systems on the ground and in some 
flights. 
Partner 
3 INSPECTOR CDTI-CIEN Industrial inspection and maintenance of complexor 
unattended facilities: Machine Learning and big data 
analysis project, which has been applied to predictive 
maintenance associ ated to AEGs and hydroelectric 
generators. The project has improved the semiautomatic 
signal process, significantly reducing the workload of the 
analysts of predictive analysis and diagnosis of machines in 
perfect working order. 
Partner as 
Preditec 
4 VODI CDTI-CIEN Video operation of installations: The VODI project uses 
Artificial Vision techniques to observe the open/closed state 
of electrical disconnectors during the complete solution 
supply operation: Specific Hardware, Monitoring Software, 
Artificial Vision Algorithms, Connectivity. It is capable of 
detecting temperature and it is electromagnetically shielded. 
Partner 
5 ENJAMBRE CDTI-CIEN Critical emergency missions with manned and unmanned 
aerial means in cooperative flight. The works to be carrie d 
out were: Definition of the technical specifications of the 
mission management system. Analysis of the sensors that 
meet the defined technical and operational characteristics. 
Execution of the integration of the different sensors required 
for each of the missions with the intelligent mission control 
system, carrying out its functional validation. 
Partner 
6 ONTIME Retos-
Colaboración 
Remote operation of information transmission in 
emergency missions. The work to be carried out was: 
Develop a new information capture system that makes an 
intelligent selection of sensors based on mission conditions, 
synchronizing and integrating heterogeneous multisource 
information. Develop new advanced visualization and 
interaction technologies to facilitate decisi on-making in 
emergency missions, based on Mixed Reality technologies. 
Partner 
7 INTEFIX 7PM-UE Intelligent Fixtures for the machine of low rigidity 
components. The main result of this project has been the 
integration of new and cutting -edge technologies (sensors, 
actuators, control algorithms, simulation tools, etc.) applied 
Partner 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  97 
to workpiece handling systems in order to develop 
intelligent and modular devices capable of modifying the 
behavior and interactions between process and systems in 
machining operations. These systems reduce time and costs 
with better performance and capabilities. 
 
 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
 
Following facilities of MRA (Grupo Álava) will be at disposal of the project: 
• Two laboratories equipped for electronic repair of industrial equipment. One located in Leganes, of 
70 m2, and the other in Zaragoza, of 35 m2. 
• CMDT center (Condition Monitoring, Diagnostic & Training Center): center specialized on remote 
monitoring of industrial critical equipment, where predictive maintenance analyst foresees 
breakdowns by monitoring key elements of   industrial assets. 
 
 
Partner 16 ThingsO2– (TiO2), Spain 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: 16 ThingsO2 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the tasks 
in the proposal 
Description of the entity 
ThingsO2 is a company specialized in the digitalization of industrial environments through cutting-edge IoT 
and Big Data technologies. Its solutions are designed to increase the knowledge about the plant industrial assets 
and processes, knowing their actual working-state together with real-time visualization and deep analysis of the 
parameters. Therefore, our solutions contribute to increase the reliability, efficiency, effectiveness and quality of 
industrial processes. 
The company is formed mainly by senior specialists in computer science who are developing an IoT platform 
based on open source technologies in order to satisfy their clients that are mainly coming from industrial sector. 
Company profile of the unit involved in the project 
ThingsO2, which is placed in Madrid (Spain), will be a key partner of the project in order to support the activities 
which are specialists: 
- Edge Computing 
- Technological integration and technical advising 
- Cloud applications based on big data technologies 
- Front End development. 
- Machine learning integration 
The company develops the IoT platform using Agile methodologies and gathering in it all the knowledge from its 
clients and its stakeholders which convert ThingsO2 in one of the most prominent start-ups in Spain at the moment. 
Role in the project 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  98 
ThingsO2 will collaborate in WP1 (Requirements, specifications and data collection), WP4(Smart edge 
computing), WP5(Integration and production optimization), WP6 (Integration and industrial demonstration),   
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Tomás Ciudad Sobrino (male) – Project Manager 
He is an industrial engineer with more than 10 years of experience in the industrial sector. Their role has 
evolved from I&C specialist to project manager. He has participated in several projects of the digitalization 
in the energy industry and now I am responsible for all the projects in ThingsO2. 
Marcos Bejarano (male) – Product Owner 
He is a Computer Science engineer with more than 15 years of experience in software development. He 
has the role of the product owner of the ThingO2 platform, which oversees gathering all the requirements 
from the business unit, prioritizing and sharing them with the development team. 
Rafael Garrote (male) – Technical Lead 
He is a Computer Science engineer specialized in big data technologies. He has participated in several 
projects related to big data applications and he has wide experience coding. He is the ThingsO2 technical 
lead which supports the development teams in their tasks. 
 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
▪  N/A 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 
# Project 
/Activities 
Type Objective Role of your 
organisation 
1 FANDANGO  CDTI-
CIEN 
Advance Fabrication of Automotive components using 
trustworthy and secure digital twins. FANDANGO Project 
explores Digital Twins as the hybridation of models or virtual 
simulations with real data captured from the assets, processes 
or products with the goa l of standardize data exchange; 
improve digital twin abilities through machine vision and other 
technologies; and manage data reliability and data ownership. 
Subcontractor 
2 HEATLAND PRIVATE The project consists in testing a new type of pavement in order 
to reduce the heat that is transmitted to the environment. The 
ThingsO2 platform is in charge of monitoring the main 
characteristics of the pavement installed. 
Main 
contractor 
3 ALTRAN PRIVATE Smart PDM, the project consists of monitoring a rotatory  
machine in order to achieve its best performance and 
minimizing the maintenance time. 
Subcontractor 
 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
ThingsO2 has developed its own services and front-end interface based on open source libraries which are hosted 
in the cloud and is the basis of the big data IoT platform. In addition, the company has developed its own software 
for the edge including connectors with the industrial equipment using standard protocols as OPC UA and Modbus 
among others. 
 
 
 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  99
4.2 Third parties involved in the project (including use of third-party resources) 
01 – AIMEN  
No third parties involved. 
02 – ABRAIA  
No third parties involved. 
03 – IRIS 
No third parties involved. 
04 – IMEC 
No third parties involved. 
05 – AIROPTIC 
No third parties involved. 
06 – SCM  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties Y 
 
SCM is going to involve its related companies CSR and SCM Espa ña in order to develop p art of the work in 
various WPs. 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: [Linked third 
party of n.] 6 
 
CSR Srl (Linked thid party of 
SCM Group S.p.A.) 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the 
tasks in the proposal 
Description of the entity 
CSR was born within the SCM group, world leader in the field of woodworking machines, with the aim of 
bringing together and developing all the research activities of the companies of the Group. Today CSR is an 
autonomous and independent reality from the managerial and operational point of view which, thanks to the 
experience gained and the potential of the structures, approaches in the areas of pertinence the problems of 
manufacturers and users operating in these sectors. The industry needs more and more specialized research for 
the determination of design hypotheses, for the evaluation of the performance parameters of the prototypes and 
for carrying out controls to verify the quality standards as well as their compliance with the regulations. In this 
context CSR is a qualified partner accredited at European level that offers solutions to industrial research 
problems operating in the following areas: Acoustic studies, Vibrational studies, Dust studies, Laboratory 
checks and Structural analysis. 
Role in the project and in the WPs  
SR will work in close collaboration with beneficiary SCM Group, taking specific care of the following tasks: 
• In WP1 (Requirements), supporting Industrial use case requirements and specifications, System 
architecture and Data collection activities 
• In WP6 (Industial Demonstration), overseeing WP management activities and benchmarking 
• In WP7 (Exploitation and dissemination), carrying out innovation management activities for SCM 
• In WP8 (Project Management) coordinating the reporting and costs accounting activity within SCM 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  100 
Enrico Callegati (Male). Graduated in International Relations. He has gained experiences at the Italian embassy 
at Warsaw, the EU, and the Institute of Industrial Promotion. After working for 8 years as an expert of public 
funding for research and innovation in an Italian SME named CRIT, he entered in the SCM staff in 2018 with 
the role of Innovation Manager. He has a long experience in managing and coordinating financed projects both 
in National and European (Fp7, H2020, etc) context. 
Michele Mazza (Male). Director of CSR R&D laboratory. He has 30 years of experience i n Machine design 
and construction, CFD modelling, Acoustic and vibration. He also developed several working tools for wood 
manufacturing process. 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
Not applicable 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
REEMAIN - Resource and Energy Efficient ManufacturINg (FoF.NMP.2013-1).  
REEMAIN combines cutting edge knowledge and experience from production processes, professional 
energy simulation, energy and resource planning, and renewable energy and storage to develop and 
demonstrate a methodology and platform for the boost, of efficiency resources. 
CTC - Close To the Customer (FoF.NMP.2013-6). 
The CTC project aims to support European Industry to adapt to global competitive pressures by developing 
methods and innovative enabling technologies towards local flexible ma nufacturing of green personalized 
products close to the customer in terms of features offered, place of fabrication, time to deliver, and cost. 
Smart and adaptive interfaces for INCLUSIVE work (FoF.NMP.2016) 
Modern manufacturing systems are becoming more and more complex because of higher demands for fast 
production rate with high quality and flexibility, that is the ability to customize the production lines to the 
constantly changing market requests. Despite high levels of automation of machines and robots , humans 
remain central to manufacturing operations since they take charge of control and supervision of 
manufacturing activities. Human operators interact with machines and robots by means of human-machine 
interfaces (HMIs), which are unavoidably becoming  very complex as new functions are implemented by 
the production system and include a wide range of possible operational modes and commands. In this 
scenario, human operators experience many difficulties to interact efficiently with the machine; this is 
particularly true for middle age workers who feel uncomfortable in the interaction with a complex 
computerized system and young inexperienced or disabled people who cannot effectively manage such 
complex production systems. To overcome this gap, INCLUSIVE ai ms to develop a new concept of 
interaction between the user and the machines in which the behavior of the automation system adapts to 
human operator capabilities. 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
 CSR Lab is a structure owned 100% by SCM Group with many acknowledgements and certifications. It is 
registered to the Italian register of highly qualified laboratories provided by MIUR (Ministry of Education and 
Scientific Research) authorized to carry ou t research of an applicative nature in favour of small and medium 
industries. 
CSR can provide acoustic and dust tests, and has all necessary equipment in order to work on the study, 
development and modelling of innovative components in the woodworking machinery sector.  
6. Resources to be committed 
CSR will allocate 10 PMs distributed in  WP1(2), WP5(4), WP7(2) and WP8(2), and 10,000€  in ‘other direct 
cost’: 
CSR Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 10,000€ Attending to project meetings (5,000€). Attending to dissemination events 
(5,000€) 
Total 10,000€ 
 
 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  101 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: [Linked third 
party of n.] 6 
 
SCMGROUP ESPANA 
S.A.U. (Linked thid party of 
SCM Group S.p.A.) 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the 
tasks in the proposal 
Description of the entity 
SCM España is the Spanish subsidiary of the SCM group. It hosts roughly 30 employees, mainly technicians 
and engineers, devoted to customer assistance for the machinery maintenance and aftersales services. SCM 
Group is an industrial group which is leader in the crea tion, production and distribution of technologically 
advanced solutions to process a vast range of materials (wood, glass, stone, plastic, metals and composite 
materials) with specialist brands for specific technologies and centers of excellence expert in industrial 
components, present in all 5 continents for almost 70 years. 
Role in the project and in the WPs  
SCM España will work in close collaboration with beneficiary SCM Group, taking specific care of the following 
tasks: 
• In WP6 (Industial Demonstration ), supporting ROYO in the deployment of Furniture manufacturing 
demo 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Pier Alpañez (Male). Managing Director. Managing Director, CEO. Spanish, Italian, French. Master in 
marketing and sales management. He has worked at SCM SPain (previusly NOVOREX IBERICA) since 1989. 
Previusly, freelance. 
Montserrat Ventura (Female). Sales Support, International Trade Specialist. Spanish, Italian. She has worked 
at SCM Spain  (NOVOREX) since 1999. Previously in IQV, Expeditions Manager for 7 years.  
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
Not applicable 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
None 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
Our headquarters in Sant Cugat del Vallés, Barcelona has offices of 200 SQ.M. approx, and a warehouse of 
approx 1000 SQ.M. The workforce is made up of 33 people, of which 15 based at our headquarters, the rest are 
dispersed across the country.  In the offices, we have a local data server for greater privacy, as well as a 1GB 
local network; 2 WIFI networks; Windows Server, VMware virtualization software, ERP, CRM, IService for 
remote management and technical support, CAD for technical drawings. In the warehouse, we have brand new 
SCM machines on display worth approximately € 500k and € 300k in spare parts in order to  provide the best 
possible service to our domestic customers. 
6. Resources to be committed 
SCM España will allocate 4 PMs in WP6 and 2,000€ in ‘other direct costs’: 
SCM 
España 
Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 2,000€ Attending to project meetings 2,000€ 
Total 2,000€ 
 
 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  102 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 
11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
  
 
07 – ROYO  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties Y 
 
Acronym of the project: MULTIPLE 
Participant Nº: [Linked third 
party of n.] 7 Mobiliario ROYO 
 
1. Description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile matches the 
tasks in the proposal 
Company profile of the group 
Royo Group International Bathroom (RGIB) is one of the leading European companies in the field of bathroom 
furniture and shower. RGIB results from the union of two leaders who teamed up to win in this equation: they 
join the trajectory and experience of Royo G roup and the financial strength that, as a platform for growth and 
consolidation, is provided by HIG. 
Company profile of the unit involved in the project 
Mobiliario Royo is the Parent Company of Royo Group, which, among others, includes Royo Spain SL.  
Mobiliario Royo provides balanced resources to ensure the expected development of all its affiliated companies 
by offering complete corporate services that include: Strategic Plans definition and execution; Financial services 
(including accounting, planning, analysis, taxes, treasury and financing); Procurement with a base of common 
suppliers; Research and Innovation in materials, procedures and designs; IT infrastructure and tools; 
Communication and Brand Equity build up; etc. 
Role in the project 
The tasks of Mobiliario ROYO in the project will focus on the validation of MULTIPLE’s multimodal solution 
performance to the production processes performed under the Royo Group Internationl Bathroom associated 
companies.. Mobiliario Royo  will help to define the overall requisements and specifications regarding RGIB 
processes and catalogue of products, aiming to widening the MULTIPLE projects results not only to Royo Spain 
but the whole Group.  Mobiliario Royo w ill assist to Royo Spain in defining the production needs (WP5), the 
KPIs to be achieved and to  assess on the integration of MULTIPLE results onto Royo Spain Management 
Systems (WP6). 
2. Curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, includin g their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities ] 
Key personnel 
César Taboas (male), Chief Technology and Innovation officer  
Mechanical engineering in the Polytechnic University of Valencia in 1996. He did a master’s in quality 
management in 1997 and a MBA in 2006. He also coursed the Executive development program from IESE. He 
has worked as a process engineer at Ford for two ye ars and later he became production manager in ROYO 
Group for ten years. Nowadays he is the Chief Technology and Innovation officer at Mobiliario Royo (group 
company providing central and common services to all group companies, i.e. knowledge management and  
exploitation) . During his professional experience, he has coordinated various national (CDTI) and H2020 

ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  103 
projects that have been developed in ROYO Group. 
3. List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or 
software), or other achievements relevant to the call content 
 
# Product/services… Objective Role of your organization 
1 Royo Click System First bath furniture with 15 -minutes no -tool 
assembly. 
Owner 
 
4. List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 
# Project/Activities Type Objective Role of your organization 
1 TELLME EU- FP7  Development and improving 
learning and training in smaller 
manufacturing environments 
with the use of technologies. 
The aim is to bring innovative 
training methods to SME 
manufacturers so they can 
better supply the needs of their 
markets, which include larger 
industries. 
Subcontractor 
2 NEW LINE OF 
POLYLAMINATE 
COATING 
CDTI New line of polylaminate 
coating 
Partner 
3 OPTIMIZATION 
OF THE 
PRODUCTION 
PROCESS OF 
BATHROOM 
FURNITURE 
THROUGH 
SENSORIZATION 
CDTI  Optimization of the production 
process of bathroom furniture 
through sensorization 
Partner 
4 SAIN4 IVACE and 
FEDER 
program 
The objective of the project is to 
increase the efficiency of the 
main manufacturing processes, 
through the construction of an 
Advanced Management System 
that will support in the decision 
making for continuous 
improvement of availability, 
performance and quality 
Partner 
5 HUMAN H2020- Define and demonstrate 
workplaces where automation 
and human workers operate in 
harmony to improve the 
productivity, quality, 
performance of the factory as 
well as the worker satisfaction 
Partner-Development of 
tools demonstration in 
furniture manufacturing. 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  104 
and safety. 
 
5. Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work 
Mobiliario ROYO brings the IPR and knowledge of the RGIB to be used in the MULTIPLE project. 
6. Resources to be committed 
Mobiliario ROYO will allocate 9 PMs distributed in WP1(3), WP5(6) and WP6(6), and 6,000€ in ‘other direct 
costs’: 
MOB.  
ROYO 
Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 6,000€ WP6: Attending to project technical meetings (1,000€); WP8: 
Attending to project meetings (5,000€) 
Total 6,000€ 
 
 
 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 
11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
  
 
08 – PHF 
No third parties involved. 
09 – RUSSULA 
No third parties involved. 
10 – LDL  
No third parties involved. 
11 – EPIC 
No third parties involved. 
12 – TEMATYS 
No third parties involved. 
13 – JOTIS 
No third parties involved. 
14 – SENORICS 
No third parties involved. 
15 – MRA 
No third parties involved. 
16 – TiO2 
No third parties involved. 
 
 
5 Ethics and Security
5.1 Ethics 
Human Embryos/Foetuses 
Not applicable. 
Humans 
ICT-05-2019          
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  105 
Not applicable. 
Human Cells/Tissues 
Not applicable. 
Protection of Personal Data 
Not applicable. 
Animals 
Not applicable. 
Non-EU countries 
Not applicable. 
Environment Protection 
Not applicable. 
Dual Use 
The research conducted in MULTIPLE does not have any potential for military applications. 
Misuse 
The research conducted in MULTIPLE does not have the potential for malevolent/criminal/terrorist abuse. 
Other Ethics Issues
ICT-05-2019  
 
 
871783 MULTIPLE – Part B  106 
 
 
There are no other ethics issues currently identified beyond those discussed above
5.2 Security 
Please indicate if your project will involve: 
• Activities or results raising security issues: NO 
• 'EU-classified information' as background or results: NO