4. Design and implementation of effective communication campaigns (and supporting tools and materials)- 
our aim will be to generate understanding within the different communities of support  as to what  MyToolBox is 
seeking to achieve. We will ensure regular communication to our stakeholders through these campaigns, which 
will involve the use of emailings, face-to-face meetings (in the case of p olicy stakeholders), leaflets, posters, 
videos and virals, the website and social media, etc.  The impacts of these campaigns will be regularly assessed 
to enable any modifications or improvements to be made to ensure our communication efforts are effective.  
3. Implementation
3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables and milestones 
Brief presentation of the overall structure of the work plan 
A highly structured and logical 48 month work plan  has been drawn up with the input of all partners including end 
users, such as farmers and food processors (see Section 3.3). Five integrated research and innovation work 
packages (WP) have been envisaged (see F igure 3 below), and an overarching project management work package. 
The work packages with cor responding milestones and deliverables are described in detail in table 3.1a. Milestones 
are designed as the point w here the first available information from the WP will be handed over to the MyToolBox 
e-platform for implementation. Th e content and usability of this information will be assessed by key -users during the 
project and finally fine-tuned in the last phase of WP3.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: The MYTOOLBOX Work Packages 
In close cooperation with the end -users in our consortium, crop yield and mycotoxin contaminat ion after current crop 
management will be compared with crop yields and mycotoxin contamination after using the novel pre-harvest 
interventions (WP1). These include investigation of genetic resistance to fungal infection, cultural control, the use of 
novel biopesticides (organic-farming compliant), and competitive biocontrol treatment. Field trials will be carried out 
in North-West and South Europe and the results will be translated into clear and easy to use management strategies 
included in MyToolBox. 
Research into post-harvest measures (WP2),  including real-time monitoring during storage  to be carried out in 3 
countries including China , innovative sorting of crops,  novel milling technology and efficient biofuel production, will 
enable raw cereal materials with higher mycotoxin levels to be processed without breaching regulatory limits on 
mycotoxins in finished products. To overcome problems in a relation to user acceptance of the web -based MyToolBox 
decision support e-platform, our multi -actor approach and well managed innovation cycle ensures that stakeholder 
groups are involved at all stages of the  development of MyToolBox e-platform (WP3) to ensure that their feedback 
is considered in the iterative development approach.  Their involvement will be crucial to translate the key components 
of HACCP, GAP and the Decision Support System (DSS) for pre - and post-harvest treatments together with legal 
aspects and socio-economic drivers of the actors into clear, unambiguous advices to prevent mycotoxin contamination 
and the safe use of contaminated batches. Hence, the individual measures will be implemented in the MyToolBox 
decision support e-platform (WP4), followed by the evaluation of the tool from various angles (mostly face-to-face 
interviews with key-users and use of questionnaires) through a multi -actor approach with end users and stakeholder 
groups at relevant points in the food chain in different countries, and this assessment will be conducted feeding 

 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 34 
outputs into WP4 to aid the socio -economic analysis. The cost-effectiveness of the developed  intervention 
strategies in combination with the MyToolBox e -platform to effectively monitor and reduce the incidence of  
mycotoxin contaminants in crop production and in the food and feed supply chains will be verifie d a) for Fusarium 
mycotoxins in wheat in the UK and b) for aflatoxins in maize in Serbia and c) in cooperation with the Chinese partner, 
for the peanut supply chain in China.  
Early in the project, a business plan will be developed in order to draw up a robust business model for the commercial 
exploitation (WP5) and maintenance of the MyToolBox outcomes after the project: this is the key to the 
sustainability of the measures developed in the project and of its web-based MyToolBox platform and it will be 
centred on a strong value proposition to the end user community. Within the MyToolBox project we will also implement 
a communication campaign including training (WP5)  to reach the targeted stakeholders including farmers and 
their associations and to disseminate information about the project and its results to actors and stakeholders along the 
food supply chain, to opinion leaders/regulators, the media, professionals working in agriculture and food manufacture, 
educators, and other multiplier s, food and drink industries (including SMEs), consumer organisations, the scientific 
community and the general public.  A compliance assessment will be carried out to identify critical issues in 
legislation/standards in order to implement MyToolBox and to anticipate legislative implications of the project 
outputs. Project management (WP6) will closely follow the actions and developments initiated by all partners with 
the aim to reach all objectives within the time and budget limits.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
MyToolBox 35 
Gantt Chart: Timing of the different work packages and their components 
 
 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48
WP1 Pre-harvest reduction strategies
T1.1 Alternative control (incl. control suitable for organic farming) of Fusarium 
mycotoxins in small grain cereals D1.2
T1.2 Cultural control of Fusarium  mycotoxins in small grain cereals D1.3
T1.3 Reduction of aflatoxins in maize through genetics (drought resistance, early
maturity)
D1.4
T1.4 Biocontrol for aflatoxins in maize D1.5
WP2 Post-harvest reduction strategies
T2.1 Real time monitoring systems for improving grain storage management
solutions for mycotoxins in stored cereals and nuts M2.1 D2.1 D2.3
T2.2 Innovative drying and sorting of figs M2.4 D2.4
T2.3 Innovative pre-milling and milling of grains M2.3 D2.5
T2.4 Conjugation and reduction of mycotoxins during tthermal processing D2.6
T2.5 Safe use options for contaminated batches (deactivators, biogas, bioethanol) M2.2 D2.2
WP3 Decision support tools
T3.1 GAP, GMP guidelines and HACCP protocols to prevent and control
mycotoxin contamination M3.1 D3.2
T3.2 Forecasting for optimal farm management in the EU and China D3.3
T3.3 DSS System post-harvest:Pilot and full scale silo trials in the EU and in China
with integrated platform M3.2 D3.4
T3.4 Optimization of the mycotoxin monitoring schemes for the entire chain D3.2
T3.5 Design and building of the MyToolBox D3.1 D3.5
WP4 Practical implementation and standard settings
T4.1 Evaluation of the developed MyToolBox at an end user’s level D4.1 M4.1 D4.2 D4.4
T4.2 Socio-economic and stakeholder analysis M4.3 D4.5
T4.3 Legislation and standard setting for foods D4.6
T4.4 Standard setting for feed additives M4.2 D4.3
WP5 Exploitation, dissemination and communication
T5.1 Knowledge management activities M5.1 D5.5
T5.2 Data management D5.2
T5.3 Communication activities and multi-actor engagement D5.1 D5.3 D5.4 D5.6
T5.4 Dissemination to a wide audience D5.4 D5.8
T5.5 Preparation for the post-project use of the results D5.4 M5.1 D5.6
T5.6 Training activities D5.7
WP6 Coordination and project management 
D6.1 - D6.2
♣
◊
▼
D6.1
D6.2 ♣
D6.1
♣
◊
D6.1
♣
D6.1
♣
◊
▼
D6.1
♣
D6.1
♣
◊
□
D6.1
♣
D6.1
♣
◊
□
D6.1
D2.1 - D2.6
M2.1 - M2.4
D3.1 - D3.4
M3.1 - M3.3
D4.1 - D4.6
M4.1-M4.3
D5.1 - D5.8
M5.1
T6.1 Coordination; T6.2 Financial management; T6.3 Decision making, conflict 
management; T6.4 Organisation of reporting to the EC; T6.5 Day-to-day 
management (Internet, helpdesk and back-office); T6.6 Organisation of consortium 
meetings (incl. telephone/video-conferences, web meetings); T6.7 Maintenance of 
all legal agreements
D = Deliverables (can be shared by two or three tasks) /  M=Milestones/  ♣Project Management Board  Meetings / ◊ Project Steering Committe Meetings / ▼ Advisory board Meetings / □Stakeholder Meetings
WP. 
No. WP and Task Titles Del. & 
Milest.
Months in the project
D1.1 - D1.4
M1.1 - M1.3 M1.1 D1.1 M1.2
 SFS-13-2015 
 
MyToolBox 36 
Table 3.1a: Work package description 
Work package No.  WP1 Start date or starting event M1 
Work package title  Pre-harvest reduction strategies 
Particip. No. 01 04 09 10 14 15 19 20 22 
Particip. short 
name 
BOKU HAU54 UNS HOR 
TA 
BIOFO
RSK 
CAAS- 
IAPPST 
AXEB AGR
O LV 
AGROCENT
RUM 
PM per participant          
Objectives  
This WP will use novel technologies with proven effects in related scenarios to expand the range of tools available 
for the mitigation of pre -harvest mycotoxin formation . Throughout the entire project period, the farm companies 
(AGRO LV and AGROCENTRUM) will provide advice on the enduser suitability of mitigation strategies.  Results will 
be incorporated with known mitigation strategies to develop integrated mycotoxin management tools within WP3 to 
be used by end users and to be incorporated into the web-based MyToolBox.  
O1.1 Implement alternatives to conventional fungicides  (suitable for organic farming) for small grain cereals to 
achieve comparable or better performance to conventional fungicides in re ducing levels of biological 
contamination and mycotoxins by 50%. 
O1.2 To integrate cultural control protocols targeting the Fusarium inoculum within crop debris using 
biofumigation and accelerated biodegradation combined with minimum tillage (50% reduction) 
O1.3 To achieve a 70-90% reduction of the aflatoxin contamination in EU maize through a) the selection and 
application of resistant plant cultivars in field conditions (70%) and b) the use of atoxigenic Aspergillus strains 
to outcompete toxigenic Aspergillus strains (90%). 
Description of work (broken down into tasks), and role of participants 
T1.1 Alternative control (incl. control suitable for organic farming) of Fusarium mycotoxins in small grain 
cereals (M1-M40) 
Lead: HAU PM; Partners: BOKU 4.5PM; BIOFORSK 3.5PM; AXEB 1.25PM; AGRO LV 0.8PM; 
HAU and BIOFORSK will conduct field experiments in the UK and Norway on the reduction of mycotoxins in small 
grain cereals through the application of biopesticide technology. Current chemical control of Fusarium mycotoxins is 
limited to a single chemical group, the triazoles. This creates a large selective pressure for fungicide resistance to 
develop and there are currently safety concerns with triazole fungicides as they are classed as endocrine 
disruptors, and as such they may be removed from the market. This task will look at a number of alternatives to 
triazole fungicides. This will include alternative chemistry as well as novel biopesticides such as salts, botanical 
extracts, plant defence elicitors and biocon trol agents. Several recent studies conducted at HAU, BIOFORSK and 
other institutes have shown reductions using various forms of biopesticides, for example preliminary experiments at 
BIOFORSK have shown significant reduction in Fusarium and its mycotoxins in wheat after treatment with a foliar 
fertiliser. This study will allow a comprehensive comparison of different categories of biopesticide s to be evaluated 
within the same experiments. Due to their nature several of these alternatives are suitable for org anic as well as 
conventional production systems. An identical matrix of up to 18 biopesticides will be tested on wheat in the 
UK and on oats in Norway  in comparison to untreated and triazole (prothioconazole) treated controls in year 1. In 
the growing seasons of years 2 and 3 a selection of biopesticides showing most promising activity will be optimised 
for dose and timing. HAU will use artificial inoculation with Fusarium graminearum  and mist irrigation t o 
generate high disease pressure whilst BIOFORSK plan to use natural infection at sites with high disease pressure. 
Both institutes have used these strategies successfully for many years to test the efficacy of products against 
Fusarium infection and subsequent mycotoxin contamination of harvested grain s. Field experiments will be 
conducted according to EPPO guidelines . In order to verify the the efficacy of the plant protection products , the 
harvested grains will be quantified for deoxynivalenol using immunoassay (ELISA) technology  by HAU and 
BIOFORSK. In addition, and to verify the impact of these biopesticides on mycotoxins beyond Deoxynivalenol, 
targeted analysis of all relevant  Fusarium mycotoxins including their masked (conjugated) forms  will be carried out 
by BOKU using a sophisticated and fully validated LC-MS/MS based multi-analyte method, which covers more >300 
secondary metabolites of fungi. BOKU will  also ensure accuracy and comparability of the ELISA measurement 
results through LC -MS/MS reference analyses and by pro viding laboratory- and certified reference materials. In 
                                                        
54 Partner underlined is WP leader 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 37 
Europe, EPPO guidelines now constitute a reference in Commission Regulation (EU) No 545/2011 of 10 June 
2011, implementing Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 regarding the data requirements for plant prote ction products. 
AXEB will advise on the biopesticide technology and take forward the commercialisation of potential biopesticide 
products (see also WP5). AGRO LV will advise on end -user suitability of the biopesticide technology and conduct 
demonstration trails of successful products for growers in year 4.  
T1.2 Cultural control of Fusarium mycotoxins in small grain cereals (M1-M40) 
Lead: HAU 55PM; Partners: BOKU 4.5PM; BIOFORSK 9PM; AGRO LV 0.2PM; 
Cultural control mechanisms will be investigated focusing on the study of the crop debris management  in this 
Task. This will include microbial agents to colonise and exclude Fusarium inoculum from plant debris and the use 
of biofumigation crops. These biol ogical control strategies are suitable for organic as well as conventional 
production systems. BIOFORSK will conduct laboratory and field studies on the efficacy of chemical and biological 
control agents to reduce the inoculum of Fusarium in crop debris fo r oats in Norway. This will involve an initial 
screen of up to 20 products in laboratory studies  followed by optimisation and validation of selected 
products from year 1 in field experiments in the growing seasons in year 2 and 3.  Preliminary experiments at 
BIOFORSK have shown significant reduction in Fusarium inoculum after treatment with Biowish (fertiliser that 
stimulates microbial activity) and some reduction by Trifender ( Trichoderma asperellum). HAU will conduct studies 
in glasshouse on the efficacy o f biofumigation technology to reduce Fusarium inoculum in crop debris followed by 
optimisation and validation in the growing seasons in years 2 and 3 for wheat and maize rotations in the UK. Within 
this task Fusarium inoculum will be quantified using qPCR technology developed and validated in previous projects 
at HAU and BIOFORSK. AGRO LV will advise on the end user suitability of debris management technology . As 
described in T1.1, targeted analysis of the Fusarium mycotoxins will be performed by a novel and fully validated LC-
MS/MS based multi -analyte method developed by BOKU, which covers all relevant myocotoxins including their 
masked (conjugated) forms.  
T1.3 Reduction of aflatoxins in maize through genetics (drought resistance, early maturity) (M1-M40) 
Lead: UNS 15.6PM; Partners: BOKU: 0.5 PM; AGROCENTRUM 4PM; HORTA 11.5PM 
UNS and HORTA will conduct field experiments in Serbia  and Italy  to determine the resistance of local and 
European maize hybrids to aflatoxin contamination at harvest. A range of maize hybrids will be screened for 
aflatoxin resistance  based on known genetic traits that impact on aflatoxin contamination (namely drought 
tolerance and rate of maturity). Hybrids will be selected based on local and European origin as well as the 
screening of newly developed hybrids. An initial screen will be conducted of 50 genotypes with a single sowing date 
and location (Serbia) in year 1. In the growing seasons in year 2 and 3, 20 selected hybrids will be tested at 2 
locations (Serbia and Italy) and with 2 sowing dates (early and late). Experiments will be conducted according to 
EPPO guidelines and harvested grains will be quantified for aflatoxin using ELISA tests. BOKU will ensure accuracy 
and comparability of measurement results through complementary LC-MS/MS reference analyses and by providing  
laboratory- and certified reference materials. In addition to the individual farmers involved through Agrocentrum the 
results of the field trials for ear rot resistance will be presented at the annual meeting organised by Agrocentrum 
(´field day´) for breeding companies, agricultural organisations and grain producers, to obtain feedback from end 
users and other relevant agricultural institutions. 
T1.4 Biocontrol for aflatoxins in maize (M1-M40)  
Lead: UNS 36.4PM; Partners: BOKU 0.5 PM; AGROCENTRUM 8PM; CAAS-IAPPST 2PM 
Local (Serbian) atoxigenic isolates of Aspergillus flavus  have been identified and will be tested within field 
experiments. UNS and AGROCENTRUM will conduct studies of 2 atoxigenic isolates on 20 maiz e hybrids in 12 
field experiments (6 non-irrigated and 6 irrigated experiments) split between 2 sites and conducted in years 1 -3. 
Experiments will be conducted according to EPPO guidelines and harvested grains will be quantified for aflatoxin 
using ELISA t esting. BOKU will ensure accuracy and comparability of the measurement results through the 
measures described in T1.1 und T1.3. T ask 1.4 will be a novel adaptation within Europe of proven technology 
developed in America, and currently being adopted in Afri ca and Asia,  aided by the collaboration of international 
experts from those continents (Dr Peter Cotty, USDA  and member of the MyToolBox Advisory Board ; Dr Martin 
Kimanya, The Nelson Mandela African Institution of Science and Technology; Prof Liu Yang, CAA S-IAPPST). In 
particular Prof Liu Yang will provide detailed information on the production, formulation, application, standardisation 
and long -term monitoring of biocontrol agents within crops based on on -going projects within China.  
AGROCENTRUM will advise on enduser suitability of the maize hybrids and atoxigenic biocontrol strategies as well 
as demonstrate experiments to growers. 
 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 38 
Deliverables 
D1.1 Pre-selection completed of the most promising a) biopesticides, b) cultural control agents and 
methods and c) atoxigenic Aspergillus strains in consultation with end users and Advisory Board 
M16 
D1.2 Guidelines for biopesticide use to reduce mycotoxins in European cereals  M40 
D1.3 Guidelines for cultural control of mycotoxins in European cereals through management of crop 
debris  
M40 
D1.4 Guidelines for resistant cultivars to reduce mycotoxins in European maize  M40 
D1.5 Guidelines for use of atoxigenic biocontrol to reduce mycotoxins in European maize  M40 
 
Work package No.  WP2 Start date or starting event: M1 
Work package title Post-Harvest Reduction Strategies 
Particip. No. 01 05 06 07 08 12 16 17 18 21 
Particip. short 
name 
BOKU FLI BARILLA CRAN-
FIELD 
IRIS SDU BIO-
MIN 
ASAG SÜD-
ZUCKER 
TARIS 
PM per participant           
Objectives  
The approach in this WP is to provide stakeholders involved in post -harvest and processing from key food chains 
with innovative robust management tools that offer practical integrated solutions for effective mycotoxin 
minimisation. Objectives are: 
O2.1 To develop real-time environmental monitoring systems for storage of cereals and peanuts  to facilitate 
effective integrated control of moulds, mycotoxins and pest activity for integration into a Decision Support 
System (DSS) of the web-based MyToolBox for post-harvest storage managers; 
O2.2 To develop non-invasive real-time sorting of dried figs for aflatoxins using visible/NIR spectral imaging 
and appropriate algorithms for achieving significant improvements compared to manual sorting, and with a 
5% or less probability of the batch average concentration of aflatoxin B1 to meet EU limits; 
O2.3 To integrate novel downstream processing approaches such as innovative (pre)milling  to accurately 
separate grain tissues with different mycotoxin levels and to minimise the mycotoxin conte nt in the final 
wheat-based food products (with a 50% reduction); 
O2.4 To draw up novel baking procedures  controlling, e.g., fermentation, temperature, time and recipes to 
develop a sound basis for establishing process factors for risk assessment; 
O2.5 To exploit a novel generation of mycotoxin degrading enzymes  for environmentally sustainable use of 
contaminated batches using fermentation technologies for the production of biofuels (bioethanol and biogas). 
Description of work (broken down into tasks), and role of participants 
T2.1 Real time monitoring systems for improving grain storage management solutions for mycotoxins in 
stored cereals and nuts  
T2.1.1 Design and testing of measurement device for real -time monitoring of key abiotic parameters using ATEX 
compliant sensor platform components (M1-M18) 
Lead: IRIS  Partners: CRANFIELD ; BARILLA  ASAG  
The designs of the measurement device will be drawn up. The device will include an IR CO2 sensor, a 
Temperature (T) and Relative Humidity (RH) sensor. To this end, we will optimise the range of infra-red (IR) CO2 
sensor detection required in different grain types: studies will be conducted with the CO 2 sensor platform to identify 
the range of concentrations which need to be measured for wheat/barley, oats and peanuts under different moisture 
content for real-time monitoring in farm stores and grain silos depending on relative grain bulk. In addition, a review 
of commercially available T and RH sensors will be performed in order to select the most optimal for integration into 
the sensor node required.  
The sensor node (into which the sensor components will be integrated) will be designed, as will the specifications 
for its encapsulation in order to ensure ruggedness, water and air tightness. Each n ode will be coded with the 
source code for its intercommunication ensuring no noise and interference with other systems, low consumption 
and seamless communication at all times. It will be ensured that the node can accurately monitor in the range 
required for different grain silo sizes. During the design stage we will ensure that we fufill all the criteria for ATEX 
compliance based on an “ATEX-by-Design” approach.  
The integrated CO 2/RH/T sensor platform will be tested in real grain silo conditions . The num ber of sensor 
nodes required to adequately cover a standard commercial silo will be studied. BARILLA and ASAG (China) will 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 39 
provide input with regard to the number of sensors and placement considerations for later practical trials. The 
fabricated nodes will  then be installed in a pilot scale silo, and in -situ functionality and performance assessment 
tests will be carried out, in order to verify: (a) the ability to withstand pressures and long term placement in grain 
stores; the ability to provide rapid, accu rate and repeated readings of CO 2/HR/T; to offer sufficient range to ensure 
measurements from the whole silo can be obtained; (b) correlation with existing CO 2 respiration results of 
mycotoxigenic moulds in different commodities which are available from CRANFIELD.  
Following an analysis of the results of the pilot trials, the necessary modifications and improvements will be made to 
the sensor platform and designs of an optimised sensor will be drawn up, from which production of the final 
improved sensor platform will be performed.  
T2.1.2 Biotic mould spoilage and mycotoxin models (M1-M18) 
Lead: CRANFIELD  Partners: IRIS ; BOKU ; ASAG  
The work in T2.1.2 is complementary to T2.1.1 as it will provide data on rates of CO 2 production in relation to fungal 
activity in cereals at different moisture contents and temperatures. This will inform the design and development 
of the sensor platform and will be combined with the existing knowledge base at CRANFIELD for some 
mycotoxigenic moulds which is already available. ASAG and CAAS-IAPPST will provide peanut samples  and 
corresponding biological data for these studies. Boundary temperature x moisture content models will be developed 
for growth and mycotoxin production in cereals/pea nuts specifically for those toxins which are not available: 
zearalenone in wheat; T2/HT-2 in oats; aflatoxin in peanuts. The temporal production of CO 2 by mycotoxigenic fungi 
under different good, marginal and poor storage conditions will be obtained and t his will be related to relative 
potential risks of mycotoxins exceeding the EU legislative limits. Analyses of the various mycotoxins will be carried 
out by BOKU using a novel LC-MS/MS multi-toxin-method as described in T1.1. 
T2.1.3 Integration of abiotic data with biological data (M18-M36) 
Lead: CRANFIELD  Partners: IRIS ; BARILLA ; ASAG  
Real-time abiotic data on CO 2, T and RH from pilot scale silos will be integrated with the biological growth/toxin 
boundary models using process engineering  solutions. This will be done by linking the rates of CO 2 production 
under different temperature and RH conditions to these boundary models and the relationship to exceeding the EU 
legislative limits for the toxins in each grain type. The integrated system  will include (a) commodity type and (b) 
toxin of interest. Trials will be run to test the prototype system in small scale bin systems in farm stores and finally in 
large grain silos (including silos in China, see WP3) for accuracy and for remote downloadi ng by store managers. 
This will be utilised in the development of the  final DSS system  tool for post -harvest management that will be 
developed in WP3.  
T2.2 Innovative drying and sorting of figs (M12-M36) 
Lead: FLI  Partners: BARILLA ; SDU ; TARIS  
Labour-intensive, manual screening  with potential health risks to operators, will be replaced by an automated 
machine-system using multiple cameras in the visible and near -infrared regions  (NIR) of the spectrum in real 
time, combined with n ovel transparent conveyor belts. Both single and hyperspectral bands will be used to detect 
‘hot-spots’ of aflatoxin contamination visible on the surface of dried figs. Intelligent learning algorithms will be 
developed to automatically detect the contamina ted food items and to eliminate those from the conveyor belts 
through a jet of air.  
SDU has experience in the development and validation of improved sorting technologies and a PhD project will be 
focused on this aim. FLI envisage sourcing and providing su itable quantities of dried figs as well as sourcing 
aflatoxin contaminated materials. FLI will also provide support in experimental design to assess the efficiency of 
the newly developed sorting technology  and in evaluation of the results. Work will be con ducted with dried figs 
(provided by TARIS) with the technology but could in the future (beyond the project scope) progressively be 
extended to other dried fruit (apricots), chilli peppers and tree nuts such as pistachios. End -users (TARIS and 
BARILLA) will  be closely involved in provision of suitable commodities for screening and in establishing the 
efficiency of the screening technology in factory environments.  
T2.3 Innovative pre-milling and milling of grains (M1-M36) 
Lead: BARILLA  
Within pre-milling and milling strategies, debranning, micronization and dry - or wet -turbo separation are efficient, 
proven and versatile, cost effective methods for companies to achieve high quality particle size reduction results and 
to allow more accurate separation of grain tissues with characterized (different) mycotoxin contamination levels. The 
approach to be employed in T2.3 involves the development of the synergic potential of these pre -milling and 
milling strategies , in order to detail the composition of the intern al tissues and to minimise the mycotoxin 
concentration in raw materials and the final wheat products destined for consumers. By -products, usually intended 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 40 
for animal feed but also exploitable for wholegrain products, contain about 15% proteins, 40% starch and 40% fibre 
with levels of mycotoxins which can exceed legal limits. Basically, all these fractions could be decontaminated and 
directed to human consumption, leading to a significant increase in yields : we hypothesi se a decontamination 
degree of about 50% for each component that could be easily employed to produce any kind of cereal -based foods. 
The potential improved recovery from milled fractions means that EU limits on unprocessed cereals as well as on 
by-products intended for animal feed could be rai sed, i.e. a greater proportion of contaminated grain and other 
fractions obtained during milling as bran could go for human consumption: this will be a focus of BfR in with respect 
to adapted standard setting in WP4. Bread and pasta could be added with increased fibre content, ranging from 1 to 
10% according to technological requirements. 
T2.4 Conjugation and reduction of mycotoxins during thermal processing 
T2.4.1 Development of a mycotoxin mitigation strategy exploiting food processing effects (M10-M42) 
Lead: BARILLA  Partners: BOKU  
Food processing can alter mycotoxins  (parent compounds/modified forms). EFSA has published opinions on 
modified mycotoxins in 2014 and the need to obtain further data on the fate of th ese forms during food processing. 
Most studies conducted on the fate of mycotoxins have been performed at lab -scale with artificially contaminated 
material at high levels that do not reflect practical conditions. BARILLA has the possibility to collect cereals  and 
other commodities through their networks of milling plants and storage centr es. Similarly, BARILLA can also obtain 
naturally contaminated raw material as flours starting from fungal inoculation and incubation in order to obtain raw 
materials at c ontamination levels similar to those employed during real processing , as opposed to artificially 
contaminated samples through spiking experiments.  
Pilot plant/industrial production lines will be e xploited for the production of different bakery products  from the 
aforementioned raw materials (cereals but also almonds, hazelnuts, nuts, figs  and raisins). The e xperimental 
models will be based on the Design of Experiments (DoE) approach which is an  effective tool for maximi sing the 
amount of information and will ben efit from the  accurate LC -MS/MS multi-analyte measurements enabling the 
simultaneous determination of free and masked/modified forms  of mycotoxins and executed by BOKU. This 
experimental setup shall reveal which  technological process under real industry conditions can lead to  a true 
mitigation strategy, i.e. reducing the overall mycotoxin impact from the raw material to the finished products ready 
for human consumption.  
T2.4.2 Evaluation of other (food processing) metabolites of mycotoxins (M28-M42) 
Lead: BOKU   Partners: BARILLA   
The release and absorption of the parent mycotoxins as modified forms  (assuming that these exert the same 
toxicity as the parent compound) may contribute to the overall consumer exposure. BOKU has recently developed a 
novel liquid chromatography -high resolution -mass spectrometric (LC -HR-MS) based metabolomics approach  
using in vivo stable isotopic labelling combined with a sophisticated software tool (MetExtract) to extract features 
originating from true metabolites. Exploiting the same strategy, BOKU will spike blank flour with a mixture of 12C and 
13C mycotoxins, starting with deoxynivalenol; the flour will be used for the small scale production of bread, cookies 
and other bakery products under real i ndustry conditions in collaboration with BARILLA . Furthermore, other 
toxins (e.g. ZEN, FB1, T -2) or even conjugates enzymatically synthesised from 13C toxins (e.g. DON-3-Glc, HT2-3-
Glc, NIV -3-Glc) can be assessed. In this way a sort of “in -process stable i sotopic labelling” devoted to 
understanding mycotoxins fate during food processing will be brought to completion. 
The relevance of this study will be that for the first time ever not only masked/modified forms but also other 
(food processing) derivatives of mycotoxins  (neogenesis) will be determined  in relevant matrices to obtain 
structural information of altered chemical compounds. This is the first step towards a true risk assessment of 
mycotoxins including all their modified forms and degradation products. 
T2.5 Safe Use Options for Contaminated Batches (deactivators, biogas, bioethanol)  
T2.5.1 Development of a degradation system related to biogas production (M6-M24) 
Lead: BOKU  Partners: BIOMIN  
This subtask is related to biogas and in particular to determining the effect of mycotoxin -contaminated cereals 
on the degradability of biomass during anaerobic digestion. While previous studies have shown the degradability 
of mycotoxins, to date the degra dation rates have not been analysed. To guarantee the complete degradation of 
mycotoxins, specific established organisms and/or enzymes  will be added to the digesters. Organisms and 
enzymes will be provided by BIOMIN who have already successfully employed these in mycotoxin detoxifying feed 
additives. Degradation performance will be analysed and process parameters for anaerobic digestion of mycotoxin 
(DON, ZEN, Fumonisins) contaminated wheat and maize, respectively, will be developed using laboratory scale 
biogas reactors (CSTR = Continuous Stirred Tank Reactor) available at BOKU and subsequently transferred to 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 41 
fermentation experiments at technical scale. End user input  will be received through the Austrian Competence 
Center Bioenergy 2020+ where BOKU is area managing institution. 
T2.5.2 Development of a degradation system related to bioethanol production (M6-M24) 
Lead: BOKU:  Partners: BIOMIN ; SUEDZUCKER  
The use of even one mycotoxin -contaminated delivery in a bioethanol plant would lead to the contamination of the 
entire production charge, which is a big financial problem for bioethanol plants especially in view of the mycotoxin 
enriched Dried Distillers Grains with Solubles  (DDGS), a bioethanol by -product, which is added to animal feed. 
Mycotoxin free DDGS would reduce bioethanol production costs  and mitigate the current food versus fuel 
debate. The performance of mycotoxin -degrading organisms and enzymes provided by BIOMIN, will be evaluated 
during the fermentation of mycotoxin (DON, ZEN, Fumonisins) contaminated wheat and maize. Economic feasibility 
and intervention points for the addition of these organisms will be identified and test fermentations at laboratory 
scale at BOKU and subsequently at technical scale at the site of end user SUEDZUCKER will be carried out. This 
will allow the assessment whether contaminated grain batches could be diverted to the bioethanol fermentation 
industry and cleaned from mycotoxins by using the selected mycotoxin degrading enzymes. 
Deliverables 
D2.1 ATEX compliant sensor system for measurement of CO2/RH/Temp in required sensitivity range  M18 
D2.2 Final assessment of systems utilising mycotoxin degrading enzymes/microbes during biogas and 
bioethanol production 
M24 
D2.3 Integrated sensor platform for CO2/RH/Temperature real time measurement including option for 
downloading of information by farm store managers  
M36 
D2.4 Final assessment of newly developed sorting technology for figs  M36 
D2.5 Guidelines for effective grains micronization/wet extraction milling procedures M36 
D2.6 Report on the presence of mycotoxins and all their modified forms that are formed during food 
processing  
M42 
 
Work package No. WP3 Start date or starting event: M1 
Work package title  Integrated MyToolBox e-platform for mycotoxin management 
Particip. No. 02 04 06 07 08 10 13 17 
Particip. short name DLO-
RIKILT 
HAU BARILLA CRANFIE
LD 
IRIS HORTA WU ASAG 
PM per participant         
Objectives  
To limit mycotoxin contamination of the final products to the lowest level achievable, all actors in the entire 
production chain should apply and show utmost adherence to best management practices. This requires integration 
of all up -to-date pre - and post -harvest knowledge t o develop a practical framework for providing solutions to 
farmers, storage managers and processers. Consequently, this WP aims 
O3.1 To evaluate Good Agricultural Practice (GAP) and Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) guidelines , 
available in different count ries, and Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP)  based protocols for 
prevention and control of mycotoxins, and synthesi se them into a user -friendly format for application in 
MyToolBox. 
O3.2 To develop forecasting models  to predict potential fungal and mycotoxin contamination of small grain 
cereals and maize at an early growth stage so that pre -emptive action can be taken to reduce both fungal 
infection and mycotoxin formation.  
O3.3 To test and optimise the final real -time post-harvest environmental monitoring systems for storage of 
cereals and peanuts developed in WP2.  
O3.4 To adapt and integrate cost -effective sampling and monitoring strategies  for mycotoxin management 
over the entire chain, for inclusion in MyToolBox.  
O3.5 To design, built, test and validate the web-based MyToolbox platform  for facilitating decision support for 
mycotoxin management (prevention, control and monitoring) in feed and food chains of Europe. 
Description of work (broken down into tasks), and role of participants 
T3.1 GAP, GMP guidelines and HACCP protocols to prevent and control mycotoxin contamination (M1-18) 
Lead: CRANFIELD ; Partners: DLO--RIKILT ; HAU ; Barilla   
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 42 
Mycotoxin management (prevention, control, monitoring) should be part of Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) in the 
primary stage, GMP and HACCP in consecutive stages of the food and feed production chain. To date, application 
of such guidelines and protocol s is mainly restricted to DON or Fusarium toxins in small grain cereals, and 
particularly focusing on the primary production stage. The European Union has published principles to minimize 
Fusarium mycotoxins in cereals, to be used as a starting point by Me mber States for setting up national guidelines. 
So far, specific codes of practices have only been developed in the UK, completed by HAU, aimed to reduce 
Fusarium and OTA mycotoxins in cereals.  
Available GAP and GMP guidelines and HACCP protocols  to prevent and control mycotoxins will be gathered, 
structured, and evaluated. Also, knowledge gained in previous European projects will be collected and synthesi sed. 
This will be done for each of the mycotoxins/chains under investigation, including small grain ce reals (wheat, barley, 
maize, and dried fruit. Critical Control Points  (CCPs) will be determined  for each of these chains, as well as 
action limits and corrective measures for the identified CCPs. Results from WP1 and WP2, which will provide new 
information for MyToolbox during the project, will be gathered and included in the available guidelines as well. In this 
way, all available information will be synthesised for inclusion in the static component of MyToolBox (T3.3). 
T3.2 Forecasting for optimal farm management in the EU and in China (M1-M40) 
Lead: DLO-RIKILT ; Partners: HORTA ; ASAG  
The use of predictive models  for mycotoxins enables better informed decision making  on proper farm 
management, such as the use of varieties, crop rotation and soil treatment (e.g. ploughing), and use of 
(bio)fungicides for control. Depending on the aim,  forecasting models can be used for short term decisions, like use 
of fungicides around the critical period of cultivation and optimal harvesting time; for mid -term decisions like areas 
for more intensive control on mycotoxin contamination in batches; and/ or for long -term decisions like changes in 
farm management, e.g. on crop variety. Currently, operational models are available for forecasting the presence of 
DON in wheat, either mechanistic or empirical, but  not for other toxins/crop combinations . Also, t hese models 
are restricted to certain European areas, and not dedicated for specific users (actors in the chain). 
In this tasks, forecasting models will be collected and further developed for inclusion in the dynamic component 
of the web -based MyToolbox platform. Model development will start from available models, which wil l be 
extended and tested for other countries. The task will start with a literature evaluation on available predictive models 
in small grain cereals and maize, and evaluation of model cha racteristics. Then models will be selected for 
extension (to other countries, and to include ZEN in DON models) and further development, and will be tested in 
other European regions. The final models will be linked into the dynamic component of MyToolBox for interactive 
use by farmers and advisors.  
Available models are either empirical or mechanistic, or a combined modelling approach is used. The decision on 
the modelling type will depend on the available data in relation to user requirements. When multipl e models are 
available for a particular mycotoxin/crop, e.g. in case of DON in wheat, a model envelope approach will be used, in 
which multiple models will be run, and their outputs combined for instance, on Fuzzy sets.  
Models will need input on weather d ata, agronomic data, and grain samples results for the particular 
mycotoxin/grain. Weather data will be collected from national weather stations, open available  (see for 
instance: http://eca.knmi.nl/ from which weather data from entire Europe can be retrieved ) or from other open 
sources. Agronomic data as well as data on mycotoxins in grain samples will be collected via project partners 
(HAU, HORTA, DLO-RIKILT) and will be further collected in the course of the project.  
The focus will be upon: 
- Farmer model for Fusarium spp and DON and ZEN contamination of wheat, for the main wheat growing areas 
of Europe: available forecasting models for DON in wheat, which are mostly developed on the national basis 
(e.g. available for France, Belgium, Netherlands, Swiss, Italy, Czech Republic, and one for North  West Europe), 
will be collected and evaluated for integration in MyToolBox. The available models will be used as the starting 
point for modelling  and these will be linked into the MyToolBox platform. However, available models are 
scattered, regarding regional coverage and modelling approach used (mechanistic vs empirical). Since, not for 
each relevant country, a model is available (e.g. Germany, Poland), availab le models will be tested for these 
other countries. Furthermore, the models will be extended to also include ZEN, which often co-occurs with DON. 
The farmer’s model for DON and ZEN in wheat growing areas of Europe will help famers to determine the 
optimal application of fungicides and optimal harvest time . After extension and testing, models will be 
validated, which will include collection of data (farm management, weather) and wheat samples at harvest, which 
will be chemical analysed for DON and ZEN concentrations.  
- Forecasting presence of Fusarium spp. and DON contamination in wheat grown in  the Anhui and Hebei 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 43 
provinces of China  (ASAG, DLO -RIKILT). Weather data, including forecasts, will be collected from these 
provinces as well as wheat samples at harvest. These samples will be analysed for DON content (ASAG). The 
available data will be used for developing a forecasting model fo r DON contamination of wheat grown in these 
provinces. To this end, experiences gained in the previous task, as well as available models will be shared 
(DLO-RIKILT). The developed model will be tested by two end-users, located in the Anhui province , for pre-
harvest forecasting (ASAG). Currently, ASAG is also developing its own forecasting models and therefore 
exchange of expertise between MyToolBox and ASAG in this area would be of mutual interest to improving the 
forecast of DON levels in wheat. In this ar ea ASAG will also involve two end users, i.e. the farmers Luo Jiakui 
and Lin Qiyin who are located near Mingguang City in the Anhui province, where mostly wheat is grown. 
- Forecasting model for T2/HT2 in oats , to be used by farmers . Available models, develo ped in Scandinavia, 
will be provided by BIOFORSK for integration in MyToolBox.  
- Forecasting models for fumonisins and aflatoxins in maize  for central Europe (maize growing areas) (DLO -
RIKILT, HORTA).  
T3.3 DSS System post -harvest: Pilot and full scale silo  trials in the EU and in China with integrated 
platform (M 36-48) 
Lead: IRIS  Partners: CRANFIELD ; BARILLA; HORTA:; ASAG;  
Pilot scale testing and fine-tuning of the developed integrated real-time postharvest DSS system for grain stores 
and silos with different stored cereals as a management too l will be performed in T3.3. Also, the optimal number of 
integrated sensors required for each grain store/silo will be determined. Trials will be conducted to test the 
prototype system in the EU, Turkey and in China . More specifically, the postharvest DSS system will be 
evaluated by or via Barilla in the EU for durum wheat (Turkey and Italy) and via HORTA for maize in Italy. With 
respect to testing the DSS systems at an end users level in China , ASAG will provide access to its grain silos 
(200–7000t) for wheat in the Anhui & Hebei province and for maize  in the Jilin & Hebei province and in the 
Sichuan province. The involvement of different geographical regions enables MyToolBox to include a vari ety of food 
crops and mycotoxins occurring in China, such as DON, aflatoxins and fumonisins. ASAG will provide access to its 
grain silos to install the real-time sensors to be developed within MyToolBox and to study their functionality and their 
corrosion resistance especially against the fungicides used in these facilities. Through ASAG, also two end users 
from the Chinese grain industry  will be involved in post -harvest monitoring, i.e. Hebei Baoding Qinghuaxufeng 
Trade of Grains and Oil Co. Ltd. and the C hina Grain Reserves Corporation, which owns most of the grains and 
closely cooperates with ASAG. Moreover, ASAG has also got storage facilities for peanuts in the Shandong 
province where it collaborates with Hualong  (Rushan) Foodstuffs Enterprise Co. Ltd., the leading company of 
Chinese peanut industry both in production and export which has already expressed its interest to serve as end user 
to MyToolBox. ASAG will coordinate the installation and maintenance of the developed real -time post -harvest 
sensors in cooperation with these partners from the grain and peanut industry and the MyToolBox participants. 
T3.4 Optimization of the mycotoxin monitoring schemes for the entire chain (M6-M24) 
Lead: DLO-RIKILT Partners: WU  
This task aims to optimi se mycotoxin sampling and testing in the chain, while minimising the costs, using a 
modelling approach based on existing information ( no experimental work involved ). Various types of detection 
methods, such as instrumental methods, ELISA, and dipstick metho ds, will be evaluated. Each type of detection 
has its own characteristics, such as percentages of false -positives and negatives, and related costs. Using 
optimisation modelling, the sampling and testing of mycotoxins will be optimised, resulting into the number of 
samples to be taken at each point in the chain, rate of pooling of samples, and analytical method to be used. Input 
from WP1 and WP2 will be used in this task. The focus will be on Fusarium mycotoxins in small grain cereals and 
maize. Results will  lead to guidelines/advice  on sampling and analyses , including optimal points for testing 
along the chain, for use by supply chain actors. The guidelines will be implemented in the static component of 
MyToolBox at the end of year two, and verified in years 3 and 4. 
T3.5 Design and building of the MyToolBox e-platform (M1-M48) 
Lead: HORTA; Partners: DLO-RIKILT  CRANFIELD, IRIS  
This task encompasses the design, building, testing and validation of the internet -based MyToolBox 
e-platform: an interactive management and decision support tool for all actors within the chain. The MyToolBox e-
platform will be developed and integrated in detail for mycotoxins in small grain cereals and maize production 
chains, and its working principle will be demon strated for dried fruit. The tool will be very flexible so that it can later 
on (after the project) be extended to other mycotoxins and chains. The development will be in close interaction 
with the stakeholders (in WP4), which will provide user aims and re quirements for the design and development. In 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 44 
years 3 and 4, they will test the first version of MyToolbox (WP4). MyToolBox will integrate currently available 
information and make it accessible to the user. Results from WP1 -4 which become available during the project will 
be added. Amongst others, the forecasting models of T3.2 (dynamic part), the optimised monitoring schemes 
of T3.3 (static part), and the real time post -harvest storage management systems of WP2-3 (dynamic part) 
will be linked into web-accessible MyToolBox e-platform. The tool will be specific to the activities of each 
particular actor within the chain, and will enable the actor to direct batches to safe -use options based on CCPs for 
mycotoxin contamination in the specific production  system. Furthermore, it will provide: guidelines for GAP, GMP 
and HACCP; potential corrective measures in case action levels or EU legal limits are exceeded; and 
recommendations on the best choice of preventive and corrective measures (including inspectio n). For batches with 
contamination above certain action limits, recommendations for alternative safe use will be provided.  
This task is divided into three subtasks: 
T3.5.1: System architecture and specifications. 
This sub -task includes the following activ ities: definition of the MyToolBox architecture, technological cloud 
infrastructure and cloud hosting; definition of the operative system to be used for the app; definition of inputs and 
outputs APIs (Application Program Interfaces) and structure of the databases (for crops characteristics, weather and 
environmental data, etc.); formalisation of the model’s algorithms (models from WP2 and WP3); definition of the 
front end GUI (Graphical User Interface) and adaptive features (access by PC, tablet and smartph one devices); 
definition of the graphic layout, mock -up development and approval (screenshots or ‘mock ups’ of User Interface 
concepts will be made available to our end -users/clients for feedback, discussion and approval prior to front -end 
coding in sub-task 3.5.2); connection and relationships with the project web-site.  
T3.5.2: Development of the e-platform. 
This sub -task includes the following activities: setting up of the user’s authentication module (registration, 
authentication, profiling); creation o f the data flows and configuration of the databases; development of the inside 
components (dynamic models running in MyToolBox as internal web services; the models formulated within and 
supplied by WP2 and WP3 will be converted to executable code in the ap propriate computer programming 
language) and the outside components ( dynamic models entering in MyToolBox via web services ); 
development of the front end GUI for data entry and data viewer for different users with restricted access, i.e., 
registered users and administrators; interoperability testing among dynamic models (data exchange testing); setting 
up of the static pages (static contents from WP1 and T3.3, with public access); development of the app to access 
the MyToolBox authentication module in order  to provide easy and fast access to the platform (the app will be 
developed for compatibility with one of the following standards: android, iOS and windows operating systems); 
development of info -graphic and visual reporting tool as interpretation guide, e nsuring easy to interpret information 
for users; optimisation work and scale up of the platform.  
Sub-task 3.5.3: Verification and validation 
This sub-task includes the following activities: testing of the data flows and MyToolBox outputs against the original 
components (expected outputs); testing with partners and with a panel of users in close collaboration with WP4. 
Deliverables 
D3.1 Alpha release of the MyToolBox e-platform M15 
D3.2 Guidelines on optimal, cost -effective schemes for monitoring mycotoxin contamination and 
synthesis of available GAP, GMP guidelines and HACCP protocols for mycotoxin management in 
small grain cereals, maize and figs  
M24 
D3.3 Forecasting models (for vario us combinations of mycotoxins/crops) for optimal harvest timing and 
use of (bio)fungicides  
M40 
D3.4 Report on trials with the DSS platform in different silos systems in different regions (including China) 
by post-harvest grain/nut managers 
M40 
D3.5 Tested and validated web -based MyToolBox platform for integrated mycotoxin management and 
decision support tool kit for all actors in the chains of small grain cereals, maize and figs available 
M48 
 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 45 
 
Work package No.  WP4 Start date or starting event M15 
Work package title Practical Implementation and Contribution to Standard Setting 
Participant No. 2 5 6 10 11 13 16 17 23 
Participant short 
name 
DLO-
RIKILT 
FLI BARILLA HORTA BFR WU BIOMIN ASAG CAAS-FRI 
PM per participant 2 15 4 1 13 18 2.5 8 12 
Objectives  
The objectives of WP4 are focussed on ensuring that the proposed interventions to reduce levels of mycotoxins are 
acceptable to end -users, barriers to implementation are overcome and that the MyToolBox is user -friendly and 
meets user expectatio ns. Implications from the project results, in terms of standard setting, will be exploited to 
improve industry competitiveness. 
O4.1 To evaluate the elements of the MyToolBox developed in WP1, WP2 and WP3 in terms of their practical 
viability for different end-users and their performance in terms of preventing and reducing levels of 
mycotoxins.  
O4.2 To evaluate the application of the MyToolBox  project (individual measures  and web -based 
MyToolBox platform) for mycotoxin control over the entire chain, given the variation in risk behaviour of 
actors along the chain 
O4.3 To develop recommendations to increase compliance  for control and prevention throughout the entire 
chain including the use of incentives. 
O4.4 To anticipate legislative implications of project outputs (MyToolBox) and work with relevant bodies 
such as EFSA and DG Santé for standard setting. 
O4.5 To establish the performance of mycotoxin -detoxifying feed additives under local conditions in China in 
order to enable standard settings in China for au thorisation of these feed additives , and thereby 
improve market access. 
Description of work (broken down into tasks), and role of participants 
T4.1  Evaluation of the developed MyToolBox e-platform at an end user’s level (M18-M48) 
Lead FLI 13 PM Partners: BARILLA 4PM; DLO-RIKILT 1PM; HORTA 1PM; ASAG 8PM 
Essential to the ‘MyToolBox’ project is the principle of maximum involvement of end -users within each WP at 
early developmental stages, to ensure that proposed tools (interventions) are viable in practice a nd are likely to be 
attractive for ultimate implementation. The interactions with end-users has already started while setting up the 
proposal and will continue at the start of the project. This close cooperation  will be part of an iterative process 
orchestrated by partner 5 (FLI) to ensure that developments in the project MyToolBox are consistently realistic in 
terms of practical viability and also reflect to perceived requirements of end -users. The design of the  MyToolBox e-
platform itself (essentially a dissemination vehicle) cannot wait until all the individual tools have been developed and 
optimised, but will be conceptualised at an early stage. During conceptualisation of the MyToolBox e-platform, 
views will be sought from a variety of end -users through the use of Focus groups, which will feed into WP3 as 
an aid to improved design. The tools will range from generic advice encompassed in GAP and HACCP, through to 
practical measures which can only be tested and evaluated after substantial changes to existing practices and 
capital investment (use of alternatives to conventional fungicides, biocontrol measures, improved sorting, changes in 
milling of grain, changes in the baking processes). The individual measures will be evaluated in different ways 
(mostly face-to-face interviews and use of questionnaires) with end -users and stakeholder groups at relevant points 
in the food chain and in different countries. Questionnaires and a structured format for interviews will  be 
developed by partner 5 (FLI), but in close collaboration with partner 13 (WU) to ensure adequate coverage of socio-
economic aspects and also ensuring that the feedback covers areas of interest specifically raised by individual 
partners in WP1, WP2 and WP3. T4.1 will include examination of the potential for the exploitation of the DSS 
system developed in WP2 as an effective integrated management tool for the stored grain industry post -harvest for 
minimizing mycotoxins present during downstream processing. In T4.1 partner 6 (BARILLA) will operate as a food 
industry end-user providing contacts  inside the company both internationally and at various stages of the food 
processing chain, partner 3 (ICC) will facilitate interactions internationally with end -users in the cereal industry as 
well as facilitating training indicated in WP5. Partner 21 (TARIS) will provide feedback specifically as a dried fruit 
end-user. Partner 17 ( ASAG) will facilitate Interactions with end -users in China  which will include China Gra in 
Reserves Corporation, Hebei Baoding Qinghuaxufeng Grain and Oil Co. Ltd and Hualong (Rushan) Foodstuffs 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 46 
Enterprise CO., Ltd. the latter who will act as a peanut production end -user. Both partners 15 and 17 will assist with 
language translation with end-users as appropriate. The assessment of the MyToolBox measures including the 
web-based platform will be conducted continuously on  an on-going basis, feeding into T4.2 to aid the socio -
economic analysis, which in turn will feed into WP3. The prototype ‘MyTo olBox’ after refinement will be finally re -
evaluated with a range of end-users including some involved in early-stage evaluations. 
 
T4.2 Socio-Economic and Stakeholder Analysis (M12-M48) 
Lead WU 18PM; Partners: DLO-RIKILT 1PM 
T4.2 will analyse how the risk  behaviour of individual actors along a supply chain can affect the cost -
effectiveness of proposed control and prevention measures . This study will use a principal -agent approach in 
the stochastic estimation of the cost and benefits/effectiveness of the in dividual actors as well as of the whole chain 
(by simulation studies), given the defined interventions. As the cost -effectiveness of mycotoxin interventions in the 
chain depend on the uptake level of the various actors (= principal agent problem), it is of  importance to have an 
estimation on the expected uptake level as well as insight in the factors that will drive the level of uptake (based on 
output of T4.1 in combination with in depth questionnaires). These insights provide the window of opportunities w ith 
respect to the development of incentive mechanisms aimed "to induce the supplier to apply measures as the buyer 
requests" in an attempt to optimise chain control. Key elements of incentive mechanisms will be identified  by a 
literature review on actual and theoretical incentive mechanisms (e.g., quality premiums, discounts, tournaments, 
production contracts, regulation) aimed at food quality and food safety control. Relevant incentive mechanisms will 
subsequently be evaluated for their expected impact on  costs and benefits/effectiveness by the use of simulation 
studies. Based on these study results, recommendations will be developed to stimulate the uptake of interventions 
throughout the chain. 
T4.3 Legislation and Standard Setting for foods (M36-48) 
Lead BFR 13PM; Partners: FLI 1PM 
T4.3 will focus on analysis of the actual regulated maximum levels of (selected) mycotoxins  in food, at first 
instance Regulation (EC) No 1881/2006, Directive 2002/32/EC, Commission Recommendation 2006/576/EC) in 
view of the un derlying processing factors and potential transfer rates. Undertaking a compliance assessment of 
maximum levels in the feed/food chain for selected examples (data evaluation/modelling) which will lead to 
identification of points to be changed in legislatio n/ standards in order to implement the MyToolBox  e-platform 
and analysis/discussion of benefits and drawbacks and making regulatory impact assessment (Month 12 -48). After 
development of risk-based assessments, meetings will be sought with relevant EU policy -makers in EFSA and DG 
Santé to discuss legislative implications. A minimum of 3 meetings are envisaged between months 36-48.  
T4.4 Standard Setting for Feed Additives (M6-M47) 
Lead FLI 1PM; Partners: BIOMIN 2.5PM; CAAS-FRI 12PM 
T4.4 aims to contribute to the standard settings for authorisation of mycotoxin -detoxifying feed additives in 
China aided by the expertise of stakeholder FEFANA in cooperation with CAAS -FRI and the Chinese Ministry of 
Agriculture (MOA). To this end, feeding trials to evaluate the efficacy of mycotoxin detoxifying feed additives in 
target species are crucial. In the last decade, the focus of such in vivo studies has shifted from the sole assessment 
of performance data to the determination of specific mycotoxin biomarkers in biological matrices of exposed 
animals. The latter allows the demons tration of an increased excretion/reduced deposition of mycotoxins and 
therefore represents an important aspect for the registration of mycotoxin detoxifying feed additives from the EU.  
The efficacy of feed additives to reduce the absorption of dietary aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) in dairy cows (M6-M15) and 
absorption of dietary fumonisin B1 (FB1) in pigs (M15-M24) will be investigated with in-vivo experiments conducted 
at the research facilities of the Feed Research Institute at CAAS (CAAS-FRI) under local conditions in China. The 
feeding trial will be performed according to Commission Regulation (EC) No 429/2008 of 25 April 2008 on the 
preparation and the presentation of applications and the assessment and the authorisation of feed additives . (a) Based 
on these guidelines a 4x4 Latin square design  will be applied , and dairy cows will receive four treatment (control 
diet, AFB1 contaminated diet, AFB1 contaminated diet [preferably naturally contaminated material will be employed] 
supplemented with an EU authorised feed additive, AFB1 contaminated diet supplemented with a local feed 
additive). Due to the absence of respective official or advisory limits in China, maximum dietary mycotoxin 
concentrations (aflatoxin B 1, AFB 1; fumonisin B 1, FB 1) will be  set on the basis of Directive 2002/32/EC and 
Commission Recommendation 2006/576/EC. Used animal numbers will be defined by statistical sample size 
calculations. Aflatoxin M1 concentration in milk will be quantified by a validated LC -MS/MS method to evalua te the 
efficacy of the feed additives. In addition, hematological, immunological and performance parameters will be 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 47 
assessed. (b) In a randomised block design, weaned piglets will be assigned to four treatment groups (control diet, 
FB1 contaminated diet, F B1 contaminated diet supplement with an EU authorised feed additive, FB1 contaminated 
diet supplemented with a local feed additive). Mainly, the sphinganine to sphingosine ratio in serum will be 
evaluated by LC -MS/MS. In addition, FB1 and hydrolysed FB1 (H FB1) levels in serum and faeces as well as 
haematological, immunological and performance criteria will be determined.  
Based on these feeding trials and in cooperation with CAAS -FRI and MOA, we aim to contribute to the standard 
settings for authori sation of mycotoxin -detoxifying feed additives  in China . Current guidelines (e.g. from 
EFSA) for the registration of detoxifying feed additives in the European Union will serve as examples for possible 
adaptions of Chinese legislation. Our activities shall help European producers of mycotoxin-degrading feed additives 
to gain broader access to the Chinese market as well as to contribute to an improvement of Chinese 
legislation. 
Deliverables 
D4.1 Report providing end-user feedback to WP1, WP2 and WP3 partners on preliminary assessment 
of proposed interventions and initial MyToolBox e-platform design 
M18 
D4.2 Report on preliminary end user evaluation of MyToolBox for application to cereal industries and to 
the feed supply chain and alternative uses of contaminated commodities  
M34 
D4.3 Report on standard-setting implications of animal feeding trials with detoxifiers conducted in China  M36 
D4.4 Report setting out basis for establishing processing factors for mycotoxins based on transfer rates 
and overview of end-users assessment of final version of MyToolBox 
M45 
D4.5 Report covering socio-economic impact of MyToolBox including recommendations for incentives  M45 
D4.6 Report with recommendations to regulators resulting from mycotoxin reduction strategies 
developed in MyToolBox  
M47 
 
Work package No.  WP5 Start date or starting event M1 
Work package title Exploitation, Dissemination and Communication 
Participant No. 01 03 08 15 17 Other core 
partners 
All other 
partners 
Participant short name BOKU ICC IRIS CAAS-
IAPPST 
ASAG   
PM per participant        
Objectives: 
O5.1 To disseminate information about the project and its results to >5000 actors and stakeholders along the 
food supply chain , to opinion leaders/regulators, the media, professionals working in agriculture and food 
manufacture, educators, and other multipliers, food and drink industries (including SMEs), consumer 
organisations, the scientific community and the general public. 
O5.2 To facilitate collaboration, information exchange and interaction between different actors  and 
organisations involved in the control and management of mycotoxins in the food supply chain through the 
presentation o f MyToolBox at international conferences (~8) and workshops and the organisation of 4 
webinars and 4 training sessions for end user. 
O5.3 To develop exploitation plans, including a business model , to ensure the use of the project outputs 
among the farming and industry end users (including farmers and food processors), opinion leaders, decision 
makers, etc. and to establish and verify a robust business model for the MyToolBox platform. 
 O5.4 To strengthen international cooperation in research and innovation for mycotoxins and to ensure a 
sustainable dialogue with China. 
Description of work 
T5.1 Knowledge Management Activities (M1-M48) 
Leader: IRIS  Partners: All partners will play a role.  
The strategy for knowledge management and protection that is discussed in Section 2.2 will be implemented, 
whereby all knowledge that is generated during the project will be assessed for its novelty  and to enable the 
most appropriate IPR strategy to be def ined. All patentable items of the project results will be patented by the 
owner or joint owner(s) of the results. Internal expertise in relation to patent applications within the consortium will 
be mobilized under the leadership of the IPR Manager from IRI S. In keeping with the rules outlined in Section 2.2 in 
relation to IPR ownership and access rights, which will also be agreed in the Consortium Agreement , the IPR 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 48 
Manager will work closely with the knowledge holders to assist in fulfilment of the IPR rule s, as well as negotiating 
any additional agreements (e.g. Joint Ownership Agreements) as necessary in line with developments as they 
unfold. At M24, a Knowledge Management report will be produced and the status of IP protection and any Joint 
Ownership agreements will be reported (D5.5).  
T5.2 Data management (M1-M48) 
Leader: BOKU  Partners: IRIS. All partners will play a role.  
A Data Management Plan (DMP) will be delivered at Month 6, following the H2020 Guidelines. This plan and 
includes the participation in the Pilot Open Access Research Data Scheme  (D5.2) and will serve as a blueprint 
for guiding all the partners in sound data management procedures and will outline: which data will be generated by 
the project; data standards and quality assu rance measures; how data will be exploited and shared; copyright and 
intellectual property rights of data; data storage and back-up measures; data management roles and responsibilities. 
The DMP will be co -developed by the Coordinator and IRIS with the supp ort of the WP leaders, followed by a 
contribution by all partners involved in the activities. 
T5.3 Communication activities and multi-actor engagement 
This task will ensure the communication activities defined in Section 2.2c are built upon, implemented and their 
impact continually assessed to ensure they are effective in informing, engaging, create awareness and promoting 
information about the MyToolBox project, its aims, its funding source, its outputs and impacts to our target 
audiences. This task is divided into the following subtasks:  
T5.3.1 Communication planning, implementation and reporting (M1-M48) 
Leader: ICC Partners: IRIS will support heavily with their marketing team, which includes digital marketing 
professionals. All partners will contribute by performing communication activities. 
A Communication plan (D5.3) will be developed  (building on the preliminary outline discuss ed in Section 2.2 b), 
and appropriate activities will be implemented. Key messages and target audiences as well as appropriate tools and 
channels (as mass media, social/digital media, demos, pilots, posters, brochures, newsletters and EU dissemination 
resources such as the EU Horizon Magazine) to meet the needs of the target audiences will be developed at the 
beginning of the project and updated throughout. This will seek to ensure media interest and coverage from the 
outset of the project right through, an d beyond the project’s completion. IRIS will lead the branding and brand 
development strategy in consultation with all the partners. The communication plan will be implemented and all 
activities will be reported in D5.6. 
T5.3.2 MyToolBox identity, website and promotional materials (M1-M48) 
Leader: ICC; Partners: IRIS, BOKU + all partners will contribute inputs, ideas and expertise. 
The project website  (D5.1) will be available at the following domain, which has already been registered  
www.mytoolbox.eu . It will be built and maintained by ICC and it will follow the common graphic theme developed 
by IRIS for all project communications, including the project logo and visual theme in order to build a strong brand 
awareness for MyToolBox. ICC takes care of hosting the site during the project and a plan will be in place for 
maintenance of the site after the project’s end (defined from T5.5.2). The public part will be actively maintained by 
ICC. It will consist of well-presented non-confidential project information including project concept, its partners, 
core objectives, work areas, project vi deos and expected impacts. Post -project, the relevant public information and 
results will remain available on this site.  
Project leaflets, posters, newsletters and other promotional materials such as project videos, brochures, etc. will be 
produced in order to support project communication and dissemination efforts. These materials will be reported and 
annexed to the Communication Report (D5.6). 
T5.3.3 Multi-actor engagement (M1-M48) 
Leader: ICC; Partners: CAAS-IASSPT; ASAG M; All partners  
Maximum involvement of end -users within each WP of MyToolBox will be established at early developmental 
stages, to ensure that proposed tools (interventions) are viable in practice and are attractive for ultimate 
implementation as described in WP4. The impact of MyToolBox will be maximise d through connecting to ICCs 
world-wide network of associations, cooperatives and industrial partners in the agro -food & feed area in WP5, to 
establish a direct global dialogue with end-users including those from China.  The EU-China-Mycotoxin Forum will 
be established as a dialogue platform between China and the EU to provide building -blocks for further EU -China 
dialogue across a wider range of food safety topics. It will be chaired by Prof. Yang (China) and the MyToolBox 
coordinator Prof. Krska (EU) and co-chaired and supported by ICCs current president Prof. Fengcheng Wang 
who also serves as director of the Research Center for Cereal, Oil and Food of the Stat e Grain Administration of 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 49 
China. This Forum will be reported in Final Plan for the dissemination and exploitation of the project’s results (D5.6). 
The Advisory Board, which is composed of policy makers, scientists and stakeholder from the industry, will ensure 
active involvement of key stakeholders and scientific experts to support strategic project deci sion making and finally 
Standards development and policy advice for “Better Future Regulations” as described in WP4.  Exchanges will be 
mobilised with other networks, such as the International Society for Mycotoxicology and the Society for 
Mycotoxin Research as well as with projects in similar areas and synergies will be used. The activities performed 
in relation to multi-actor engagement will be reported in the Communication Report in D5.6.  
T5.4 Dissemination to a wide audience (M6-M48) 
Leader: ICC; Partners: IRIS and all partners will be involved in actively disseminating the project 
results 
The project partners will disseminate the project results and the newly developed tools as defined in the 
communication plan and with participation in conferenc es (~8) and organisation of workshops (~4), etc. – targeting 
the relevant stakeholder audiences and multi -actors, including the research community, SME and industry, policy 
makers, interest groups as well as the general public (D5.7). The final project meeting will be organised in 
conjunction with an internationally established mycotoxin conference such as the IUPAC or ISM conference 
on mycotoxins, which has already been chaired twice by the MyToolBox Coordinator. A satellite workshop  (D5.9) 
organised by ICC will enable the wrap up of the project, to disseminate new findings and to demonstrate the newly 
developed tools, and to outline a Roadmap for a future research and cooperation agenda. 
In keeping with H2020 guidelines, partners will also publish their work in peer reviewed publications. 
T5.5 Preparation for the post-project use of the results 
We will perform a structured series of activities to gear up for the future exploitation and deployment of the project 
results in the crop and food industry value chains and in the global market. The following subtasks have been 
planned: 
T5.5.1 Business and exploitation plans (M6-M48) 
Leader: IRIS;  Partners: All partners will be involved in planning how they will exploit their results. 
As discussed in Section 2 .2b, the proposed exploitation routes for the project results are : a) Commercial 
exploitation, whereby we will use the results in the production and commercialisation of a new technologies, tools 
and services for the global markets; b) Further research - especially in the context of research required for the 
transfer of the developed technologies to other applications; c) standardisation activities - for securing 
standardisation of the MyToolBox technologies and for improving food and feed safety standards th rough improved 
mycotoxin management. 
We will assess, by means of multi -actor interaction and feedback, the sustainability and implementation possibilities 
of the newly developed tools in business cases. We will also assess the potential use, impact and policy implications 
of the new findings and newly developed tools (which will be linked with WP4). We will plan the transition and up -
scaling of innovations based on project results. Linking in with T5.1, IPR issues will be assessed, as will open 
access possibilities, patent and/or commercialization of products and services for sustainability of project results. 
Business plans will be developed for outputs that show high potential for sustainability  and/or 
commercialisation, such as the use of the MyToolBox pl atform for the development of data services, as well as the 
silo monitoring solution from WP2 as a new product, whereby IRIS will perform an up -to-date market analysis of the 
current market offering in relation to grain silo monitoring solutions, as well a s to define the Unique Selling Points 
(USPs) for positioning of our DSS platform in the market. IRIS will draw up a business plan for the exploitation of the 
DSS system as an effective integrated management tool for the stored grain industry post -harvest for minimizing 
mycotoxins present during downstream processing. Plans for future research or spin -off projects will also be 
elaborated. Post-project dissemination activities will also be planned in order to ensure continuity and outreach 
of the projects activities and results to the target audience. This will ensure the non-confidential results and our post-
project developments continue to reach a wide audience post -project. Drafts of these plans will be included in the 
Interim ‘Plan for the dissemination and exploitation of the project’s results’ and final versions in the Final Plan at M48 
(D5.4 and D5.6 respectively).  
T5.5.2 Technology Watch & Links with other Relevant Research Projects (M1-M48) 
Leader: IRIS;  Partners: BOKU. All partners will contribute to technology watch actions.  
This work will take account of any relevant past or on -going research activities from the literature and at EU 
and national level. A preliminary table (table 3) of projects has been provided in  Section 1.3 and additional relevant 
projects from H2020, FP7, FP6, Eurostars, LIFE, MANUNET, and national projects etc. will be identified and their 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 50 
compatibility to link into MyToolBox will be analysed. This action will be on -going throughout the project  to 
ensure that relevant research developments from third parties, along with technological developments and 
innovations, are identified analysed and, if relevant, their results can be built on in the project. The partners will aim 
to mobilise joint activi ties and manage synergies with relevant research projects. A “Technology Watch” repository 
will be populated and will be periodically updated with new literature, articles and reports resulting from this on-going 
task. Major relevant findings will also be documented in a dedicated section of the ‘Plans for the dissemination and 
exploitation of the project’s results’ (D5.4 and D5.6) and their impact on the future industry adoption of the project 
outputs will be analysed.  
T5.6 Training activities (M12-M48) 
Leader: ICC Partners: CAAS ; All partners will assist in the preparation of the training activities 
Specific topical and regional training workshops  (at least 4) will be organised, to ensure that there is sufficient 
knowledge transfer opportunity during the project. Each workshop will be organised by ICC in a different country and 
will focus on different aspects of MyToolBox (e.g. biocontrol of maize in Serbia and real time post-harvest monitoring 
of grains in China). Ideally, these meetings will be organised in conjunction with a Project Management Board 
Meeting or a Steering Committee Meeting. The training, in which up to 50 participants and especially end users , 
including farmers, can  participate, will focus on the operational and wider socio -economic benefits of the newly 
developed tools. Four webinars will be offered to support the interaction with, and the training of actors of concern, 
as well as providing demonstration activities of newly developed tools. The training activities will be reported in D5.7. 
Deliverables 
D5.1 Project website- public website available at www.mytoolbox.eu  M4 
D5.2 Data management plan- standard plan following the H2020 guidelines M6 
D5.3 Initial Communication Plan- written report M6 
D5.4 Interim Plan for the dissemination and exploitation of the project’s results - written report with initial 
Business Plans annexed 
M24 
D5.5 Knowledge Management Report- written report  M36 
D5.6 Final Plan for the dissemination and exploitation of the project’s results (with Communication 
report annexed) - written report with all dissemination and communications materials, articles in 
magazines, etc. a nd final Business plans annexed, along with a report on the EU -China 
Mycotoxin-Forum). 
M48 
D5.7 Report on Training activities (with materials annexed) M48 
D5.8 Satellite workshop at final conference- Proceedings from the final conference M48 
 
Work package number WP6 Start date or starting event: M1 
Work package title Coordination and project management  
Participant number 1 2 3 
Short name of participant BOKU DLO-RIKILT ICC 
PM per participant: 29 5 2 
Objectives 
The objectives of WP6 are the overall scientific and managerial coordination of the MyToolBox -project. WP6 will be 
involved in aligning the outcomes of the work packages to ensure the sustainability of the developed decision support 
system MyToolBox. WP6 will also deal with the financial, administrative, and  ethical management of the MyToolBox-
project. Key is time- and cost-efficient implementation of the work plan. 
O6.1 To provide leadership, project management and effective scientific, administrative and technical 
coordination to ensure MyToolBox delivers h igh quality outputs in an appropriate and timely manner and 
within budget. 
O6.2 To provide and apply methodologies for effective coordination of all project activities and maintenance of 
contact with EC representatives. 
O6.3 To undertake quality assessment of project progress, results and impact. 
O6.4 To achieve timely submission of progress reports and cost statements to the commission. 
O6.5 To ensure the Description of Action (DoA) and the Consortium Agreement are maintained. 
O6.6 To create a project management intranet for inter-consortium sharing of information, databases and project 
knowledge management. 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 51 
Description of work (broken down into tasks), and role of participants 
T6.1 Coordination 
Lead: BOKU 10PM  Partners: DLO-RIKILT 3PM 
The coordination task concerns the overall coordination of the technological and scientific developments within the 
different WPs to ensure alignment of the developed products and scientific findings. The Project Coordinator  
(BOKU) is responsible for conta ct with the EU representative to communicate all results, scientific and financial, and 
related issues. The Coordinator (BOKU) will be assisted by a Project Manager (BOKU) and a Scientific Manager 
(Deputy Coordinator from DLO-RIKILT). 
The Coordinator and Scientific Manager will monitor the project progress and risks with the Project Management 
Board (PMB) every 6 months and with the Project Steering Committee (PSC)  (see T6.3) every 12 months and at 
ad hoc  meetings when necessary (task T6.6). The Project Man ager will assist the Coordinator in administrative 
issues related to reporting and finance. The Project Manager is responsible for the timely delivery of draft scientific 
and financial reports to the Project Coordinator. The Scientific Manager will monitor the progress of the milestones 
and deliverables as agreed upon in the work plan and will (pre)review all project reports.  
T6.2 Financial management 
Lead: BOKU 6PM  Partners: All partners 
BOKU is responsible for the financial management of the project and for the timely distribution of funds to partners 
from the EC payments. It will present payment procedures and financial reporting aspects during the kick-off meeting. 
It will provide excel-templates and guidance to all partners for preparing the formal financial reports . It will 
also prepare and submit the financial reports to the EC. All consortium members are responsible for delivering their 
financial reports to BOKU complete and in -time. The Coordinator keeps records of the financial management, and 
informs the EC on any necessary financial transfers. 
T6.3 Decision making, conflict management 
Lead: BOKU 2PM 
Each WP is led by one of the partners (WP leader) with a deputy WP leader from a d ifferent partner. This will ensure 
focus on the work that is agreed upon. The WP leaders take the routine decisions, communicate those with the 
Coordinator, monitor progress of output according to the work plan, and prepare all documents and 
documentations for their WP. The decision-making body  will be the Project Steering Committee , with 1 
representative from each partner organisation and chaired by the Coordinator  (see details of composition in section 
3.2), each partner has a vote and the ability to steer the project. Major strategic decisions will be made by the 
Steering Committee, such as  change of scope, IPR related decisions, conflicts, budget related decisions, etc.  First 
line of day -to-day decision making will be up to the Project Management Boa rd whose membership will comprise 
the Coordinator and the WP leaders. M atters of a strategic nature are floated to the Project Steering Committee and 
will aim to be accompanied by a recommendation from the Project Management Board. 
The Project Coordinator will handle any cases of fraud, unethical behaviour, and breach of procedures, however, 
such incidences are expected to be highly unlikely. The Project Coordinator will distribute a list of decisions to be 
taken to all participants prior to each meeting. P artners may request in writing for additional topics to be discussed, 
and the updated agenda is distributed before the meeting. All meetings are documented, including the outcome of all 
decisions and distributed to all partners.  
T6.4 Organisation of reporting to the EC 
Lead: BOKU; 6PM  Partners: DLO-RIKILT 2PM; All other partners; 
BOKU, the Project Coordinator, will present reporting procedures during the kick -off meeting . The Project 
Coordinator will provide templates for the formal reports and updates during the course of the project when 
necessary. The Project Coordinator will prepare a brief 6 month report  and distributes it to all participants. Formal 
project reports will be prepared by the Coordinator in keeping with the contractual reportin g periods stipulated in the 
Grant Agreement. The Coordinator will present this formal report, including finance, IPR, ethics, and gender issues to 
the EC on time (and during formal review meetings as proposed by the EC). The Coordinator will also prepare a  brief 
non-confidential version of the formal report for public access on the website. 
T6.5 Day-to-day management (Internet, helpdesk and back-office) 
Lead: BOKU 1PM  ICC: 2PM 
ICC, who will be building the project website  (www.mytoolbox.eu) in WP5, will also build a secure project 
intranet (D6.2) utilizing an open -source content management system with common web technology, such as HTML 
5. This secure internet will be employed for all project internal communications  and will only be  accessible by 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 52 
consortium members. Different access levels will be incorporated based on user roles. It will provide tools for 
knowledge management, the development of databases and the mycotoxin control MyToolBox, to share preliminary 
results and internal documents amongst partners, to discuss and edit pre -publication documents and deliverables. 
This intranet will be maintained by BOKU . S hared documents, contact data, templates, agreements and links to 
official guidelines for reference and  reports and conclusions of meetings will be stored on the  password protected 
part of the website which will be maintained by BOKU. 
T6.6 Organisation of consortium meetings (incl. telephone/video-conferences, web meetings) 
Lead: BOKU 2PM 
A kick-off meeting for all project partners including the Steering Committee (and the Project Management Board as 
part of the Committee), the Advisory Board and representatives from the EC will be organised by the Coordinator 
(BOKU. The back-office of BOKU will take care of all aspects of the consortium meetings, as presented in paragraph 
3.2, such as agenda, invitations, preparation of materials (hand -outs, programmes, etc.), organisation of rooms and 
equipment, catering and dissemination activities to the consortium in coo peration with the host of the meeting, i.e. 
typically the location of one of the WP leaders. BOKU will also organi se and host all consortium telephone/video -
conferences (regular according to schedule, and on demand). In total 5 Steering Committee  meetings (the 
second will be organised in China) , 4 additional Project Management Board  meetings and several ad -hoc 
meetings, depending on the needs, will be organised. 2 plenary meetings will be organised in conjunction with an 
end user meeting organised by partne r 3 (ICC). The minutes of all meetings will be delivered in a timely manner by 
the Project Coordinator (D6.1) 
T6.7 Maintenance of all legal agreements 
Lead: BOKU 2PM 
All partners will sign a Consortium Agreement, with detailed matters on access to know -how, intellectual property 
ownership, and liability in line with the information contained in Section 2.2b as the starting point. During the kick -off 
meeting all contractual requirements on the Grant Agreement will be reviewed with all the partners to ensure that all 
partners recap on their commitments. 
All partners must report issues relevant to the legal agreements to the Coordinato r in a timely manner. The 
Coordinator will decide on how to proceed with any deviation and will inform the Project Officer. 
Deliverables 
D6.1 Minutes from KO, PMB and PSC meetings (M1 and thereafter)- confidential meetings of each 
meeting 
M1-M48 
D6.2 MyToolBox Intranet management tool- secure collaboration platform for project management, 
document repository and internal communication.  
M2 
 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 53 
The development of the web -based MyToolBox platform in interaction with the other WP activities is depicted in  the 
Pert Diagram below (figure 4): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Pert Diagram (GAP - Good Agricultural Practice; CCP-Critical Control Point; DSS-Decision Support System; 
GMP-Good Manufacturing Practice) 
 
 
 
Table 3.1b: List of Work packages 
WP 
No 
Work Package Title Lead Participant Persons 
Months 
Start 
Month 
End 
Month No Short 
1 Pre-harvest reduction strategies 04/RTD HAU  M1 M40 
2 Post-Harvest Reduction Strategies 06/IND BARILLA  M1 M42 
3 Integrated MyToolBox e-platform for 
mycotoxin management (prevention, control 
and monitoring) 
02/RTD DLO-RIKILT  M1 M48 
4 Practical Implementation and Contribution to 
Standard Setting 
05/SME FLI  M6 M48 
5 Exploitation, Dissemination and 
Communication 
08/SME ICC  M1 M48 
6 Coordination and project management 01/RTD BOKU  M1 M48 
       
 

 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 54 
Table 3.1c: List of Deliverables55 
Delive-
rable 
Nr 
Deliverable name Work 
package 
number 
Short 
name lead 
participant 
Type56 
 
Dissemi
nation 
Level 
Delivery 
date 
D1.1 Pre-selection completed of the most 
promising  
a) biopesticides, b) cultural control agents 
and methods and c) atoxigenic Aspergillus 
strains in consultation with end users and 
Advisory Board 
WP1 HAU R PU M16 
D1.2 Guidelines for biopesticide use to reduce 
mycotoxins in European cereals  
WP1 HAU R PU M40 
D1.3 Guidelines for cultural control of mycotoxins 
in European cereals through management of 
crop debris  
WP1 HAU R PU M40 
D1.4 Guidelines for resistant cultivars to reduce 
mycotoxins in European maize  
WP1 UNS R PU M40 
D1.5 Guidelines for use of atoxigenic biocontrol to 
reduce mycotoxins in European maize  
WP1 UNS R PU M40 
D2.1 ATEX compliant sensor system for 
measurement of CO2/RH/Temp in required 
sensitivity range  
WP2 IRIS DEM CO M18 
D2.2 Final assessment of systems utilising 
mycotoxin degrading enzymes/microbes 
during biogas and bioethanol production 
WP2 BOKU R CO M24 
D2.3 Integrated sensor platform for 
CO2/RH/Temperature real time 
measurement including option for 
downloading of information by farm store 
managers  
WP2 IRIS DEM CO M36 
D2.4 Final assessment of newly developed sorting 
technology for figs  
WP2 FLI R PU M36 
D2.5 Guidelines for effective grains 
micronization/wet extraction milling 
procedures 
WP2 BARILLA R PU M36 
D2.6 Report on the presence of mycotoxins and 
all their modified forms that are formed 
during food processing  
WP2 BOKU R PU M42 
D3.1 Alpha release of the MyToolBox e-platform WP3 IRIS DEM PU M15 
D3.2 Guidelines on optimal, cost-effective 
schemes for monitoring mycotoxin 
contamination and synthesis of available 
GAP, GMP guidelines and HACCP protocols 
for mycotoxin management in small grain 
cereals, maize and figs for use in WP3 
WP3 CRANFIELD R PU M24 
D3.3 Forecasting models (for various 
combinations of mycotoxins/crops) for 
optimal harvest timing and use of 
(bio)fungicides  
WP3 DLO-RIKILT R PU M40 
D3.4 Report on trials with the DSS platform in WP3 CRANFIELD R PU M40 
                                                        
55 If your action taking part in the Pilot on Open Research Data, you must include a data management plan as a distinct deliverable within the first 6 months of the project. 
This deliverable will evolve during the lifetime of the project in order to present the status of the project's reflections on data management. A template for such a plan 
is available on the Participant Portal (Guide on Data Management). 
56 Type: R: Report; DEM: Demonstration, prototype, pilot; DEC: Websites, patents, press & media action; Other: Software, technical diagram 
 Dissemination level: PU: Public, fully open; CO: Confidential, restricted; CI: Classified; information as referred to in Commission Decision 2001/844/EC 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 55 
Delive-
rable 
Nr 
Deliverable name Work 
package 
number 
Short 
name lead 
participant 
Type56 
 
Dissemi
nation 
Level 
Delivery 
date 
different silos systems in different regions 
(including China) by post-harvest grain/nut 
managers 
D3.5 Tested and validated web-based MyToolBox 
platform for integrated mycotoxin 
management and decision support toolkit for 
all actors in the chains of small grain cereals, 
maize and figs available 
WP3 HORTA Other 
(soft-
ware) 
CO/PU M48 
D4.1  Report providing end-user feedback to WP1, 
WP2 and WP3 partners on preliminary 
assessment of proposed interventions and 
initial MyToolBox e-platform design  
WP4 FLI R PU M18 
D4.2 Report on preliminary end user evaluation of 
MyToolBox for application to cereal 
industries and to the feed supply chain and 
alternative uses of contaminated 
commodities  
WP4 FLI R PU M34 
D4.3 Report on standard-setting implications of 
animal feeding trials with detoxifiers 
conducted in China  
WP4 FLI R PU M36 
D4.4 Report setting out basis for establishing 
processing factors for mycotoxins based on 
transfer rates and overview of end-users 
assessment of final version of MyToolBox 
WP4 FLI R PU M45 
D4.5 Report covering socio-economic impact of 
MyToolBox including recommendations for 
incentives  
WP4 WU R PU M45 
D4.6 Report with recommendations to regulators 
resulting from mycotoxin reduction strategies 
developed in MyToolBox  
WP4 BFR R PU M47 
D5.1 Project website WP5 ICC DEC PU M4 
D5.2 Data management plan WP5 BOKU R PU M6 
D5.3 Initial Communication Plan WP5 ICC  R PU M6 
D5.4 Interim Plan for the dissemination and 
exploitation of the project’s results  
WP5 ICC R PU M24 
D5.5 Knowledge Management Report  WP5 IRIS R CO M36 
D5.6 Final Plan for the dissemination and 
exploitation of the project’s results (with 
Communication report annexed) 
WP5 ICC R PU M48 
D5.7 Report on Training activities (with materials 
annexed) 
WP5 ICC R, 
DEC 
PU M48 
D5.8 Satellite workshop at final conference WP5 ICC OTHE
R 
PU M48 
D6.1 Minutes from KO, MB and PSC meetings WP6 BOKU OTHE
R 
CO M1-M48 
D6.2 MyToolBox Intranet management tool  WP6 ICC DEC CO M2 
 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 56
3.2 Management structure and procedures 
Management structure 
Project Management Organisation structure and decision making procedures 
The coordination tasks defined in WP6 concern the overall coordination of the technological and scientific 
developments within the different WPs to ensure alignment of the d eveloped products and scientific findings. The 
Coordinator, Prof. Rudolf Krska (BOKU), will be responsible for the robust coordination of the MyToolBox consortium 
and ensuring that the project is within scope, is delivered on time, within budget and to a high quality to ensure impact. 
Prof. Krska is a well-renowned and well -respected academic from the mycotoxin field globally. Prof. Dr. Krska is 
currently the world -wide most cited mycotoxin expert of the last decade, has been involved in many 
international projects and has been successful co-founder of two spin -off companies of his university.  He is 
an ideal figure to lead such a flagship project and he also has the organisation and leadership skill -sets to effectively 
perform this role, which is demonstrated through is role as the Head of the Department of Agrobio technology at BOKU 
with a team of 180 researchers under his leadership. Prof. Krska will also be responsible for communicating all results, 
scientific and financial, and related issues with the EU representative. 
The Coordinator will be assisted by a  Project Manager and a Scientific Manager (Deputy Coordinator) from RIKILT. 
The Project Manager will assist the Coordinator in administrative issues related to reporting and finance. The highly 
experienced project manager Dr Kurt Brunner (BOKU) will be responsible for the timely delivery of draft scientific and 
financial reports to the Coordinator. The Scientific Manager Monique de Nijs (DLO-RIKILT) will monitor the progress of 
the milestones (see table 3.2a) and deliverables (see table 3.1c) and will ( pre-)review all project reports. The 
Researcher Manager will also consult the Project Coordinator  especially in case immediate feedback is required. The 
Dissemination Manager will be responsible for leading the consortium in further planning and implementation of the project 
communication and dissemination activities, and ensuring the project reaches out to different audiences in the most 
effective way . The IPR Manager (Dr Mir ta Pinilla, IRIS)  will be r esponsible for knowledge management within the 
consortium. Will lead the consortium in protecting the project results where appropriate, and in maintaining confidentiality of 
the results until the IP is protected to safeguard the  innovation impacts. Mirta has vast experience in relation to knowledge 
management in collaborative projects. She has experience of leading patent applications, open access publications, etc. in 
past projects. 
Each WP is led by a WP leader who take routine decisions communicate those with the Coordinator, monitor progress 
of output and budget according to the work plan, and prepare all documents related to their WP. 
Table 3.2a: List of Milestones 
No. Milestone name Related 
WP(s) 
Estim. 
date 
Means of verification 
M1.1 Selection of a) biopesticides for Fusarium head 
blight experiments, b) crop debris treatments, c) 
brassica species for biofumigation studies, d) 
maize cultivars for aflatoxin resistance 
experiments and e) of atoxigenic Aspergillus 
strains completed 
WP1 M3 List (names) available of the selected 
biopesticide products, crop debris 
treatments, brassica species, maize 
cultivars and of appropriate 
atoxigenic Aspergillus strains 
M1.2 Field experiments in years 2 and 3 to optimise the 
selected a) biopesticides, b) crop debris 
treatments & c) biofumigation and to d) validate 
cultivar resistance environmental stability and e) 
quantify biocontrol efficacy, host genotype and 
environment stability completed 
WP1 M30 Results of year 2 & 3 years field 
experiments statistical analysed and 
reported including translation to crop 
management advises provided to 
MyToolBox 
M2.1 Infra-red regions for CO 2 sensing in different grain 
types selected and boundary temperature x 
moisture content models for growth and mycotoxin 
production in wheat/barley/oats and peanuts 
optimised 
WP2 M12 IR-wavenumber-region available and 
start of prototype testing 
M2.2 Performance of mycotoxin -degrading organisms 
and enzymes during the fermentation of 
contaminated wheat and maize at laboratory scale 
evaluated  
WP2 M15 Organisms and enzymes and 
fermentation parameters to achieve 
best performance at biofuel 
production at l ab-scale and 
guidelines provided to MyToolBox 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 57 
No. Milestone name Related 
WP(s) 
Estim. 
date 
Means of verification 
M2.3 Testing pre -milling and innovative milling 
strategies in pilot plants completed 
WP2 M22 Data Collection from pilot plant trials 
for achieved mycotoxin reduction in 
wheat batches available. including 
translation to advise on safe use 
options provided to MyToolBox 
M2.4 Prototype of an automated sorting system for dried 
figs and other commodities such as apricots and 
pistachios ready to be assessed by end-users 
WP2 M30 Feedback from end users (see also 
WP3) 
M3.1 Overview of available GAP, GMP and HACCP 
protocols for small grain cereals, maize and dried 
figs and on forecasting models including plans for 
their further extension  
WP3 M10 Presentation, discussion and further 
decisions at Steering Committee 
Meeting 
M3.2 Integrated platform completed for testing in end 
user silos for post-harvest managers  
WP3 M36 Platform implemented in several silos 
for testing 
M4.1 Completion of MyToolBox end-user assessment of 
α-version of MyToolBox 
WP4 M24 Written feedback provided to WP3 
M4.2 Feed additives studies with cows and pigs 
undertaken in China completed 
WP4 M24 The efficacy of feed additives to 
reduce the absorption of dietary 
aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) in dairy cows and 
to reduce the absorption of dietary 
fumonisin B1 (FB1) in pigs under 
local conditions in China is known 
and reported 
M4.3 Completion of MyToolBox end-user assessment of 
prototype version of MyToolBox and completion of 
cost-effectiveness assessment of proposed 
interventions from MyToolBox and feedback of 
proposed incentives to relevant partners 
WP4 M36 Feedback provided to WP3 and 
written recommendations to WP3 
M5.1 The project IP is being protected as appropriate 
and robust business, exploitation and 
dissemination strategies to indicate post-project 
impacts 
WP5 M36 Means of verification: IRP register 
 
Two project management bodies  are envisaged: The Project Management Board, which is an executive 
management body of the project, and the Project Steering Committee, which is the strategic steering and decision 
making body.  
Day-to-day decision making  will be the responsibility of the Project Management Board  (PMB), chaired by the 
Coordinator, whose membership will comprise the Coordinator (chair), Scientific Manager (Deputy Coordinator) , 
Project manager  and WP leaders . The Project Management Board  will meet as frequently as required with a 
minimum of every 6 months. In general, occasions will be sought to combine activities to minimise travel costs.  
The decision-making body on major strategic decisions  will be the Project Steering Committee  (PSC), chaired 
by the Coordinator,  whereby each partner organisation will appoint one representative  and will include the 
Coordinator (chair), the Scientific Manager, the Project Manager, the IPR Manager (Dr Mirta Pinilla, IRIS) and the 
Dissemination Manager  (Dr Michaela Pichler, ICC) as well as the Deputy WP -leaders (WP1: Prof Ferenc Bagi, 
UNS; WP2: Prof. Naresh Magan, CRANFIELD; WP3: Dr Vittorio Rossi, HORTA; WP4: Dr Carsten Fauhl -Hassek, BfR; 
WP5: Dr Ine van der Fels -Klerx, DLO-RIKLIT; WP6: Dr Monique de N ijs, DLO-RIKILT). Each partner is assigned one 
vote to ensure a democratically run project (2/3 majority voting). Major strategic decisions will be made by the Project 
Steering Committee, such as  change of scope, IPR related decisions, conflicts, budget re lated decisions, etc.  All 
matters of a strategic nature will be floated to the Steering Committee and will aim to be accompanied by a 
recommendation from the Project Management Board. The PSC suggests refocusing of research directions, proposes 
the publication plan and decides on conflicting issues such as prioritizing samples in case of a temporary breakdown 
or other contingency situation and subsequent mitigating actions (see table 3.2b). The Project Steering Committee will 
meet once per year.  
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 58 
In addition, a voluntary Advisory Board has been established that will provide guidance and advice to the consortium 
through its international experts in themes of high relevance for the project. To this end, the Advisory Board (AB) of 
MyToolBox involves policy makers (table 7), scientific advisors (table 8), and stakeholders (table 9). The Advisory 
Board will provide an important mechanism not only for providing guidance on the Project Steering Committee, but 
also for dissemination to their membership an d most importantly on the needs of the end users. The Advisory Board 
will contribute particularly to activities in WP4 (Practical Implementation) and WP5 (Dissemination), which are both 
outward-facing project activities. It is noteworthy that the Advisory Board is a voluntary body. The Advisory Board will 
sign a confidentiality agreement with the Coordinator in order to safeguard the confidential aspects of the project that 
they might be exposed to. The members of the Advisory Board will have no decision ma king capacity in the project. 
The AB will meet three times with the PSC. 
In addition to policy makers, the AB includes renowned scientists in the area of mycotoxin reduction from t wo other 
continents, i.e. the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)  and the Nelson Mandela African Institution of 
Science and Technology. It also consists of external stakeholders represented by the European Breakfast Cereal 
Association (CEEREAL), the European Farmers & European Agri -Cooperatives ( COPA-COGECA), the Europe an 
Feed Technology Center (EUFETEC), the European Feed Manufacturer’s Federation (FEFAC), the EU Association of 
Specialty Feed Ingredients and their Mixtures (FEFANA), the DLG group, one of Europe's biggest exporters of seed, 
feed and milling grain , the International Nut and Dried Fruit Council (INC) and the Global Food Safety Partnership  
(GFSP), a unique public -private initiative dedicated to improving the safety of food in middle -income and developing 
countries. All these organisations have already expressed their willingness to join the Advisory Board (LOIs available, 
see Annex) should the MyToolBox project be selected for funding. These stakeholders will provide additional ‘reality -
checks’ from the outset of the project and will also function as a forum for ensuring that the actions have ‘end -user’ 
support.  
 
Table 7: Policy members of the Advisory Board (AB) 
 Short name Full name 
1 DG Sante EU Health and Food Safety 
2 FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
3 EFSA European Food Safety Authority 
4 MAO Chinese Ministry of Agriculture, Division of Feed (Hongyang Wei) 
 
Table 8: Scientific advisors in the Advisory Board  
 Representatives name Full name 
1 Peter Cotty, USA USDA 
2 Martin E. Kymania, Tanzania The Nelson Mandela African Institution of Science and Technology 
 
Table 9: Stakeholder members of the Advisory Board  
 Short name Full name Mission 
1 CEEREAL European Breakfast Cereal 
Association 
CEEREAL represents the breakfast cereal and oat milling 
industries towards the European Union and its institutions, industry 
and consumer associations as well as consumers. 
2 Copa Cogeca European Farmers & 
European Agri-Cooperatives 
The united voice of farmers and their co-operatives in the 
European Union 
3 EUFETEC European Feed Technology 
Center 
The EUFETEC mission is to support feed sector-bound and 
sector-steered technological innovation 
4 FEFAC European Feed 
Manufacturer’s Federation  
Represent, defend and promote the interests of the European 
compound feed industry to the European Institutions; 
5 FEFANA EU Association of Specialty 
Feed Ingredients and their 
Mixtures 
FEFANA (EU Association of Specialty Feed Ingredients and their 
Mixtures) is the organization representing the interests of the 
specialty ingredients industry that enter the food chain via feed, 
whether produced in Europe or imported from third countries. 
Manufacturers and traders of feed additives, functional feed 
ingredients, premixes and other mixtures of specialty ingredients 
are amongst our member companies. 
6 DLG DLG group, Denmark The DLG Group is one of the largest agricultural companies in 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 59 
Europe and is currently owned by 30,000 Danish farmers. 
7 INC International Nut and Dried 
Fruit Council 
The INC is the International source for information on nuts and 
dried fruits for Health, Nutrition, Food Safety, Statistics, 
Government Standards and Government regulations regarding 
trade barriers and trade quality standards. 
8 GFSP Global Food Safety 
Partnership 
The World Bank´s Global Food Safety Partnership is a unique 
public-private initiative dedicated to improving the safety of food in 
middle-income and developing countries. It brings together 
farmers, business and industry, governments, regulatory bodies, 
international development organizations, and civil society to drive a 
globally-coordinated and locally-driven food safety approach. 
 
The overall organisational structure for management of the project and the relationship between the EC, Project 
Coordinator, Project Management Board, Project Steering Committee and the Advisory Board is shown in Figure 5.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 - Management structure for MyToolBox 
 
Meetings 
There will be nine face -to-face meeting points in the project during which one or several groups meet (Meetings are 
indicated in the GANTT Chart). 
The first of nine Project Management Board (PMB) meetings will take place during the Kick-off meeting (M1). BOKU 
will present the decision-making and financial procedures and will put the corresponding documentation on the internal 
website. The other eight PMB meetings will take place in months M6, M12, M18, M24, M30, M36, M42. 
Comprehensive progress reports a nd plans for the next 4 -6 months will be presented by the WP leaders. These 
meetings serve to solve practical and scientific issues of non -strategic nature and to discuss immediate actions to be 
taken case milestones or deliverables cannot be delivered on time. 
The five Project Steering Committee (PSC) meetings will take place during the kick-off meeting in M1 and in months 
M12, M24, M36 and M48. At the PSC meetings, major strategic decisions are made, the progress of the entire project 
is discussed in deta il in cooperation with the Advisory Board (see below) and plans for the next 12 months are 
reported. The Project Steering Committee will verify that the project meets both deliverable and milestone targets. If 
there is a major decision point in a WP which could affect the scope of the work for example, the issue will be brought 

 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 60 
first to the Project Management Board and then to the Project Steering Committee for decision making. The Project 
Steering Committee will have an agenda which covers at least the fol lowing points: i) Update of progress against 
implementation plan; ii) Update on next stage of implementation; iii) Financial issues; iv) Contractual issues; v) 
Intellectual property issues; vi) Update on meetings with DG Research and other stakeholders; vi i) Gender 
implementation plan; viii) Dissemination of project results 
The Advisory Board (AB) meetings will take place in months M1, M24 and M48. I n addition, annual teleconferences 
after year 1 (M12) and 3 (M36) will be organised between the Project Steering Committee and the Advisory Board. 
Each meeting will be held at the location of one of the WP leaders. The host will provide meeting rooms, lunches and 
one formal dinner for all attendants. The meeting in Month 12 will be held in China. The meeting s in months M36 and 
M48 where the stakeholders will be present will be organised by ICC. 
Teleconferencing will be used to address specific issues that might arise during the project or where specific 
decisions are required. WP leaders will also need to hol d separate ad-hoc meetings of those partners involved in 
activities, and again these will be combined wherever possible with other meetings. 
The Coordinator will chair each meeting and will produce written minutes of each meeting, which shall be the formal  
record of all decisions taken. Minutes of each meeting will be distributed by e-mail to all project partners within a week.  
All Project Management Board Members and Project Steering Committee members can suggest topics for the meeting 
agenda.  
Additionally, it is expected that WP leaders could be invited to specific stakeholder association meetings to describe 
specific commodity related aspects of the project. The Agenda will be a mixture of progress reports from WPs where 
there are non -confidential scien tific and innovation achievements to report and items generated by the Project 
Steering Committee that require end-user input. 
Reporting Procedures 
In addition to formal deliverables identified in table 3.1c, WP leaders will provide the Coordinator with 6 monthly and 
annual internal progress reports as follows:  
- 6 monthly reports summarising progress on milestones and deliverables, reporting any unexpected results and 
future strategies 
- 12 monthly report reporting on progress, highlighting any planning issues and also providing a summary of financial 
resources for the WP 
The internal reports will feed into the Contractual reports required by the Grant Agreement.  
In addition, all partners will contribute to the formal project progress reports and will submit formal financial statements 
as appropriate in line with the requirements of the Grant Agreement. Communication amongst the consortium will be 
enabled through a secure section of the MyToolBox website (by passwor d access), which will also serve as a 
structured repository for project documents and will be the main project platform for internal exchange of information.  
Appropriateness of the organisational structure and decision-making mechanisms  
This large consor tium includes pan-European and cross-continental members that has a remit to address a pressing 
societal challenge in a 48 month work plan through the delivery of a series of ambitious scientific and technological 
advances and ensuring high impact. To this end, we are confident that a core project management unit made up of the 
Coordinator, Scientific Manager and Project Manager, each with key roles and responsibilities is a realistic and robust 
approach. As this core unit will be supported by the Project M anagement Board, is sufficient decentralised leadership 
to enable this ambitious project highly manageable. In the interest of a democratic and inclusive project for all 
partners, the existence of a Project Steering Committee that can focus of the strategi c direction of the project will 
ensure that all partners have a voice in how the project is run and all are afforded an opportunity to steer the project 
ensuring it delivers impacts for all partners and for the wider stakeholder communities (through extern al engagements 
and interaction with a highly relevant and influential Advisory Board).  
Innovation Management 
As MyToolBox is focussed at delivering innovations that will lead to real changes in agricultural and food processing 
practices, it is critical that the MyToolBox partners from the academia and industry are strongly linked to ‘end-users’.  
As such, innovation Management is firmly embedded in all aspects of our project. Importantly, the development of 
MyToolBox will be done in close interaction with the end-user stakeholders. On the one hand this is achieved through 
the inclusion of five end-user partners in the MyToolBox project. While these five SME and large industries will have 
direct practical involvement in the project by providing access to facilities and providing materials, ultimate success will 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 61 
require uptake by much larger sections of the agricultural community and the food industry. To this end, in addition to 
collaboration with our end -user partners, engagement with a wider community of end -users from beyond the 
consortium will be mobilised, whereby they will be afforded the opportunity to provide their detailed user aims and 
requirements that will feed into an d have an influence on the design and development of the MyToolBox e -platform. 
They will also be afforded the opportunity to be involved in testing its various iterations so that continuous feedback 
loops from the users to the development teams are establi shed. The first alpha version of MyToolBox will available for 
feedback on use by stakeholders (M15) in WP4. Subsequent iterations of the beta platform will also be tested by them 
so that they can provide their feedback so that a fully operational and debug ged version of the platform can be 
deployed in the latter stages of the project (WP3). This will ensure there is an effective innovation cycle to our project, 
where the end -user and stakeholders are central to the development to ensure a market and user -centric approach. 
Cross-cutting activities in our project such as Knowledge/IPR management, business and exploitation planning are all 
central to Innovation Management.  
Risk management 
During the project we will systematically analyse and manage risks that could jeopardise the implementation of the 
project, its scientific and technological outcomes, as well risks in relation to IPR, or the ability to deliver the projects 
innovation and long term impact. The tasks and the organisational structure were analyse d for their specific risks per 
WP. The severity of each risk was analysed and a plan for a solution was suggested. In case a risk does happen, the 
partner will immediately inform the work package leader who will inform the Coordinator. The Coordinator will  directly 
inform the EU representative. Solutions will be discussed between the coordinator, the WP leader and the partner and 
proposed to the EU representative and only be implemented after discussion with and written approval of the EU 
representative. Co nsequences for distribution of budget will be identified and agreed upon with EU representative 
before the implementation of the proposed solution. 
At proposal stage, a number of critical risks have been identified and discussed in table 3.2b below including details on 
risk mitigation action to be taken. 
Table 3.2b: Critical risks for implementation 
Risk 
nr. 
Description of risk WP (s) 
involved 
Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
R1.1 Field experiment crop failure (e.g. poor 
crop establishment due to adverse 
environmental conditions) 
WP1 Multiple experiments conducted in multiple years and 
environments reduce impact of individual crop failure in 
single year/environment. 
R1.2 Lack of efficacy of biopesticides 
against Fusarium or inconsistency of 
biopesticides between environments 
WP1 Screen large number and diverse range of biopesticides 
including some with preliminary data showing efficacy.  
Screen within various environments in UK and Norway. 
Output maybe environment specific and identify most 
suitable biopesticides for Northern and Central Europe 
R1.3 Lack of efficacy of crop residue 
management against Fusarium or 
Inconsistency in efficacy of crop 
residue management between 
environments 
WP1 Multiple strategies to be investigated including some with 
preliminary data showing efficacy 
Due to environmental condition this can be expected and 
using different strategies (competition for residues and 
biofumigation) will overcome this 
R1.4 Lack of aflatoxin resistance within 
European maize genotypes tested 
WP1 Large number of genotypes will be screened and known 
differences within two traits (drought tolerance and 
maturity class), key to aflatoxin resistance, are known  
R1.5 Lack of efficacy of atoxigenic 
biocontrol against aflatoxin 
WP1 Atoxigenic biocontrol to reduce aflatoxin has been 
successfully developed in America, Africa and Asia. This 
is application of proven technology will be implemented 
with the aid of International Experts from each of these 
continents 
R1.6 Complexity of matrices beyond those 
validated for quantitative multi-target 
analysis may cause significant signal 
suppression in LC-MS/MS analysis 
WP1, 
WP2 
Apply 13C-labelled internal standards and clean-up 
strategies for major mycotoxins to correct for matrix 
effects; severity sensitivity and accuracy of the method by 
regular participation in international ring-trials. 
R2.1 Lack of conformity between integration 
of abiotic/biotic data and process-
WP2 This technical risk will be mitigated re-analysing all output 
information and exploiting new variables. 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 62 
Risk 
nr. 
Description of risk WP (s) 
involved 
Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
engineering solutions within integrated 
management system. 
R2.2 Technical failure to apply the 
screening model to diversified raw 
materials characterized by different 
properties 
WP2 Evaluation of alternative screening parameters/properties 
not strictly related to hyperspectral imaging. 
R2.3 Failure to obtain the desired increase 
in yields according to pre-
milling/milling mycotoxin mitigation 
protocols 
WP2 Special measures (applications and instrumental 
conditions/parameters) will be newly set.  
R2.4 Identified and tested mitigation 
strategies (exploiting food processing 
effects) do not provide expected 
results in terms of percentage of 
mycotoxin reduction 
WP2 Special measures (applications and instrumental 
conditions/parameters) will be newly set. Further 
pilot/industrial trials will be designed to strengthen the 
predictive models. 
R2.5 Failure of the established degrading 
organisms related to biogas and 
bioethanol production. 
WP2 Partner BIOMIN is EU leader in the field. Test on different 
species/strains according to time/budget re-allocation. 
R2.6 Variable results obtained from animal 
feeding trials in China upon specific 
mycotoxin detoxifying feed additives 
due to inter-individual differences.  
WP2 A repetition of the experimental design could be set in 
order to reduce number of involved animals and inter-
individual variability. 
R2.7 Degradation / conjugation products of 
mycotoxins formed during thermal 
processing, cannot be 
chromatographically retained under 
applied LC-MS/MS conditions due to i) 
polarity, ii) covalent binding or iii) lack 
of standards 
WP2 Analytical method will be extended to i) hydrophilic 
interaction chromatography, ii) solvolysis will be applied 
with automated labelling and iii) synthesis of standards at 
BOKU from cell cultures 
R3.1 ZEN in wheat data available from only 
a few EU countries, or not linked to 
farm management 
WP3 ZEN will be included in current DON models only for 
those countries for which ZEN data is available, or using 
weather data only (not linked to farm management)  
R3.2 Available DON-wheat forecasting 
models from EU show bad fit for China 
WP3 Models will be re-parameterized for China 
R3.3 Pilot scale testing of post-harvest DSS 
shows no large differences (< 10-15 
%) between using and not using the 
DSS 
WP3 Further tests will be planned to confirm this and 
consultations will be made with testers in order to identify 
the value of using the DSS and to establish additional 
user requirements that should be met. 
R3.4 Few data on the same batch sampled / 
analysed in different ways is available 
WP3 Data from different batches will be used, and Monte Carlo 
simulations run to take account of variability and 
uncertainty 
R3.5 The MyToolBox e-platform fails to fulfil 
on usability and user experience 
WP3 The iterative development involving close engagement 
with target users (including farmers) will ensure any 
failures are quickly addressed in upcoming development 
sprints.  
R4.1 Poor response to consultations via 
questionnaires 
WP4 Increase level of telephone and face-to-face interviews to 
be conducted 
R4.2 End-users indicate severe motivational 
barriers to implementation of 
interventions despite possible 
incentives or provide adverse 
feedback from end-users from 
stakeholder focus groups on practical 
viability of implementation of measures 
WP4 Seek compromises with WP leaders (WP1, WP2 and 
WP3) to find means to accommodate end-user concerns 
R4.3 Interventions in WP2 do not achieve WP4 The wider potential impact of improved understanding the 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 63 
Risk 
nr. 
Description of risk WP (s) 
involved 
Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
sufficient reductions in mycotoxin 
levels to justify changes in regulatory 
limits 
effects of processing factors on limits for processed foods 
will explored with regulators. 
R4.4 Results from in-vivo experiments in 
China with cows and pigs with feed 
additives are inconsistent with EU data 
WP4 Facilitate meeting between EU and CAAS-FRI 
researchers to identify and reconcile differences in data 
interpretation– if necessary repeat experiments 
R4.5 Failure to reach informal agreement on 
standards to be applied in China for 
testing feed additives 
WP4 Consider taking results from experiments in China to 
Codex to seek some form of arbitration. 
R5.1 Contrasting visions among different 
partners/stakeholders with regard to 
strategies, methodologies or 
intellectual property issues.  
WP5 Any conflicts will be managed by Management Board, 
assisted by the IPR Manager, in keeping with the 
information contained in Section 2.2b of this bid and in 
line with a previously signed Consortium Agreement in 
order to keep confidentiality requirements yet maintain 
effectiveness of the developed strategies and protocols. 
R5.2 The business model for the 
MyToolBox platform is unconvincing 
and will not lead to sustainable post-
project exploitation 
WP5 This will become apparent after an analysis of the 
business plans at Project Interim and the Project 
Management Board will propose a contingency Business 
model and consultations with external experts will be 
made if required.  
R6.1 Misunderstanding among partners (i.e. 
China/Europe). 
General  
(managed 
in WP6) 
Partner experiences in cross-cultured context. 
R6.2 Estimated resources (i.e. P/M) might 
not be sufficient. 
General  
(managed 
in WP6) 
Special measures with time (i.e. milestones/ deliverables) 
and budget re-allocation, if necessary. 
R6.3 Key personnel, scientists or laboratory 
personnel involved can no longer 
participate due to unforeseen changes 
in work due to food safety crises, 
illness, change of job or position or 
any other reasons  
General  
(managed 
in WP6) 
Key personnel will be quickly replaced with another 
similar profile, scientist or laboratory personnel with 
relevant expertise. The CV will be discussed with the 
coordinator for approval.  
R6.4 Unforeseen delays in the workplan 
due to the close connection among 
different sub/tasks 
General 
(managed 
in WP6) 
Re-scheduling of the affected parts will be immediately 
planned with the Management Board.
3.3 Consortium as a whole 
Description of the consortium 
The MyToolBox consortium con sists of leading experts from 23  partner organisations, 43% of which are from 
industry including farmers , who together have jointly developed the MyToolBox proposal. The consortium is 
founded on high quality scientific work and long experience in the proposed fields of innovation from the partners.  
The multi-actor partnership  in MyToolBox is exemplified by the involvement of five prominent end users  
representing the food industry (Barilla, Italy), food and crop energy (Südzucker, Germany), grain industry (AGRO LV, 
Ukraine with operations in Poland), fig industry (TARIS, Turkey) and the feed industry (D.O.O. Agrocentrum Becej  in 
Serbia, which also involves the farm of i ts owner ). Hence, through our consortium end users from the farming 
community, agronomists, actors along the food & feed supply chain, professionals working in agriculture and food 
manufacturing, along with policy partners, will collaborate closely with a group of 5 technology SMEs and with the 
partners from academia. This is a complete value chain of actors. MyToolBox has EU partners from Austria 
(Coordinator), the Netherlands, Germany, Great Britain, Spain and Italy, from associated countries of Norway, S erbia, 
Turkey and Ukraine (in cooperation with Poland) and three partners from China  (ASAG, CAAS -FRI and CAAS -
IAPPST) who are tightly connected with several end users representing the Chinese grain and peanut industry.  
The MyToolBox project will build on the positive achievements of the substantial EU -funded research previously 
conducted and mentioned before which dealt with mycotoxin contamination in the food and feed chain. Through the 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 64 
Project Advisory Board representing policy makers and seven Stakehold er associations from the European food and 
feed industry (see 3.2) valuable additional input will be provided especially in relation to the needs of end users all 
across Europe and beyond. 
Participation from outside EU 
Besides the strong involvement of our partners from the ‘Other Country’ China in line with recommendations from the 
call text (see below) , the MyToolBox consortium has strong linkages in research and innovation with many other 
national, European and international projects around the world. So me 40 countries are represented through the 
participation of ICC, mainly through governmental organisations, federal ministries, or national research institutions. 
The continents are also connected via linkage to the International Society for Mycotoxicology (ISM), of which the 
MyToolBox Coordinator is General Secretary. 
Through the Project Advisory Board , MyToolBox will receive valuable advice from outside the EU  including the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the Chinese Ministry of A griculture, Division of 
Feed (MOA) who have also confirmed their participation in the MyToolBox Advisory Board. Moreover, the Advisory 
Board will obtain scie ntific support through the involvement of renowned scientists in the area of mycotoxin reduction 
from two other continents, i.e. the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)  and the Nelson Mandela African 
Institution of Science and Technology. By con necting with USDA and its projects funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates 
Foundation, advice on the formulation and application of biological control agents (see WP1) will be provided.  
The involvement of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS -FRI and CAAS-IAPPST) and the Academy 
of State Administration of Grain (ASAG), MyToolBox allows to link to a number of ongoing research projects in 
China that deal with mycotoxin formation and its prevention and control in grains and cereals, as carried out in WP1 - 
3. By doing to, numerous Chinese universities, academies and end users who have either agreed to contribute to 
MyToolBox or will be willing to become part of the EU-China-Mycotoxin-Forum to be established in MyToolBox: 
- Academy of State Administration of Grain (ASAG)* 
- Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS) *  
• Feed Research Institute (CAAS-FRI)* 
• Institute of Agro-Products Processing Science and Technology (CAAS-IAPPST)* 
- Institute of Food Quality and Safety, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences 
- Department of Public Health, Chengdu Medical College  
- College of Light Industry and Food Sciences, South China University of Technology 
- Xihua University 
- Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
- Shandong Academy of Agricultural Science 
- China National Center For Food Safety Risk Assessment (CFSA) 
- Chinese Ministry of Agriculture, Division of Feed 
- Hebei Baoding Qinghuaxufeng Trade of Grains and Oil Co. Ltd. 
- China Grain Reserves Corporation 
- Hualong (Rushan) Foodstuffs Enterprise Co., Ltd. 
* MyToolBox partner 
In addition, the following Chinese institutions will be connected to MyToolBox and is EU -China-Mycotoxin-
Forum via Prof Liu Yang´s (CAAS-IAPPST), who is coordinator of numerous mycotoxin related projects in China: 
- Agricultural Resources and Regional Planning of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences 
- Beijing Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Bureau 
- China National Center for Food Safety Risk Assessment 
- Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University  
- Henan University of Technology  
- Huazhong Agricultural University 
- Institute of Plant Protection, Safety and Quality Institute of Agricultural Products of Anhui Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences 
- Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences  
- Jiangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences 
- Jinan University 
- Liaoning Technical University  
- Nanchang University 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 65 
- Northwest Agriculture & Forestry University 
- Oil Crops Research Institute of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences  
- Jiangnan University 
- Nanjing Institute of Agricultural Mechanization of National Ministry of Agriculture 
- Nanjing Agricultural University  
- Peanut Research Institute of Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences 
- Qiqihar University  
- Sericulture & Agri-Food Research Institute of Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences 
- Shandong Agricultural University 
- Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences  
- Southwest University  
- Zhejiang University 
New relations and collaborations will be forged with other relevant projects over the course of the project with the view 
to maximising synergies and establishing an enduring scientific relationship with China. The EU -China partnerships 
established through MyToolBox will contribute to creating transparent supply chains for food and feed imported in the 
EU and exported to China, which will have far reaching implications for food safety and consumer confidence. 
Roles of each member, management and leadership 
The roles of each participant are described in the partner profiles.  MyToolBox will be  coordinated by BOKU (lead) 
The Coordinator Prof Dr Krska is the world -wide most cited mycotoxin expert of the last decade, has been involved in 
many international projects and is successful co -founder of two spin -off companies of his university. His expertise will 
be applied in leading the project and supervising the analytical work and metabolomics studies carried out in WP1 -2. 
Furthermore, Prof Dr Krska will play a key role in the relations with the Chinese partners thanks to his  distinguished  
professorship at CAAS; WP1 will be led by Partner HAU. Within WP1, HAU will contribute to the tasks on alternative 
chemical control and novel cultural control of Fusarium Head Blight in small grain cereals through the use of field 
experiments. BIOFORSK (SME) will participate in WP1 to identify treatments (chemical/biological) that can reduce the 
inoculum potential of Fusarium spp. on oat straw residues by aiding residue decomposition and/or directly targeting 
the pathogen. AXEB (SME) will provide commercial bio-pesticides as active ingredients for the screeni ng of products 
in field experiments in wheat (UK) and oat (Norway) in WP1 and will advise on the selection of alternative control 
products for Fusarium control in small grain cereals.  UNS will investigate the possibility of reduction of aflatoxins in 
maize through genetics (drought resistance, early maturity), and secondly finding the way of biocontrol for aflatoxins in 
maize in WP1. Agrocentrum (SME) will be responsible for providing field experiments at one locality in Serbia, near 
Bečej. It will assist U NS in WP1 during inoculation, infection assessments, harvest and storage of maize from field 
experiments to reduce aflatoxins in maize through genetics and through biocontrol.  AGRO LV (IND/End User)  will 
provide advice on end -user suitability of components  of the integrated mycotoxin management system developed in 
WP1 and will conduct demonstration trials of successful control strategies. 
Barilla (IND/End User)  will coordinate WP2 including the research into post -harvest measures including innovative 
milling strategies and the investigation of the effects of baking processing on mycotoxin levels. Cranfield will be 
involved in WP2 in relation to the development of real time monitori ng of biological activity in stored cereals and 
peanuts and in WP3 to provide a dynamic DSS tool for post -harvest grain storage managers. IRIS (SME) will work 
with Cranfield in the development of real time monitoring system for stored grains/peanuts (WP2),  and in planning the 
post-project exploitation pathways for the solution. In order to facilitate safe use options for contaminated cereal 
grains, mycotoxin degrading enzymes/microorganisms provided by BIOMIN (IND) will be evaluated in cooperation with 
BOKU for their efficacy during the biogas and bioethanol production. For the latter, Südzucker (IND/End User) , a 
sugar producing company, will be involved in WP2 as end user, to test the efficacy of these employed enzymes and 
microorganism in their industrial facilities, to minimize the mycotoxin content in the by -product dried distillers’ grain 
soluble (DDGS). 
SDU is another experienced partner in WP2 and will contribute to developing non -invasive screening and sorting 
systems for aflatoxin contaminated figs b y using NIR and VIS spectra. Finally, in WP2, TARIS (IND/End User) will 
contribute to the development of real -time fig sorting systems by providing consultancy to partner SDU who is the 
responsible partner for system development. TARIS will also be the res ponsible partner to announce the developed 
system to the other fig processing companies which are a member of TARIS fig Union.  
DLO-RIKILT will lead WP3 to develop, test and validate the web -based ICT MyToolBox platform. Moreover, DLO -
RIKILT will lead WP3 task related to forecasting optimal farm management and control, and optimization of mycotoxin 
monitoring. HORTA (SME) will lead the design and testing of MyToolBox and will contribute to WP3 task related to 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 66 
forecasting optimal farm management and control strategies. HORTA will also be involved in WP1 to perform field 
experiments to test different maize genotypes.  In WP3,  IRIS (SME)  will build the infrastructure for the web -based 
MyToolBox web-based cloud platform, and its mobile platforms. They will also t est and service the platform over the 
course of the project, and, together with HORTA they will plan a sustainable business model for the platform in WP5. 
FLI (SME) will provide leadership within WP4 and will interact with WP1, WP2 and particularly WP3 to ensure the 
involvement of end -users is maximised at all stages of development. As a standard setting authority,  BfR will 
contribute to WP4 by carrying out a scientific compliance assessment of maximum levels in the feed/food chain for 
selected examples whi ch will lead to an identification of points to be changed in legislation/standards in order to 
implement and apply the MyToolBox and analysis/discussion of benefits and drawbacks and making regulatory impact 
assessment. In WP4, WU will analyse how the risk  behaviour of individual actors along a supply chain can affect the 
cost-effectiveness of proposed control and prevention measured and will study the potential socio -economic impact of 
MyToolBox including recommendations for incentives.  
ICC (SME)  will act  as leader of WP5 and will implement tasks related to communication and dissemination of 
information about the project and its results to a wide audience and by multi -actor engagement in connection with a 
MyToolBox identity, website and promotional materia l. The development of effective exploitation plans and of a 
sustainable business model for the platform in WP5, as mentioned above, will be carried out by IRIS. 
With respect to the strong involvement of Chinese partners, the Institute of Agro -Products Processing Science and 
Technology (IAPPST) of CAAS will provide information and share experiences on the production, formulation, 
application, standardisation and long -term monitoring of biocontrol agents for peanuts and maize ( WP1). Prof Liu 
Yang, chief scientist within IAPPST is coordinator of numerous national projects which are dealing with the prevention, 
formation and detoxification of mycotoxins. I n cooperation with ICC, the International Society for Mycotoxicology and 
the Division of Mycotoxicology , Mycological Society of CAAS and the MyToolBox coordinator, Prof Yang  will be 
coordinating a network of knowledge  through the EU-China-Mycotoxin Forum between the institutions and 
stakeholders involved in the MyToolBox project including the Chinese institutions CAAS-IAPPST and CAAS -FRI and 
ASAG and their cooperation partners from the academia and industry  (WP5). Based on the guidelines established in 
the EU, in vivo experiments in dairy cows and pigs will be conducted at the research facilities of the Feed  Research 
Institute of CAAS  (CAAS-FRI), in order to assess the efficacy of mycotoxin detoxifying feed additives under local 
Chinese conditions ( WP4). In cooperation with several end users from China, ASAG, the second major Chinese 
partner within the MyTool Box consortium will provide access to its silos in four different provinces to install the real -
time sensors for the post -harvest monitoring of grains and peanuts to be developed in WP1. ASAG will facilitate 
collaboration with two end users from the Chines e grain industry in post -harvest monitoring, i.e. Hebei Baoding 
Qinghuaxufeng Trade of Grains and Oil Co. Ltd. and the China Grain Reserves Corporation, which owns most of the 
grains and closely cooperates with ASAG. In the field of peanuts, ASAG will faci litate collaboration with to Hualong 
(Rushan) Foodstuffs Enterprise Co., Ltd., the leading company of the Chinese peanut industry both in production and 
export. ASAG will also collaborate in development of forecasting models to predict potential fungal con tamination of 
small grain cereals at an early growth stage ( WP3). In this area ASAG will involve two end users, i.e. the farmers Luo 
Jiakui and Lin Qiyin who are located near Mingguang City in the Anhui province, where mostly wheat is grown. 
In short, this  is a very strong consortium that brings together relevant academic, industry and policy actors from the 
field of mycotoxins, food and feed production, food processing, ICTs, photonics, process engineering, standardization 
and consultancy, who are all stak eholders in the outcomes and the medium to long term impacts of this project. The 
consortium mobilises the necessary complementary scientific excellence, industry involvement , commercial 
ambition and regulatory insights to be able to effectively and sustai nably tackle a major societal challenge related to 
the biological contamination of crops and the food chain in the EU (including associated countries), China and beyond. 
Leadership 
One of the major strengths of the consortium is that it joins outstanding expertise covering all aspects of the call 
text. The partners are complementary to each other in several ways such as: 
 Prof Dr Krska is currently a leading expert in mycotoxin research world-wide (greatest number of citations in the 
last decade and greatest number of papers in the area of mycotoxins since 1961) and involved in many 
international projects. His expertise will be applied in leading the project and exploring the field of masked 
mycotoxins. Furthermore, Prof Dr Krska will play a key role in the relations with the Chinese partners thanks to his 
distinguished professorship at CAAS;  
 BOKU ( Coordinator) is highly experienced in project coordination and has all necessary administrative and 
financial tools available to perform this task. DLO-RIKILT) is a well experienced coordinator and deputy coordinator 
of many EU projects e.g. COLLAB4SAFETY, CONffIDENCE; NANODEFINE.Prof Dr Yang  (CCAS-IAPPST), Dr. 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 67 
Wang Jin Quan (CAAS -FRI) an d Dr Wang Songxue  (ASAG), are highly respected scientist in food and feed 
science in China. They lead internationally known research groups and will carry out research on forecasting, real-
time monitoring of grain silos and feeding trials in their institutions; 
 Dr. Schatzmayr, Dr. Suman, Mr. Gortva, Mr. Casals and Dr Klingeberg are well known experts from the private 
food and feed industry  whose expertise will be implemented in technical area’s as well as for advise on policy 
making; 
 AGRO LV, AGROCENTRUM and HAU are farmers and represent farmers , their immense expertise in crop 
management regarding mycotoxins will be implemented for the field trials but also for the translation of the 
scientific findings into applicable relevant and clear crop management advises; 
 IRIS, BIOFORSK and HORTA have vast experience in integrating relevant prediction models in e-platforms 
 DLO-RIKILT and BfR are internationally well known for their knowledge in the food safety area, with Dr. de Nijs as 
an expert in mycotoxins and Dr. Fauhl-Hassek in the field of risk assessment . The expertise of Dr de Nijs will be 
implemented as Scientific Manager. 
 FLI has considerable experience working with the food and feed industry as well as regulators.  FLI has got the  
ability to network with a wide range of end -users and to be flexible in working with the primary agricultural 
producers as well as processors at different stages in the chain and with different size organisations ranging from 
multi-nationals to SMEs.  
 Dissemination activities through press articles, articles in professional magazines, peer reviewed publications, 
exhitions and conferences, websites, social media and other dissemination channels , will ensure wide diffusion of 
the project results under the leadership of ICC who has got members in over 40 countries (and who will be heavily 
supported by IRIS). 
 CRANFIELD and UNS and SDU are leading knowledge institutes with access to fungal collections, sensor 
technologies. They will design, coordinate and evaluate field trials and prototypes of sensors; 
 Dr. van der Fels-Klerx and Dr. Mourits are leading experts in the area of bioeconomic modelling and their expertise 
will be used to maximise the acceptance of MyToolBox. 
 IRIS brings vast expertise in vanguard and widely accessible Information and Communication T echnologies, 
which are a fundamental practical vehicle for channelling the project results into practical decision support tools 
that can be used by farmers and professionals from the food and feed chains.