3.3 Consortium as a whole ......................................................................................... 62
3.4 Resources to be committed ..................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Table 3.4a: Summary of staff effort ..................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Table 3.4b: Other direct costs items (travel, equipment, other goods 
and services, large research infrastructureError! Bookmark not defined. 
 
 
 
  
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 3 
1. Excellence
1.1 Objectives  
Introduction 
The occurrence of fungal and subsequently, mycotoxin contamination in various crops is of major concern since it 
has significant implications for food and feed safety, food security and international trade. The EU produces yearly 
about 133 million tons (MT) wheat (~M€ 29038), 68 MT maize (~M€ 13571) and 8 MT oats (~M€ 1543)1,2. Results 
using latest state-of-the-art multi-analyte methods show that almost 100% of the crops is contaminated with one or 
more mycotoxins3. With annual losses due to mycotoxins estimated at 5 -10%, this equates to €1.2 -2.4 billion (Bn) in 
lost income for wheat alone, a reduction in these losses of only 1% wou ld save €12 -24 Mio. Moreover with ‘’one in 
eight persons worldwide suffering from chronic undernourishment’’ 4; there is clearly a moral obligation to curb these 
significant food and feed losses.  
Grain and foods based on these grain  (e.g. pasta, bread, bakery products) account for the largest contribution to 
mycotoxin exposure in all age classes of the EU population, in particular due to the mycotoxins produced by Fusarium 
spp. (deoxynivalenol [DON], T-2/HT-2 toxins, zearalenone [ ZEN], ochratoxin A [OTA] and fumonisins). Despite huge 
research investments prevention and control of these toxic secondary metabolites remain s difficult and the agriculture 
and food industries continue to be vulnerable to problems of contamination: In February–March 2013 Romania, Serbia 
and Croatia, reported aflatoxin M 1 contamination of milk. Severe droughts in Serbia in 2012 resulted in 70% of the 
maize crop being contaminated with aflatoxins 5. Use of this maize to feed dairy cattle led to the high levels of  
aflatoxin M1 in milk, up to twice the EU legal limit. The milk scandal was fuelled when the permitted level of aflatoxin 
M1 in milk in Serbia was temporarily raised to 0.5 µg/kg milk, 10 times the EU legal limit. In recent years, a dramatic 
increase in DON contamination in Nordic countries  has been observed. The Norwegian Scientific Committee for 
Food Safety concluded in a study published in 2013 that “ The estimated mean and high (95 -percentile) exposures to 
DON ...were in the range of, or exceeded the T DI by almost 2 times in 1 -year-old infants and 2-year-old children 
and up to 3.5 times  in years with high DON levels which has been especially true for oat based products 6. On the 
other hand the catastrophic floods and the rainy summer in 2014 resulted in low levels of aflatoxin B1 with high levels 
of DON. Obviously, extreme weather conditions as a result of  climate change is increasingly affecting the mycotoxin 
map in Europe and also world-wide. In 2013 the EU’s RASFF7 (Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed) showed that of 
the total rejections at the EU borders, 18.7% were due to mycotoxin contamination exceeding the EU legislative  
limits8. The RASFF notification system also reveals that among the susceptible fruit imported into the EU, the 
commodity with th e highest risk for aflatoxin contamination  was dried figs. In addition, over the last five years 
RASFF reported 292 alerts relating to aflatoxin levels exceeding legal limits in peanuts imported from China. 
Exposure of livestock to mycotoxins may lead to substantial economic losses (Wu & Munkvold 2008) 9. While 
mycotoxicoses in agricultural animals are regularly reported (Jovanović et al. 2015)10, it is difficult to get an accurate 
estimate of the burden of market loss associated with animal health and produ ctivity, and loss of animal feed. 
However, several publications from different parts of the world provide some insight into the potential magnitude of the 
problem. In the USA, Vardon et al. (2003)11 estimated a loss of 225 million US$ per annum for feed mai ze due to 
contamination with aflatoxins, and an additional loss of livestock of 4 million US$ per annum . Wu and 
Munkvold (2008) estimated the losses due to decreased weight gain in pigs resulting from fumonisin contamination of 
DDGS in the USA at 147 million US$ annually (20% DDGS in the diets and market penetration is 100%). A study 
                                                        
1 EUROSTAT, Selling prices of crop products (absolute prices) - annual price (from 2000 onwards). 
http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=apri_ap_crpouta&lang=en. 
2 EUROSTAT, Crops products - annual data. http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=apro_cpp_crop&lang=en. 
3 Berthiller F. et al. (2014) Developments in mycotoxin analysis: an update for 2012-2013. World Mycotoxin J 7: 3-33. 
4 Schmale III D.G. and Munkvold G.P. 2009. Mycotoxins in Crops: A Threat to Human and Domestic Animal Health. 
https://www.apsnet.org/edcenter/intropp/topics/Mycotoxins/Pages/EconomicImpact.aspx,  
5 http://www.allaboutfeed.net/Process-Management/Feed-Safety/2013/3/EU-Aflatoxin-contaminated-feed-1196477W/ 
6 VKM, Risk assessment of mycotoxins in cereal grain in Norway. Norwegian Scientific Committee for Food Safety (VKM) http://www.vkm.no/dav/eee04d10c4.pdf, 2013 
7 EU (2014) The Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed 2013. Annual Report. RASFF 2013: p. 45. 
8 http://www.allaboutfeed.net/Process-Management/Feed-Safety/2014/7/Mycotoxin-alerts-in-EU-have-gone-down-1568614W/ 
9 Wu F. & Munkvold GP. 2008. Mycotoxins in ethanol co-products: Modeling economic impacts on the livestock industry and management strategies. J Agric Food Chem. 
56: 3900-3911. 
10 Jovanović M. et al. 2015. An outbreak of fumonisin toxicosis in horses in Serbia. World Mycotoxin J. Accepted for publication, DOI 10.3920/WMJ2014.  
11 Vardon PJ. et al. 2003. Potential economic costs of mycotoxins in the United Sates. CAST report: Mycotoxins; Risks in Plant, Animal and Human Systems. Task Force 
Report no. 139, CAST, Ames, Iowa. USA 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 4 
conducted in Thailand (Lubulwa et al. 2015)12 revealed that aflatoxins in maize can be expected to cause losses for 
the livestock sector between 7 and 110 million US$ per annum.  These estimates, though limited to aflatoxin and 
fumonisin in 2 countries only, show that on a worldwide basis and taking account of other commodities and other 
mycotoxins as well, the losses in the livestock sector will be multiple. 
There is a pressing n eed to mobilise the wealth of knowledge that exists from the mycotoxin research in Europe and 
internationally conducted over the past 25 -30 years and to perform cutting -edge research where knowledge gaps still 
exist. This knowledge needs to be integrated into practical and affordable tools that can be used by farmers and 
food processors along the chain in order to reduce the risk of mycotoxin contamination of crops, feed and food, to 
prevent losses and waste along the food chain, and to provide traceability  information to the supply chain and 
consumers using mainstream ICT technology. Exisiting knowledge combined with novel findings need to be adapted 
and integrated to provide the vehicle needed to practically implement this knowledge into tools for use along the chain: 
this is the mission of the MyToolBox project.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1- Overview of the MyToolBox project approach  
                                                        
12 Lubulwa GAS. et al. 2015. Estimating the burden of market loss due to aflatoxins in maize: methods and estimates for Thailand. World Mycotoxin J.  In press, DOI 
10.3920/WMJ2014.1836 

 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 5 
Objectives 
The overall objective of the MyToolBox project is to develop a series of integrated measures, which will enable a 
significant reduction in losses of crops due to fungal and mycotoxin contamination. Depending on the commodity 
and the type of intervention, the achievable reduction s range from 20-90%. MyToolBox will not only pursue a field -to-
fork approach along the food and feed chain , but will also consider safe use options of mycotoxin contaminated 
batches such as microbial energy conversion to efficiently produce biogas and bioethanol . The consideration of t he 
entire chain ( soil-field-crop-food processing -waste management -alternative energy)  to ensure food & feed 
security and safety within a sustainable economic environment, is a major motivation behind MyToolBox.  The project 
will specifically address biological contamination from fungal infection and subsequent events leading to the formation 
of mycotoxins. The innovative pre - and post-harvest interventions resulting from the research undertaken within the 
MyToolBox project will build on and integrate the wealth of knowledge resulting from the substantial EU - and 
nationally and internationally funded research  previously conducted on mycotoxin prevention and control . Our 
goal will be to implement exisiting knowledge and novel findings and technologies developed in the MyToolBox project 
into a comprehensive series of tools and applications. These will provide the end users along the whole food and feed 
chain with the recommended measures for mycotoxin reduction an d will be accessible via a dynamic web -based 
MyToolBox e- platform (MyToolBox-figure 1). Information and decision support tools will be developed for each level of 
the chain and will be integrated into the ergonomic and secure web-based MyToolBox platform that will also be 
accessible over all mobile platforms. As such, the MyToolBox platform will guide the end user to the most effective 
measure(s) to reduce biological contamination in crops, and will  provide the necessary  intelligence to ensure these 
measures take into account the prevailing conditions such as geographical location, meteorological conditions, land -
use, crop management, storage and intended end use with relevance to specific crops. The mycotoxin commodity 
combinations that will be addressed a re the most prevalent Fusarium mycotoxins (DON, T-2/HT-2 toxins, ZEN and 
fumonisins) in wheat, oats, maize and animal feed chains, ochratoxin A in wheat and aflatoxins in maize, peanuts and 
dried f ruit (figs) . We have mobilised a comprehensive multi -actor approach behind a Pan -European-Sino effort 
towards reducing risk due to mycotoxin contamination in crops all along the feed and food chains, involving pre -
harvest interventions undertaken at farm level, together with post -harvest interventions undertaken from storage 
through to food processing into the finished food or feed product. Within this multi -actor approach partners from 
industry ( 43% of consortium) including 5 end users  from the farming community  (including individual farm ers), 
agronomists and professionals working in agriculture and food manufacturing have already been  involved in the 
project planning and  will collaborate closely with the Technology SMEs and partners from academia  at all 
stages of the various work packages.  
As demanded in the Call SFS -13-2015, the MyToolBox project will also anticipate legislative implications  of the 
project outputs and work with relevant bodies such as EFSA and DG Santé for standard setting. The project will also 
aim to develop a sound scientific basis for standard settings in China for authorisation of mycotoxin detoxi fying 
feed additives, and consequently improve market access of relevant EU products.  The variety of  complementary 
approaches to be pursued in the MyToolBox project address all the specific challenges mentioned in the EU-Call 
SFS-13-2015 and will increase the productivity and competitiveness of the EU -agri-food and feed sector whilst 
securing safe food crops at minimum mycotoxin leve ls. In order to achieve our overall objective, the following 
specific objectives will be fulfilled over the course of our 48-month project:  
Pre-harvest objectives 
 To implement alternatives to conventional fungicides (suitable for organic farming) for small grain cereals to 
achieve comparable or better performance to conventional fungicides in reducing levels of biological 
contamination and mycotoxins by 50% (WP1). 
 To integrate cultural control protocols targeting the  Fusarium inoculum within crop debris using 
biofumigation and accelerated biodegradation combined with minimum tillage (50% reduction, WP1) 
 To achieve a 70 -90% reduction of aflatoxin contamination in EU maize  through a) the selection and 
application of resistant plant cultivars in field conditions (70%) and b) the use of atoxigenic Aspergillus strains to 
outcompete toxigenic Aspergillus strains (90%) (WP1). 
 To develop forecasting models  to predict potential fungal contamination of small grain cereals at an early 
growth stage so that pre-emptive action can be taken to reduce both infection and mycotoxin formation (WP3). 
Post-harvest objectives 
 To develop real-time post-harvest environmental monitoring systems for storage of cereals and peanuts to 
facilitate effective integrated control of moulds and mycotoxins and provide an early warning of risks, enabling 
effective prevention/remedial actions to be implemented (WP2).  
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 6 
 To develop non-invasive real time sorting of dried fruit (figs)  for mycotoxins using visibl e and NIR spectral 
imaging and appropriate algorithms to achieve significant improvements compared to manual sorting with 5% or 
less probability of the batch average concentration of aflatoxin B1 failing to meet the EU limits (WP2). 
 To integrate novel down -stream processing approaches such as innovative (pre -)milling for accurate 
separation of grain tissues with different mycotoxin levels and to minimise the mycotoxin content in the final 
wheat based food products (up to 50% reduction) (WP2). 
 To develop novel baking procedures  at industrial scale  to reveal the thermal processing  factors which are 
relevant for the reduction of mycotoxins and the ir transformation into modified forms (incl. conjugated toxins) 
(WP2). 
 Utilising a novel generation of mycotoxin degrading enzymes for environmentally sustainable use of 
contaminated batches using fermentation technologies for the production of biofuels (bioethanol and biogas) 
(WP2). 
Throughout the food & feed chain 
 To design, build, test and validate an integrated, dynamic, MyToolBox e-platform for decision support in 
mycotoxin management, which provides users with information, tools and guidance concerning actions that can 
be taken to reduce fungal contamination and lead to reduction in levels of mycotoxins in the f ood and feed 
chains. The web -based MyToolBox e-platform will be accessible to farmers, food processors and other actors 
along the chain through all mainstream interfaces (PCs, tablets or smartphones) (WP3). 
 To maximise  uptake of the web -based MyToolBox e-platform by the stakeholders  in the project and 
beyond, t he intent of  actors will be determined by  their perceptions  of risks of  mycotoxin contamination  
(= perception of probability consequences) and their perception of  the possibilities to reduce  these risks in the 
most reliable and cost-effective way by using the MyToolBox e-platform (WP3). 
 To draw up Good Agricultural Practice (GAP) and Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP)  based 
protocols for prevention  and control of mycotoxins that can be applied throughout the entire food & feed chain 
(WP3). 
 To adapt and integrate cost-effective sampling and monitoring strategies  for mycotoxin management over 
the entire chain (WP3). 
 To establish international cooperation in research and innovation for mycotoxins and in particular with partners 
from China across all WPs including the initiation of a formal EU-China dialogue  through an EU -China 
Mycotoxin Forum as part of the MyToolBox activities (WP5). 
Dissemination activities 
 To create a project website including a public dissemination part and a portal for inter-consortium sharing of 
information, databases and knowledge management (WP5). 
 To disseminate information  about the project and  its results to actors and stakeholders  along the food 
supply chain, to opinion leaders/regulators, the media, farmers, professionals working in agriculture and food 
manufacture, educators, and other multipliers, food and drink industries (including SMEs),  consumer 
organisations, the scientific community and the general public (WP5). 
 To facilitate collaboration, information exchange and interaction between different actors  and 
organisations involved in the control and management of mycotoxins in the food su pply chain through training, 
consultations and webinars (WP5). 
 To develop exploitation plans, including a business model, to ensure the use of the project outputs  
among the farming and industry end users, opinion leaders, decision makers, etc. and to estab lish and verify a 
robust business model for the MyToolBox e-platform (WP5). 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 7
1.2 Relation to the work programme  
MyToolBox relates to H2020 topic ‘ SFS-13-2015 Biological contamination of crops and the food chain ’ and 
addresses all the specific challenges in the Call, as well as the full scope of this Call as explained in table 1:  
Table 1: Relation to the Work Programme  
SFS-13-2015  MyToolBox 
The occurrence of 
biological contami-
nation in various 
crops is of major 
concern ….. 
…effectively monitor 
…. the incidence of 
mycotoxin 
contaminants. 
MyToolBox addresses the issue of biological contamination of crops arising from both pre - 
and post -harvest fungal infection. Pre -harvest infection of crops causes large reductions in 
yields and losses du e to poor quality. During drying and subsequent storage, further fungal 
infection can occur, which can lead to further losses. MyToolBox focuses on prevention and 
minimising pre-harvest fungal infection at different stages in the plant growth cycle, through 
selection of fungal resistant crop varieties, minimising reservoir sources of fungal infection for 
the growing plant, and applying novel biopesticides. MyToolBox will monitor crops during 
storage, measuring real -time parameters such as CO 2 levels, which are indicative of fungal 
growth enabling remedial action to be taken to reduce losses from biological 
contamination. Moreover, improved forecasting models  to predict contamination  of 
wheat and maize with fungi and mycotoxins at early growth state will be developed.  
Proposals should aim 
at reducing the risk 
of mycotoxin 
contamination in 
crops and all along 
the feed and food 
chains. 
 
 
Besides the economic losses from fungal infection, there is also the potential for mycotoxin 
contamination of crops with risks to human and animal health. However, mycotoxin formation 
is not inevitable, even if crops are infected with toxigenic fungal stra ins. To predict mycotoxin 
formation, MyToolBox will develop models based on historical data, which will utilise 
measurement of parameters in real -time that will be used to model when fungi are most likely 
to produce mycotoxins. Such predictions will be use d to optimise harvesting times or 
optimise the use of biopesticide treatment to reduce contamination . Competitive  
biocontrol measures using non-toxigenic fungi isolated locally will be developed for use in the 
EU, based on well -established techniques already in use in the US and Africa. Sophisticated 
sorting techniques using vision imaging will be implemented to selectively remove 
contaminated units from dried f ruit. Innovative  (pre-) milling techniques will result in 
reductions in levels of mycotoxins in wheat. Innovative baking strategies will be optimised to 
study the fate of mycotoxins in finished products. 
Integrated 
approaches… are 
required to effectively 
control the incidence 
of mycotoxins in 
crops and reduce 
contamination 
throughout the feed 
and food chains. 
MyToolBox recognises the substantial progress already made worldwide  in the area of 
prevention and control of mycotoxins and thus builds on this existing knowledge . Several 
recognised agricultural strategies including crop rotation, tillage practices, resistance breeding, 
fungicide application and less susceptible plant cultivars will be integrated to reduce the impact 
of fungal infection of crops and subsequent mycotoxin formation. As none of these strategies 
by themselves are able to reduce the impact of fungal infection, an integrated approach will 
be pursued, which also takes climate change factors into account . Pre- and post-harvest 
interventions will be assembled in a web -accessible MyToolBox platform in a way that will 
guide actors in the food and feed chains to identify and implement the most relevant strategies. 
The web-based MyToolBox platform will also  integrate HACCP and GAP protocols  
specifically addressing wheat, oats, maize, peanuts, dried fruit and animal feed. 
Reducing the risk of 
mycotoxin 
contamination ….. 
bringing technical, 
management and 
organisational 
solutions, incl. 
HACCP. 
MyToolBox will develop a series of decision support tools  which will be able to forecast 
potential fungal infection and subsequent mycotoxin occurrence, enabling actions such as 
early harvesting or fungicide spraying to be undertaken at the optimum time  during the 
cereal growth cycle. A number of factors relevant to fungal infection and mycot oxin formation 
are already well-known and Good Agricultural Practice (GAP) combined with Hazard Analysis 
Critical Control Points  (HACCP), have already been developed in some food and feed 
chains. Some of the technical innovations will require changes to ex isting standards to be able 
to fully benefit from the developments, and such changes will be sought as part of the project. 
… …. and also deal 
with the safe use of 
contaminated 
batches. 
Existing EU Regulations, set maximum limits or guideline values for m ycotoxins in animal 
feed. Contaminated batches above these limits must be destroyed and are an economic loss. 
In MyToolBox we will test the performance of specific mycotoxin -degrading microorganism 
strains and enzymes, on the process-efficiency and degradation of mycotoxins  during 
biogas and bioethanol production. This will allow the safe use of contaminated batches for 
both, the efficient production of biofuels and of safe DDGS (Dried Distillers Grains with 
 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 8 
SFS-13-2015  MyToolBox 
Solubles), to be used as a protein rich source in animal feed. 
Proposals should …. 
fall under the concept 
of 'multi-actor 
approach and allow 
for adequate 
involvement of the 
farming sector. 
Innovative science alone will not achieve the desired outcomes , as it also  requires the 
commitment of all actors along the food and feed supply chain  to implement change . The 
multi-actor approach in MyToolBox is exemplified by involvement of five prominent end 
users representing the food industry (Barilla, Italy), food and crop energy (S üdzucker, 
Germany), grain industry (Agro LV, Ukraine with operations in Poland), Dried fruit  industry 
(TARIS, Turkey) and the maize based feed industry (D.O.O. Agrocentrum Becej, involving also 
individual farmers from Serbia). Hence, through our consortium end users from the farming 
community, agronomists, actors along the food & feed supply chains and professionals 
working in agriculture and food manufacturing will collaborate closely with the Technology 
SMEs and with our partners from academia. Formal evaluations of specific interventions will 
be conducted as well as beta testing of the web-based MyToolBox platform at an early stage of 
development to ensure user -friendly and fit -for-use design. Furthermore, economists will be 
involved in assessing the cost -effectiveness of specific interventions , and the 
involvement of sociologists in assessing potential barriers to acceptance. This multi -
disciplinary project uniquely involves a diversity of actors along the entire food and f eed chains 
essential to ensure that the practical objectives of substantial reductions in biological 
contamination and reductions in mycotoxin levels are achieved. 
Proposals should 
benefit conventional 
and organic supply 
chains…. 
Technical interventions , primarily developed pre -harvest, will be applicable to both 
conventional and organic supply chains . Novel biopesticides such as salts, botanical 
extracts, plant defence elictitors and biocontrol agents, also suitable for use in the organic 
supply chain, will be investigated as alternatives to conventional triazole fungicides. Novel 
cultural control mechanisms  will focus on studying crop debris management, applicable in 
organic as well as conventional production  systems. This will include microbial agents to 
colonise and exclude Fusarium inoculum from plant debris and the use of biofumigation of 
crops as a novel cultural control strategy. The conventional and organic farming 
community will be involved as partners, stakeholders and end users . MyToolBox will 
connect with appropriate organic food certification bodies such as the ‘Soil Association’ to 
ensure that proposed interventions are organic-farming compliant.  
…contribution to 
legislation… 
MyToolBox will anticipate legislative implications of the project  outputs and work with 
relevant bodies such as European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) and DG SANCO for standard 
setting (see 2.1. Expected Impacts). Moreover, the MyToolBox project aims to contribute to the 
standard setting for authorisation of mycotoxin -detoxifying feed additives in China  in 
cooperation with FEFANA, the Chinese Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) and CAAS -FRI as an 
important aspect for the registration of mycotoxin detoxifying feed additives from the EU. 
In line with the 
objectives of the EU 
strategy for 
international 
cooperation in 
research and 
innovation and in 
particular with the 
implementation of the 
EU-China dialogue, 
proposals are 
encouraged to 
include third country 
participants, 
especially those 
established in 
China. 
MyToolBox has EU partners from Austria (Coordinator), Netherlands, Germany, United 
Kingdom, Spain and Italy, from associated countries of Norway, Serbia, Turkey and 
Ukraine (with additional operations in Poland) and two partners from China: The Chinese 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS)  a national, integrative agricultural scientific 
research organization with over 5,000 professional employees and the Academy of State 
Administration of Grain (ASAG). From CAAS two institutes will b e involved as partners: 
The Feed Research Institute  (CAAS-FRI) and the  Institute of Agro -Products Processing 
Science and Technology  (CAAS-IAPPST). Especially t he latter will link its current research 
projects dealing with mycotoxin formation and its preven tion and control in grains and cereals 
with MyToolBox. CAAS, ASAG and their partners from the Chinese grain and peanut 
industry will contribute to the overall delivery of the MyToolBox , as well as making 
specific technical contributions to three work packa ges (WP1, 2 & 3)  and to the practical 
implementation and standard setting in WP4 . Some technologies (e.g. CO 2 sensing during the 
storage and DON forecasting) developed in MyToolBox will be evaluated by these partners in 
cooperation with end users in China, which will ensure that the MyToolBox e-platform meets 
international aspirations in terms of scope and ease -of-use and may be “transplanted” to 
China. Chinese partners have extensive networks within their research community, and we 
propose to build on these networks to form an EU-China Mycotoxin-Forum (WP5). 
Moreover, through the Project A dvisory Board and partner ICC , numerous organisations 
and experts from third countries, such as USA and Tanzania are involved in MyToolBox.  
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 9
1.3 Concept and approach 
Overall concept underpinning the project  
Based on a thorough screening of existing measures to reduce moulds and mycotoxins  in the feed and food 
chain, a consortium with leading experts from 2 3 partner organisations representing 11 countries (including 2 from 
China) and 43% industry participation (farmers, technology SME s, food/feed industry, incl. 5 end users) have 
recognised significant gaps in the current knowledge and management strategies at different points of interventions for 
various food & feed commodities and have jointly developed the MyToolBox proposal. Previous studies have shown 
the combination of more than one control strategy in an integrated system to have a synergistic positive effect (i.e. the 
combined effect is greater than the sum of the parts) 13. By combining the developed control strategies with one 
another, in combination with other known control mechanisms in a fully integrated mycotoxin management system 
will allow for maximum reductions in mycotoxins in food and feed. A s a result, MyToolBox is not only based on a 
complete field -to-fork approach ranging from biocontrol and novel cultural control protocols (suitable for organic 
farming) at a farmer´s level to novel thermal processing procedures performed by a major end use r from the food 
industry. MyToolBox goes beyond the field -to-fork concept  and also considers safe use options of mycotoxin 
contaminated batches, such as microbial energy conversion to efficiently produce biogas and bioethanol in 
combination with safe DDGS.  The consideration of the entire chain soil-field-crop-food processing -waste 
management-alternative energy  to ensure food & feed security and safety within a sustainable economic 
approach, is a major motivation behind MyToolBox. The project will not only i mplement and develop a series of 
innovative integrated measures, which will enable a significant reduction in losses of crops due to fungal and 
mycotoxin contamination. Depending on the commodity and the type of intervention the achievable reduction in losses 
ranges from 20 -90%. The  main idea  of MyToolBox, distinguishing this proposal from previous efforts in the 
area mycotoxin reduction, is to provide the recommended measures to the end users along the whole food and feed 
chain in a web-based MyToolBox platform. Th is unique e-platform will be an internet -based decision tool that 
provides users with access to static and dynamic information (see figure 1) concerning actions that can be taken to 
reduce fungal contamination and lead to reduction in levels of mycotoxins in the food and feed chains.  
These actions will be based on existing knowledge as well as on the novel information/results obtained within 
the MyToolBox project . The ergonomic and user centred MyToolBox e-platform will be accessible through a PC, 
tablet and all commonly used mobile interfaces. Through a dedicated and experienced smart systems development 
team an interactive user -friendly platf orm will be designed to meet the needs of all actors along the food chain, 
whether these be farmers, processors, feed suppliers or manufacturers from the food and feed industry. Sound 
management of the innovation cycle will ensure that end users and stakeh olders are mobilised in a co -creation 
approach, to ensure the MyToolBox e -platform is tailored to meet the needs of each and every end user by 
establishing a specific set of individual circumstances rather than simply providing generic advice. MyToolBox is  
dedicated to the cereal (wheat, oats, and maize) and dried fruit ( fig) supply chain in Europe and the peanut 
supply chain in China. By step-wise interrogation of the end user, the crop of interest, the relevant stages in the food 
& feed chain, geographica l location, storage conditions, transport and end -use will all be established. The web-
accessible MyToolBox will prioritise possible actions (interventions) that can be taken, giving priority to recommending 
those actions which give the maximum possible reductions in mycotoxin levels at the lowest cost, i.e. focussing on the 
most cost-effective. The developed web-tool is not an endpoint but will be flexible and will continuously be improved. 
MyToolBox will make use existing safety and agricultural  models, C odex Alimentarius CoP, HACCP and 
GlobalGap. These models are based on science, are well established and, moreover, are already accepted by actors 
in the food and feed supply chain. HACCP and GlobalGap evolve in time and will thus allow the MyToolBox e-platform 
to stay up-to-date. The implementation of the well -established and accepted PDCA Deming cycle (plan -do-check-act) 
approach will allow the continuous improvement of the MyToolBox e-platform even beyond the duration of the project. 
To secure continuity and user acceptance, the platform will be designed for compatibility with all commonly used 
mobile device and the most popular operating systems (android, iPhone, windows). Access to the platform will be 
freely available to end users during the lifetime of the project, and its sustainability will be achieved through a robust 
business model that will be  developed during the project (that coul d involve levying a nominal membership fee to 
users) and maintenance through the participating commercial ICT-related enterprise. 
Based on preliminary market analysis  and dialogue with our industrial partners, especially with end users and 
stakeholder associations, we know that there is strong interest among the majority of actors along the food and feed 
                                                        
13 Blandino et al. 2012. Integrated strategies for the control of Fusarium head blight and deoxynivalenol contamination in winter wheat. Field Crops Res 133:139-149. 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 10 
chains in a platform of scientifically validated tools such as those proposed by MyToolBox, as increasingly all actors 
in the food supply chain are aware of and dedicated to the reduction of mycotoxins. There is an increasing culture of 
cooperation and inf ormation sharing along the food/feed supply chain in the context of addressing the mycotoxin 
challenge. 
The MyToolBox web-platform will be used on -site by all partners in the supply chain. This means that scientific 
information must be translated to clear unambiguous instructions. The transdisciplinary challenges will be tackled 
by the project team including scientific groups from the field of both agronomy and social sciences. Furthermore, end 
users (farmers, food industry, etc.) and stakeholders will be i nvolved in each step of the project , which will be 
enabled through a professional communication campaign including training in cooperation with major stakeholder 
associations that will be designed in order to mobilise and secure the ‘buy -in’ of the necessa ry targets. The project 
partners have access to relevant data on crop growth, food processing, microbiology, climate, economics, human -
decision-making, and communication in the European setting.  Pictograms, photographs, diagrams and other imagery 
will be used extensively in the MyToolBox e-platform, both as an aid to achieving a ‘user -friendly’ product, as well as 
minimising the needs for extensive translation i.e. to open up access to a community that is not always necessarily 
English speaking. 
 
Overall approach and methodology 
Our ground breaking research activities will be undertaken within 6 Work Packages (WP). The  mycotoxin-commodity 
combinations that will be addressed are the most prevalent Fusarium mycotoxins (deoxynivalenol (DON), T -2 and 
HT-2 toxins, zearalenone ( ZEN) and fumonisins)  in wheat, oats, maize and animal feed chains (incl. DDGS) and 
aflatoxins in maize, peanuts and dried figs. However, the project  will also impact on other mycotoxins, such as 
ochratoxin A in wheat  and emerging mycotoxins, such as enniatins. The overall approach, depicted in figure 1, 
involves pre-harvest interventions undertaken at farm level, together with post -harvest interventions undertaken from 
storage through to food processing into the finished food or feed pr oduct each with a set of specific objectives. Due to 
our comprehensive integrated approach and the required field trials, a project duration of 4 years  is considered 
appropriate. The chosen approach will integrate scientific knowledge, translate and commun icate it, apply it in 
cooperation with the end users and incorporate it in the simultaneously developed web-based MyToolBox platform, for 
use by all actors in the food and feed supply chain for the reduction of mycotoxin contamination in food and feed. Thi s 
approach requires the input of scientific data, (anticipation of) legal requirements, but also the involvement of 
sociologists in assessing potential barriers for acceptance of the developed measures incl. the web-based My-ToolBox 
by the stakeholders.  
The central part of this project is the development of the MyToolBox e-platform: an interactive, internet based tool 
that will facilitate optimal decision making for mycotoxin management (prevention, control, monitoring) in European 
feed and food chains.  This decision support web platform is intended for use by various actors in the chain, including 
farmers, millers, processors and feed/food producers, as well as governmental authorities , whereby it provides these 
users with multiple information, tools and guidance concerning actions that can be taken to prevent and reduce fungal 
contamination and lead to reductions in levels of mycotoxins in the food and feed chains. MyToolBox will be 
configurable to the activities of each particular actor within the chain , and when there is no other option will enable the 
actor to direct contaminated batches to safe-use options (see figure 1). 
In a co-creation approach, MyToolBox will be designed, built and tested in close collaboration with the end users 
including farmers  and the  multiple stakeholder groups  involved in the project through ICC and the Advisory 
Board, such to ensure it fulfils all their needs. Via an interactive User Interface, which will be accessible overall all 
mainstream interfaces (PCs, tables and smart phones), each of these actors can easily navigate and access 
the required information and decision support, as well as input and output information from the system.  
The web-based MyToolBox will be highly flexible and scalable so that it can be extended to  other mycotoxins and 
other food and feed chains beyond the scope of the project. Over the course of the project, a business plan for future 
exploitation of the MyToolBox platform will be developed in order to arrive a sustainable business model.  
The MyToolBox platform itself (figure 2) will integrate currently available information and make it readily accessible to 
the user. In relation to its architecture, the core elements will consist of: 
a) web platform back -end (or engine), which consists of a cloud database (Postgres 9.3) housing both static 
content and dynamic content, as well as a security layer;  
b) web-based User Interface (coded in HTML5 and JQuery -Javascript) that will be accessible over a standard 
PC and all mobile platforms (tablets, smartphones- iphone, android, windows…); 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 11 
c) Application Programming Interface  (API)- (PHP5) that enables data from the tools and applications 
developed in other work packages and tasks, as well as other external sources, to be in tegrated in the 
MyToolBox platform. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: MyToolbox e-platform architecture 
 
As can be seen, the MyToolbox platform consists of static and dynamic components as follows: 
Static parts: 
- Synthesised existing guidelines as e.g. published by the FAO for Good Agricultural Practice (GAP), Good 
Manufacturing Practices (GMP), as well as protocols for Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP), 
sorting, milling and baking for mycotoxin management (prevention and control)  in small grain cereals, maize 
and figs (WP3), both pre-harvest and post-harvest. 
- Potential corrective actions and recommendations for alternative safe use in case certain action levels or EU 
legal limits are exceeded.  
- Guidelines for cost -effective sampling and monitoring strategies for mycotoxin management by actors in the 
entire chain. These includes points in the chain at which samples need to be taken, amounts of samples, 
extent of pooling of samples, and types of measurement (dipstick, ELISA, chromatographic methods) to be 
used (WP3). 
Dynamic parts (via the API): 
- Optimal storage conditions, by using real-time sensing DSS (WP2&3). 
- Forecasting models to predict fungal and mycotoxin contamination of small grain cereals and maize at early 
growth stages, for optimal application of biofungicides and optimal harvest time (WP1&3).  
- Information from external sources, such as weather stations. 
During the first year of the project, the web-based MyToolBox will make use of existing  official information, guidelines 
and data, and will present this to the user in an easy -to-understand, interactive and synthesised format. As the results 
from WP1 -4 become available during the project, they will be added and hence the MyToolBox e-platform will be 
updated. MyToolbox has an easy to set up User Administration page , whereby the user identifies himself, selects 
the crops and stage of chain, and the required information he/she wants to obt ain from the system. The MyToolB ox 
engine consists of static and dynamic components. The for mer includes GAP/GMP guidelines, HACCP protocols , 
and any other relevant information, presented in a practical and engaging format, by using images, visuals and videos 
whenever possible. Minimal text will be used making the system user -friendly irrespectiv e of different language 
constraints. The latter relates to the dynamic real time (or very recent) data that is being entered into MyToolBox via 
an application programming interface (API) that will be built to allow MyToolBox to accept data from the other p roject 
developed applications- i.e., real time post-harvest storage management systems (WP2) and forecasting models for 
crop management (WP3), as well as their party systems, e.g. for obtaining up-to-date environmental data.  
In the design and development of the MyToolBox, the so -called ‘problem of implementation’ of available information 
and the agricultural decision support systems (DSSs) (i.e., under-utilization due to both technical limitations of the 
DSSs and to user’s attitude towards DSSs) will be sp ecifically addressed by a very robust approach to Innovation  
Management (discussed in Section 3.2) to ensure that we work effectively with our end -user and stakeholder groups 
in order to deliver user centric and market-oriented results, whereby we will be: 

 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 12 
(i) Focusing on the important problems of the complete chain with a systems approach; 
(ii) Using automation and integration in data collection, and supporting flexible input efforts by the user; 
(iii) Developing and validating fit-for-purpose, mathematical models;  
(iv) Designing a user -friendly interface with navigation facilities within the web-based MyToolBox functionalities 
(e.g., decision trees) and providing complete and easy-to-understand information;  
(v) Delivering MyToolB ox through the Web and thereby enabling both cont inuous updating by the provider and 
flexible access by the user; 
(vi) Cloud databases with the ability to handle large volumes of data and to enable interfacing with the MyToolbox 
platform over all mobile interfaces  
(vii) Designing the MyToolBox e -platform with the goal  of assisting the decision maker (by providing necessary 
information) rather than replacing the decision maker; 
(viii) Involving potential users during the MyToolBox development and testing so as to obtain insight into how users 
make decisions (stan dard methodologies to engage with the users will be used, such as Focus Groups, 
Usability Tests, Card Sorting and Accessibility Analysis). This end -user involvement, and in particular farmers,  
in different stages of design, building and testing of MyToolbox is part of WP4;  
(ix) Communicating the benefits of the web-accessible MyToolBox platform via seminars and demonstration; 
(x) Involving all the potential stakeholders; and 
(xi) Developing a two-way communication mode with the end-users, i.e., by combining “push” and “pull” systems. 
Finally, in relation to our development methodologies, the software development of the MyToolbox e-platform will be 
following agile Scrum and Test Driven Development methodologies . Scrum is a highly powerful methodology for 
keeping the end-user engaged and with influence over the software development process and in particular to ensure 
user experience and interaction with the system is guaranteed. The Test Driven Development method is used for 
efficiently developing “almost-bug-free” software platforms because it is a programming methodology oriented to code 
“reliable-by-design” software.  
Positioning of the project  
In relation to where our project is positioned on the Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs), table 2 below provides a 
summary of t he starting TRL of each of the different core project components and the expected TRL advance come 
the end of the action. 
Table 2: TRLs advancement for the major knowledge/technology components of the project 
Description WP TRL at 
project 
start 
TRL at 
project 
end 
Explanation 
Crop management using 
biopesticides 
1 TRL4 TRL6 Crop management advice for the use of 
biopesticides based on large field trials 
Crop management using 
biofumigation 
1 TRL3 TRL5 Crop management advice for the use of 
biofumigation based on large field trial 
Atoxigenic Aspergillus strains for 
crop management in Serbia 
1 TRL3 TRL5 Atoxigenic Aspergillus strains isolated from the 
area, available for use in maize 
CO2 silo monitoring solution  2 TRL4 TRL6 An integrated platform will be field validated in silos 
Innovative fig sorting 2 TRL3 TRL5 Sorting technique validated in pilot plant 
Innovative milling solution 2 TRL3 TRL5 Milling techniques validated in pilot plant 
Novel enzymes in biofuel production 2 TRL4 TRL6 Mycotoxin degrading enzymes and microorganisms 
tested for efficient production of safe DDGS and 
biofuels  
Web-based cloud platform- 
MyToolBox DSS 
3 TRL5 TRL6/7 The MyToolBox e-platform will be built and scaled 
up from alpha to a beta version that will be validated 
with the target group under real conditions  
Forecasting models available for 
mycotoxin  prediction in cereals 
(including maize) 
3 TRL3 TRL5 Forecasting models validated with data collected in 
project 
 
Linkage with national and international research 
The MyToolBox consortium will not work in isolation . The project will build on the positive achievements of the 
substantial EU -funded research previously conducted on mycotoxin contamination in the food and feed chain. 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 13 
Several of MyToolBox consortium members have coordinated previous EU mycotoxin -related projects or led major 
WPs- in projects such as MYCORED (http://www.mycored.eu), QSAFFE (www.qsaffe.eu), EMTOX14 and MYCOSPEC 
(http://mycospec.eu/de/). The consortium has also got strong linkages in research and innovation with many other 
national, European and international projects around the world . Some 40 countries are represented through the 
participation of partner 3 (ICC) and via the linkage to the International Society for Mycotoxicology  (ISM), of which 
the MyToolBox Coordinator is secretary and 2016 President-Elect.  
Thanks to the numerous national research and innovation activities the MyToolBox consortium members  are 
currently involved in, the project will benefit from valuable input. E.g. to identify key components of Good Agricultural 
Practice to reduce mycotoxins in primary crops (UK national funding) and to determine field trial settings for 
Aspergillus isolates on the basis of Serbian agroclimatic conditions (Serbia national funding ); t hrough the Austrian 
project FUSARIUM (led by BOKU) state-of-the-art multi-toxin-methods for verification of the efficacy of the developed 
interventions at a mycotoxin level acro ss WP1-3 will be available and new insights into wheat -Fusarium-interactions 
using novel Genomics and Metabolomics tools  (WP1) will be provided to MyToolBox; insight into the metabolism of 
mycotoxins in plants and animals and the bioavailability of masked/ conjugated mycotoxins will be considered for t he 
studies on conjugation and reduction of mycotoxins through thermal processing and safe -use option fermentation 
processes in WP2 (Austria, national Christian Doppler Foundation through BOKU).  
The Project Advisory Board (AB) will include various international organisations (who already agreed to join the 
MyToolBox AB – see 3.3 and LOIs in the Annex) representing the European food and feed industry (e.g. Copa-
Cogeca, FEFAC, EUFETEC, INC, FEFANA, Global Food Safety Partnership ) as well as international experts  on 
mycotoxin prevention and control (e.g. from USDA, EFSA, FAO, CODEX, DG SAN TE, ISM). The AB will link this 
project to other international networks facilitating further scientific and practical advice t o MyToolBox. e.g. advisory 
board member Peter J. Cotty (USDA & University of Arizona) will allow us to access USDA´s expertise on atoxigenic 
strains of A. flavus  as biological control agents and its projects funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, 
relevant to WP1; CAAS and its Institute of Agro -Products Processing Science and Technology  (CAAS-IAPPST), will 
link the results of their current research projects (~€8 Mio national funding), dealing with mycotoxin formation and its 
prevention and control in  grains and cereals, to the research carried out in WP1 and 2.  New relations and 
collaborations will be forged with other relevant projects over the course of the project with the view to maximising 
synergies and establishing an enduring scientific relationship with China. 
Positioning of the project 
The proposed innovative pre - and post-harvest reduction strategies along with the developed measures throughout 
the entire food and feed chain will be tested and validated in the field by end users . Moreover, th e web-based 
decision support system (DSS) MyToolBox Platform will be deployable on -line and accessible through all mobile 
interfaces. It will be accompanied by precise procedures for the stakeholders on how to maintain and update the 
content of the MyToolBox e -platform in future. A major strength of the web-accessible MyToolBox  is that it is not 
designed as an end-point but as a flexible system based on the ’continuous improvement’ approach. This means that 
relevant new data can be included at any time to ensure that the system makes use of the newest insights. By the end 
of the project, the MyToolBox e-platform will provide all actors in the food/feed supply chain with solutions on how to 
control mycotoxins and on safe use options for contaminated batches. 
Gender analysis 
Gender issues are important in that women's work and women's lives all over the world have long been intertwined 
with food. To this end, in relation to business behaviour, gender analysis will also be important, especially in view of 
growing trends and commitments to see more women occupy high level and decision -making positions in industry. 
Consequently, sex and gender analyses will be addressed throughout our work plan , especially in relation to co -
creation opportunities and ensuring femal es are included in the innovation cycle to give input and feedback to shape 
the research and its outputs where required. More specific attention will be paid to gender issues in WP2 in case of 
introduction of automated sorting techniques for figs in Turkey. Traditionally this work is carried out by hand by women 
and the required work circumstances, in the dark under UV light, is potentially harmful to their health.  If we are 
successful with automated sorting techniques it would improve the health and safety  of the female workforce. 
However, automation might push women out of work and, therefore, specific attention will be paid to involving 
women in the operating of the automatic sorting systems.  
                                                        
14 http://www.moh.gov.cy/moh/sgl/emtox.nsf/emtox01_en/emtox01_en?OpenDocument 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 14 
Moreover, we understand that inventions and developments that incorporate the smartest aspects of gender can open 
new markets and enable innovation in products, processes, services, or infrastructures. Indeed, products that meet the 
needs of complex and diverse user groups enhance global competitiveness and sustainab ility15. Inspired by how 
taking gender into account has yielded new research results and sparked creativity, opening new avenues for future 
research for those who give it serious attention16. During the work plan, gender analysis will be addressed in relation to 
the User Interface of the MyToolBox e-platform, whereby graphic designs of the interface will be consulted with both 
men and women during the design phase in WP3, and posterior alpha and beta versions will be trialled by both sexes. 
Females are also key decision makers in relation to household consumption patterns in many households, and as 
such communication activities targeting the general public and consumers will need to consider gend er aspects. It is 
important to highlight that within the consortium itself, there is a balanced mobilisation of women and men across 
the work packages , working both in senior and early career positions. Moreover, a number of key management 
positions in the  consortium are occupies by females: Scientific Manager, IPR Manager, Dissemination Manager, WP 
Leaders and Task Leaders. Gender issues will also be addressed during recruiting of new staff and in regard to career 
progression.
1.4 Ambition 
Ground-breaking nature of concept and approach 
The MyToolBox project will not only pursue mycotoxin reduction in the field-to-fork approach, specifically addressing 
wheat, oats, maize, peanuts and dried figs, but will also go beyond that by considering safe use options of  mycotoxin 
contaminated batches such as microbial energy conversion to efficiently produce biogas, bioethanol and safe DDGS . 
Up to now, different agricultural strategies including crop rotation, tillage practices, fungicide application and the use of 
resistant plant cultivars have been used to reduce the impact of fungal infection of crops and subsequent mycotoxin 
formation. As none of these strategies by themselves have been able to efficiently reduce the impact of fungal 
infection, a novel integrated appr oach will be pursued, which also takes climate change into account. Consequently, 
MyToolBox will combine a series of integrated pre- and post-harvest measures (see “beyond state -of-the-art” below), 
which shall enable a 20 -90% reduction (depending on the ty pe of commodity and intervention) in losses of 
crops due to fungal and my cotoxin contamination.  The consideration of the entire chain (soil-field-crop-food 
processing-waste management-alternative energy) to ensure food & feed security and safety within a sustainable 
economic environment, is the major ambition behind MyToolBox. The outcomes of the project including novel 
interventions will be assembled in a web -accessible MyToolBox e -platform that provides multiple information  to 
support decision-making in mycotoxin management by all actors along the food chain (farmers, processors, feed 
suppliers or manufacturers from the food and feed industry). The  constant loop back to the MyToolBox end users 
representing SME and large agricultural industries (Agrocentrum Becej and Agro LV., resp.) as well as the  food 
(Barilla) and feed sector (end user & partner Agrocentrum and FEFANA as member of the Advisory Board) and the 
crop energy industry (Suedzucker) accompanied by an established world-wide communication platform (ICC) will 
ensure maximum interaction and practical applicability of the developed techniques and measures. 
The web-based MyToolBox platform is based on the latest ICT technologies and platforms, as well as computational 
tools, and makes it possible to: a) integrate multiple and asynchronous information/data sources, both dynamic and 
static; a) perform complex analyses based on these multiple sources and advanced modelling techniques; and c) 
transform this complexity into simple and intuitive information to final users to support the decision -making process. 
The first dynamic component of the platform  is based on crop monitoring at the single plot level . The crop 
environment is continuously monitored by sensors (e.g., weather and soil sensors) that send the environmental data to 
the remote MyToolBox server. At the same time, growers and advisors (i.e., the users) use handheld devices (such as 
tablets or smartphones) to monitor the status of the crop and look at the outbreaks  of relevant pest and diseases. 
These data, together with plot-specific information (such as the variety, the previous crop, etc.), are used as inputs for 
mathematical models capable of predicting Fusarium Head blight (FHB) development and potential mycotoxin 
contamination. The model outputs are provided in real -time to users via an easy -to-use web-based user interface for 
informed decision-making about the optimal use of external inputs (e.g., fungicides) in such a way to preserve farm 
income and red ucing the negative impacts on the environment. Prediction of mycotoxin contamination also provides 
information for the dynamic design of optimised sampling plans for: a) determination of mycotoxins in grain batches at 
the reception in the storage centre; and b) managing the post-harvest handling of grains accordingly. 
                                                        
15 http://ec.europa.eu/research/science-society/gendered-innovations/index_en.cfm 
16 Schiebinger L. 2008. Gendered Innovations in Science and Engineering. ISBN: 978080475814. 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 15 
The second dynamic component  also involves the post -harvest handling of grains. This component is based on 
real-time monitoring of the environment in storage facilities  by means of a wireless sensor network (e.g., 
temperature, humidity, CO 2). The CO 2 production is a more sensitive early indicator of the grain moisture content  
(moisture content  [m.c.], wet weight basis) than temperature and intergranular relative humidity. Where grain/nut 
moisture contents are above the safe levels (>15%; >8.0% m.c. respectively) CO 2 will increase due to grain, mould 
and/or pest activity where hygiene is poor. The measured e nvironmental data are transmitted to the MyToolBox 
central server and used to feed mathema tical models predicting the potential dynamics of mycotoxin contamination 
under the specific storage conditions. These predictions are available for the user so that correct actions can be 
implemented to reduce the potential risks. 
Interventions based on G AP and HACCP derived CCPs (as well as action limits and corrective measures for these 
CCPs) are the main component of the static part of the MyToolBox plaform. Information from multiple external 
sources, such international standards, and the relevant EU and China legislation is also part of the static component. 
By using MyToolBox, users can all easily access recommendations on the best choice of preventive and corrective 
measures, as well as useful information for decision -making about the management of specific problems such as, for 
instance, the potential corrective measures in case action levels or legal limits are exceeded, or recommendations for 
alternative safe use in case of mycotoxin contamination above certain limits.  MyToolBox will also contain modelling 
software that will calculate potential financial savings for the end user.  Access to the MyToolBox decision 
support e-platform will be freely available to end users during the lifetime of the project, and its sustainability will be 
achieved through a robust business model that will be developed during the project (that could be that of levying a 
nominal membership fee to users) and maintenance through the participating commercial ICT-related enterprise. 
MyToolBox advance beyond state-of-the-art 
The advances provided by MyToolBox are beyond the state-of-the-art pre- and post-harvest interventions as explained 
in table 3: 
Table 3: MyToolBox - Advance beyond the state-of-the-art 
Status quo  MyToolBox – Advance beyond the state-of-the-art 
Minimum tillage, to minimise energy use 
and soil erosion,  increases Fusarium 
inoculum within cereal rotations resulting in 
increased mycotoxin levels in harvested 
grains compared to ploughing17. 
More sustainable crop production using minimum tillage while 
maintaining a high organic matter within the soil. Most promising 
available novel cultural control strategies will be explored targeting 
the Fusarium inoculum within crop debris with a) Brassica for 
biofumigation18 and b) accelerated biodegradation 19 by using an 
extract or competitive fungi20. 
No adequate prevention of Fusarium 
infection and the  risk of fungicide resistance 
when using ( triazole) fungicides, and the 
risk for endocrine disruption effects in 
humans21. 
The current strategy will be replaced by a combined approach for the 
sustainable use of recently developed biopesticides 22 (permitted 
within organic production systems) combined with agro -management 
tools such as water and soil conservation. 
Appropriate biocontrol agents to reduce 
aflatoxin contamination in maize  are not 
available for local use in South -East Europe. 
To face climate change and thus aflatoxin contamination in EU maize, 
a) appropriate genotypes of maize will be selected with various traits 
(drought resistance, early mature plant cultivars) in field conditions  that 
                                                        
17Edwards SG. 2004. Influence of agricultural practices on fusarium infection of cereals and subsequent contamination of grain by trichothe cene mycotoxins. Toxicology 
Letters 153, 29-35; Bernhoft A. et al. 2013. Risk Assessment of Mycotoxins in Cereal Grain in Norway; Opinion of the Scientific Steering Committee of the Norwegia n 
Scientific Committee for Food Safety: Oslo, Norway; Ulen B. et al. 2010. Soil tillage methods to control phosphorus loss and pote ntial side-effects: a Scandinavian 
review. Soil Use and Management, 26:94-107. 
18 Ngala BM. et al. 2015. Biofumigation with Brassica juncea, Raphanus sativus  and Eruca sativa for the management of field populations of the potato cyst nematode 
Globodera pallida. Pest Management Science  71:759-769; Perniola OS. et al  2014. Biological control of Fusarium graminearum : use of Trichoderma spp. and 
biofumigation with aerial part of Brassica juncea. Revista De La Facultad De Ciencias Agrarias 46:12. 
Hofgaard IS.  2012 Reduction in the inoculum potential of F. graminearum  on residues after treatment with Biowish crop or Trifender after sowing in spring 
(unpublished). 
20 Matarese F. et al . 2012. Biocontrol of Fusarium head blight: interactions between Trichoderma and mycotoxigenic Fusarium. Microbiology 158: 98-106; Palazzini JM. Et 
al. 2013. Biocontrol and population dynamics of Fusarium spp. on wheat stubble in Argentina. Plant Pathology 62: 859–866. 
21 Under Regulation 1107/2009 on the Placing of Plant Protectio n Products on the Market; Klix MB. et al. 2007.  Comparison of the declining triazole sensitivity of 
Gibberella zeae and increased sensitivity achieved by advances in triazole fungicide development. Crop Protection, 26:683-690; Edwards SG & Godley NP . 2010. 
Reduction of Fusarium head blight and deoxynivalenol in wheat with early fungicide applications of prothioconazole. Food Additives and Contaminants Part A- 27:629-
635; Hillocks RJ. 2012. Farming with fewer pesticides: EU pesticide review and resulting challenges for UK agriculture. Crop Protection, 31:85-93. 
22 Forrer HR. et al. 2014 Fusarium Head Blight control and prevention of mycotoxin contamination in wheat with botanicals and tannic acid. Toxins, 6:830-849. 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 16 
Status quo  MyToolBox – Advance beyond the state-of-the-art 
Due to global warming there is also a need 
for drought resistant maize23 in South-East 
Europe. Very limited information is availab le 
for European maize genotypes. 
are lik ely to reduce aflatoxin contamination and b) atoxigenic 
Aspergillus strains will be used to outcompete toxigenic Aspergillus 
strains. This will be a novel adaptation within Europe  of proven 
technology developed in the USA and Africa and aided by collaboration 
with the international experts from those continents.  
At present only temperature, and sometimes 
relative humidity (RH) are measured in silos 
periodically or in some cases r emotely as an 
aid to post-harvest management of stored 
grain and other commodities24. 
The development of a real time post -harvest Decision Support 
System (DSS) based on a sensitive indicator of CO 2 (+ temp and RH) 
will provide silo managers, for the first t ime, with accurate information 
to make informed decisions  immediately based on this platform 
technology. This component will be linked to the ICT dynamic part of the 
MyToolBox e-platform and will become an effective post -harvest tool to 
minimise losses from mycotoxins. 
Sorting of dried figs  to remove 
contaminated units is traditionally carried out 
by hand 25. The required work 
circumstances, in the dark under UV light, is 
potentially harmful to the health of the 
employees26. 
Non-invasive real time sorting of dried figs  for mycotoxin 
contamination, using visible and NIR spectral imaging and appropriate 
algorithms on lab -scale, will be refined and up -scaled in practice to 
achieve significant improvements compared to manual sorting with 5% or 
less probability of the batch average concentration of aflatoxin B 1 failing 
to meet the EU limits. It will also improve work circumstances 
dramatically. 
Milling strategies, such as debranning and 
micronisation are efficient but individual 
tissues of the grains are often not 
homogeneous and not well separated.  
By-products, usually intended for animal 
feed but also exploitable for wholegrain food 
products, contain about 15% proteins, 40% 
starch and 40% fibre with levels of 
mycotoxins which can exceed legal limits27.  
Innovative pre -milling and milling strategies, will be  combined, up 
scaled and implemented in MyToolBox and will allow more accurate 
separation of grain tissues with characterized (different) mycotoxin 
contamination levels. The synergistic potential of debr anning, 
micronisation and dry- or wet -turbo separation  will minimise the 
mycotoxin concentration in raw materials and the final wheat products 
destined for the consumer.  We hypothesize a decontamination degree 
of about 50% for each component that could then be safely employed to 
produce any kind of cereal -based foods. Bread, pasta or biscuits could 
therefore be added with increased fibre content, ranging from 1 to 10% 
according to the technological requirements. 
EFSA published terminology on masked/ 
modified mycotoxins in 2014 and the need 
to obtain further data on the fate of these 
forms during food and feed processing 28. 
Most studies conducted on the fate of 
mycotoxins, are on lab-scale with 
artificially contaminated material  at high 
levels that do not ref lect practical 
conditions29.  
The fate of mycotoxins (incl. modified forms) in naturally contaminated 
raw materials (with simultaneous co-occurrence of different metabolites) 
will be monitored during thermal food processing at an industrial scale (at 
end user Barilla) to a) obtain structural information of altered 
chemical structures  (using newest LC -HRMS and metabolomics  
techniques30 and to b) develop novel bakery production protocols,  
controlling for instance fermentation, temperature/time and recipes , to 
develop a sound basis to establish process factors for risk assessment 
as part of a post-harvest intervention strategy. 
 
                                                        
23 Guo B. et al. 2008 Drought stress and preharvest aflatoxin contamination in agricultural commodity: genetics, genomics and proteomics. J Integrative Plant Biol. 50:1-
31. Williams WP. et al. 2011. Ear rot, aflatoxin accumulation, and fungal biomass in maize after inoculation with Aspergillus flavus. Field Crops Research 120:196–200; 
Gardner HD. et al. 2007 Diallel analysis of aflatoxin accumulation in maize. Field Crops Research 102:60–63; Abbas HK. et al. 2006. Aflatoxin and fumonisin 
contamination of corn (maize, Zea mays) hybrids in Arkansas. Crop Protection 25:1–9. 
24 McIntosh RB. & Casada ME. 2008 Fringing field capacitance sensor for measuring the moisture content of agricultural commoditi es. IEEE sensors J. 8, 240 -247; 
Agrolog Temperature Monitoring System: DAN-CORN A/S, Mimersvej 5, DK-8722 Hedensted, Denmark ( www.dancorn.com). 
25 Patel KK. et al. 2012. Machine vision system: a tool for quality inspection of food and agricultural products. J Food Sci Tec hnol. 49:123–141; Ozluoymak OB. et al. 
2014. Development of a UV-based imaging system for real-time detection and separation of dried figs contaminated with aflatoxins. J Agric. Sciences 20:302-316,2014; 
Benalia S. et al. Automatic sorting of dried figs based on computer vision system, VII Congreso Ibérico de Agroingeniería y Ciencias Hortícolas 
26 Ichihashi M. et al. 2003. UV-induced skin damage. Toxicology. 189:21–39; Lavker RM et al. 1995. Cumulative effects from repeated exposures to suberythemal doses 
of UVB and UVA in human skin . J American Academy of Dermatology. 32:53 –62, 1995; Kammeyer A.& Luiten RM. 2015. Oxidation events and skin aging. Ageing 
Research Reviews. 21:16–29. 
27 Delcour JA. et al. 2012. Technologies for enhanced exploitation of the health-promoting potential of cereals. Trends in Food Science & Technology 20, 1-9. 
28 European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) 2014. Opinion of the Scientific Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain on a request fr om the Commission related to the 
presence of modified forms of certain mycotoxins in food and feed. The EFSA Journal, 12(12), 3916 
29 Valle-Algarra FM. et al. 2009. Changes in ochratoxin A and type A and type B trichothecenes contained in wheat flour during dough fermentation and bread mak ing. 
Food Addit Contam Part A.  26:896-906; Voss KA. & Snook ME. 2010. Stability of the mycotoxin deoxynivalenol (DON) during the production of flour -based foods and 
wheat flake cereal. Food Addit Contam Part A. 27:1694-1700; Meca G. et al. 2013. Beauvericin degradation during bread and beer making. Food Control 34:1-8. 
30 Kluger B. et al. 2014. A novel stable isotope labelling assisted workflow for improved untargeted LC–HRMS based metabolomics research 10:754-769. 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 17 
Maize based DDGS can be contaminated 
with high levels and a broad spectrum of 
mycotoxins31 resulting in losses in feed 
production. Micro -organisms can degrade 
mycotoxins but the adequacy for a safe use 
to efficiently produce biogas32 and 
bioethanol33 by fermentation of mycotoxin 
contaminated batches must still be given. 
The performance of specific mycotoxin -degrading microorganism 
strains34 and novel enzymes provided by partner Biomin, on the 
detoxification of DON , ZEN and fumonisins  (Commission Implementing 
Regulation (EU) Nr. 1016/2013) during biogas and bioethanol production 
will be evaluated. Recently available, novel enzymes  will b e used in 
technical scale fermentation processes  to study the use of 
mycotoxin contaminated batches in biofuel production  (partner: end 
user Suedzucker)  and to investigate the effect on the (decreased) 
mycotoxin content in the DDGS by-product. 
Previous projects and standards (GAP, 
HACCP) in the area of crop production 35 and 
mycotoxin reduction provided either isolated 
solutions rather than integrated 
approaches or have not involved end 
users representing the major food/feed/crop 
energy/ fruit and grain in dustry as full 
partners. 
A fully integrated multi-actor approach with end user involvement is 
envisaged: The outcomes of the MyToolBox project with novel 
intervention strategies will be assembled in the web-accessible 
MyToolBox decision support system (DSS ) or e -platform based on 
new ICTs, which provides multiple information to support decision -
making in mycotoxin management by all actors along the food chain and 
enables to integrate multiple and asynchronous information/data sources, 
both dynamic and stati c. The incentives of all actors in the food/feed 
supply chain will be studied and used to build MyToolBox to maximise 
the opportunities for practical use of the platform by the stakeholders in 
and beyond the project. 
Weather-driven forecasting models have 
been developed in some countries 36, mostly 
to predict Fusarium head blight  and/or 
DON contamination in wheat. Most of these 
models are empirical, and few are 
mechanistic37. Some models for mycotoxin 
contamination in maize were also developed 
within the  EU-project MYCORED on which 
MyToolBox will build on. DONCast is 
available in Europe but only accessible to 
end users linked to one specific 
agrochemical company  (www.doncast.eu/). 
These models were validated to a limited 
extent, mainly in the regions where they have 
been developed38. 
For DON in wheat and aflatoxins in maize, available  forecasting models 
will be evaluated for performance, and extended such they cover the 
most important wheat and maize growing areas in Europe. Enlargement 
of existing models  to include  additional regions, cereals (oats), fungi 
and mycotoxins.  
Effective integration of both existing empirical and mechanistic 
models (see this table) and their extensive cross -validation to provide 
the end users with a real time decision support system based on a 
multiple-model platform  and novel monitoring techniques. This 
forecasting system will allow both short term decision regarding fungicide 
application and harvest timing, as well as long term planning. 
Innovation potential 
                                                        
31  Zachariasova M. et al. 2014. Occurrence of multiple mycotoxins in European feedingstuffs, assessment of dietary intake by farm animals. Anim Feed Sci Tech 
193:124–140; Renewable fuels association (2014) URL: http://www.ethanolrfa.org/ (accessed 20.11.2014); Wu F. and Munkvold G.P. (2008) Mycotoxins in ethanol co-
products: modeling economic impacts on the livestock industry and management strategies. J Agric Food Chem 56:3900-3911; Zhang Y. and Caupert J. (2012) Survey 
of mycotoxins in U.S. distiller’s dried grains with solubles from 2009 to 2011. J Agric Food Chem 60:539-543; Schaafsma, AW et al. 2009 Mycotoxins in fuel ethanol co-
products derived from maize: A mass balance for deoxynivalenol,. J.Science of Food and Agriculture. 89: 157-1580 . 
32 Hanschmann G.  2008. Versuch zum Verhlaten von DON in einer Biogasanlage 
http://www.landwirtschaft.sachsen.de/landwirtschaft/download/DON_Belastg_inBGA_2008BfUL.pdf 
33 Kłosowski G. 2010 The influence of raw material contamination with mycotoxins on alcoholic fermentation indicators; Bioresource Technology 101: 3174-3152. 
34 Vekiru E. et al. 2010. Cleavage of Zearalenone by Trichosporon mycotoxinivorans to a Novel Nonestrogenic Metabolite. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 76, 
2353-2359. 
35 Coceral/Cogeca. 2010. European Good Hygiene Practices Guide for the collection, storage, trading and transport of cereals, oilseeds  and protein crops, 95 pp.; Codex 
Alimentarius CAC/RCP 51 -2003 Code of Practice for the Prevention and reduction of mycotoxin conta mination in cereals, including Annexes on ochratoxin A, 
zearalenone, fumonisins and tricothecenes; EU Recommendation (EU) No 583/2006 on the prevention and reduction of Fusarium toxins in cereals and cereal products; 
HGCA. 2002. Practical guidelines to minimise mycotoxin development in UK cereals, in line with forthcoming EU legislation, using the correct agronomic techniques and 
grain storage management. Project report No.289, 65 pp.; Van der Fels-Klerx HJ. & Booij CJH. 2010. Managing mycotoxins in the cereal supply chain using geographic 
information. J Food Prot. 73:1153-1159. 
36 Van der Fels-Klerx HJ et al. 2012. A model to estimate deoxynivalenol contamination of wheat in north western Europe for use in climate change impact assessment. J 
Food Prot 75:1099 -1106; Van der Fels -Klerx HJ. et al. 2010. Descriptive modeling to predict deoxynivalenol in winter wheat in The Netherlands. Food Add. Contam. 
Part A 27:636-643; Rossi V. et al. 2003. A model estimating the risk of Fusarium head blight on wheat. Bull. OEPP/EPPO Bull. 33:421–425; Landschoot S. et al. 2012. 
Ordinal regression models for predicting deoxynivalenol in winter wheat. Plant Pathology 62:1319-1329. Hooker DC. et al. 2002. Using weather variables pre- and post-
heading to predict deoxynivalenol content in winter wheat. Plant Disease. 86:611 –619; Schaafsma AW. & Hooker DC. 2007. Climatic models to predict occurrence of 
Fusarium toxins in wheat and maize. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 119:116–25. 
37 Van der Fels-Klerx HJ & Booij CJH. 2010. Managing mycotoxins in the cereal supply chain using geographic information. J. Food Prot. 73:1153-1159; Van Asselt ED et 
al. 2012. Modeling mycotoxin formation by Fusarium graminearum in maize in the Netherlands. Food Addit. Contam. A 29:1572-1580. 
38 Prandini A. et al. 2009. Review of predictive models for Fusarium head blight and related mycotoxin contamination in wheat. Food Chem. Toxicol. 47: 927–31.  
 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 18 
The MyToolBox project has high innovation potential and will produce new products and services that can be 
marketed and patented, as it will lead to:  
 A user-friendly and sustainable multi -actor decision support system (DSS) to reduce mycotoxin contamination in 
the food and feed supply chain, that takes into consideration the user requirements and desired user experience of 
our target end -users (that will include farmers, grain silo managers, food and feed production managers, among 
others) 
 Effective production and applic ation of atoxigenic fungal strains to use for biocompetitive exclusion of toxigenic 
strains in the field in the EU. 
 Application of “next generation” advanced models to forecast fungal growth and mycotoxin formation in the field. 
 Procurement of alternatives  to conventional fungicides (bio -pesticides), to effectively combat fungal growth in the 
field. 
 Availability of real-time environmental monitoring systems in storage facilities for post-harvest mycotoxin control.  
 Applicability of innovative sorting, milling and baking strategies to increase the safe use of mycotoxin-contaminated 
batches for food and feed. 
 Insight into the fate of mycotoxins during industrial milling and baking operations to facilitate science -based 
decisions about possible derogations and fine-tuning of current EU-legislation on mycotoxins. 
 Optimised processes for mycotoxin reduction in DDGS, to enable better valorisation of these materials for feed use 
and efficient production of biofuels. 
 Updated standards for Good Agricultural Practice and safe food and feed storage and production. 
Exploitation of the project results is the most direct way of gaining commercial benefits, such as new 
products/services, increased profitability and industry growth, as well as socio -economic benefits suc h as 
sustainability, jobs and competitiveness. A strong impact -oriented approach to our project ensures that from the 
outset activities are in place to plan for the future use and sustainability of the project’s outputs. As such, a sound 
business model wil l be developed  in order to ensure the viability of the proposed platform as a sustained 
MyToolBox e-platform that will be used for many years to come in the European crop production, food and feed supply 
chains and this will be fundamental for ensuring the long-term impacts of the project. 
To conclude, MyToolBox is clearly an ambitious proposal  with many goals set at different points of possible 
interventions at the pre- and post-harvest levels and through-out the food chain. It is our intention to co-operate with 
and to avoid duplication of research carried out in running major mycotoxin reduction programmes  (especially 
in the area of resistance breeding against Fusarium Head Blight) and to come up with a proposal in cooperation with 
major end users and SME s which addresses commonly identified scientific and technical gaps in mycotoxin 
reduction in various stages within the food and feed chain as identified by the end users . We are aware of the 
ambitious nature of our project goals but are convinced that all  the goals defined in the proposed project 
MyToolBox are re alistic for 3 major reason s: 1) The multi -actor based consortium involves the relevant 
international experts from farming, industry and academia, 2) the current state -of-the-art and the knowledge gained in 
recent (inter-)national projects will be taken into account and cooperation will be realised with other ongoing activities 
in the area of mycotoxin reduction and 3) for nume rous objectives set in MyToolBox we will not have to start from 
scratch but will build on existing knowledge and achievements of the project partners being involved in 
MyToolBox as e.g., a pre -selection of biopesticides (partner Axeb), significant expertis e and high -performance 
industrial instrumentation in pre -milling (Barilla) or novel enzymes to be employed in biofuel production as a safe 
option of contaminated batches (Biomin , Südzucker) – all being available to MyToolBox from the very beginning 
of the project. 
2. Impact
2.1 Expected impacts  
MyToolBox mobilises a multi-actor partnership  (farmers, technology SMEs, food and feed industry, policy 
stakeholders and academia) to develop novel interventions aimed at achieving a 20 -90% reduction in crop losses 
due to fungal and mycotoxin contaminatio n. MyToolBox will not only pursue a field -to-fork approach but will also 
consider safe use options of contaminated batches, such as the efficient production of biofuels. A major component 
of MyToolBox, which also distin guishes this proposal from previous efforts in the area mycotoxin reduction, is to 
provide the recommended measures to the end users along the food and feed chain in a web-based MyToolBox. 
Cutting edge research will result in new interventions, which will be integrated together with existing measures in the 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 19 
MyToolBox that will guide the end user as to the most effective measure(s) to be taken  by farmers to reduce crop 
losses. We will focus on small grain cereals, maize, peanuts and dried figs, applicable to agricultural conditions in EU 
and China. Crop losses using existing practices will be compared with crop losses after novel pre -harvest 
interventions including investigation of genetic resistance to fungal infection, cultural control, the use of novel 
biopesticides (organic-farming compliant), competitive biocontrol treatment and development of forecasting models to 
predict mycotoxin contamination. Res earch into post -harvest measures including real -time monitoring during storage  
(on farm grain silos, silo stores in food processing plants, silo centres, etc.) , innovative sorting of crops using vision -
technology and novel milling technology will enable ce reals with higher mycotoxin levels to be processed without 
breaching regulatory limits in finished products. Research into the effects of baking on mycotoxin levels will provide a 
better understanding of process factors which influence both the mycotoxin levels and the formation of conjugated and 
other modified forms of these toxic secondary metabolites.  Involvement of leading institutions from China is aimed at 
establishing a sustainable cooperation in mycotoxin research between the EU and China. 
The MyToolBox project will contribute to each of the expected impacts of SFS-13-2015 as follows: 
a) A toolkit (plant resources, management tools, technologies) to effectively monitor and reduce the 
incidence of mycotoxin contaminants in crop production as well as in the food and feed supply chains 
MyToolBox mobilises a multi-actor and multi-disciplinary partnership throughout the food and feed chain (with 43% 
industry participation including 5 end users and Chinese institutions who collaborate closely with farmers and other 
relevant stakeholders from the industry ) to develop novel interventions aimed at achieving an increased volume of 
safe food and feed in the EU by a reduction in crop losses due to biological (fungal) and mycotoxin contamination, 
of at least 20% and up to 90% - depending on the type of commodity and point of intervention - due to biological 
(fungal) and mycotoxin contamination. Cutting edge research will result in n ew and adapted interventions, which will 
be integrated together with existing measures in a web -based MyToolBox platform. It will represent a one-stop-shop 
MyToolBox web-based platform and will consist of information and advisory modules, management tools, as well as 
technologies that equip farmers and all other actors in the food and feed supply chain with systematic/pro -active, cost 
effective, affordable approaches for effective monitoring and reducing the incidences of mycotoxin 
contaminants in crops , fo od and feed, and reducing the dependence on expensive, wasteful end -point 
testing/segregation. Since MyToolBox will be a sustainable web-based platform that will be readily accessible by all 
actors in the EU food and feed chain beyond the project, this impact will last for many years to come in the EU and 
will ensure the long-term impacts of the project.  
The pre-harvest impact will be measured by comparing the achieved reduction in mycotoxin content and increase in 
yield in field trials between the convent ional agricultural systems to the new designed systems. The use of 
biopesticides and biofumigation or debris treatment in EU field trials should each reduce the deoxynivalenol 
level in wheat by  50%39, the combined effect is yet unknown. In EU field trials t he aflatoxin content of resistant 
maize cultivars will be compared to the aflatoxin content of susceptible cultivars, which is expected to be lower than 
the 70% achieved by other s40. The aflatoxin contents of maize (EU) and peanuts (China) after treatment with 
atoxigenic fungal strains will be compared to non-treated crops in field trials. The aim is to achieve a 90% reduction in 
aflatoxin contamination41. 
The post-harvest impact will be measured by comparing the achieved reduction in mycotoxin content of cereals in 
trials in grain silo’s using real -time sensors compared to conventional practices. This would contribute to approx. 15% 
savings (~ 100 Mio Euro/year). While it is impossible to accurately determine the reduction in costs, it is estimated that 
cost for monitoring will be reduced by at least 30% in all stages of the food and feed supply chain. This impact will 
be measured by comparing the estimated current cost for monitoring by EU governments and industry to the new 
designed monitoring models.  
The novel non -invasive real time sorting of dried fruit (figs)  will achieve a 5% or less probability of the batch 
average concentration of aflatoxin B 1 failing to meet the EU limits as compared to conventional sorting. The 
developed innovative milling and baking techniques will result in, resp. 50 and 15% mycotoxin reductions in the 
finished food products. The effect of the use of enzymes on mycotoxin reduction  during biofuel production will be 
assessed in trials with and without adding the enzymes. Impact will be a reduction of the DON and fumonisin content 
to 4% of the mycotoxin level (DON) achieved by conventional production (Project ENERCYCLE). 
b) Contribution to legislation and standard setting  
                                                        
39 Paul P.A. et al. 2008 http://apsjournals.apsnet.org/doi/abs/10.1094/PHYTO-98-9-0999. 
40 Windham G.L. and Williams W.P. (1998) http://apsjournals.apsnet.org/doi/abs/10.1094/PDIS.1998.82.3.281. 
41 Dorner J.W. 2004. http://informahealthcare.com/doi/abs/10.1081/TXR-200027877. 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 20 
At a European level , MyToolBox will anticipate potential legislative implications of the project outputs  and 
therefore work with relevant bodies such as EFSA, DG SAN TE and the Chinese Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) for 
standard setting. Compliance assessment will be undertaken of maximum levels in the feed/food chain for selected 
examples which will lead to identification of points to be changed in legislation/standards in order to implement the 
MyToolBox e-platform and analysis/discussion of benefits and drawbacks and making regulatory impact assessment. 
Our pan-European approach will have impact on European cohesion, in particular in raising food safety standards in 
New Member States, as well as in candidate Countr ies, such as Serbia which faced severe food safety and social 
problems due to aflatoxin contamination in maize in 2013. Our pre-harvest research on maize will help Serbian 
farmers to conform to EU legal limits, and hence aiding Serbia's aim to increase foo d and feed safety and to 
facilitate entry to the EU. 
The project will also provide new information on the presence of mycotoxins and their modified forms that are formed 
during food processing which will be forwarded to EFSA as a relevant contribution for the overall risk assessment of 
mycotoxins in foods. 
Together with our partner CAAS-FRI from the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences  and the Chinese 
Ministry of Agriculture  (MOA), under the auspices of FEFANA, we aim to contribute to the standard setti ngs for 
authorization of mycotoxin -detoxifying feed additives in China. Current guidelines (e.g. from EFSA) for the 
registration of detoxifying feed additives in the European Union will serve as examples for possible adaptions 
of Chinese legislation.  As a basis in vivo experiments will be performed to assess the efficacy of detoxifying feed 
additives under local Chinese conditions  based on the guidelines established in the EU . Thus, our activities will help 
European producers of mycotoxin-degrading feed additives to gain broader access to the Chinese market as well as 
to contribute to an improvement of Chinese legislation. 
c) Safe use options for contaminated batches 
Implementing MyToolBox will reduce the number of incidents and crises in EU related to mycotoxin contamination in 
crops, food and feed, thus limiting crop losses because it enables all actors in the  farming, food and feed supply chain 
to effectively monitor contamination and use the decision support tools to take immediate actions to prevent further 
deterioration and to direct contaminated batches to appropriate use. Use of MyToolBox in countries exporting to the 
EU will lead to less border rejections in EU, thus saving food and feed, besides from improving food and fe ed 
sustainability in the country of export. Despite increased crop production with an increased part of food and feed 
quality, a certain volume of crop will remain unfit for consumption. Part of this volume can be brought to food or feed 
quality by applying the novel sorting and milling techniques developed in MyToolBox. The impact will be measured 
by comparing the volume fit for food/feed between the conventional and novel processing techniques. The still 
remaining volume of mycotoxin contaminated grains unfit for further physical processing for food/feed will be subjected 
to innovative bioethanol production  using e.g. novel mycotoxin degrading enzymes  to allow the DDGS by-
product still to be used as feed  component. Impact of this measure will be a 10-30% improved efficiency of the 
biofuel production due to the improved fermentation process which will at the same time lead to low levels or even 
mycotoxin free DDGS . The outcome of these MyToolBox studies could also positively contribute to the current 
food vs fuel debate as mycotoxin contaminated batches could then be safely employed to produce biofuels on the 
one hand and high quality DDGS on the other hand. 
d) Reduced occurrence of mycotoxin contamination in crops in order to improve productivity and 
competitiveness of European agriculture and food sectors 
Maintaining the competitiveness of the industry at European -level is critical for economy, growth and jobs in many 
rural locations that are dependent on a healthy agro -food industry. Increasing the c ompetitiveness in the food and 
agricultural sector is of key strategic interest to the EU, which in 2010 invested €43.8 billion into Agricultural 
expenditure and direct aid 42. Moreover, by 2050, food production will need to be 70% higher  than at present to 
satisfy the world demand, whilst faced with a limited increase in arable land and other natural resource constraints 43. 
Productivity therefore needs to be increased. Currently, the economic consequences of mycotoxins in terms of food 
and feed losses, increase of the cost of inspection and analyses, etc., are considerable, and lead to costs in  billions of 
€ annually to the European and global food supply chain44,45,46. 
                                                        
42 http://ec.europa.eu/budget/library/publications/budget_in_fig/dep_eu_budg_2010_en.pdf. 
43 http://www.ecpa.eu/event/food/outlook-eu-agriculture-causes-constraints-and-challenges-productivity 
44 Waller M. and Williams G. (1996) Mycotoxin economics. Feed Manag 47: 23-25. 
45 USDA (1999) Grain fungal diseases and Mycotoxin. Reference pp 6-28. 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 21 
Without doubt, the pan -European deployment of the outputs of the MyToolBox project will have a marked impact on 
improving the productivity  of our EU agriculture and food and feed sector, by providing pre -harvest interventions 
undertaken at farm level, toge ther with post-harvest interventions undertaken from storage through to processing into 
the finished food or feed product to prevent yield and monetary losses due to mycotoxin contamination, through 
prevention, reduction and reuse strategies. In economic a nd job creation terms, should the deployment of MyToolBox 
achieve a reduction of 5% of the annual EU losses due to mycotoxins (estimated at €2 bn), we could save the 
industry and the economy €100 million per year, the equivalent of 830 jobs directly  (based on average capital 
intensity in the industrial sector of €120k per job per annum 47). To this end, from 2020 (when the MyToolBox platform 
will be widely deployed) to 2030, the project could have contributed to reductions in EU mycotoxin losses of €1 bn, 
safeguarding over 8300 jobs. In relation to wealth and new job creation attributed to growth, should the EU be able to 
add even 1 cent per ton to the value of the cereals it produces, this would generate €28.5 M per annum, which would 
yield €285 M by 2030, le ading to the creation of some 2375 new jobs (based on the 2010 volumes of cereals 
produced- 285.2 million tons of cereals). 
If we consider, for example, that  wheat and maize  account for 68% of cereals grown within the EU with an annual 
production of over 200 million tons. With annual losses due to mycotoxins estimated at 5-10%, this accounts for a loss 
of €1.2-2.4 billion for wheat alone. A reduction of losses  of even 1% would save €12 -24 million annually, but would 
also provide an additional 66 -133 thousan d tons of wheat, which would have major implications for improved 
productivity, food security, as well as reduce the carbon footprint of EU agriculture. With average reduction by 20 -
50% of current losses in wheat due to Fusarium mycotoxins alone, which is the impact achievable through 
MyToolBox for wheat,  yielding cost savings in the multi -millions € per year. The effects as a result of unexpected 
contamination of maize with aflatoxins can be even more severe: the long term costs for aflatoxins contaminated  
maize based feed are estimated to cost Serbia hundreds of millions € per year. It is expected that post-harvest 
losses, due to mould spoilage and mycotoxins, pests in food/feed chains, in the EU will be reduced by at least 15%, 
representing value of £75M-100. In addition, the achievable impact of MyToolBox could reduce the border rejections 
by at least 30%  due to prevention of moulds/mycotoxins during shipping transport (current mould/mycotoxins 
represent 30-40% of all EU border rejections, representing a losses of ca. 30-40 Mio€ per annum).  
In 2013 about 5.2 million m³ of bioethanol were produced in Europe (and 88.8 million m³ worldwide), with almost 
exclusively grains as a feedstock, resulting in a production of about 4.2 million tons of DDGS in Europe. We estimate 
the losses in feed production due to mycotoxin contaminated DDGS to be in the range of €15 -20 million 
annually for the swine industry alone. The major end user,  Suedzucker, one the world´s greatest producers of 
sugar and operating one of Europe´s largest bioethanol production plants, participates in MyToolBox based on the 
expected impact of reduced waste  by a) significantly lowering mycotoxin levels in DDGS, b) 10-30% improved 
efficiency of the bioethanol production c) increased market value (>10%) of mycotoxin free DDGS. In short, the 
potential for reducing mycotoxin-related yield- and economic- losses in the EU agriculture and food sector will directly 
impact on  productivity and competitiveness and will open up the potential for further investments and 
innovation in these sectors as a result of increased profitability.  
e) Reduced risks for human and animal health, and thus increase consumer confidence in agro -food 
products 
The impact of MyToolBox will be a decreased risk for human and animal health in the EU,  due to a reduction of 
the mycotoxin levels in food and feed and, at the same time an increase in volume of safe food and feed  
produced in the EU. The benefits of MyToolBox for consumer and market confidence in agro-food products will be 
high due to effective communication of the results of this project to the general public, retailers, policy makers and 
stakeholders. With between 25 and 50% of global food and fe ed sources affected by mycotoxin contamination, this is 
a major food safety hazard. As food safety is the key criteria by which consumers judge quality 48, it needs to be 
safeguarded from farm-to-fork. 
Impacts of MyToolBox will be  the reduced number of incidents and more transparent supply chain , due to 
improving pre- and post-harvest measures and a more reliable monitoring of crops for mycotoxin contamination and, 
most important, better communication among the EU -28. The impact will lead to a reducti on in RASFF notifications 
thus saving a lot of effort and money on control and issue management. Moreover, it will improve consumer trust in 
imported food and feed. EFSA will be member of the advisory board to safeguard the interests of the consumer. 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
46 Swamy H.V.L.N. et al. 2004. Effects of feeding blends of grains naturally contaminated with Fusarium mycotoxins on growth and immunological parameters of broiler 
chickens. Poultry Sci 83: 533-543. 
47 Apel R. 2004. http://larouchepub.com/other/2004/3135germany_jobs.html. 
48 Anonymous 2005. http://www.foodproductiondaily.com/Safety-Regulation/Consumer-trust-vital-says-Czech-food-safety-head. 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 22 
If we consider the negative impacts for animal health, and indeed the directly related economic losses, the US pork 
industry alone is estimated to sustain an annual loss of 147 Million USD from reduced weight gain as a result of swine 
feed that is contaminated with AF, ZEN, DON, FB and OTA 49. Estimates of the annual economic impacts of economic 
impacts of livestock losses in the developing world (Philippines, Thailand and Indonesia) as a consequence of 
aflatoxins alone are ~200 Million USD 50. Beyond these economic  losses, there are also the negative animal welfare 
impacts of poor animal health. MyToolBox will contribute to reducing the economic losses and increasing the wellbeing 
of livestock.  
f)  Contribution to long-term collaboration with China on food safety 
As p art of our long -term China collaboration strategy, we will exchange information and share experiences on the 
production, formulation and application of biocontrol agents  (partner CAAS-IAPPST), forecasting models and on the 
use of on -line sensing for enviro nmental factors during the storage of grains and peanuts. This will contribute to the 
impact of creating transparent supply chains for food and feed both in the EU and in China. In cooperation with the 
Coordinator, o ur Chinese partner  Prof. Liu Yang  (CAAS-IAPPST), who chairs the Division of Mycotoxicology  of the  
Mycological Society of China will set up an EU-China-Mycotoxin Forum as a dialogue platform between China and 
the EU to provide building -blocks for further EU -China dialogue across a wider rang e of food safety topics. The EU-
China Mycotoxin -Forum will be chaired by Prof. Yang and the MyToolBox coordinator Prof. Krska and will receive 
support from ICC and its current president Prof.  Fengcheng Wang (Partner 3). Cooperation will be sought with the 
International Society for Mycotoxicology (ISM )- the MyToolBox -Coordinator is General Secretary of ISM  - and the 
Division of Mycotoxicology, Mycological Society of CAAS. It will draw together research achievements on mycotoxin 
prevention and control, and su bsequently provide building -blocks for further EU -China dialogue on mycotoxin 
prevention. Measures will be implemented to ensure that the EU-China Forum is sustainable beyond the lifetime of the 
project. Our EU -Sino partnership will also contribute to the standard settings for authorization of mycotoxin -
detoxifying feed additives in China, whereby current EU guidelines for the registration of detoxifying feed additives 
will serve as examples for possible adaptions of Chinese legislation.  This is important a s currently, ~475 million pigs 
are farmed in China, representing nearly 60% of the world´s total pig population. Since up to 24% of complete feed for 
pigs have exceeded even the maximum limits set for DON levels by the Chinese authorities 51, the potential o f 
mycotoxin-degrading feed additives on the Chinese market is clearly recognizable. A need for more than 54,000 
metric tons of detoxifying agents can be estimated in China. The EU-China partnerships established through the 
MyToolBox project will contribute  to creating transparent supply chains for food and feed imported in the EU and 
exported to China, which will have far reaching implications for food safety and consumer confidence. 
Improving innovation capacity and the integration of new knowledge  
Innovations in pre- and post-harvest strategies and safe use options will be developed in the MyToolBox project. These 
innovations and new knowledge will be combined with recently developed innovations, into new innovations and insights 
that are translated  to clear instructions in the MyToolBox decision strategies. T his strategy will be applicable beyond 
the project and to other areas where contaminants play a role. 
MyToolBox makes innovations for mycotoxin prevention available to all actors in the food and feed chain, thus 
strengthening the competiveness and growth of the companies while meeting the needs for EU and global markets. 
The increase in available high quality food and feed will result in more jobs available in the EU and increased export of 
food and feed. Moreover, the export of mycotoxin binders is expected to increase thus leading to world -wide 
improvement of food and feed. 
Key to improving the innovation and the integration of new knowledge in the EU crop and f ood production and supply 
chain in order to better equip farmers and the industry to reduce crop and food losses due to mycotoxin contamination 
is our post-project strategy for the dissemination and exploitation of all the results generated during the project. As 
will be discussed in the next section, t he MyToolBox consortium has a clear vision and strong capacity to bring the 
project innovations to the market. The consortium has strong industrial European partners from all relevant parts of the 
food and feed chain. Furthermore, the members of the scientific advisory board and the stakeholders are strong 
representatives of the food and feed sector . MyToolBox will develop a sound business case to take the MyToolBox 
e-platform to the market beyond the project period. The aim is to develop a sustainable business model that enables the 
deployments, maintenance and further develop ment and expansion of  the MyToolBox e -platform in future.  The 
MyToolBox consortium has good participation of industrial representatives from along the value chain, who will ensure 
                                                        
49 Wu and Munkvold, 2008. J. of Agric. Food Chem 2008.  
50 Lubulwa and Davis, 1994. Cited in Wu 2004. 
51 Li X.Y. et al. 2014. Occurrence of mycotoxins in feed ingredients and complete feeds obtained from the Beijing region of China. J Animal Sci Biotechnol 5: 37-44. 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 23 
that the MyToolBox and the business plan are relevant and viable. The involvement of both the industrial partners and 
the stakeholders will guarantee quick acceptance of the MyToolBox by other partners beyond the project. The project 
fully addresses the ma rket and societal needs and will significantly contribute to further implementation of safe use 
options in regulatory context in EU as well as in China.  
Barriers and obstacles, and any framework conditions (such as regulation and standards), that may 
determine whether and to what extent the expected impacts will be achieved 
The MyToolBox consortium recognises the difficulties of acceptance of new agricultural practices and detoxification 
procedures by farmers and regulators and the complexity of multiple stakeholder dialogues. To this end, w ithin WP4 
(T4.1) we will identify a nd engage with farmers, retailers, regulators, quality managers of multiple food and feed 
suppliers and consumers in order to establish their needs and constraints. Besides assessing potential strength, 
weaknesses opportunities, and threats (SWOT), from the stakeholders’ perspective, the level of understanding and 
acceptability of different developed safe use concepts and perceived information needs will also be explored, as will any 
regulatory impacts. A SWOT analysis will help to understand the barriers  and will identify the conditions for maximal 
acceptance. Importantly, MyToolBox already benefits from an existing cooperation with DG SANTE and the European 
Food Safety Authority and a number of partners have experience in relation to the application process for seeking 
regulatory approvals. Furthermore, WP4 will be fully dedicated to the involvement of all stakeholders  to ensure 
acceptance by the proposed farmer and industrial partners in the food and feed chain. The achievement of the expected 
impacts will be monitored throughout the project. The impacts have been clearly defined with measures for monitoring.  
It is noteworthy that the MyToolBox results will be an enabler to the adhere to the EU crop and food production and 
supply chain to comply with  EU Regulations and Recommendations 1881/2006, 1126/2007, 165/2010 and 165/2013 
that set maximum levels for mycotoxins. This should contribute favourably to numerous EU policies and Directives that 
outline requirements guaranteeing the standards of all European products. Moreover, this project will contribute to Rural 
Development, Food Security and Sustainability policies, and it will support an emerging strategy: a move  from food 
security to self-sufficient food security, one of the long terms goals of the Treaty of Rome. To ensure wide dissemination 
of the results, and to plan for post -project exploitation, work package (WP5) is aim ed at targeted dissemination of 
MyToolBox results to the relevant international discussions and committees, including China , and to developing a 
sustainable business model to ensure the continuity and growth of the MyToolBox e-platform.
2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
Dissemination and exploitation of results and outline of dissemination plan 
The MyToolBox project will develop a series of integrated measures that will be combined in the decision model, which 
enables a significant reduction in losses of crops due to fungal and mycotoxin contamination. The exploitation potential 
of the project results is very promising. As such , our project is backed with very sound strategies for the 
dissemination and the exploitation  of the project results , to maximise the societal, innovation and competitive 
impacts. 
Our dissemination plan encompasses a comprehensive series of actions to diffuse the non-confidential results that are 
generated during the project to as wide and relevan t an audience as possible in order to heighten awareness about 
the results, to contribute to knowledge building in Europe, as well as to ensure that as many actors from the crop 
and food chains and consumers/citizens as possible have access to these result s. This includes farmers/crop 
producers, collectors, food processers, retailers, consumers, as well as scientists, policy makers, mass media (TV, 
radio and the written press) and multipliers for addressing the general public, early stage researchers , including young 
people. In keeping with the general profile of each target audience, the most appropriate dissemination tools and 
channels will be selected for targeting each and the expected impacts of our dissemination activities have 
been defined (table 4). 
Table 4: Outline of the MyToolBox Dissemination Plan  
Target Audience  Tools & Channels Expected Impacts 
Farmers/Crop 
producers  
Crop 
collectors/storage 
Food processors  
Retailers and 
consumers 
Project corporate identity tools (logo, label) 
Project Website 
Project Leaflets 
Project Posters 
Video clip (for YouTube, project website, etc.) 
Powerpoint Presentations 
Generation of awareness about 
MyToolBox and its benefits for 
reducing crop and food losses due to 
mycotoxin contamination among EU 
farmers, crop and food production and 
supply chain and other industry 
stakeholders in order to stimulate 
interest in the project results and to 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 24 
Industry Multipliers- 
Sectoral Associations 
(e.g. Copa Cogeca, 
also member of the 
stakeholders group, 
Standardisation 
bodies and policy 
stakeholders, national 
food safety authorities, 
EFSA, EC, national 
governmental bodies, 
ICC, AACCI, CEN, 
ISO, WHO, FAO, 
CODEX 
General public and 
Mass media 
Research and 
academic 
stakeholders 
Early stage 
researchers 
Government & policy 
makers Innovation 
programs 
Educational 
stakeholders and 
students 
Other cross-cutting 
H2020 projects and 
international/ national 
projects 
Other innovation 
programs and 
initiatives (e.g. COST, 
LIFE, etc.) 
Press releases 
Trade fairs and exhibitions: Alimentaria (ES)); 
Anuga (DE); The Cereals Event (UK); SIMA (FR); 
GrainTech (EG), Agrotech (PL); Growtech (TR), GFIA 
(AE). Agritech 2017 (IL); Agritech 2016 (IN); 
Conferences, seminars and workshops: ICC 
International conferences; Conferences of the 
International Society for Mycotoxicology; MoniQA 
International Conferences; European Fusarium 
seminar, Annual World Food and Innovation Forum; 
Nordic Baltic Fusarium Seminar; World Mycotoxin 
Forum, European Association of Agricultural 
Economics; Annual World Food and Innovation 
Forum; European Commission Mycotoxin Forum; 
IUPAC Symposia; Gordon Conference on Mycotoxins 
and Phycotoxins; Food Mycology Workshops; 
International Mycological Congres; British Mycological 
Society; Association of Applied Biologists; British 
Society of Plant Pathology; in the course of 2016-2019 
in China: Chinese cereals and oils association annual 
congress; China International Food Safety & Quality 
(CIFSQ) Conference; China International Food Safety 
Technology & Innovations Expo: participation in 
organising, scientific committees, with poster, paper, 
presentation, or chairing. 
Magazines: Milling & Grain; Miller Magazine, Farmers 
Weekly, Grain Journal; National magazines: VMT 
(NL), De Molenaar (NL). 
Open Access Journal Articles: J. of Food 
Engineering; J. Agric. Food Chem., J. of Stored 
Products Research; J. of Environmental Monitoring 
and Assessment; PlosOne; Food Additives and 
Contaminants; World Mycotoxin Journal; International 
J Food Microbiology; Journal of the Chinese Cereals 
and Oils Association (Journal of Food Safety and 
Quality Science and Technology of Cereals oils and 
Foods) 
 
Involvement in networks/clusters: Mycotoxin 
Stakeholder Groups ( UK); Food4Life; EIP-
AGRIHome-Grown Cereals Authority events; NABIM 
(UK and Irish Millers Association); GAM (European 
Millers Association 
Features in Newsletters and e-bulletins All About 
Feed- www.allaboutfeed.net; ICC News Alerts 
Visibility on Web portals e.g. Food Production Daily 
Inclusion in EU dissemination resources such as 
the EU Horizon Magazine and the EIP Agri Website 
http://ec.europe.eu/eip/agriculture 
Mass media, e,g. Euronews  
Social media 
Programme meetings 
Policy roundtables  
develop novel interventions to 
increase volume of safe food and feed 
in the EU. 
Effective knowledge sharing among 
the research and scientific 
communities, which will contribute to 
the ERA, and to the EU recovery 
package and the EU 2020 strategy for 
smart, sustainable and inclusive 
growth. 
Sound communication towards policy-
makers to increase the influence of 
the project and its results in 
policymaking (which will be reinforced 
by the presence of our expert partner 
in standards setting, BfR).  
Communication to retailers and 
consumers about the efforts being 
made along the chain to increase food 
safety and quality and to reduce 
biological contamination  
The general public should also feel 
they are getting value for money from 
public funded research that will 
ultimately benefit them as consumers, 
by understanding how MyToolBox 
contributes to food safety, food 
security and environmental benefits, . 
More young people will be attracted to 
scientific and research careers, their 
curricula will be enriched by 
knowledge from the project. Early 
stage researchers inspired by the 
results, will be motivated to remain in 
EU- research and possibly work in 
areas that are beneficial for society, 
sustainability and innovation. 
New jobs generated by the industrial 
partners as well as EU suppliers due 
to the development of new business 
opportunities. 
Special attention will be paid to 
dissemination in China. At least one of 
the stakeholder meetings will be held 
in China, preferably with a 
dissemination to involve Chinese 
stakeholders. Scientific meetings will 
be held in China following the 
networks to form an EU-China 
Mycotoxin-Forum. 
Sustainable EU-China dialogue on 
mycotoxin occurrence, detection and 
reduction of mycotoxins and new 
business opportunities the area of 
pre- and post-harvest techniques for 
EU-partners in China 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 25 
 
Within the framework of Task 5.4 - Dissemination to a wide audience, the partners will build on and execute this 
dissemination plan following a process of analysing: Why – the purpose of the dissemination action; What will be 
communicated – the message; To whom  – the audience; How – the method; When – the timing. Performance 
indicators will be established as part of the upgraded plan, such as number of citations (for publ ications), number of 
hits on web, number of downloads (for electronic documents/materials), number of industry consultations (from 
tradeshows/exhibitions), number of policy-maker engagements, etc.  
Importantly, as part of our dissemination strategy, the “ MyToolBox Roadshow” of events will be organised, which will 
consist of an agenda of events that will be planned for the 48 month duration of the project, where in order to 
maximise resources and to bring mutual benefit to events being organised by third par ties, we will schedule out the 
trade fairs, exhibitions, workshops, seminars, conferences, round tables, etc. of relevance in Europe and 
internationally that MyToolBox consortium members can attend (e.g. Alimentaria (ES); Anuga (DE); The Cereals Event 
(UK); SIMA (FR); GrainTech (EG); Agrotech (PL); among others). Our target will be to have M yToolBox present in at 
least 40 events in Europe and internationally  over the course of the project. A philosophy of ‘not wasting’ any 
dissemination opportunities will b e instilled in the consortium and partners will be encouraged to capitalise on the 
relevant marketing and dissemination events they are attending or organising to plan a dissemination activity for 
MyToolBox. In addition, a number of dedicated MyToolBox events will be organised (it is envisaged 1 per year), of 
which one will be in China, whereby the culmination of the Roadshow will be the Final MyToolBox 
Workshop/Conference in conjunction with a major Mycotoxin Event, such as the IUPAC conference on mycot oxins 
that will be organised to coincide with the end of the project.  
Our dissemination channels (which will be complemented by a professional communication campaign discussed 
below) will cover all the traditional channels such as dissemination at confere nces (papers and posters), publications 
in peer -reviewed journals, dissemination in industry magazines, newsletters and on -line platforms, as well as more 
vanguard channels, such as social media platforms, project blogs and videos, etc. An important dissemination platform 
for the project will also be the project website that will be built during T5.3.2, which will serve as an enduring internet 
site for promoting the project and housing all the downloadable public deliverables and outputs of the project, and  it 
will also house our ‘MyToolBox Green Channel’ for open access to the peer-reviewed publications of the project. It will 
be widely disseminated across Europe and worldwide to generate visitors and traffic to the site.  It is noteworthy that 
we have already registered the www.mytoolbox.eu domain name. 
In addition, our project dissemination activities will link with the broader dissemination strategies of the European 
Technology Platform, Food For Life , as well as with those of Meetings of EIP -AGRI, EU Arable Farmers network, 
International Association for Cereal Science & Technology, EU Crop Protection Association, and other initiatives, etc. 
to contribute to efficient coordination and dissemination of the project outputs across the relevant European, Chinese 
and international communities to promote the project.  Moreover, the dissemination strategy will also consider how it 
can best be used to maximise the future exploitation of the results of the research. 
In order to protect the commercial opportunity, a confidentiality policy will underpin our dissemination activities . 
The consortium experience in collaborative projects points towards the most effective default position being that all 
information is confidential u nless otherwise agreed as non -confidential. This is the clearest starting point. However, 
that said, the academic participants in the consortium aim to publish results  (publications being considered very 
positive success indicators by all the consortium, a lso serving as peer reviewed documents towards the industry, 
standards bodies and policy stakeholders as discussed above), and the industry partners and market actors are also 
eager to showcase and exhibit results at tradeshows and exhibitions and through other industrial channels  
(technical/sectoral magazines.). As such, the IPR Manager  (Dr. Mirta Pinilla from IRIS) will work closely with the 
Dissemination Manager  (Dr. Michaela Pichler from ICC) to manage the identification of non -confidential 
publishable/discloseable information that can be available for dissemination activities.  
Initial business and exploitation plans 
Over the course of the project we will integrate existing and new knowledge in relation to technical, management and 
organisational solutions that are effective for mycotoxin reduction, into practical and affordable management strategies 
that can be used by farmers and food processors along the chain in order to reduce the risk of mycotoxin 
contamination of crops, feed and food, to prevent losses and waste along the food chain, and to provide traceability 
information to the supply chain an d consumers using mainstream ICT technology. As such, the project outputs are 
highly relevant for future market exploitation.  
Critically, all the expected impacts from this project as discussed in Section 2.1 can only be realised through a robust 
post-project exploitation strategy. Our intention is to realise all the exploitation pathways for the results:  
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 26 
a) Commercial exploitation - the industrial use of the project knowledge and outputs for increased 
competitiveness and growth will deliver high innovation and growth impacts. 
Our initial plan for the post -project exploitation of the MyToolBox web-based platform is to use it for the 
development of a new data service for the value chain, whe reby the proposed Business Model (which will be 
further developed and validated over the course of the project) will be a subscription model (typical for Software 
as a Service platforms) for advanced use of the platform (access to the dynamic components), the pricing of 
which will be studied during the project. A freemium model will allow the static component of the platform to be 
readily used for free by farmers, food and feed producers and all stakeholders. A detailed guideline will 
accompany the MyToolBo x platform for the periodic reviewing of the content and incorporation of new 
knowledge. This will ensure that as a wide a community of actors from the value chain can benefit from the 
results of this project for high competitive and social impact in the industry.  
However, in order to ensure that the results that have a high commercial value can be commercially exploited, a 
subscription model will be studied to contribute to the economic and business impacts of the project. During 
Subtask 5.5.1 Business and exploitation plans, we will ensure that we arrive at a robust pricing strategy that is 
based on market research among our target groups  (farmers, grain store operators, food and feed producers, 
etc.) in order to establish the value they perceive for the different dynamic components of the platform and to 
establish the price tolerance to ensure we deliver a high value for money subscription model. It is noteworthy 
that IRIS has expertise in the development of SaaS (software as a service) marketing plans an d 
commercialisation strategies.  
Striking this balance between free dissemination of the results and capitalising on those that have commercial 
value is a winning formula for sustainably tackling societal challenges.  
In addition to the business model for exploiting the MyToolBox platform, for each of the commercially exploitable 
outputs of the project (Table 5 provides a starting point), we will draw up an individual business plan.  
b) Education and training - the use of the new knowledge generated for upskill ing and for enriching curricula in 
European education will have a high impact for raising the European mycotoxin knowledge base  among the 
farming sector, as well as along the food and feed supply chain. 
c) Further research - planning future spin -out research a nd development projects especially in areas that will 
contribute to the transferability of the project results to new applications , such as for example  the large-scale 
integration of mycotoxin degrading enzymes in biofuel plants and the metabolomics approa ches optimised in 
MyToolBox to study the effect of novel baking procedures on the fate of mycotoxins to other areas of food and 
feed processing. 
d) Contribution to standards - the project results can contribute to improved standards in relation to the 
prevention and control of mycotoxins in the Europe and internal food and feed chains.  The project will also aim 
to enable standard settings in China for authorisation of mycotoxin detoxifying feed additives produced in the EU 
and consequently improve market access  of relevant EU products . As has been discussed , during the  project 
we will work with relevant bodies such as EFSA and DG SANTE for standard setting, and we will continue these 
efforts in a post -project phase . Moreover, we aim  to contribute to the standard  setting for authorisation of 
mycotoxin-detoxifying feed additives in China in cooperation with FEFANA, the Chinese Ministry of Agriculture 
(MOA) and CAAS -FRI as an important aspect for the registration of mycotoxin detoxifying feed additives from 
the EU. These are medium to long-term ambitions that will be followed through as part of our exploitation plans. 
Each partner has summarised their broad exploitation expectations ( table 5). These statements showcase the 
exploitation ambitions of each of the partne rs considering the contribution of the results to patents, to new or existing 
products, services, infrastructures, knowledge bases and standards, to ensure the project innovations are delivered to 
the market. During the project, and through Subtask 5.5.1 Business and exploitation plans in-depth plans will be drawn 
up, whereby partners will collectively and individually (based on joint or individual ownership of the different exploitable 
aspects of the project results) create business plans (or exploitation plans) for how they intent to use the results 
(based on the summarised intentions outlined in table 5).  
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 27 
Table 5: Summary of exploitation intentions of the MyToolBox partners 
nº Short 
Name 
Intention for use of project results 
 ALL Promote the use MyToolBox to governments and stakeholders in the respective countries for 
reduction of losses due to fungal infection and mycotoxins. 
1 BOKU Use of knowledge from Task 2. 5 for intensifying know-how in the field of inhibition processes during 
biogas and bioethanol production and degradation of contaminants by microbiology  will directly be 
exploited for industrial applications. This includes the use of mycotoxin contaminated batches in 
biogas and bioethanol production, the production of safe and high quality DDGS and the efficient 
production of biofuels.  
2 DLO-
RIKILT 
Use the expertise collected and gained through the project in interaction with national government 
and food safety authority, as well as private companies, through the running of national projects on 
related topics. Use for international activities, in and outsid e EU, e.g. training given by  DLO-RIKILT 
personnel. 
3 ICC Use of project knowledge and results to develop internationally -accepted standard methods to 
facilitate the trade of grains and grain -based food products within and between countries. Use of the 
project knowledge to offer training activities to future stakeholders and end users. Dissemination of 
the gained knowledge worldwide. 
4 HAU Use the knowledge from Task 1.1,  Task 1.2 and Task 3.1 on alternative and cultural control of 
Fusarium and in the development of an integrated management strategy to reduce Fusarium and 
mycotoxins in UK cereals. 
5 FLI Feedback from end -users and stakeholders  (Task 4.1) will be used to progressively improve the 
design of MyToolBox and ensure that it meets end -user needs and is therefore more likely to be 
widely employed along the food and feed chains. The results of experimental work undertaken with 
feed additives will b e used as a basis for establishing criteria by authorities for market acceptance in 
China. 
6 BARILLA Use of the knowledge from Task 2.1 to test the efficiency of a real time monitoring system for 
improving storage management solutions for mycotoxins in st ored wheat and from Task 3.3 to 
validate the DSS system with different stored cereals as a management tool; Use of the knowledge 
from Task 2.2 to validate an innovative screening technology on suitable commodities; Use of the 
knowledge from  Task 2.3 and Task 2.4 for the development of pre -/milling and food processing 
(especially baking) techniques to mitigate mycotoxin contaminations in the finished food products; 
Use of the knowledge from Task 3.1 and Task 4.1 to synthesi se information to provide guideline s 
(GAP, GMP, HACCP protocols) to control mycotoxin contamination evaluating at the same time the 
real application on the field of the MyToolBox e-platform along the entire chain up to the end -user 
level. 
7 CRAN 
FIELD 
Use of platform technology in Task 2.1 and Task 3.3 of the DSS post -harvest management tool to 
potential user stakeholders via Home -Grown Cereals Authority events; NABIM (UK and Irish Millers 
Association); GAM (European Millers Association), Soil Association, presentations at National Cereals 
Symposia, Research aspects via Symposia organised by British Mycological Society, Association of 
Applied Biologists and British Society of Plant Pathology and at the Biannual World Mycotoxin Forum 
and Gordon Conference on Mycotoxins and Phycotoxins. Task 3.1 on integrated HACCP tools will 
have wider benefits at both a national (HGCA) and European level and be of benefit as components 
of the static platform for industry and for agricultural and food  related organisations (FSA (UK); EFSA 
(EU); European Commission; ILSI Europe). 
8 IRIS Use of the knowledge from Task 2.1 for the development of a real time monitoring system for 
improving grain storage management solutions for mycotoxins in stored cereal s and nuts; Use of the 
knowledge from Task 3.5 for the production and deployment of a SaaS DSS platform for mycotoxin 
reduction in conjunction with HORTA 
9 UNS Use the knowledge from Task 1.3, Task 1.4 and Task 3.1 in the development of an integrated 
management strategy to reduce Fusarium and mycotoxins in maize in Serbia and Italy.  Use the 
knowledge in training purposes in academic courses on integrated crop management. 
10 HORTA Use of results from Task 3.2 for improvement of the small-grain cereals and maize models inserted in 
the HORTA’s web platform for farmers in Italy and used in the MyToolBox as external dynamic 
component (i.e., a component residing in the HORTA’s platform and linked to the MyToolBo x via web 
services for exchanging numerical inputs and outputs); Use of the DSS developed in Task 3.5 for 
future exploitation based on the agreements developed within the Consortium during the project. 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 28 
nº Short 
Name 
Intention for use of project results 
11 BfR Knowledge gained in studying food processing factors and in new developments coming from work on 
milling and food processing from WP2 will be used to provide a sound scientific basis for setting of 
mycotoxin limits in processed foods and refining existing limits where appropriate. 
12 SDU Designs of novel sorting system will be patented and exploitation will be pursued from pilot scale 
sorting of figs to full commercialisation through an existing SME enterprise previously established by 
SDU. The developed sorting system will also be extended to other dried fruits, nuts, chili peppers and 
pistachios. 
13 WU Knowledge gained from the survey on the end -users’ potential motivational barriers to implement 
MyToolBox (Task 4.2) and from the cost-effectiveness analyses (Task 3.4 and Task 4.2) will be used 
in running socio -economic research projects (national and international) on related topics as well as 
for training purposes  in academic  courses on Decision Science and/or Risk management in food 
supply chains 
14 BIOFORSK Use the knowledge from  Task 1.1, Task  1.2 and Task 3.1 in the development of an integrated 
management strategy to reduce Fusarium and mycotoxins in Norwegian cereals 
15 CAAS- 
IAPPST  
Use the knowledge from MyToolBox in the development of an integrated management strategy to 
reduce Fusarium and mycotoxins in cereals, maize and peanuts in China.  
16 BIOMIN BIOMIN intends to secure foreground -IP of Task 2.5 by supporting a quick and reasonable patent 
filing to not hinder scientific communication of the MyToolBox project results. BIOMIN intends use 
these results -IP, especially the developed methods and protocols to reduce mycotoxins in the 
bioethanol or bi ogas production process for increased process performance and DDGS safety, to 
enlarge the existing BIOMIN business segment of mycotoxin deactivation from the feed additive 
industry towards the biogas and bioethanol industries worldwide. That will allow org anic economic 
growth of the company and strengthen especially the EU BIOMIN entities as being the major 
producers of the mycotoxin deactivating product portfolio. Furthermore , existing labour force will be 
secured and, in addition, new jobs in research, de velopment and marketing (>30) will be created 
within BIOMIN as well as by its distributors. To globally spread the benefits of these results within a 
contemporary manner, BIOMIN is willing to out-licence the generated foreground-IP, preferably to the 
relevant industry partners of MyToolBox, so that it may become a standard in industry. 
17 ASAG Use of the knowledge from  Task 2.1 for the development of a real time monitoring system for 
improving grain storage management solutions for preventing and reducing mycotoxin contamination 
in stored cereals and peanuts in China. 
18 SÜD-
ZUCKER 
Use of knowledge to improve management of contaminated grains in bioethanol and animal feeding 
production. This will add to the companies sustainability aim to d evelopment new, sustainable 
production processes and products and better resource management to bring by-products on the feed 
market, an area where currently the US is the leading nation. By implementing the us e of novel, 
effective enzymes and processes, the EU could beco me the new market leader. The existing labour 
force will be secured and, in addition, hundreds of new jobs could be created in the EU as well. 
19 AXEB Use of the knowledge of WP1 and Task 3.1 (pre-harvest reduction strategies for mycotoxins) for an 
expansion of our commercial portfolio with specific products for pre -harvest control of mycotoxins in 
cereals. 
20 AGRO-LV Advice to the farmers to implement debris management technologies and use of MyToolBox to 
increase high quality crop production. 
21 TARIS Pilot scale sorting equipment will be critically compared in terms of efficiency and performance with 
existing manual sorting under UV light. Providing cost -effective manufacture is achieved uptake will 
be consider on a commercial scale. 
22 AGROCEN
TRUM 
Implement crop management strategies for the growing of cereals (except rice), leguminous crops 
and oil seeds in Serbia. 
23 CAAS-FRI Use the gained knowledge on mycotoxin detoxifiers and the related legal issues  for proper standard 
setting in cooperation with the EU and  to develop strategies for safe use options for contaminated 
batches in China. 
 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 29 
How the proposed measures will help to achieve the expected impact of the project 
Our multi-actor and vertical integration approach (i.e. including the whole value chain)  supported by collateral 
implementation channels (such as socio -economic and legal analyses, etc.) will contribute to the achievement of the 
expected impacts of the project. A f undamental strategy for success, is that of enabling actors and stakeholders from 
along the farming/crop and food production and supply chains to enter the research -development-innovation cycle 
linked to mycotoxin reduction to ensure more, safer/higher quality food and feed, social innovation is fostered, 
improved technical, management and organisational solutions are exploited, developed and implemented, as well as  
the development of new business models. To realise this there is a strong innovation dimension/cycle  in our 
approach with a view to promoting early  stakeholder participation, adoption of the project results, and 
continuity of the MyToolBox initiative/movement for impact.  
In short, sound management of the knowledge generated during the project (discussed below), act ive planning in 
relation to post-project exploitation activities for industrialisation of the most market ready results, and further research 
work for escalating along the TRLs, as well as a solid communication strategy to disseminate the non -confidential 
aspects of the result to the European, Chinese and international industry from the crop and food production and supply 
chain, as well as to market actors and multipliers, and policy makers, will all contribute to achieving the expected 
impacts of the proje ct. It is worthy of mention that partner ICC, will provide a pathway to implementation that is not 
available through the normal commercial (market) channels, thus providing a global footprint for MyToolBox. 
How the participants will manage the research data generated and/or collected during the project 
The MyToolBox project will participate in the Open Research Data Pilot initiative . Effective exploitation of data 
depends upon proper data management and curation and as such as Data Management Plan will be drawn up and 
managed through Task 5.2 - Data Management . A formal data plan  will be drawn up and implemented during the 
project that will include: which data will be generated during the research; metadata, standa rds and quality assurance 
measures; plans for sharing data; copyright and intellectual property rights of data; data storage and back -up 
measures; data management roles and responsibilities; costing or resources needed. Indeed, data management will 
be embedded in the wider knowledge management of the project, and it will follow the Guidelines on Open Access to 
Scientific Publications and Research data in Horizon H2020.  
Strategy for knowledge management and protection 
To pave the way forward for commercial exploitation and dissemination of the project results, the consortium will 
implement an integral strategy for the effective management of this knowledge.  
Background IPR and access rights 
Background- information and knowledge (including inventions, databas es, etc.) held by the participants prior to their 
accession to the EC grant agreement, as well as any intellectual property rights which are needed for carrying out the 
project or for using foreground 52 held by the consortium, or indeed by third parties - is defined in the proposal 
preparation phase (pre -Grant Agreement). The current status of the Background being brought to the project by the 
consortium has been included in each participant’s profile description in section 4.1, whereby each beneficiary has 
provided a background statement (which will also be included in the Consortium Agreement that will be sig ned by all 
partners in the eventuality of a successful grant application) . Access to Background that is, or will be found to be, 
necessary for the implementation of the project will be granted royalty free  and background needed to use the 
results of the project will be provided either royalty free or under fair and reasonable conditions. 
A comprehens ive review of “prior art” and patents ( Section 1.4 ) has revealed that to date there is no relevant 
Background held by third parties  that is needed for implementing the research or using the project results. In order 
to ensure that the intended MyToolBox R&D effort does not trespass into the owned knowledge space of a third party, 
and to mitigate against expensive infringement claims, during Task 5.1- Knowledge Management Activities, up-to-date 
patent reviews will be performed periodically to confirm the nov elty of the proposed research and the freedom to 
exploit the results. 
Results definition, protection, ownership and access rights  
The expected results from the project are listed in table 6 below, and will be continually assessed in terms of novelty, 
patentability and protection  as part of Task 5.1, as part of an effective knowledge management strategy. Results 
shall be owned by the participant generating the se52. However, the consortium realizes that it is unethical to withhold 
                                                        
52 REGULATION (EU) No 1290/2013 Of The European Parliament And Of The Council  of 11 December 2013 laying down the rules for participation and dis semination in 
"Horizon 2020 - the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2014-2020)" and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1906/2006 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 30 
innovations or management practices that can provide more and safer food from all actors in the food chain. To avoid 
doubt or confusion over ownership, a protocol of proc edures will be defined, which will be followed by each partner to 
clearly show the development of the generation of knowledge or results. In cases where the results are generated 
jointly (i.e. where the separate parts of some result cannot be attributed to  different participants), it will be jointly 
owned. The allocation and the terms of exercising this joint ownership will be agreed in Joint Ownership Agreements 
that will be established during our knowledge management activities in T5.1 . However, an overriding principle will be 
that the participating industry partners are always provided with the access that they need to the results to 
exploit them in keeping with the needs and strategy of their business. As such, access rights to results for 
implementing the project will be granted on a royalty -free basis. Access rights for use purposes will be granted either 
royalty-free, or on fair and reasonable conditions  to be agreed in Exploitation Agreement(s). Table 6 provides an 
overview of the expected scenarios of results ownership and access rights.  
Table 6: Expected Results Ownership and Access Rights 
WP Description of the 
Expected Result 
Envisaged   
IPR Tool 
Owner(s) Partners to which access rights 
will be granted and conditions 
WP1 Real time monitoring system 
for improving grain storage 
management solutions for 
mycotoxins in stored cereals 
and nuts 
Patent or Know 
How secured 
through 
confidential design 
IRIS, 
CRANFIELD 
Preferential use to BARILLA and 
ASAG (early access and cost price 
in first units purchased) 
WP1 Biofumigation product/s for 
mycotoxins control in cereal 
crops 
Know How 
secured through 
confidential design 
AXEB Access rights to partners that 
require access to be negotiated 
under Fair and Reasonable 
conditions 
WP1 Biopesticide for Fusarium 
control 
Patent or know 
How secured 
through 
confidential 
formulation 
HAU, 
BIOFORSK, 
AXEB 
Access rights to partners that 
require access to be negotiated 
under Fair and Reasonable 
conditions 
WP1 Atoxigenic biocontrol agent Patent UNS, 
AGROCENTRUM 
Preferential use to partners that 
require access under Fair and 
Reasonable conditions 
WP2 Innovative (pre -) milling 
strategies for accurate 
mycotoxin separation and for 
minimization of their content 
in final wheat based food  
products 
Patent or Know 
How secured 
through 
confidential design 
BARILLA Preferential use to partners that 
require access under Fair and 
Reasonable conditions 
WP2 Novel food processing 
procedures to develop a 
sound basis to establish 
process factors for risk 
assessment 
Patent or Know 
How secured 
through 
confidential design 
BARILLA, BOKU Preferential use to partners that 
require access under Fair and 
Reasonable conditions 
WP2 Final risk assessment of 
mycotoxins (free/modified 
forms) during food 
processing through “in -
process stable isotopic 
labelling” 
Patent or Know 
How secured 
through 
confidential design 
BARILLA, BOKU Preferential use to partners that 
require access under Fair and 
Reasonable conditions 
WP2 Real time monitoring system 
for improving grain storage 
management solutions for 
mycotoxins in stored cereals 
and nuts 
Patent or Know 
How secured 
through 
confidential design 
IRIS, 
CRANFIELD 
Preferential use to Barilla and 
ASAG (early access and cost price 
in first units purchased) 
WP2 Product compositions 
including product 
formulations -IP suitable for 
reducing the toxicity and / or 
Patent 
 
Trade secret, if 
patenting does not 
BIOMIN Access to University partners for 
scientific use only. No access 
rights will be provided to industry 
partners for commercial use. No 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 31 
WP Description of the 
Expected Result 
Envisaged   
IPR Tool 
Owner(s) Partners to which access rights 
will be granted and conditions 
the amounts of mycotoxins 
within the biogas and / or 
production bioethanol 
processes including DDGS. 
Methods and protocols for 
applying above mentioned 
products-IP within the biogas 
and / or production 
bioethanol processes. 
seem to be 
possible 
rights for scientific use outside the 
project. Distribution or licensing 
agreements will be negotiated 
under Fair and Reaso nable 
conditions 
WP2 Pilot scale automated sorting 
system for removal of 
aflatoxin contaminated figs.  
Patent or Know 
How secured 
through 
confidential design 
SDU Preferential use to Barilla and 
TARIS 
WP3 Models for to predict fungal 
infection and mycotoxin 
accumulation in wheat, 
barley and maize.  
None DLO-RIKILT, 
HORTA 
Free access to all partners via the 
MyToolBox Platform 
WP3 MyToolBox web -based 
platform 
Know-how through 
software 
development 
secured by code 
HORTA, IRIS, 
DLO-RIKILT 
Free access to all partners.  
Open access to peer-reviewed scientific publications  
The two ways authors can provide open access are (1) by self -archiving their journal articles in an open access 
repository, also known as 'green' open access, or (2) by publishing in an open access journal, known as 'gold' open 
access.53 It is envisaged that green open access will be the preferred option in this project, whereby the partners will 
publish in peer-reviewed scientific publications and then self -archive a version of the article for free public use in their 
institutional repository, in a central repository, or on some other open access website.  The project website (or Internet 
Portal) will house a ‘MyToolBox Green Channel’ for open access to the peer -reviewed publications of the project. In 
relation to expected publications from the project, these include and are not limited to : “Alternative control of Fusarium 
mycotoxins in small grain cereals” to be published in Quality Assurance and Safety of Crops and Foods;  “Conjugation 
and reduction of mycotoxins during thermal processing ” in Food Additives and Contaminants ; DSS System post -
harvest: Real time monitoring systems for improving grain storage management solutions for mycotoxins in stored 
cereals and nuts in the Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry ; and Development of a mycotoxin mitigation 
strategy exploiting food processing effects to be published in the World Mycotoxin Journal, etc. 
Communication activities 
Communication activities are considered to be an important aspect of this project, to ensure that we effectively 
promote our project and its outputs, as well as its benefits and impacts to the stakeholders that we want to reach. It is 
relevant that citizen s are aware of the development and its potential societal impacts, especially in the context of its 
positive impacts for food security, food quality and safety (and ultimately consumer safety). Indeed effective social 
engagement is particularly important  in the case of this project given that consumer confidence has been 
negatively impacted in recent years as a result of quite a number of highly publicised failings in the food supply chain 
to deliver high quality and safe products. Efforts to increase consu mer trust in the food supply chain would be very 
positive, especially as consumers have a central and crucial role to play as a key engine for future prosperity. 
Strengthening consumer confidence in the safety of the products they buy is fundamental for st rengthen the European 
food supply and value chains. Moreover, it is important to communicate the societal benefits as the project is 
benefiting from tax-payers contributions. Through our communication activities we have an opportunity to ensure that 
citizens are informed and feel like they are getting value for money.  
Additionally, as one of the key’s to successfully gaining impact is through our ability to secure stakeholder ‘buy -
in’, i.e. the cooperation or positive participation of our key stakeholders,  they will also be the target of our 
                                                        
53 Jeffery, Keith G. 2006. "Open Access: An Introduction". Ercim News, 64, January 2006. 
 SFS-13-2015 
 
 MyToolBox 32 
communication activities - a) farmers; b ) food and feed producers and food processors; c) multipliers (Collectives, 
Associations, etc.); d) OEMs and engineering companies (who install food processing plants); e) policy makers, etc. 
Through Task 5.3 Communication activities and multi -actor engagement we will plan out our communication activities 
and develop the necessary communication tools (project website, leaflet, posters, social media accounts, video, etc.) 
building on and complementing table 4 above, whereby communication activities will be effectively intertwined with the 
project dissemination effort to ensure that we engage, stimulate the interest and support, and motivate the 
collaboration of actors along the value chain in order to benefit our action and to increase its impacts for the benefit of 
consumers and the value chain.  
As such, we will develop a communications plan, which will consist of the following steps: 
1. Identify and list all possible stakeholders- the target audiences of our dissemination activities will be used as 
the starting point (in addition to any other stakeholders that might be considered important). 
2. Organise our stakeholders - following a stakeholder analysis, the target audience of our communication 
activities will be categorised into “communities of support” for helping MyToolBox to realising its ambition, goals 
and objectives.  
3. Development of the MyToolBox brand – in order to help us in engaging with our stakeholders the principles 
behind the MyToolBox brand ( visually identified through its logo and a tagline, which will both be trademarked) 
will be further elaborated and documented.