2.3 Data analysis against reference methods ■
2.4 Definition of upscaling specifications ■
3 ■
3.1 Laboratory test rig setup
3.2 RTO pilot tests for each relevant nanoparticles production case study ■ # #
3.3 Data analysis against reference methods ■
3.4 Definition of upscaling specifications ■
4 Turbidity Spectrometry (TUS) Development ■
4.1 Laboratory test rig setup
4.2 RTO pilot tests for each relevant nanoparticles production case study ■ # #
4.3 Data analysis against reference methods ■
4.4 Definition of upscaling specifications ■
5 ■
5.1 Development of PAT software platform ■ ■ ■ #
5.2 Simulation of nanoparticles production processes ■ #
5.3 Process monitoring integration in industrial production processes ■ #
5.4 Data analysis strategies for nano-monitoring combined solutions ■ #
6 # ■ # #
6.1 Dispersed polymers NPs industrial pilot plant demonstration ■
6.2 Silica NPs industrial pilot plant demonstration ■
6.3 Hydroxyapatite NPs pilot plant demonstration ■
6.4 Zeolites NPs industrial pilot plant demonstration ■
6.5 Ceramic NPs industrial pilot plant demonstration ■
6.6 Recommendations for NanoPAT industrial implementation ■
7
7.1 Knowledge transfer, training and capacity building ■ ■ #
7.2 Dissemination and stakeholders engagement ■ # ■ # ■ #
7.3 Clustering and definition of metadata ■
7.4 Nanosafety assessment &Elaboration of safety/Safety-by-Design ■
8
8.1 Innovation and Open-innovation Management ■
8.2 Exploitation plan #
8.3 Sustainability and Business model ■ ■ #
8.4 Knowledge and Data Management ■ ■
8.5 Standardisation ■ #
9 Project Management ■ ■
9.1 Management of project resources ●ᴥ ● ¤ ᴥ ● ¤ ᴥ ● ¤ ᴥ ● ¤ ᴥ ● ¤ ᴥ ● ¤ ᴥ ● ¤ ᴥ ● ¤ ᴥ
9.2 Implementation of the management procedures
9.3 Coordination with and Reporting to the EC
D8.1-8.5; 
MS18,19,20
■ Deliverable / # Milestones ●Steering Committee Meetings / ¤ Technical Committee Meeting  / ᴥ Exploitation Committee Meeting/  
D1.1-D1.3; 
MS1
Definition of the nano-monitoring technologies requirements
D4.1-4.4; 
MS6,7
D3.1-3.4; 
MS4,5
D2.1-2.4; 
MS2,3
Photon Wave Density Spectroscopy (PDW) Development
Market Strategy & Innovation Impacts
D5.1-5.7; 
MS8,9,10,11
D6.1-6.7; 
MS12,13,14
D7.1-7.7; 
MS15,16,17,
18
Knowledge Transfer & Dissemination
NanoPAT Industrial Pilot Plant Demonstration
OptoFluidic Force Induction (OF2i) Development
Monitoring Technologies integration, Data Analysis and Simulation software
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 51 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B
3.2 Management structure, milestones and procedures 
Organisational structure and decision-making 
The project will be managed by the experienced 
Project Coordinator (PC), IRIS. They follow proven 
project management procedures, which adhere to ISO 
9001:2008 certified processes and UNE-EN-ISO 
166002: Management Systems for R&D&I. The 
organisational structure (¡Error! No se encuentra el 
origen de la referencia. ) consists of the Project 
Coordinator (the interface with the EC), who is 
supported by a Project Steering Committee in the 
strategic management of the project. At executive 
management level, the PC is supported in the 
implementation of the work by a Technical Committee 
on the one hand and an Innovation Committee on the 
other, the roles and decision-making capacity of which 
are discussed below. As opposed to a monopoly role 
of the PC, this structure distributes the governance 
between various partners according to their 
background to allow a good balance in decision and 
management of different aspects. An Advisory Board (AB) 
is also included, which consists of a voluntary group of industry actors and stakeholders who will engage with the project at different 
points along the work plan. This body has no voting rights and a Confidentiality Agreement will be in place with all AB members. 
Project coordinator  
The Project Coordinator (Dr. Simona Neri) is responsible for the day-to-day running of the project, and for ensuring that the work 
programme adheres to its schedule, fulfils its objectives, and the project meets the needs and expectations of all the partners. She 
will be active in steering the evolution of the project by closely monitoring the work performed by each partner. She will assume 
responsibility for ensuring that the project management procedures are being correctly implemented and that all deadlines and 
obligations are met. She will also act as the communication and administrative interface with the EC, to carry out the reporting and 
overall administrative management of the project. As this is also a leadership role, it requires a profile that is sufficiently experienced, 
qualified and capacitated not only to supervise the execution of work programme and delegation of the work packages (WPs), but 
also one that can foment team-building and is a strong communicator, who can motivate the team and encourage proactive 
participation, facilitate collective problem solving and the taking of timely corrective actions. In terms of the competence of Dr. Neri to 
successfully execute this role, she has solid project management experience at EC level. She is currently the Coordinator of 
POLYBIOSKIN (GA745839) where she is in charge of administrative procedures involved in the management of EC research projects, 
from the negotiation process, preparing and maintaining the Consortium Agreement, monitoring work, reporting requirements, the use 
of tools for communication with the EC. She is also WP Leader and main representative of IRIS in other H2020 projects mainly focused 
on circular economy in which IRIS applies new technologies and photonics for the optimisation of processes and products (DAFIA 
GA 720770, ECOAT GA 837863, ECOBULK GA 730456, PROLIFIC GA 790157). Furthermore, thanks to the expertise she gained 
in her PhD in Supramolecular Chemistry she demonstrates a strong capability to also be able to make decisions based on a solid 
scientific content. In has invaluable experience in moderation and leadership during the management for the main Chemical Industry 
stakeholders in Spain. Furthermore, thanks to her prior jobs in multinational chemical and pharma companies, she gained not only 
scientific knowledge, but also strong industrial experience, as well as experience in project management, product development in a 
competitive environment, as well as the organisation of large-scale events. Simona is genuinely curious and dedicated. She spent 6 
years studying the behaviour of nanomaterials and their self-assembly and she can contribute to the project with deep knowledge of 
both scientific and administrative tasks but also with her spontaneous enthusiasm. 
Project Steering Committee 
To ensure that the project is implemented according to the needs and requirements of all the project partners, and to empower each 
partner organisation with a role in the strategic management of the project, a Project Steering Committee (PSC) is established. It 
consists of a key representative of each of the beneficiaries. Although large industry and SME will represent the majority in this board, 
Figure 31 NanoPAT organizational structure 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 52 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
RTO partners will play a crucial role, as they are better represented in the S&TC and IC boards (see below). The PSC will meet every 
6 months (or for remote extraordinary meetings convoked by the Project Coordinator in case of urgent matters to be solved in between) 
and will be facilitated through the chair of the Project Coordinator. Through this Committee the partners will closely monitor and control 
the work performed, following the principles of “quality, time, cost”. The Project Milestones (Table 3.2 a) will be used as a valuable 
tool for evaluating critical performance and determining whether or not the project is on schedule. In terms of decision making 
mechanisms, when strategic decisions need to be taken, such as action to solve conflicts, action to mitigate critical risks to project 
implementation, action to manage changes in the work plan, decisions in relation to IPR and exploitation, etc., it will be the 
responsibility of the Project Coordinator to seek consensus with the PCS, whereby each beneficiary will be assigned one vote. 
Decisions will be taken by simple majority. In the event of a tie situation, the Coordinator will take the final decision. Each representative 
of the PSC will be responsible for mobilising and coordinating the active and coherent participation of the other personnel from their 
organisation who are involved in the project team, and they will also ensure that reporting and cost statements from their organisation 
are submitted on time and correctly.  
 
Scientific and Technical Committee 
The Scientific & Technical Committee (S&TC) is established to take care of scientific and technical (S&T) issues and for supporting 
the Project Coordinator in ensuring that the S&T objectives and activities of the project are successfully accomplished in a timely 
manner, taking into account the interdisciplinary approach and the interdependence between the technical tasks of the work plan. The 
S&TC is composed of the WP and task contributors in WP1-6 allowing the required interactions across the WPs developing the key 
individual technical results.  
The S&TC is chaired by the Scientific &Technical Manager, who will preside over the WP leaders: Prof. Ilko Bald, a Professor of 
Hybrid Nanostructures at UP, who previously earned research experience at the Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center (iNANO, 
Rejkiavik) and the Center for DNA nanotechnology (CDNA) of the Aarhus University in Denmark. In 2017 I. Bald received an EU-ERC 
consolidator grant. His group studies different aspects of nanoparticle-based sensing, surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), 
DNA nanotechnology and electron induced processes.  
The appointment of the S&TC will greatly facilitate the implementation of his work, especially in view of the ambitious, highly 
interdisciplinary nature of the activities involved. Whereas the WP leaders, who will themselves be fuelled by their task contributors 
and their teams, will assume responsibility for the implementation of the work towards the fulfilment of the associated Project 
Objectives (and milestones related to the WPs), the S&TC will ensure the consistency (selection of processes suitable for later scale 
up at end users) and compatibility (e.g. amount of materials needed for different purposes of validation) among WPs within their 
thematic through the proper engagement of the partners and entrusting to the WPs leaders. The Scientific & Technical Manager will 
act as facilitators for the integration of the transversal knowledge without losing the benefit from synergies among the three 
breakthrough nano-monitoring techniques proposed for the 5 applications thanks to the common partners involved. The Scientific & 
Technical Manager will also ensure the seamless integration of the results by convoking meetings on a regular basis with the 
implementation teams (virtually or on-site meetings will be scheduled as appropriate). It is expected that this structure will increase 
the potential for early identification of inter-WP scientific or technical risks and WP deviations level that could impact other activities 
in their thematic to enable effective and timely management. Each WP leader will report on the status and progress of the work 
involved in their WP to the Project Coordinator in monthly remote and biannual presential meetings of the Scientific & Technical 
Committee (chaired by the Technical Manager). While the S&TC will have the mandate to take decisions that relate to the 
implementation of the workplan, any decisions that could affect the scope of the work, its budget, or have a strategic impact on the 
project will be escalated via the Project Coordinator to the PSC for voting and decision taking.  
Innovation Committee 
The Innovation Committee (IC) is responsible for identifying and managing innovation from the project. A key goal will be to ensure 
that the project results are effectively protected and exploited to the full for future industrial growth and competitiveness. The IC 
consists of a qualified representative from each beneficiary. 
This Committee assumes the important role of Innovation Management in the project. Within this context, the IC committee will 
manage the implementation of the innovation cycle, and the feedback linkages to the development work. It will evaluate the knowledge 
as it is generated in line with its market impacts. It will also ensure that the project results are effectively protected and exploited 
to the full for future industrial growth and competitiveness. Key strategic issues, such as IPR protection mechanisms, IPR sharing 
and routes to exploitation will be discussed extensively during meetings the IC. The IC will also ensure that Business and Exploitation 
Plans are further developed based on the draft plans from Section 2.2. A main focus is on the evaluation of EU-networking strategies 
as developed in WP 7 and WP 8.  
The IC will be chaired by the IPR & Innovation Manager, Dr. Ioanna Katsavou (EXEL) who will lead the partners in effective 
management of the innovation cycle of the project. She will also act as a driver for the industrial partners in defining the post-project 
concerted value chain commercial strategy. She has, for this role, the perfect balance between technical (as Chemical Engineer by 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 53 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
formation) and market knowledge of the issues related with the introduction of new technologies on the market. She will be supported 
by MSc. Andreas Falk (BNN), who will also act as Training, Communication & Dissemination Manager–CEO of BNN, who has his 
core competences in Safe-by-Design implementation from science to development/processing of smart materials and products, 
supporting research and innovation with high-quality project management in multidisciplinary innovation projects on international level, 
as well as in strengthening dissemination and outreach for organizations and/or projects through his professional network. A Data & 
Exploitation Manager- Dr. Christian Micheletti (TEMASOL)- will also be appointed. He will be responsible for assisting NanoPAT 
partners in identifying and managing innovation from the project to put on the market innovative products based on nanotechnology 
and monitoring. He will also advise on regulatory affairs and risk assessment issues, providing insights from Safe-by-Design platform 
application and implementation. Finally, he will be responsible for DMP definition and implementation, establishing data curation 
strategies within the consortium by applying GDPR and FAIR principles. 
The IC will meet regularly (at least every 6 months) and pay attention to discerning IP at regular checkpoints. The IPR & Innovation 
Manager supported by the Data & Exploitation Manager will have holistic view of the innovations arising out of the project, and will 
advise individual partners on IPR and funding strategy, with the aim of maximizing the commercial potential of the innovations created. 
IP ownership will belong by default to the partner’s creating it, and will be subject to terms and conditions outlined in the Consortium 
Agreement. The IPR & Innovation Manager will update the Project Coordinator of the innovations arising, and recommendations for 
next steps on how best to handle it. In relation to decision making, the IC will decide on all matters with regard to IPR and exploitation, 
whereby each beneficiary can decide how best to protect and own its own IP, and joint IP will be decided by the beneficiaries involved, 
with each beneficiary in this case being assigned a vote (and decisions being taken by simple majority). The IC will have the ability to 
take decisions that relate to the implementation of WPs 7 and 8, but any strategic decision such as those in relation to IPRs that affect 
the consortium, etc. will be raised to the PSC for voting. Moreover, in meetings of the PSC, the IPR & Innovation Manager on behalf 
of the IC will report on the status of Innovation Management Activities.  
Appropriateness to the complexity and scale of the project 
This organisational structure is considered appropriate for the management of this project, in view of its size, multidisciplinary nature 
and its S&T scope and ambition, and its expected innovation impacts. With key roles and responsibilities, each body within the 
structure ensures that there is dedicated and qualified management and skills-sets mobilised at the different levels, as opposed to a 
centralised, one-dimensional management approach, which would be highly unlikely to deliver the necessary versatility. To this end, 
there is an integral approach to the management of the project, ensuring:  
● effective management of the day-to-day running of the project & its resources, appropriate interfacing with the EC (Project 
Coordinator) 
● all participants have a stake in the strategic management of the project (Project Steering Committee) 
● effective management of the execution of the interdisciplinary work plan and its ability to deliver impact, whereby two 
executive-level Committees have been planned- the Technical Committee will be responsible for ensuring the project achieves its 
research objectives through sound management of the overall S&T work and it potential risks; the Innovation Committee will be 
responsible for effective dissemination and management of the knowledge and data generated, Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs), 
as well as the other innovation-related activities required to deliver market exploitable results and to map out the route for further 
research in order to build on the project results. 
Innovation management 
A key objective of publicly-funded research is that it should lead to the exploitation of results, which goes one step further than the 
mere production and dissemination of new scientific knowledge47. As such, our project envisages an Innovation Committee in addition 
to an Innovation & IPR and Data & Exploitation Managers in its organisation structure (as described above). We also have dedicated 
tasks to Innovation and Open-Innovation Management (task 8.1), which will be closely linked with the IPR Management and patent 
filling work in Task 8.4. Our IPR & Innovation Manager, Dr. Ioanna Katsavou from EXEL, has the necessary entrepreneurial spirit to 
foment the conditions for an innovation eco-system to flourish. She has a deep business understanding, along with a strong technical 
background for ensuring creative ideas are anchored to the required market, regulatory and performance requirements. In addition to 
IP protection, our Innovation Management activities will pivot around the implementation of an innovation cycle, which is a vital 
component for ensuring success in market-oriented research projects. Close interaction with the Technical Committee will be 
promoted to facilitate co-creation and fluid interaction between the development teams and our industry end-users. Open 
brainstorming and idea management at the project outset in WP1 will contribute to a deep understanding of the market needs, industry 
constraints and regulatory/standards framework. Thereafter, the nano-monitoring technologies will be upscaled through WP2-4 to 
                                                           
 
47 Innovation. How to convert research into commercial success story? Part 3: Innovation Management for Practitioners. European 
Commission. Directorate -General for Research and I nnovation, 2013. Nanosciences, Nanotechnologies, Materials and New 
Production Technologies (NMP) 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 54 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
meet the requirements of industrial pilot scale validations for five key NPs production processes in WP6. At the same time, WP5 will 
support innovation arising for enforcing the digital transformation of the target industry. The market strive will accompany the entire 
work plan and the development teams will be guided by feedback loops from fellow developers, end-users and market insights to fuel 
an innovation cycle that leads to exploitable project results for a successful project outcome in terms of innovation impacts.  
Critical risks and mitigation measures 
Risks can be categorised as follows; technology related risks, market related risks and transversal risks (environment related risks 
and organisation related risks)48. Technical risks will be managed by the Technical Committee within the related WPs. Market-related 
risks and environment related risks will be closely analysed by the Innovation Committee, and organisational-related risks will be 
managed by the Project Coordinator supported by the Project Steering Committee and will be embedded in the close monitoring of 
the evolution of the work. Table 3.2b shows the main risks identified to date, their probability of occurrence, the severity of the problem 
(impact), the actions to mitigate the risk and foreseen contingency actions. Through Task 10.2.1, a continuous process of risk 
identification and management (of these risks below and any newly identified risks) will be implemented based upon the principles 
and guidelines of the FERMA (ISO 31000 related) Standard49. Agreement sought for risk-related contingency actions from the TC (in 
relation to technical risks) and the IC (in relation to market- and environment-related risks) will be taken by the PSC.  
 
As will be further defined in the Consortium Agreement, in case of a significant unexpected risk requiring a quick decision, an 
emergency/extraordinary meeting of the relevant committee will be called by its responsible. In addition, as seen, a decision procedure 
has been defined within each committee, where each member has a vote. To avoid the case where the corrective/decided action is 
blocked due to disagreements between the different committees, all transversal decisions as well as decisions of strategic importance 
to the Project will be the mandate of the PSC, acting above the other committees. 
  
                                                           
 
48 Kasap et.al. Risk Management in R&D Projects. Management of Engineering and Technology, Portland, US. 5-9 Aug 2007. ISBN: 
978-1-8908-4315-1 
49 Federation of European Risk Management Associ8ations (www.ferma.eu)  
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 55 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B
3.3 Consortium as a whole 
Bringing together public and private 
organisations across Europe to perform 
collaborative research and development is 
key for the interdisciplinary approach often 
needed to bring technical innovations to 
diverse markets. The NanoPAT consortium 
is made up of 14 partners from 9 countries: 
8 EU countries (Portugal, Spain, France, 
Germany, Austria, Netherlands, Czech 
Republic, Greece), 1 associated countries 
(Switzerland). As such we have an 
integrative consortium covering a broad 
geography throughout the EU territory 
ranging from innovative SMEs to world 
leading nanoparticle production Global 
chemical companies. Our team constitutes a 
pan-European eco-system that unites the 
necessary infrastructure, knowledge, 
expertise, services and industry value chain 
to succeed in delivering on the project’s 
objectives to realise the expected impacts of 
the topic DT-NMBP-08-2019- Real-time nano-characterisation technologies. As illustrated in Figure 32, the consortium brings together 
complementary types of partners well distributed across Europe. There is solid scientific presence covering all relevant fields (UP, 
MUG, UPV, ZHAW, BNN), combined with strong industrial and commercial involvement (6 SMEs and 3 large enterprises) to 
ensure that the value chain of commercial actors can progress swiftly towards the introduction of new real-time solutions for the 
monitoring of nanoparticles production processes. To this end, RTOs will be working closely with monitoring technology providers 
(IRIS, PDWA, MUG), NPs industrial producers (DSM, EVONIK, FLU, ARK), NPs conversion manufacturers (CNANO)  and digital 
technologies providers (IRIS, DSC). To strengthen impact, complementary partners have been included in terms of transversal 
activities and to ensure a business-driven focus to the project: IPR & Innovation management (EXEL), Data & Exploitation 
management (TEMASOL), dissemination (BNN). In short, this is a complete storyboard of actors.  
Importantly the consortium will draw on the voluntary and objective advice, expertise and support of an external Advisory Board, in 
order to complement the consortium’s industrial and technical insight in relevant fields. AB members include EPPN, GDch, SECPho, 
A.SPIRE. Each will provide invaluable insights into different applications that could use the new monitoring techniques, and mutually 
benefit from the clustering with associations linked to photonic technologies and open innovation test beds, some of which strategic 
adopters obtaining a license for the developed technologies.  
As is fitting for an RIA, this is a project oriented to establish new knowledge and explore the feasibility of three innovative real-
time nano-monitoring technologies (PDW, OF2i and TUS) both at a small scale and industrial scale pilot systems for five different 
NPs production processes. The integration of these breakthrough nano-monitoring techniques with advanced digital data processing 
platform will allow to maximise the industrial applicability of these new monitoring strategies. All the leading industrial end users 
involved in the consortium acting as early adopters of NanoPAT outcomes will guarantee their market uptake once the project is 
finalised, setting their way towards new competitive businesses in the nanoparticles production value chain.  
Finally, in relation to the gender dimension of our consortium, our team of researchers, technologists, industrialists, business 
experts, and policy influencers has a good participation of females. A number of the key management and decision-making positions 
within the project organisational structure have been assigned to highly qualified women, not least the roles of the Project Coordinator 
(Dr. Simona Neri) and IPR & Innovation Manager (Dr. Ioanna Deligkiozi), as well as number of WP and task leadership roles. 
Interestingly, females are among the key drivers of this project (Simona Neri, Elodie Bugnicourt, Judith van Gorp, Ioanna Deligkiozi, 
Blanca Suárez, Edurne González, etc.). Recommendations regarding recruitment for securing future researchers and development 
profiles for the project will be overseen by the Project Coordinator in WP9 to ensure a reasonable level of balance between the sexes 
(gender balances will be considered as a selection criterion between equally qualified candidates).  
Other countries: The consortium includes two Swiss partners, TEMAS Solutions Gmbh  and Management Services and Zurich 
University of Applied Sciences (ZHAW). These partners have been included in the consortium due to their vast expertise in technology 
transfer, innovation consulting and exploitation strategies at early development stages, and for their specific capabilities dealing with 
zeolite synthesis and process monitoring, respectively. TEMASOL roles, together with their network in nanoparticles production at 
both European and global level has been considered essential for carrying out WP7 and 8 in the project. ZHAW work on performing 
 
Figure 32: NanoPAT consortium map 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 56 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
the RTO tests for the zeolites case study and their close collaboration with ARK are capital for developing a monitoring solution for 
zeolite NPs production processes.
3.4 Resources to be committed 
The project budget has been built using a bottom-up methodology. There is a logical budget distribution among the partners and each 
has mobilised the necessary staff/person months (Table 3.4a) and infrastructure to get the job done in a competitive timeframe. The 
necessary personnel resources reflect the realistic efforts required to deliver the project objectives, and have been costed up based 
on actual costs for staff for each partner organisation (in line with average staff costs within the sectors and reflected the differences 
in cost of living between the different participating EU regions). A reasonable budget has been allocated to mobility of developers and 
industrialists between sites, which is important for knowledge exchange and building excellence among multidisciplinary and 
international teams, as well as for practical on-site testing across partners as needed. Minimal subcontracting costs for non-core tasks 
have been budgeted as the consortium has the internal resources and knowledge to perform the work.  
The other goods and services (OG&S) that need to be contracted have also been included (and a breakdown of these costs are 
provided in Table 3.4b- for those partners whose Other costs exceed 15% of personnel costs). It should be further stressed that in 
the range of 250 k€ is allocated in direct costs for the NanoPAT prototype monitoring systems (included in the budgets of PDWA, 
MUG and IRIS) that will be used for demonstration of the feasibility of the nano-characterisation solutions developed for the five 
industrial applications selected as representative for guaranteeing a proper post project exploitation. The SMEs and industry partners 
occupy a sufficient portion of the budget (40% of the EC contribution goes to SMEs, 13% to large and 47% to RTOs), ensuring a 
practical research-industry partnership for high competitive impact. There is an appropriate budget allocated to communication, 
dissemination, IP and knowledge management and business planning activities for impact. Considering that there are 14 partners in 
the project, and a competitive 48-month work plan that will output knowledge on NP production processes, industrially validated 
innovative nano-monitoring devices, a digital PAT platform, as well as possible new nanoparticles products and services, a requested 
EC Contribution just below 5M€ is very good value for high impact.  
 
Table 3.4b: ‘Other direct cost’ items (travel, equipment, other goods and services, large research infrastructure)50 
1. IRIS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 25,500 
Travel costs to project meetings (13 meeting in 3 years with 1 person, average 500€ per meeting), 
3000€ for traveling to end users networking meetings travel cost for installation and trials of the 
monitoring,Systems in hosting sites (3k€ for 1 engineers for 2 weeks) ,Travel cost of some of the 
advisory board companies to attend selected project meetings (10k€) 
Equipment 0    
Other goods and 
services (OG&S) 123,000 
Cost of components for TUS systems (70k€), Cost of consumibles and external analysis such as 
TEM to calibrate/validate systems built (10k€), cost of IPR protection and dissemination 
materials/events (7k€), cost of financial audits (6k€), cloud hosting fees (30k). 
Total 148,500   
2. UP Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 24,000 
Traveling to partners: UPV, ZHAW, IRIS, EVONIK, ARKEMA, DSM for lab work; travel costs to 
project meetings. 
Equipment 0 N/A  
OG&S 
62,000 
Analytical & chemical lab utilities and lab consumables (40k€), audit of EU (4k€) .  In total, 6 
international, individual transports (preparation of goods, packaging and insurance handling).  UP 
will apply its usual sub-contracting rules. Budget 18,000 €. 
Total 86,000   
3. MUG Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 24,000 Traveling to partners for lab work, equipment transport, project meetings 
Equipment 0 N/A  
OG&S 
97,200 
Analytical and chem lab utilities (12k€), raw materials&standards/references (7.5k€), optics, 
photonics (lasers) and modification materials (47.8k€), fluidic&fluidic cell components (13.4k€), 
electronics, sensing/detection components (15.3k€) audit (1.2k€) 
                                                           
 
50 Equipment included only for partners for whom it is relevant. No infrastructure costs are reported. Direct costs are reported  for all partners even when < 15% 
direct costs.   *Travel costs depends on the number of people involved per organisation and accessibility of journeys’ origin - include travel to project meetings (up 
to 17 meeting in 4 years, depending on the location, travel costs will be used by the host for organising the meeting), dissemination events and other partners visits.    
#generic costs adjusted to each needs include dissemination material and events registration, publication fees for open access journal. In terms of IP costs  
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 57 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Total 121,200   
4. UPV Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 25,000 
Travel costs to project meetings (up to 15 meeting in 4 years (some remote) and other partners 
visits 
Equipment 0 N/A  
OG&S 28,000 
Reactants and small lab consumables (20k€), dissemination material and events, cost of open 
access publications, cost of IPR protection (8k€) 
Total 53,000   
5. ZHAW Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20,000 
Travel costs to project meetings (up to 15 meeting in 4 years (some remote)  and other partners 
visits 
Equipment 0 N/A 
OG&S 31,200 Audit (1.2k€); analytical and chemical lab utilities, raw materials (30k€) 
Total 51,200   
6. PDWA Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20,000 
Travel costs to project meetings (up to 15 meeting in 4 years  (some remote) and other partners 
visits 
Equipment 0 N/A 
OG&S 80,000 
Analytical and chemical lab utilities, raw materials; Equipment and hardware modifications 
(pre)pilot runs 
Total 100,000   
7. DSC Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 15,750 
Travel costs to project meetings (up to 15 meeting in 4 years (some remote) and other partners 
visits 
Equipment 0 N/A 
OG&S 20,000 Lease of Ansys CFD software for the CFD analysis during the projects 
Total 35,750   
8. DSM Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 18,000 
Travel costs to project meetings (up to 15 meeting in 4 years (some remote) and other partners 
visits 
Equipment 0 N/A 
OG&S 40,000 
Analytical and chemical lab utilities, equipment, raw materials; Raw materials for (pre)pilot 
polymerisations; Equipment and hardware modifications (pre)pilot runs 
Total 58,000   
9. EVONIK Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 10,000 
Travel costs to project meetings (up to 15 meeting in 4 years (some remote) and other partners 
visits  
Equipment 0 N/A 
OG&S 38,500 
Analytical evaluation of samples generated both at UP as well as at Evonik (20 k€), mechanical 
changes to implement PAT in PPL (18,5 k€) 
Total 48,500   
10. FLU Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20,000 Project meetings travel & accommodations 
Equipment 10,000 Depreciation of equipment and hardware for pilot plant demonstration 
OG&S 10,000 Analytical and chemical lab utilities, lab consumables, raw materials 
Total 40,000   
11. ARK Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 13,000 
Travel costs to project meetings (up to 15 meeting in 4 years (some remote) and other partners 
visits. 
Equipment 1,000 Depreciation cost for connection equipment to attach the online measurement to pilot. 
OG&S 5,000 Dissemination material and events, cost of open access publications, cost of IPR protection. 
Total 19,000  
12. CNANO Cost (€) Justification 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 58 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Travel 8,000 N/A (below 15% ODC vs. Personnel). 
Equipment 8,000 N/A (below 15% ODC vs. Personnel). 
OG&S 5,000 N/A (below 15% ODC vs. Personnel). 
Total 21,000  
13. TEMAS  
(terminated) Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 0 
Travel costs to project meetings (up to 15 meeting in 4 years (some remote) and other partners 
visits 
Equipment 0 N/A 
OG&S 0 
Membership to Industry associations for dissemination and exploitation, Membership to 
standardization association, Fees for open access publications,  
Total 0   
14. BNN Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 18,000 
Travel & accommodation: 6 project internal meetings, 4 conferences, 8 workshops participation  
 
Equipment 0 N/A 
OG&S 18,000 
Workshop rooms, publication fees, licences. Outsourced services for the programming and website 
security maintenance. 
Total 36,000   
15. EXEL Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 5,000 N/A (below 15% ODC vs. Personnel). 
Equipment  N/A (below 15% ODC vs. Personnel). 
OG&S 7,000 N/A (below 15% ODC vs. Personnel). 
Total 12,000  
TEMASOL Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 15,000 
Travel costs to project meetings (up to 15 meeting in 4 years (some remote) and other partners 
visits 
Equipment 0 N/A 
OG&S 12,000 
Membership to Industry associations for dissemination and exploitation, Membership to 
standardization association, Fees for open access publications,  
Total 27,000  
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 59 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 
4. Members of the Consortium 
 
Participant 
no. 
Participant name Participant short name Country Type 
1 (CO) IRIS Technology Solutions, SL IRIS ES SME 
2 Universitaet Potsdam UP DE RTO 
3 Medizinische Universitat Graz MUG AT RTO 
4 Uiversidad del Pais Vasco/ Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea UPV ES RTO 
5 Zurcher Hochschule fur Angewandte Wissenschaften ZHAW CH RTO 
6 PDW Analytics GmbH PDWA DE SME 
7 Dynamic & Security Computations SL DSC ES SME 
8 DSM Resins BV DSM NL LARGE 
9 EVONIK Resource Efficiency GmbH EVONIK DE LARGE 
10 Fluidinova SA FLU PT SME 
11 Arkema France SA ARK FR LARGE 
12 Creative Nano CNANO EL SME 
13 TEMAS AG Technology and Management Services TEMAS CH SME 
14 Bionanonet Forschungsgesellschaft Mbh BNN AT RTO 
15 EXELISIS PC EXEL GR SME 
16 TEMAS Solutions GmbH TEMASOL CH SME
4.1 Participants (applicants) 
 
Participant no. 1 Name (short name)/ Country  IRIS Technology Solutions (IRIS)/Spain 
Description of the legal entity  
IRIS (www.iris-eng.com) is an advanced engineering company that was established in 
Barcelona in 2007 and specialises in the manufacture and integration of Process Analytical 
Technology (PAT)-based real-time quality monitoring solutions for the process industries 
and IoT systems for smart manufacturing, predominantly targeted at the food, 
pharmaceutical and chemical industries. In particular, our product line comprises proprietary state-of-the-art IR analysers for 
at-line and in-line process monitoring.  
On the one hand, our solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics-in the fields of MEMs Near Infrared 
Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral Imaging, and Raman. On the other hand, we leverage ICTs, whereby we apply Machine 
learning, Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining techniques for predictive and active control, as well as for decision support 
systems. In addition to photonics-based analysers, we also work with IoT sensors for enabling equipment and machinery for 
smart manufacturing and transitioning industry to the Industry4.0 paradigm. Our solutions are cloud-based for mobility, 
remote monitoring and multi-site applications.  
Our Innovation Division which is governed by an Innovation Committee comprising Senior Management, and an Innovation 
Unit for managing and executing the companies innovation roadmap, has 3 core strategic lines, for shaping the Factory of 
the Future: 
1. New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process optimisation 
2. ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms) 
3. Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorisation 
In addition to running an internal R&D programme, as well as carrying our various joint private projects with industry partners, 
our Innovation Division is highly experienced in working in collaborative R&D projects in H2020 (both as coordinators of >30 
FP7 and H2020 projects and partners), and principally in the SPIRE, FoF, and BBI programmes. The company was 
established in 2007 and currently employs 60+ staff with a turnover of € 5 M. It is equipped with engineering workshops (3), 
food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 60 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
certified and also is certified under UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i. We are also certified by the local 
(Catalonian) government as a provider of technological R&D services (Tecnio Certification). IRIS is a member of the following 
sectorial networks: SPIRE, SPIE and SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial collectives such as Smart Space (association 
of companies and organisations that specialise in the ‘smartification’ of industry). 
 
Main tasks 
IRIS will have an active role in WP1 in terms of defining process monitoring specifications. As technology providers, they will 
have very strong roles in WP4, leading the development of nano-characterization system based on TUS and its validation in 
polymer dispersions, silica and ceramic nanoparticles processes. In WP5, they will develop the PAT Platform that will gather, 
elaborate and display the data coming from the developed sensors. Furthermore, a DSS based on different machine learning 
technique will be provided allowing the economic and environmental assessment. In WP6, IRIS will support the end-users 
during the integration, implementation and validation of the monitoring devices providing the tools and ad-hoc trainings. In 
WP7, they will also contribute to the dissemination and training activities in terms of PAT, as well as to WP8 in terms of IPR, 
innovation. They will design the different dissemination materials and website for the project. Finally, IRIS will act as Project 
Coordinators (WP9). In this direction, their extensive experience, in particular in the context of industry-driven FP7 and H2020 
projects and private contacts with the industry will guarantee the optimal project management. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
IRIS has a matrix of multidisciplinary knowledge groups in the company with strong expertise in data science, biopolymers, 
chemometry, spectroscopy, among others. 
With its team and resources, including electronics engineers, mechatronics, mechanical, optical engineers, industrial design 
engineers, system engineering, application programming and web development etc. the group can carry out full system 
design and engineering, including electronic design (PCB) and assembly, firmware and software development, electrical 
harnesses and interconnections, mechanical design for enclosure and prototype integration, as well as installation, validation 
and industrialisation of prototypes and equipment in food and pharma production plants. As such they have recently delivered 
advanced plastic sorting devices. In addition to this broad cross-disciplinary engineering team, IRIS’ research team consists 
of material scientists and physicists, among other, who have the expertise to validate the technologies developed.  
IRIS has significant expertise in the use of such co-creation methods as Quality Function Deployment (a very useful 
framework for translating often subjective client quality criteria into objective information ones that can be quantified and 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 61 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
measured and subsequently used to design and manufacture the product)51, Kano52 (for prioritising the spoken and unspoken 
customer wants and needs and translating then into technical characteristics and specifications), scoping sessions, Design 
Thinking, among others. In addition, IRIS uses agile methodologies, such as KANBAN for managing development task 
implementation. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Dr. Ing. ELODIE BUGNICOURT. (female) Masters in Material Science & Engineering (2002), PhD in Polymers and 
Composite Materials (2005), both from National Institute of Applied Science (INSA), Lyon, France. Leader of the Eco-
Materials business unit in IRIS since 2009. Coordinated several European projects in the fields of bio-based packaging 
materials development, process monitoring, surface treatment. Previous industry experience: R&D in chemical industry 
especially related to reactive polymer formulations: i) Arkema (ex. Cray Valley, 2002, Spain) in the field of polyester powder 
coating; Wacker Chemie (2002-2005, Germany and France), Silicone division that funded her PhD thesis: development of 
nanocomposites based on an epoxy matrix and silica; iii) Ashland (2006-2009, located sequentially in US, Spain and France) 
in the Composite Polymers division, focussing on bio-sourced resins, flame retardant resins, SMC resins, PU and epoxy 
structural adhesives. Led and participated in many R&D projects aimed at developing new formulations, understanding 
mechanisms and structure-properties relationships, developing new analytical methods and modelling (for improved quality 
management); as well as collaborations with academic labs and other players in the supply and value chain. Author of several 
papers in peer-reviewed and technical journals, and has presented her work in numerous international conferences.  
Dr. SIMONA NERI (Female), PhD in Supramolecular Chemistry from the University of Padua focused on gold nanoparticles 
used as sensors and bio-catalysts. Master degree in Organic Chemistry and Bachelor degree in “Packaging Science and 
Technology” from the University of Parma. After her job experiences as packaging technologist in Lind&Sprüngli, 
Procter&Gamble and GlaxoSmithKline Simona moved to the University of Padua as researcher in the field of nanotechnology 
and to VillaPharma Eurofins as synthetic chemist. In 2017 she moved to Barcelona as project manager in Fira Barcelona 
(LifeScience&Chemistry department) coordinating the main stakeholders playing a role in the scientific tradeshows. After 
joining Iris, she has been involved in the management of European funded projects on biobased materials for packaging and 
healthcare and on waste valorization both as Partner and Coordinator. 
IGNACIO MONTERO CASTRO (Male) is a Project and Innovation Manager at IRIS since 2018. He is Chemical Engineer 
graduate from the University of Santiago de Compostela, Spain, and holds a Master in Process Engineering from Polytechnic 
University of Catalonia, Spain. Ignacio comes from a background in process control and industrial safety, developing applied 
research in self-optimizing control strategies for industrial facilities and environmental risk analysis for the Catalan department 
of Industry. He spent almost three years on the Circular Economy unit of LEITAT Technological Centre working as R&D 
engineer and Technical Project Manager. During this period, he was responsible for management, execution and proposal 
writing of Public Funded Research Projects under the different financial International, National and Regional schemes: 
H2020, CIEN, LIFE. Since joining IRIS, he has been providing business management services to support the award, 
coordination and implementation of EU funded projects on Applied Photonics, ICT & Digitalisation and Circular & Bio-
economy sectors. 
Dr. DAVID NETTLETON. (male) Data Mining Analyst. Has a Ph.D in Artificial Intelligence from the Universitat Politécnica de 
Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, M.Sc. In Computer Software and Systems Design from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, 
U.K., and B.Sc. (Hons) Computer Science from the University of Wolverhampton, U.K. Has over 20 years experience of 
applying data mining algorithms (including neural networks, rule induction) and statistical techniques (including ANOVA, 
regression, principal components) in a diversity of data analysis and modeling projects, such as medical diagnosis/prognosis, 
fraud detection, customer loyalty and segmentation, online user web search behaviour and data privacy. As well as 
commercial projects, he has conducted research and lectured at two universities. He has published a diversity of articles in 
specialised data analysis journals/congresses and three books. He has participated in several competitive multi-partner 
research projects and has a European patent application for a graph matching algorithm.  
Dr. TIMOTHY KEHOE (Male): VISUMPalm Product Manager, as well as the Technical Lead at Dublin Facilities.  PhD in 
Engineering, University College Cork, Ireland- developed an IR photometric measurement system for thermal diffusivity in 
anisotropic materials. Masters in Optoelectronics, Queens University Belfast. Post doc at the Catalan Institute of 
nanotechnology. Patents related to nanomonitoring. 
Dr. JOSE ANTONIO IBARRA FUSTE (male). Scrum Master. PhD. in Signal Theory and Communications, Universitat 
                                                           
 
51 Reilly, Norman B, The Team based product development guidebook, ASQ Quality Press, Milwaukee Wisconsin, 1999  
52  Kano, N, Seraku, N, Takahashi, F and Tsuji, S (1984) Attractive quality and must-be quality, The Journal of the Japanese Society 
for Quality Control 14 No 2 pp 39e48 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 62 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Politècnica de Catalunya, Spain (2014), Thesis: “Design Rules and Optimization of Electro-Optics Modulators Based on 
Coplanar Waveguides”. Master Degree in Telecommunication Systems from Universidad de Oriente, Cuba (2005). 
Telecommunication Engineer Degree from Universidad de Oriente, Cuba (2003). Experienced in optical communication 
softwares, in electromagnetic structures simulators and in many programming languages. 
Dr. CUAUHTEMOC ARAUJO (Male) Chemometrician. Degree on Physics, master degree in Material Sciences, and 
doctorate degree in Applied Sciences. Conducted research in the fields of materials sciences, optical spectroscopies and 
chemometrics. More than 20 years of experience working on a wide range of biological and non-biological applications of 
vibrational spectroscopies (i.e. Raman, MIR and NIR). Also worked closely with other characterization techniques such as: 
UV/Vis and fluorescence spectroscopies. 
Dr. LAURENT PHILIPPET (Male) Scientist. Bachelor’s degree in science, speciality applied physics (Université Paris Sud). 
Engineer’s degree in Optical Science (Institut d’Optique Graduate School). PhD in Optical Science (University Paris XIII). 
Experimental physicist specialised in optics and photonics with specific skills in laser physics, spectroscopy techniques, 
microscopy, interferometry and optical design. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
 E. Bugnicourt, T. Kehoe , M. Latorre, C. Serrano, S. Philippe and M. Schmid, Recent Prospects in the Inline 
Monitoring of Nanocomposites and Nanocoatings by Optical Technologies, Nanomaterials 2016, Review, 6(8), 150; 
doi:10.3390/nano6080150 
 “MONITORING INNOVATION: Optical systems to support the production of surfaces with advanced functionalities”. 
Elodie Bugnicourt, Severine Philippe, Tim Kehoe, Laura Rodriguez, Simona Neri, European Coatings Journal, 06 
– 2019, pp 42-48. 
 Sensing Technology. Chapter 6. Resource Efficiency of Processing Plants. Monitoring and Improvement.  A. 
Rosales, O. Mc Nerney. Edited by Stefan Krämer and Sebastian Engell. Wiley-Vch. Print ISBN: 978-3-527-34074-
3 in press 
 Commercial Data Mining, Processing, Analysis and Modeling for Predictive Analytics Projects, David Nettleton, 
Elsiever book, ISBN9780124166028, 304p 
 Towards Automatic Calibration of In-Line Machine Processes, 18th International Conference on Industrial 
Engineering and Manufacturing Process Modeling, D.F.Nettleton, E.Bugnicourt, C. Wasiak, A. Rosales, London, 
UK, July 28-29, 2016 
 Dispersion and Performance of a Nanoclay/Whey Protein Isolate Coating upon its Upscaling as a Novel Ready-to-
Use Formulation for Packaging Converters. Bugnicourt, E.; Brzoska, N.; Kucukpinar, E.; Philippe, S.; Forlin, E.; 
Bianchin, A.; Schmid, M. Polymers 2019, 11, 1410. 
Relevant product line: Cloud-enabled NIR spectroscopy platform for inline and at line process monitoring (Devices 
engineered for harsh environments- IP65 and optionally higher, optional ATEX DC compliance- and proprietary optical probe 
that maximises the interaction between the light and the sample for more accurate measurements).  
Related services: Chemometrics model development and training. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
 
 ProPAT: Robust and affordable process control technologies for improving standards and optimising industrial  
operations (H2020- SPIRE, Grant Agreement no: 637232, 2014-2018). IRIS is leading the development of a global 
PAT control platform integrating novel low -cost smart sensors, such as MEMS -NIR spectroscopic and 
granulometric analysers, which together with chemometric tools and predictive software, is being validated to 
optimise the performance of batch and continuous processing industrie s. As initial target applications, the milling 
of minerals, ceramics, metals, mixing and granulation of pharma products and polymerization of resins are 
optimized both in terms of process efficiency, and output quality. 
 OPTINANOPRO: Processing and control of novel nanomaterials in packaging, automotive and solar panel 
processing lines (H2020-NMP-PILOTS-2015 GA 686116). Development and industrial integration of tailored online 
dispersion and monitoring systems to ensure a constant quality of nanomaterials. 
 IbD: Intensified by Design® for the intensification of processes involving solids handling (SPIRE GA 680565). 
Development of methodologies to analyse complex processes related to flow and particles. Development of digital 
tools for process intensification design tools. 
 ECOBULK: Circular Process for Eco -Designed Bulky Products and Internal Car Parts Circular Process for Eco -
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 63 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Designed Bulky Products and Internal Car Parts (CIRC GA 730456). Development of QAS based on expert systems 
improved with rule induction algorithm, case -based reasoning to retrieve historical knowledge which is most 
adequate for a new situation and agent based process for knowledge organization. 
 PARTICLE-PRO, Development of a hybrid process analytical technology to characterise the physical and chemical 
properties of particles; FP7 R4SME. IRIS integrated the PAT solution (hardware based on direct imaging+ software) 
which was used for microparticles in terms of size and shape in the pharma sector. NIR was used for composition 
monitoring. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work 
Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, a FTIR-ATR (Interspectrum), 2 UV-VIS (PerkinElmer 
and Ocean Optics), an Extended-SWIR (StellarNet) and a NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as well as a SWIR 
Hyperspectral imager (Specim-Xenics). The associated staff are properly trained and skilled in chemometrics modelling by 
using a commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non-commercial chemometric tools (Matlab and 
Python toolboxes). 
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up-to-date hardware and tools: signal 
generators, wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for programming 
microcontrollers, CNC-milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD software [SolidWorks], among 
others.   
IRIS’ optical engineers work with ZEEMAX software for optimally designing of optical systems and to setup the designs by 
means of advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and related 
“opticalware”). 
Food and wet chemistry lab equipped with a DSC, a Surface Energy analyser, an HPLC, a Cobb tester, microbiological 
equipments, microspcope and microtome for structural analysis, migration cells, colourimeter (for colour and opacity 
measurement), Ford cup viscometers, water vapour permeation cells, turbidimeter, climatic chambers, manual and automatic 
coaters, electrospray, different drying technologies, plasma surface activation, etc. 
 
Participant no. 2 Name (short name)/ Country University Potsdam (UP) / Germany  
Description of the legal entity  
Founded in 1991, the University of Potsdam (UP) has developed from a small institution of higher 
education into one of the leading middle-sized universities in Germany. UP is now among the World’s 
250 Best Universities in the International THE Ranking. More than 21,000 young people (2019) study 
here at the largest university in the Federal State Brandenburg. UP has a total of around 2.800 
employees, among them there are 317 professors. The University benefits from a close cooperation 
with the whole range of renowned non-university research institutes in the region. By combining its 
own research capacities with them, promoting international research cooperation as well as 
technology transfer and supporting promising young researchers, the UP permanently ra ises its national and international 
visibility. Among the seven UP faculties, the Faculty of Science, located in Potsdam -Golm, is the largest. The laboratories 
and research groups at the Institute of Chemistry cover all aspects of the chemical sciences. Re search fields range from 
inorganic & organic to physical & theoretical, and polymer & colloid chemistry. Research within the physical chemistry (PC) 
section (Bald, Kumke, Löhmannsröben, Müller -Werkmeister) focuses – both on fundamental and practical levels  – on 
photophysics & photochemistry, plasmonics, ultrafast molecular dynamics, optical & laser spectroscopy and process 
analysis. The groups play a leading role in, e. g., light scattering & photon density wave spectroscopy (PDWS), synthesis & 
characterization of hybrid nanostructures, multidimensional spectroscopy & imaging as well as optical process analytical 
technology, all themes highly relevant of NanoPAT. Moreover, NanoPAT will profit directly from scientific and technological 
infrastructure in Potsd am-Golm, such as the Technology Campus Golm with Joint Labs OPAT and NanoMAT 
(Löhmannsröben PI). Outreach and dissemination activities of NanoPAT will be integrated in the “Student and Master 
Laboratory NanoChemistry” (in preparation). 
Main tasks 
UP has an active role in WP1 and will meet with Evonik and the other RTO’s to prepare the execution of the different case 
studies. The RTO’s (ZHAW and DSC) will be trained to use PDWS in their labs.  
In WP2 the silica case study will be carried out in the laboratories of UP. In cooperation with PDWA, PDWS will be applied 
to the process and successively improved to reach TRL5. In addition, UP will assist in data analysis of the other case studies 
in which PDWS is used. 
UP is leading WP6 and supports the RTO’s and industrial partners by planning and transfer of the case studies investigated 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 64 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
in WP2 into a pilot plant environment. Execution of measurement campaign’s at Evonik will be the main focus of UP, while 
assisting in the other case studies in which PDWS is applied. With the implementation of PDWS in these case studies the 
TRL6 will be proved. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
UP consists of an experienced interdisciplinary team. Main research focus is the development of spectroscopic inline 
technology and its application. The team has an excellent knowledge about process development and control, and the 
possibility to transfer industrial processes into a lab environment. Due to the great experience with PAT and implementation 
of PAT into process environments UP is well suited to assist in the preparation of measurement campaign’s.  
UP can provide rooms and measurement equipment needed for the execution of the described case studies as well as PDWS 
prototypes for these. Reference measurement techniques, like DLS, SLS and STEM are available on site and can be used 
to evaluate the final product parameters. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
PROF. DR. HANS-GERD LÖHMANNSRÖBEN. (Male) UP Chair professor of Physical Chemistry (UPPC). He studied 
physics at the Universities of Oldenburg, Göttingen and Chapel Hill/USA. In 1985 he earned his doctoral degree in Physical 
Chemistry at the University of Göttingen. Then he moved to TU Braunschweig, where he habilitated in 1994. Afterwards he 
became a professor for “Laser Application in Chemistry and Environmental Analysis” at the FH Ostfriesland (Emden) 
(1995/1996). In 1996 he accepted a call to the Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg as a professor at the 
Institute of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry. Since 2000 he is professor at the University of Potsdam and Physical 
Chemistry Chair professor. From 2001 to 2003 he was head of the Institute of Chemistry and from 2002 to 2006 Vice-Dean 
of the Faculty of Sciences at the University of Potsdam. He was a founding member of the European Technology Platform 
(ETP) “Photonics21” (2006 – 2012). From 2008 to 2014 Prof. Dr. Löhmannsröben also headed a workgroup at the Fraunhofer 
Institute of Applied Polymer Research (Fraunhofer IAP). Since 2008 he is member of the executive board of the Centre of 
Innovation Competence (ZIK) innoFSPEC Potsdam. From 2008 to 2011 he was 1st Chairman of the sector expertise 
cooperation network in the field of optics “PhotonikBB e.V.” In March 2009 he was appointed Science Ambassador of the 
Federal State of Brandenburg. He was member of the Board of G.W.P AG, Manufacturing Services (2012 – 2018). His current 
memberships include: Board of Directors at the graduate school “SALSA”, School of Analytical Sciences Adlershof, Scientific 
Advisory Board of the Leibniz-Institute of Surface Modification (IOM Leipzig), directorate “GO:UP”, Innovation & Technology 
Campus Golm, and Board member of Universitätsgesellschaft Potsdam e. V.. Prof. Dr. Löhmannsröben is winner in the 
German excellence competition of the Federal Government and the Federal States of Germany, and in 2013 he was awarded 
the Global Vision Lecture of the SKIPER College, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Science, Peking, 
China. Since 2013 he is co-founder and shareholder of spin-off company PDW Analytics GmbH. In the summer semester 
2017 he was visiting Scholar at Heriot Watt University Edinburgh, Scotland. Prof. Dr. Löhmannsröben is co-author of more 
than 150 peer-reviewed publications and holds 5 patents. 
PROF. DR. ILKO BALD (Male). Professor of Hybrid Nanostructures at UP. He studied Chemistry at the Freie Universität 
Berlin, Germany, and performed PhD studies in Physical Chemistry at the same university under the supervision of Prof. 
Illenberger from March 2005 – December 2007 in the field of low-energy electron induced reactions in DNA. After a first 
Postdoc period of 14 months in the group of Prof. O. Ingolfsson at the University of Iceland in Reykjavik he moved to the 
Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center (iNANO) and the Center for DNA nanotechnology (CDNA) of the Aarhus University in 
Denmark. In the group of Prof. F. Besenbacher he performed postdoctoral research from July 2009 to March 2012 in the 
fields of scanning probe microscopy and DNA nanotechnology. In April 2012 he moved to the University of Potsdam and 
from January 2013 he established the junior research group “Optical Spectroscopy and Chemical Imaging” at the University 
of Potsdam and the Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing (BAM) in Berlin, Germany. In 2017 he received an 
ERC consolidator grant and from 2019 he is Associate Professor for Hybrid Nanostructures. The group studies different 
aspects of nanoparticle-based sensing, surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), DNA nanotechnology and 
electron induced processes. So far, Ilko Bald had supervised eleven PhD students and published more 
than 70 papers in peer-reviewed journals. 
DR. ANNE HARTWIG. (Female) Diploma in food chemistry at the Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg (2013), PhD in 
thermal process engineering (Dr.-Ing.) at the Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg (2017). Specialized in the application 
of inline optical spectroscopy, especially Photon Density Wave Spectroscopy. Participated in several R&D projects with 
industry partners and gained experience in process analytics for a broad range of applications including crystallization, 
polymerization and food processing. She is (co-)author of 6 papers in peer-reviewed journals, 1 patent, gave invited talks at 
different institutes and has participated with talks in many national and international conferences.  
DR. MARVIN MÜNZBERG. (Male) Diploma in chemistry at the University of Potsdam (2012), PhD in physical chemistry at 
the University of Potsdam (2018). Specialized in instrumentation of inline optical spectroscopy, especially Photon Density 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 65 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Wave Spectroscopy. Participated in several R&D projects and gained experience in implementation of Process Analytical 
Technologies in chemical, biological and industrial processes. He is (co-)author of more than 10 papers in peer-reviewed 
journals and has participated in different national and international conferences. 
DR. NABARUN POLLEY. (Male) Master in Biomedical Instrumentation at the University of Calcutta (2011) (India), PhD in 
applied optics and photonics (PhD Tech.) at the University of Calcutta (2017). Specialized in application and instrumentation 
of several spectroscopic tools and techniques including Photon Density Wave Spectroscopy. Experience to work with multiple 
industrial research projects e.g. spatially resolved monitoring of bio-chemical process. He is (co-) author of 20 papers in peer-
reviewed journals, 5 patents (Applied, Indian) and has participated with talks in many national and international conferences. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
 J. Häne, D. Brühwiler, A. Ecker and R. Hass, “Real -Time inline monitoring of zeolite synthesis by Photon Density 
Wave spectroscopy” Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, vol. 288, 2019 
 S. Beyer, R. Schürmann, I. Feldmann, A. Blocki, I. Bald, R. J. Schneider, F. Emmerling, ”Maintaining Stable Zeolitic 
Imidazolate Framework (ZIF) Templates during Polyelectrolyte Multilayer Coating”,  Colloid Interface Sci. Commun., 
vol. 22, pp.14-17, 2018. 
 M. Münzberg, R. Hass, N. Duc Khanh, O. Reich, “Limitations of turbidity process probes and formazine as their 
calibration standard“, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, vol. 409, pp. 719-28, 2017. 
 A. Hartwig and R. Hass, “Monitoring Lactose Crystallization at Industrially Relevant Concentrations by Photon 
Density Wave Spectroscopy,” Chemical Engineering & Technology, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 1139–1146, 2018. 
 M. Zühlke, S. Sass, D. Riebe, T. Beitz, H. -G. Löhmannsröben "Real-Time Reaction Monitoring of an Organic 
Multistep Reaction by Electrospray Ionization-Ion Mobility Spectrometry", ChemPlusChem, vol. 82, pp. 1266-1273, 
2017. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
 Zentrum für Innovationskompetenz innoFSPEC Potsdam. Innovative faseroptische Spektroskopie und 
Sensorik, Winner in BMBF-contests 2008 and 2015 (fiber based chemical sensing and optical multichannel 
spectroscopy, multiple scattering, photon density waves, Applied Analytical Photonic, since 2009). BMBF-project 
„NIR-CLOUD“ incorporated into innoFSPEC: NIR-spectroscopy for characterization of light propagation in opaque 
ultra-concentrated dispersions (2018 – 2021). 
 BMBF-program Innovative Hochschule: Innovative University with technology campus Golm (together with Fh 
IAP, Joint Labs, 2018 – 2022). 
 3DZ: optical 3D-Multi Parameter-Reader for process control (cell based  therapeutics, BMBF-Verbund 2018 – 2021) 
 DFG-Forschergruppe In-CheM: Organic reactions in complex and confined environments (FOR 2177, 2018 – 
2021). 
 ProCuPro: Process control sensor systems for copper production (pyrometallic, fiber optical sensing, LIBS and 
light scattering, BMBF-Verbund with Canada, 2019 – 2022). 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work 
Laboratories at UP are equipped with several automated reactor systems. Addressable volumes scale from 100 mL to 6 L 
reaction vessels. Each reactor system can be combined with different inline measurement techniques, beside standard 
techniques like temperature, pH etc.  
For inline study of particle sizes and process analysis UP is able to apply Photon Density Wave Spectroscopy, Focused 
Beam Reflection Measurements (FBRM, to obtain chord lengths of larger particles), Particle Vision and Measurement (PVM, 
as inline microscope for large structures), RAMAN spectroscopy, IR-Spectroscopy and turbidity measurements (as inline 
reference technology).  
For product analysis state of the art offline reference can be carried out in the form of dynamic light scattering (DLS), static 
light scattering (SLS), Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM), as well as (fluorescence) microscopy in the 
same lab. 
 
Participant no. 3 Name (short 
name)/ Country 
Medical University of Graz (MUG), Austria 
Description of the legal entity  
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 66 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
The Medical University of Graz (MUG) comprises 3 pre-clinical Research Centers, 
4 pre-clinical Institutes not organized in Research Centers, 19 Clinical Departments, 
1 Clinical Institute and a purpose-built Center for Medical Research equipped with 
highly specialized core facilities as well as lab and office space for research projects. 
The number of employees is about 2500. Approx. 4300 students are enrolled in the 
study programmes (Human Medicine, Dentistry, Doctoral Programs) and post-graduate programs. 
The research activities at the Medical University of Graz cover a broad spectrum in clinical and pre-clinical fields. The 
University has been participating in numerous EU-funded projects (FP5, 6, 7 and Horizon 2020) and nationally funded 
projects (Austrian Science Fund, Austrian Research Promotion Agency, Anniversary fund of the Austrian National Bank). It 
acts as coordinator of various large research initiatives, including two projects within the COMET funding line. 
The MUG offers cutting-edge technology in the center for medical research (ZMF) with its core facilities in Molecular Biology, 
Mass Spectroscopy, Microscopy, Flow Cytometry, Ultrastructure Analysis as well as general and special laboratory facilities 
including cell culture and tissue facilities. As partner of the PaLab-Graz and the BioTechMed Graz Initiative additional 
infrastructure is provided by the Omics Center Graz and the NIKON Center Graz. 
 
The project specific allocated pre-clinical Research Centers, the Gottfried Schatz Research Center for Cell Signalling, 
Metabolism and Aging (GSRC) established in 2017 at the MED CAMPUS provides the adequate space for research and 
training in an interdisciplinary scientific environment. The research activities of the GSRC are in the fields of molecular and 
cellular biology, histology and biophysics (https://biophysik.medunigraz.at/en/). 
Main tasks 
Within the project, the following contributions will be made: Providing on-line measurement technologies for specific particle 
parameters (e.g. real time aggregation behaviour, size distribution tailored and measured at process relevant key-particle 
production locations, providing parameters for process evaluations/optimization.  
We provide our knowledge of inline and real-time sample characterization of particle streams based on an innovative new 
technology OptoFluidic force induction (OF2i) recently developed at the GSRC NM-Lab Graz. The OF2i technology is based 
on optofluidics and combines microfluidics and bio-photonics to characterize and manipulate nanoparticles. Process tailored 
inline and real-time measurement equipment will be developed, tested and installed. 
The innovative OF2i technology is well established and tested at the NM-Lab in Graz (TRL 4) and currently in translation 
preparation as a spinoff project from the Medical University of Graz. OF2i inline measurements will be compared and 
validated through state-of-the-art stationary reference characterization methodologies through the established PaLab-Graz.           
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
 The Gottfried Schatz Research Center (GSRC) provides the adequate space for research, industrial research and translation 
in an interdisciplinary scientific environment. The research fields of the Division of Biophysics include molecular physiology, 
quantitative cell biology, computational modelling and nanomedicine. The Nanomedicine Lab (NM-Lab) offers specialized 
know how in the field of particle characterisation, microfluidics and bio photonics. NM-Lab, as partner and coordinator of the 
“3 University consortium” Particle Characterisation Lab Graz (PaLab-Graz) has privileged access to additional 
complementary state-of-the-art technologies. The close relation and local proximity to the networking organisation 
BioNanoNet (consortium partners), as well as Graz as one of the leading Bio-Tech-Med science-city hotspots in Europe 
provides additional value. 
We would contribute in the following areas of research: Process evaluations/optimization through OF2i measuring equipment 
development. Validation and inter-technology comparisons through state-of-the-art stationary reference characterization 
methodologies (DLS, NTA, SAXS, TEM, SEM). 
Within the project, the following contributions will be made: Lab space for RTO lab scale PAT-implementations, providing 
inline measurement technologies for specific particle parameters (e.g. real time aggregation behaviour, size distribution, …), 
tailored and measured at process relevant key-particle stream locations. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
DR.-ING. CHRISTIAN HILL, MA (Male): Christian HILL holds a PhD in Physical-Chemistry from the University of Graz. He 
is currently at the Medical University of Graz, Gottfried Schatz Research Center / Biophysics - Nanomedicine the coordinator 
of the LightMatters group for optofluidic particle characterization. Starting from a position in a leading high-tech scientific 
instrumentation manufacturing company in 2001 for analytical and synthetical chemistry as project and product manager, he 
has gained various experience in industrial research and project management until 2009. During his PhD working at the 
GSRC / Biophysics (Medical University of Graz) in the NM-Lab of Prof. Dr. Ruth Prassl, he developed his project relevant 
key expertise working on the technology development of OptoFluidic force induction (OF2i) as a platform technology for real-
time particle characterization and active manipulation in microfluidic environments. In different research stays at the CNR-

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 67 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
IOM - Instituto Officina dei Materiali, Italy (2014, Danut COJOC, PhD) or at the Biochemistry Institute, McMaster University, 
Canada (2018) he could apply OF2i on different systems for performance evaluation. OF2i is a basic technology able to 
operate as an on-line and continuous particle stream sample scanner for statistically relevant analysis of size, homogeneity 
and shape (under development) and shows individual particles in real-time visualizations for concentration measurements. 
The active approach of OF2i enables the revolutionary possibility of controlling and manipulating the sample on a nanometer 
scale as a high throughput solution. 
ASSOC. PROF. DR. RUTH PRASSL (Female): Prof. Prassl (PhD) is a chemist and leader of the working group 
Nanomedicine (NM-Lab) at the Division of Biophysics at the GSRC. Her key expertise is in molecular biophysics and 
structural biology as well as particle characterisation as partner and coordinator of the PaLab-Graz (Particle Characterisation 
Lab) and the BioTechMed-Graz initiative. A major focus of her research is on the development of bio-nano structured 
materials, liposomes and lipoprotein related NPs as pharmaceutical nanocarrier for targeted therapy and diagnosis. She has 
>80 publications, h=26.  She supervised 14 PhD (finished) and 2 PhD (ongoing), 7 Master and 37 Bachelor theses.  She is 
thesis committee member and/or mentor of PhD students in the doctoral program (Molecular Medicine) of the MUG. Editorial 
Board Member of ISRN Structural Biology and Chemistry and Physics of Lipids. Since 2007 she is key researcher in the 
Research Center for Pharmaceutical Engineering.  Since 2009 Vice President of the Erwin Schrödinger Society for 
Nanosciences and since 2014 board member of the Austrian Science Fund (FWF). 
DI. GERHARD PROSSLINER (Male): Gerhard PROSSLINER (MSc) is co-coordinator of the LightMatters project for 
optofluidic particle characterization at the Medical University of Graz, GSRC / Division of Biophysics – Nanomedicine. He 
obtained his Dipl.-Ing. (MSc) in Electrical and Biomedical Engineering (specialization: Medical Engineering) in 2012 at the 
University of Technology Graz. He developed and designed within his diploma-thesis at the University of Technology Graz 
(Institute of Medical Engineering) and the University Hospital Graz (Division of Thoracic and Hyperbaric Surgery) a novel 
laser applicator for the photodynamic therapy of rare intrathoracic tumors; gained broad expertise in biophotonics and 
nanoparticle based translational research towards markets and entrepreneurial environments. Continuing, he worked for a 
medical engineering company specialized in continuous hemodynamic monitoring, where he applied his theoretical 
knowledge and acquired practical know-how in development and production of opto-pneumatic based patient monitors. 
Working in the corporate sector, he deepened his engineering and managing expertise as leader/manager of prototype-to-
preproduction projects in preventive medicine and computer vision Start-ups, accompanied by continuing education in 
modern project management, social competence and entrepreneurship. With his high affinity for application-oriented research 
in nanoparticle and biophotonical research, he joined the LightMatters group at the Medical University Graz (NM-Lab) in 2017 
as translational and organizational project coordinator towards market-introduction of the developed OF2i technologies. 
MAG. PHARM. ELISABETH SEIBERT (Female): Elisabeth Seibert, MSc in pharmaceutical sciences from the University of 
Graz, Austria. Her background comprises theoretical and technical skills for analytical chemistry and general instrumental 
analytics with a focus on chromatographical methods (UHPLC, GC, SEC) as well as characterization methodologies (DLS, 
NTA, OF2i). Prior to joining the nanomedicin working group (Prof. Prassl, NM Lab), she gained wide experiences in laboratory 
studies for pharmaceutical active enantiomeric substances, separating and wide-ranging characterization. She is currently 
working on the evaluation of physical/chemical properties of synthetic SeNPs including size, shape, and surface chemistry 
and their interaction with biological systems. With her high kinship of instrumental and characterization analytics and her vast 
experience in structured implementation of broad laboratory studies, she will be responsible for the execution and translation 
of OF2i validation processes, SOP´s generation and realization of RTO lab scale case studies. 
MARKO SIMIC, BSc (Male): Marko Simic holds a BSc. in Technical Physics from the University of Technology in Graz. He 
is currently working on his diploma thesis at the Institute of Material Physics at the University of Technology with supervision 
of the GSRC / Division of Biophysics at the Medical University of Graz. As part of his diploma thesis he is working as a 
researcher in the research group of Dr. Christian Hill. Marko Simic contributes in the fields of fluidics as well as light-matter 
interaction, interfaces and data processing where he is responsible for the physical and mathematical modeling using 
Boundary Element Methods and programming as one of his key skills. He gained numerous experiences working at leading 
high-tech and industrial processing companies by developing various mathematic-physical models, middleware and complex 
simulations extending his broad technical knowledge gained throughout his studies. His strong industrial IT background 
allows him to solve physically complex and computationally intensive problems using various numerical methods used 
worldwide for data processing, analytics as well as feasibility studies.      
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
 Hill, C., Optofluidic force induction (OF2i) - Platform technology for particle characterization and active manipulation 
in microfluidic environments., Diss. Medizinische Universität Graz, 2018 
 EU-Patent: „Method and device for analyzing a fluidic sample with dispersed particles“, EP 17 178 099.2 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 68 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 Renowned Styrian Innovation prize: Fast Forward Award (2017) for the development of Optofluidic Analysis 
technologies 
 Kornmueller, K. et al., Prassl R. (2018) Nano Research, 11(2), 913-928. 
 Lehofer, B. et al., Prassl R. (2018) Part Part Syst Charact. 35(9) : 1800149                                        
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. LIGHTMATTERS: OptoFluidic NANO-particle characterization (FFG SpinOff Fellowship, 2018-2020) 
2. LDLPRESS (FWF/ANR, 2013-2017) 
3. NANOHEALTH (FWF/FFG, Nano-Structured Materials for Drug Targeting, Release and Imaging, 2005-2012) 
4. NANOFAT & LIPOCEST (HTI-Human Technology Interface, 2011-2012) 
5. NANO2CLINIC (COST Action CA17140 -Cancer nanomedicine - from the bench to the bedside, 2018-2022) 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work 
MUG – GSRC:  NM-Lab is partner and coordinator of the “3 University consortium” Particle Characterisation Lab Graz 
(PaLab-Graz): Prototypic OptoFluidic force induction (OF2i); dynamic light scattering (DLS, PCS), zeta potential; nanoparticle 
tracking analysis (NTA); UV/Vis spectroscopy; differential scanning microcalorimetry (DSC); electron spin resonance 
spectroscopy (EPR); density/ultrasound, circular dichroism spectroscopy (CD); light/fluorescence spectroscopy; 
transmission- and scanning electron microscopy (SEM/TEM); atomic force microscopy (AFM); fluorescence microscopy; 
small/wide angle X-ray scattering techniques (laboratory SWAXS and access to Synchrotron Radiation facilities); thin layer 
chromatography; ultracentrifugation; size exclusion chromatography; electrophoresis techniques; gel reader, plate reader                               
 
Participant no. 4 4 Name (short name)/ Country Universidad del País Vasco Euskal 
Herriko 
UnibertsitateaUPV/EHU/Spain 4   
Description of the legal entity  
The University of the Basque country (UPV/EHU) is a teaching and research institution 
officially founded in 1985 and currently is at the helm of Research, Development and 
Innovation in the region of the Basque Country. 
POLYMAT is an internationally reputed research centre in Polymer Science located in 
Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain which is within the UPV/EHU. POLYMAT inc ludes 22 
Assistant, Associate and Full Professors and almost 100 PhD students and postdoctoral fellows. It is a multidisciplinary 
research center which includes a wide variety of research teams working in the fields of polymer synthesis, polymerization 
reaction engineering, membranes, polymers for electronic, energy storage and biomedical applications, rheology and polymer 
processing. 
Within POLYMAT, the activities related to this project will be conducted by the Polymerization Processes Group that is 
composed of 5 academic staff, 8 postdocs, and 22 PhD students plus two lab technicians (MALDI -TOF and liquid 
chromatographic analysis). This is an international and multi -cultural research team that in the last years has hosted PhD 
students and postdocs from 20 countries. The Polymerization Processes Group is expert in polymerization in dispersed media 
with special emphasis on waterborne systems, and have directed its research towards the fundamental investigation of 
industrially significant problems,  
From 2010 onwards, the Polymerization Processes Group has been awarded with several European funded projects: two 
Marie Sklodowska Curie Actions (TRACKWAY-EID as coordinators and Photoemulsion-ITN) and three collaborative research 
projects (RECOBA-SPIRE, PEPTICAPS-NMP and LIMPID-NMP). The group has over 600 m2 of laboratories equipped with 
state-of-the-art computer controlled reactors to perform polymerizations reactions. Techniques for the full characterization of 
the polymers  are available, such as: TEM, AFM, SEM , MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometer 1H and 13C NMRs, DSC, FTIR, 
DLS, Disc Centrifuge, CHDF, GPCs (SEC/MALS/RI and AF4/MALS/RI), ultracentrifuge, surface tensiometers, contact angle 
measurement, XPS, etc. POLYMAT possesses also electrochemical characterization (p otentiostat-galvanostats), glove 
boxes and coin cell battery development units.                
Main tasks 
 UPV/EHU will lead WP1 defining the requirements and the state -of-the-art of the nano-montoring technologies that will be 
used within the project. Moreover, UPV/EHU will have an active role in WP2, WP5 and WP6. In WP2 UPV/EHU will be in 
charge of the produc tion of polymeric dispersions implementing PDWA technology. For instance, laboratory testing of 
samples, synthesis of polymeric dispersions with the use of PDWA and comparison of the results obtained by conventional 
methods as well as, definition of up -scaling specifications will be performed.  In WP2 UPV/EHU, will be in charge of 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 69 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
implementing PDWA technology in the production of polymeric dispersions. PDWA will be used for laboratory samples testing 
and online monitoring of polymer reactions. The role in WP5 and WP6 will be to contribute and give assistance to the partners 
involved in simulating the process (WP5) and synthesizing polymeric dispersions at large scales (WP6). 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
 The Polymerization Process Group of POLYMAT -UPV/EHU is focused on the fundamental understanding of industrially 
relevant polymerization processes with special emphasis on polymerizations in dispersed media. Polymer dispersions are 
product-by-process materials whose microstru cture, and hence their final properties, are mostly determined in the reactor. 
Therefore, the understanding of the processes occurring in the reactor is crucial to achieve, an efficient, consistent safe and 
environmentally-friendly production of polymer materials with improved performance.  
With its team and resources the UPV/EHU can carry out the production and further characterization of the polymeric 
dispersions implementing the technologies described within this project. In addition, with its expertise in the field of polymeric 
dispersion the synthetic procedure as well as the efficiency of the PDWA could be validated.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
PROF. DR. JOSE RAMON LEIZA (Male): He is Professor of Chemical Engineering at the school of Chemistry of the University 
of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU) and Director of the Institute of Polymer Materials in Donostia-San Sebastián (Spain). He 
graduated in Chemistry in 1987 and obtained the Ph.D. degree in Chemi cal Engineering in 1991 at the University of the 
Basque Country (monitoring and control of emulsion polymerization reactors). He spent sabbatical years at Lehigh University 
(Bethlehem, PA, USA) as Visiting Research Associate (1994-95) and Queen’s University (Kingston, ON, Canada) as a visiting 
Professor (2004-05). His research has been focused on the analysis of industrially relevant polymerization processes with 
especial interest on polymer reaction engineering aspects of polymerization in dispersed media.  Thus, he has developed 
advanced monitoring and control strategies for tailor making the microstructure and morphology of waterborne polymer 
dispersions. To achieve this goal, he has extensively investigated the kinetics, characterization and modeling of e mulsion 
polymerization processes and emulsion products. He has also been involved in the research of the incorporation of inorganic 
nanoparticles into waterborne polymeric dispersions for providing additional functionality to the final applications that include 
UV absorption, photocatalysis, corrosion resistance, fluorescence emission with applications on adhesives, coatings, paints, 
multiplexing, water treatment and sensors. He is currently also involved in the Baskrete initiative in which his role is to develop 
polymeric additives to understand the fundamentals of the interaction of these macromolecules in concrete and cementitious 
formulations. He has published more than 155 papers, 19 book chapters and he has delivered 25 invited talks and more than 
160 poster and oral presentations in international conferences and workshops. He is also coauthor of 6 patents and has 
supervised 20 PhDs. He is member of the editorial boards of the Macromolecular Reaction Engineering (2010 -) and 
International Journal of Poly mer Science (2008 -2016) journals. He served as guest editor of the special series “Sensors, 
Process Control and Modeling” of the journal Macromolecular Reaction Engineering. He has organized the Workshop “3rd 
PhD student workshop in Polymer Reaction Engine ering” in 2014, he has also organized and co -chaired the International 
Polymer Colloids Group conference in 2017 (IPCG2017) and he vicechaired the Polymer Reaction Engineering conference 
(PRE10) in 2018. He is currently a member of the International Polymer Colloids Group (IPCG) and member of the Spanish 
Polymer Society (GEP). In 1993 he received the Rhone-Poulenc award in Clean Technologies organized by the Association 
of Engineers of Madrid (Spain). 
DR. MARÍA PAULIS (Female): She is Associate Professor of  Chemical Engineering at the school of Chemistry of the 
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU) in Donostia -San Sebastián (Spain). She graduated in Chemistry at the 
University of the Basque Country and obtained the BSc in Chemistry at the Strathclyde University in 1995. She obtained the 
Ph.D. degree in Chemical Engineering in 2000 at the University of the Basque Country. Her research was initially focused on 
the heterogeneous catalysis for VOC removal, but moved during her postdoctoral period to polymerization in dispersed media. 
Since then, she has been focusing on the research of the synthesis, characterization and film formation of inorganic/organic 
and organic/organic waterborne nanocomposites, in order to upgrade the properties of the bare polymeric waterborne 
dispersions. In this sense, properties like UV absorption, corrosion resistance, fluorescence emission or improved water 
resistance have been obtained in waterborne dispersions with more environmentally friendly applications than their 
solventborne counterparts. She has published 75 papers, 7 book chapters and she has had more than 95 contributions in 
international conferences and workshops. She is coauthor of 4 patents and has supervised 11 PhDs. She has co-guest edited 
a Special Issue of the Ma cromolecular Reaction Engineering (“Product Design of Hybrids”) and is currently reviewer from 
many polymeric journals. She organized the conference “Materialen Zientzia eta Teknologia: II” in 2014, and she is part of 
the organizing committee of the “Emuls ion Polymerization Processes Course” that is held every year in September since 
2003. 
DR. EDURNE GONZALEZ (Female): She is a Post-Doctoral Researcher in POLYMAT-UPV/EHU She graduated in Chemistry 
in 2008 and obtained the PhD degree in 2013 from UPV-EHU. Her PhD work was focused on the study of latex film formation 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 70 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
process and film properties. Afterwards, she got a research position in the Collaborative European Project LIMPID where she 
worked on the synthesis of polymer/TiO2 nanocomposite photocatalytic materials. In 2014, she moved to Cornell University 
(New York, USA) where she spent two years as Post-Doctoral researcher. During this time, she worked on the fabrication of 
functional and stimuli-responsive polymeric nanofibers for biomedical applications. In 2017 she joined the Polymers and Soft 
Matter Group of the Materials Physics Centre (MPC) (Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain) as Gipuzkoa Fellow (Diputación Foral 
de Guipuzcoa, OF 67/2017). During her stay at MPC, she worked with fluorescent and enzyme mimick ing single -chain 
polymeric nanoparticles. Currently, in POLYMAT -UPV/EHU, her research is focused on the fabrication of thermochromic 
coatings; polyurethane based anticorrosive coatings and quantum dots containing hybrid nanofibers for sensor applications. 
She has published 20 papers and one book chapter, she is also co-author of one patent and she has delivered more than 20 
oral and poster presentations in international conferences and workshops. In addition, she has broad experience supervising 
undergraduate and master students and is very active in outreach activities such as the Science Week, the International Day 
of Women in Science and Pint of Science. 
DR. MIREN AGUIRRE (Female): She is a Post -Doctoral Researcher at the Basque Center for Macromolecular Design and 
Engineering, POLYMAT Fundazioa in Donostia-San Sebastián (Spain). She graduated in chemistry in 2010 and obtained the 
PhD degree in 2014 by UPV-EHU. She obtained Pre-Doctoral (Formación de Investigadores modalidad AE, 2011-2014) and 
Post-Doctoral (Juan de la Cierva en Formación Post-Doctoral Grant from Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad de España 
FJCI-2014-22336, 2015-2018) grants in competitive calls from Basque and Spanish Governments, respectively.  Her research 
has been focused on the in corporation of metal oxide nanoparticles into waterborne polymeric dispersions to improve their 
final performance as UV or anticorrosive coatings. She has also been involved in the research of a new generation of 
alkoxyamines to polimerize different type of monomers by Nitroxide Mediated Polymerization (NMP). She is also involved on 
the development of new Biodegradable polyester waterborne adhesives as well as polyelectrolite complexation in waterborne 
system to obtained crosslinkable latexes. During her Post-Doctoral years she had the opportunity to specialized in the use of 
different characterization techniques that include Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM), Capillary 
Hydrodynamic chromatography (CHDF3000) and Size Exclusion Chromatography/Asymmetric Flow Field Flow Fractionation 
(SEC(AF4)/MALS/RI/Visco). She has published more than 20 papers, 3 book chapters and she has delivered more than 13 
oral and poster presentations in international conferences and workshops. She is also co -author of one patent. She was a 
member of the local organization committee in the organization of the International Polymer Colloids Group conference in 
2017 (IPCG2017). She has supervised more than 5 Master Student’s projects and she is currently supervising 2 PhD 
students.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
 O. Elizalde, G.P. Leal, J.R. Leiza “Particle size distribution measurements: A co mparison of four commercial 
techniques” Particle and particle size characterization 17(5-6), 236-243 (2000) 
 O. Elizalde, M. Azpeitia, M.M. Reis, J.M. Asua, J.R. Leiza “Monitoring emulsion polymerization reactors:  
Calorimetry vs Raman spectroscopy” Industrial and engineering chemistry research, 44, 7200-7207 (2005) 
 Luis M. Gugliotta, Georgina S. Stegmayer, Verónica D.G. Gonzalez,J. R. Leiza, Jorge R. Vega “A Neural Network 
Approach for Estimating the Particle Size Distribution of a Dilute Látex from Multi-Angle Dynamic Light Scattering 
Measurements”, Particle and particle size characterization 26, 41-52 (2009). 
 F. A. Mariz, J.R. Leiza, J.C. De La Cal “Competitive particle growth: A tool to control the particle size distribution for 
the synthesis of high solids content low viscosity latexes”, Chemical engineering journal 168, 938–946 (2011). 
 L. Clementi, L. Gugliotta, J.R. Vega, M. Aguirre, J.R. Leiza "Multi -Wavelength UV -Detection in Capillary 
Hydrodynamic Fractionation. Data Treatment for an Absolute Estimate of the Particle Size Distribution", Journal of 
quantitative spectroscopy and radiative transfer 189, 168–175 (2017).                  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
 “Reliable Multidetection Sensor for Advanced Control in Látex Production” REMAP BRITE: BRPR CT96-0275 
 "Cross-sectorial real-time sensing, advanced control and optimisation of batch processes saving energy and raw 
materials" RECOBA H2020. SPIRE-01-2014: Integrated Process Control            
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
Instruments: Field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM) with EDX, Atomic force microscope (AFM), Dynamic Light 
Scattering (DLS), Zeta potential meter, X -ray spectrometer, FT -Raman microscopy (1064 nm), Dynamic contact angle 
measurement, 5 Fully automated polymerization reactors (100 ml to 2L), RC1 calorimeter reactor (Mettler-Toledo), Microwave 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 71 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
polymerization reactor, Bottle polymerization setup, Chemspeed Mini-Plant reactor, Disk-Centrifuge , Capillary Hydrodynamic 
chromatography, CHDF3000, SEC/RI/UV/Fluorescence, SEC(AF4)/MALS/RI/Visco (organic solvent), SEC(AF4)/MALS/RI 
(aqueous), HPLC, Rheometer, Turbiscan (Emulsion stability assessment), Fluorescence spectrophotomer, Tensiometer. 
 
Participant no. 4 5 Name (short name)/ Country Zurich University of Applied 
Sciences(ZHAW)/Switzerland 
Description of the legal entity  
The Zurich University of Applied Sciences ZHAW is one of the leading universities of applied 
sciences in Switzerland. Teaching, research, continuing education, consulting and other services 
are both scientifically based and practice-oriented. The Institute of Chemistry and Biotechnology 
ICBT with its 10 centres and 26 research groups provides interdisciplinary expertise including 
Nanotechnology, Materials Science, Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Process 
Intensification and Process Analytical Technologies, Industrial Chemistry, Organic and Medicinal 
Chemistry, Pharmaceutical Technology, Catalysis and Biocatalysis and Analytical Chemistry. 
ICBT ZHAW has extensive expertise in performing inline particle size measurements for zeolite 
synthesis in lab scale under hydrothermal condi tions due to the academic track record in the field of porous materials 
(Polymer Chemistry Group) and the long-time experience in industrial process development (Centre of Industrial Chemistry 
and Processes). ZHAW has furthermore gathered experience with P DW spectroscopy. As from January 2019 a PDW 
spectrometer is available at ZHAW equipped with an inline probe to analyze crystallization experiments in real time. 
 
Main tasks 
 ZHAW will lead the RTO pilot scale tests for zeolites case study, testing PDW technology in collaboration with PDWA prior 
its implementation in the industrial pilot at ARK facilities. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
 The core competence of the Centre for Industrial Chemistry and Processes is the optimization of manufacturing processes, 
particularly by means of inline process analytical technologies (PAT). This knowledge is being used in different-sized projects 
with industrial partners. In this context the application of the Green Chemistry principles and the use of natural resources are 
central. 
Associations: Swiss Chemical Society SCS, Swiss Process and Chemical Engineers SGVC, Gesellschaft Deutscher 
Chemiker GDCh (AK Prozessanalytik), Swiss Textnet, Member of the Topical Platform Chemistry of the Swiss Academy of 
Engineering Sciences SATW 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
PD DR. DOMINIK BRÜHWILER (Male) Head of the Polymer Chemistry Group at ZHAW, obtained his PhD in Chemistry 
from the University of Bern in 2001. After a postdoctoral stay at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (Berkeley, 
California), he joined the European Research Training Network "Nanochannel" as a Young Researcher. In December 2004, 
he took a position at the University of Zürich as an independent research group leader and obtained his Venia Legendi in 
February 2011. In the same year, he moved to the Zurich University of Applied Sciences (ZHAW). The key expertise of the 
Brühwiler group lies in the synthesis, functionalization, and characterization of nanoporous materials, including zeolites and 
mesoporous silica. The nanoporous materials are tailor-made, including an adjustment of pore size, particle size and shape 
according to the requirements of the respective application. Highly organized systems are generated by introducing guest 
molecules or by surface functionalization, leading to materials with exceptional properties.  
Associations: Swiss Chemical Society, American Chemical Society, International Zeolite Association, European 
Photochemistry Association, Editorial Board of Materials, Elected Member of the Swiss National Research Council. 
PROF. DR. ACHIM ECKER (Male) studied chemistry at Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT, Germany) and École 
Supérieure de Chimie Industrielle de Lyon (CPE, France) and received his PhD in Chemistry from KIT in 1996. He joined 
Ciba Specialty Chemicals in 1997 and held several functions in manufacturing of textile auxiliaries, textile dyes and pigments 
as well as UV absorbers for personal care in Germany, Brazil and Switzerland. After 10 years of production management he 
became lecturer of industrial and inorganic chemistry at ZHAW, where he  is Head of Centre of Industrial Chemistry and 
Processes and Director of Chemistry Program today. 
 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 72 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 A. Zabala Ruiz, D. Brühwiler, T. Ban, G. Calzaferri, Synthesis of Zeolite L. Tuning Size and Morphology, 
Monatshefte Für Chemie. 136 (2005) 77–89. doi:10.1007/s00706-004-0253-z. 
 A. Zabala Ruiz, D. Brühwiler, L. -Q. Dieu, G. Calzaferri, Controlling Size and Morphology of Zeolite L, in: U. 
Schubert, N. Hüsing, R.M. Laine (Eds.), Materials Syntheses: A Practical Guide, Springer Vienna, Vienna, 2008: 
pp. 9–19. doi:10.1007/978-3-211-75125-1_1. 
 M. Dabros, O. Vorlet, R. Marti, W. Riedl, G. Grundler, A. Vaccari, M. Zinn, A. Ecker, C. Hinderling, PAT at the 
Universities of Applied Sciences, Chimia 69 (2015) 482-484. doi: 10.2533/chimia.2015.482. 
 J. Häne, D. Brühwiler, A. Ecker, R. Hass, Real-time inline monitoring of zeolite synthesis by Photon Density Wave 
spectroscopy, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials 288 (2019) 109580.  
doi: 10.1016/j.micromeso.2019.109580 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
 Optimizing Synthesis of Zeolites by means of Photon Density Wave Spectroscopy (PDWS). 
 Intelligent sensor-based assistance system for retail 
 Long-term stability of embedded ZeoFRET composites 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work 
 Zeolite synthesis optimization using inline photon density wave spectroscopy (PDWS) BMBF Research Assignment 
by Uni Potsdam innoFSPEC (01.04.2018 - 31.08.2018), Team: Achim Ecker*, Dominik Brühwiler, Janick Häne 
 True Color Pigments (TCP) SNF precoR 161557 (01.01.2016 - 31.12.2016), Team: Dominik Brühwiler*, Achim 
Ecker, Lucie Sägesser, Pascal Woodtli, Martin Winkler, Toni Schne ider, Fernanda Rossetti, True Color Pigments 
for Textiles (TCP4tex) 
 INNOSUISSE Project No. 18622.1 PFNM-NM (01.09.2016 – 01.11.2018), Team Achim Ecker*, Dominik 
Brühwiler, Sandro Giger, Patrick Müller, Roman Zambail, Martin Winkler, Jan Inauen, Stephan Kol l, Jürgen 
Banholzer, Stefan Ehrenberg, Karola Rebmann, Molecular Alignment Chips 
 SNF Project No.140303, 01.10.2012 - 30.06.2016, Team: Brühwiler Dominik*, Michael Reber 
 
Participant no. 6 Name (short name)/ Country PDW Analytics GmbH (PDWA) / 
Germany 
Description of the legal entity  
PDW Analytics GmbH (PDWA) is a SME founded in 2013 as a spin -off from Potsdam 
University. At PDWA, currently six highly skilled scientists work on the technology transfer 
and commercialization of the Photon Density Wave spectroscopy technology. This involves 
material characterization, data analysis model development, control software 
development, hardware development and specialized fibre -optical instrumentation, 
campaigning at customer sites, as well as commercial instru ment supply. To the best of 
our knowledge, PDW Analytics GmbH is the only commercial source of Photon Density Wave spectrometers worldwide. Due 
to the team’s background in chemistry, biotechnology, photonics, high -frequency fibre-optical instrumentation, i nstrument 
control, process analytical technology, and business administration it is extremely well prepared to manage the successful 
technology transfer from academia to market. In addition, team members have a background in large company affiliation, 
thus adding professional experience plus extensive commercial networks to the company portfolio. As a result, PDWA exhibits 
significant growth in head count as well as in turnover and experiences very strong demands from national and international 
customers (b oth from academia and industry). To maximize the information yield from process analytical data, specific 
instrumentation modifications and data analysis models for dedicated industries from e.g. food, chemistry, and biotechnology 
are focus of its research  and development scheme. Amongst others, this includes the development of specific fibre -optical 
process analytical probes for extremely challenging chemical process conditions (e.g. high temperatures, high pressures, 
extreme pH values).  
Main tasks 
PDWA is involved in WP1, meeting with the RTO’s and industry partners to get knowledge about the specifically needed 
modifications and requirements of the case studies investigated with PDWS. 
Furthermore, PDWA is leading WP2, Photon Wave Density Spectroscopy ( PDW) Development, giving advice and support 
by applying PDWS to the case studies, as well as adjust the PDWS Probes to the extreme conditions of the case studies. 
PDWS will be established at the RTO’s together with UP. 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 73 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
PDWA is involved in WP6 and will supp ort the application of the PDWS in the pilot plant and adept PDWS to the process 
conditions. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
 With respect to Photon Density Wave spectrometers and their further development, PDWA is the only commercial source 
worldwide. PDWA is proud of its extremely well and diversely trained employees, having backgrounds in the management of 
small to very large scale (> 1 Mio. EUR) commercial and public funded projects with national and international partners from 
academia and industry alike.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
 DR. ROLAND HASS (Male) Roland Hass studied Chemistry at the University of Potsdam, with research stays in Poland, 
Spain, and Brazil. In the group of Prof. Löhmannsröben, Physical Chemistry, at the University of Potsdam, he worked on his 
PhD thesis with the focus on “Applied Photon Density Wave spectroscopy”. In 2013, he joined Mettler Toledo as a Consultant 
for in-situ Particle Systems Characterization. Also in 2013, together with Dr. Oliver Reich, he founded PDW Analytics GmbH, 
where he acts as managing partner.  
DR. LENA BRESSEL (Female) Lena Bressel studied Chemistry at the University of Potsdam with a focus on Physical 
Chemistry. After a one-year research stay at the physics department of Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1 in Lyon, France, 
she returned to University of Potsdam to start her PhD in the working group of Prof. Dr. Löhmannsröben, (Physical Chemistry) 
on the topic of “Significance of Dependent Scattering for the Optical Properties of Highly Concentrated Dispersions”. Amongst 
others, this work introduces analysis models, being part of today’s PDW analysis software. During that time, she also gained 
experience in several industry related projects. She joined PDWA in 2016 as a scientist. Since 2018, she is also group leader 
of a BMBF-funded project (>1 Mio. €) at the University of Potsdam.  
DR. SILVIA ADELHELM (Female) Silvia Adelhelm studied European Business Administration at the Universities of Bamberg, 
Germany, and Budapest, Hungary. In 2013, she concluded her PhD -thesis on “Business model innovation – analysis with 
the example of pharma SMEs” at the University of Potsdam, Chair of Innovation Management and Entrepreneurship. Silvi a 
has been gaining research, industry, and project management expertise for the past 15 years in different positions. During 
and before her studies she worked in sales, marketing, controlling, and strategy departments in the industry. From 2004 to 
2008 she  held a project management and strategic marketing management position at Wacker Chemicals in Munich, 
Germany, including several stays abroad. In 2008, she returned to academia where she has been responsible for the 
management of different applied research  and technology transfer projects (each > 1 Mio €) as well as the coordination of 
consortia. In 2018 she also joined PDWA as an employee. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
 Hass R., Münzberg, M., Bressel, L., Reich, O.: Industrial applications of Photon Density Wave spectroscopy for in-
line particle sizing, Applied Optics, 52, p. 1423 –1431, 2013. Also in: Virtual Journal for Biomedical Optics, 8, p. 
1423–1431, 2013. 
 Bressel, L., Hass, R., Reich, O.: Particle sizing in highly turbid dispersions by Photon Density Wave spectroscopy, 
Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy and Radiative Transfer, 126, p. 122–129, 2013. 
 Hass, R., Sand mann, M., Reich, O.: Photonic sensing in highly concentrated biotechnical processes by Photon 
Density Wave spectroscopy, 25th Optical Fiber Sensors Conference (OFS), p. 1–4, 2017.  
 Bressel, L., Wolter, J., Reich, O.: Particle sizing in highly turbid dispersions by Photon Density Wave spectroscopy: 
Bidisperse systems. Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy and Radiative Transfer, 162, p. 213–220, 2015. 
 Kutlug, Ö., Hass, R., Reck, S., Hartwig, A., Inline characterization of dispersion formation of a solvent-borne acrylic 
copolymer by Photon Density Wave spectroscopy, Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering 
Aspects, 556, p. 113–119, 2018. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
 Supply of a Photon Density Wave spectrometer to the ZHAW (Switzerland) to be used in zeolite synthesis and 
biotechnological processing 
 Various small-scale feasibility tests with materials from consortium partners for the material-specific applicability of 
PDW spectroscopy (details confidential) 
 Successful measurement campaigns at different large -scale European companies from various industrial sectors 
ranging from weeks to several months (details confidential) 
 Very active industrial network to bring project results to market 
 Design, production, and characterization of complex optical reference materials (so-called “phantoms”) 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 74 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
 Photon Density Wave spectrometers 
 workshop for fibre-optical instrumentation 
 development for process-specific process analytical probes 
 instrument control software development (e.g. LabView 2018) 
 
Participant no. 7 Name (short name)/ Country ANALISIS-DSC (DSC)/SPAIN 
Description of the legal entity  
The company is known commercially as ANALISIS-DSC is a SME engineering company 
specialized in mechanical engineering and process engineering in applications related to fluid 
mechanics, heat transfer, bulk materials using CAE tools such as CFD, FEA, and DEM. The 
company was founded in the year 2002 in Madrid, Spain. The company has a high 
specialization in the analysis of complex industrial processes involving fluids in tasks of: 
 Basic Engineering 
 Failure Engineering 
 Analysis, Optimization and Scale-up of Industrial Processes. 
ANALISIS-DSC has over 130 national and international customers in countries such as 
Spain, Portugal, France, Switzerland, USA, etc. Additionally, ADSC has worked in many 
other countries in collaboration with our customers. 
Main tasks 
DSC will perform tasks of basic engineering in the definition of upscaling specifications WP2, 3, 4. ADSC will be leading the 
WP5 “Monitoring Technologies Integration, Data Analysis, and Simulation Software” package based on our know-how and 
expertise on simulation tools and previous experience on the H2020 IbD project. DSC will take in the general tasks of WP9 
Project management. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
DSC has over 16 years of working experience on both process and mechanical engineering in areas related to fluids, both 
newtonian and non-newtonian, coupled them different types of particles. This know-how and expertise have been applied in 
both private and public funded projects. Additionally, ADSC has already collaborated in another H2020 funded project, IbD, 
with two of the main partners of the current proposal, IRIS and ZHAW. 
Our experience on previous H2020 project with similar roles provides an important basis to provide a similar expertise on the 
current proposal in the areas of fluid-particle coupling, data analysis and monitorization of complex industrial processes 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
MSc. JERÓNIMO DOMINGO: (Male). Scientific Manager, ANALISIS-DSC. Ms Naval Engineer at the Helsinki University of 
Technology. Finland (Research area: Energy and Environment. Thesis: “Numerical Simulation of  Diesel Engine Particle 
Deposition on WHR-boilers.”). Naval Engineer from the ETSIN- Universidad Politécnica de Madrid. Work experience relevant 
to this proposal: Project Technical Manager of the DSC contribution to the IbD project (EU Project: 680565). Project Technical 
manager of 2 internal R&D projects financed by CDTI and Ministry of Industry on pharmaceutical biomass analysis and scale-
up from lab scale to industrial scale. Project manager of biomass boilers using CFD programs Analysis of the obtained 
chemical results. Knowledge of CAE tools such as Ansys CFD, CFAST, FDS, CEI Ensight, Ansys ICEM-CFD. Over 15 years 
of working experience on CFD tools. 
Ph.D RUBÉN BARBERO  (Male) Technical Manager, ANALISIS -DSC. Doctor of Renewable Energies (UNED, Spain) on 
Thermosolar energy. Industrial Engineer specialized in Energy Techniques from ETSII -Universidad Politécnica de Madrid. 
Work Experience relevant to this project: Project manager of projects in the area of energy, and basic and detailed 
engineering and construction of a microfiltration module for a biodiesel plant. Knowledge of CAE tools such as Ansys CFD, 
CEI Ensight, FDS, CFAST, Ansys ICEM-CFD. Over 15 years of working experience on CFD tools. 
MSc. & MBA JUAN ENRIQUEZ PARALED (Male), CEO and founder of the company ANALISIS-DSC, MBA at Instituto de 
Empresa, Madrid. MSc in Aerospace Engineering from University of Cincinnati and BSc in Aerospace Engineering from 
SUNY Buffalo and University of Cincinnati. He worked at VTT-Energia carrying process engineering using CFD tools in the 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 75 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
pharmaceutical sector. ANALISIS-DSC has been both engineering consultancy company on CFD -FEA-DEM services and 
distributor of CAE tools such as Ansys CFX, Ansys ICEM-CFD, Gridgen (Pointwise), CEI Ensight, DEM Solutions. Knowledge 
of CAE tools such as Ansys CFD, EDEM, Ansys ICEM-CFD, CEI Ensight. 20 years of working experience on CFD tools. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
 Jouni Pyykönen, Juan Enriquez, David Brown, Jorma Jokiniemi. “Exploring the limits of the sectional approach in 
the CFD-based simulation of aerosol dynamics” 6th International Aerosol Conference, Abstracts. Taipei, 9 - 13 
Sept. 2002. International Aerosol Research Assembly (2002), pp.569 – 570 
 Ludwig, Wolfgang; Lehtinen, Kari; Pyykönen, Jouni; Brown, David; Enriquez Paraled, Juan; Jokiniemi, Jorma. "CFD 
simulation on aerosol impaction and deposition" Proc. ICONE 8, 8th International Conference on Nuclear 
Engineering. Baltimore, MD, USA, 2 - 6 April 2000. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) (2000), 12 
p. 
 Jokiniemi, Jorma, Pykönen Jouni, Brown, David, Lehtinen, Kari, Enriquez J., Wolfgang L., “A CFD modelling 
approach for high temperature aerosol dynamics”, Journal of Aerosol Science 31: 220-221, September 2000. 
 Ari Auvinen, Kari Lehtinen, Juan Enríquez, Jorma Jokiniemi y Riitta Zilliacus, “Vaporisation rates of CsOH and CsI 
in conditions simulating a severe nuclear accident”.  Journal of Aerosol Science, Volumen 31, número 9, Septiembre 
2000. 
 Basic Engineering, Failure Engineering, Analysis, optimization and Scale-up of complex Industrial processes. 
Softwares: Ansys CFD (CFX, Fluent), Ansys Ensight, 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
 H2020-SPIRE-2015, SPIRE -08-2015 “ Intensified by Design for the intensification of processes involving 
solids handling”. www.ibd-project.eu. (EU Project: 680565), 2015 -2018 Our role in the project was the usage of 
CAE tools to analyze, optimized and scale-up different processes related to fluids and particles in collaboration with 
IRIS and ZHAW, partners on this proposal. 
 DSM/CPQ Ingenieros: Analysis of the agitation system in 3 polymers production tanks . Analysis of three 
polymer mixing tanks, during the 15 minutes filling up process, comparing the pre -polymer distribution for the 
proposed mixing system for the mixing tanks. 
 Solvay: Design and optimization of Carbonator mixing vessel. Design and optimization of a carbonator mixing 
vessel so that it can maintain the target pH and separate the particles, whose diameter are bigger than the target 
one.  
 UBE Chemical: Analysis and Scale -up of a Polymerization Reactor.  This study analyzes a polymerization 
reactor. After this analysis, we proceed to scale up the reactor from pilot reactor to industrial reactor. 
 Total: Oil Particle Deposition in the Water Side of a Water Heating Boiler. Thermal and fluid dynamic analysis 
of the water side of a boiler, searching from potential regions, where oil drops could deposit along the inner parts 
of the tubes, etc. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work 
ANALISIS-DSC has a wide variety of cluster of computers to use with the proper CAE tool depending of the application 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 76 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Participant no. 8 Name (short name)/ Country DSM Resins BV/The Netherlands 
Description of the legal entity  
DSM Resins & Functional Materials (DRF) is a global supplier of innovative high -quality 
resins solutions for paints and coatings and fiber optic coatings. DSM Coating Resins 
supports the coating industry with resins that allow the manufacture and applicati on of 
sustainable coating technologies, such as water based, powder and UV -curing coatings. 
DSM Resins & Functional Materials is recognized as a global leader in the development 
and production of sustainable resins systems such as water-based coating resins and powder resins for industrial coatings 
and decorative coatings, addressing the growing demand for more environmentally friendly materials.  
DFR is a subsidiary of Royal DSM. Royal DSM is a global science-based company active in health, nutrition and materials 
with 23,500 employees delivering annual net sales of around €9 billion. By connecting its unique competences in Life 
Sciences and Materials Sciences DSM is driving economic prosperity, environmental progress and social advances to create 
sustainable value for all stakeholders. 
Main tasks 
DSM will have an active role in WP1 in terms of describing and evaluating the process monitoring specifications of polymer 
production processes. Importance and industrial benefits of online measurements will be evaluated. An insight into the 
possibilities of applying the sensor technology in monitoring polymer dispersion processes with a relation/correlation 
between sensor output (e.g. PSD, particle shape, concentration) and process parameters (e.g. solids conten t, stirring, 
feeding strategies, temperature) will be defined. An approach to control the process based on real-time sensor data will be 
developed. DSM will also have a role in WP2, to build/support the of industrial polymeric case in close corporation with the 
RTO. This includes, transfer of the synthesis receipt, support in the analysis of the particles, and help in the 
discussion/evaluation of process reliability, reproducibility of parameters. DSM will have a strong role in WP6, to show the 
potential in a pilot plant. This includes setting -up the PDW in the pilot -plant, and set-up the process monitoring. Combing 
data from the PDW, production data and off -line analytical data, building new protocols, should gain insight how the PDW 
will improve the quality assurance.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
DSM has a broad and in-depth expertise in the company with strong expertise in macromolecular design, polymer synthesis, 
polymer engineering, engineering and scale-up, molecular characterization and analytics, paint formulation and application, 
as well as product development, application development, marketing and sales.  
DSM has a long-standing track record in developing innovative high-quality resins solutions for paints and coatings for fields 
driving our - sustainable - future such as fiber optics and 3 D printing. We strive to continuously decrease the footprint – in 
production as well as use – of our products.   
Our science -based innovation power and relatively small scale and flexible production assets enable us to develop 
differentiating solutions for  many industries. Our strong application development capabilities are keys to connect to the 
unmet customer needs. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
PROF. DR. RON PETERS (Male) graduated from Utrecht University (cum laude) from the group of Prof. A.J.R. Heck in the 
field of mass spectrometry. He obtained his Ph.D. at the University of Amsterdam under supervision of professors Sj. van 
der Wal and P.J. Schoenmakers on the characterization of polymeric-network structures. In 1997 he joined DSM Research, 
first as senior scientist chromatography-mass spectrometry, later as project manager. As of 2013, he is Science Manager 
Analytics at DSM Resins and Functional Materials and in 2016 he became Principal Scientist Polym er Analysis. In both 
roles, he strategically initiates and drives short - and long -term innovation programs, including support of product 
developments and process modifications in the area of polymer analysis. In 2015 he was appointed professor of Bioterials 
Analysis at the University of Amsterdam by special appointment. In this role, he leads research on the analysis of functional 
polymers, focusing on characterization of molecular structures using chromatographic separations. He is project manager 
of the TA-COAST project “Making Analytically Incompatible Approaches Compatible” (MANIAC). Ron Peters has a proven 
track-record in polymer characterization in and outside DSM. His research resulted in more than 35 publications in peer -
reviewed journals, as well as  frequent presentations at national and international conferences. His interest in innovation 
brought him a world-wide network (both in science and business), which covers a wide range of academic, institutional and 
industrial scientists. 
DR. JUDITH VAN GORP (Female) combines a role as program manager public private partnerships with a role as research 
scientist at the DSM Materials Science Center, Geleen, The Netherlands. She has been working at DMSC since 2011, 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 77 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
providing polymer chemistry support to mater ials businesses including DSM Engineering Plastics and DSM Biomedical 
Materials. She was project lead of a public private project within the Chemelot InSciTe Biomedical program, Geleen, The 
Netherlands. From 2004 to 2011, she was at DuPont Central R&D, Wilmington DE, USA. She was expert polymer chemistry 
for projects supporting materials businesses including DuPont Automotive Coatings and DuPont Safety and Protection. 
Projects also included those for the joint venture DuPont Tate and Lyle, producing renewably sourced 1,3-propanediol. She 
obtained her PhD degree in Supramolecular Chemistry from the Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The 
Netherlands. She received her -cum laude- Masters degree in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering from the same school. 
Judith’s core expertise is polymer chemistry for polycondensation polymers. In collaboration with analytical and materials 
scientist experts, this expertise is applied toward product development by design, production, and processing of molecular 
structures to optimize performance in the end use application. In collaboration with engineers, this expertise is applied in 
the design and improvement of chemical plants and processes. She has published 8 patent applications and 6 papers in 
refereed journals. 
MR. RONALD TENNEBROEK (Male) obtained his Master degree at the Technical University Eindhoven in Polymer 
Chemistry and Technology and started his career in 1989 as R&D Chemist at ICI Resins BV in Waalwijk, working on long 
term and product development projects. He held several positions within the urethane technology area like Section Leader 
Polyurethanes ICI Resins, leading and managing a group of Scientists and Technicians, Senior Scientist Polyurethanes & 
Hybrids DSM NeoResins+, coaching a team of Scienti sts. Since 2010 he combines the roles of Global Science Manager 
Polyurethanes & Hybrids and Principal Scientist. Strategically initiating and monitoring all long -term innovation programs -
including Intellectual Property and alignment with business needs - within the urethane technology area over 5 locations 
worldwide. His expertise areas are waterborne polyurethane(-urea) dispersions and its hybrids, Design of Experiments and 
High Throughput Experimentation, Computational Modelling, special design of building blocks for polyurethanes with unique 
functionality and its sequence control. He is (co -) inventor of over 30 patents and published over 20 papers in refereed 
journals. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
 R. Peters, Characterization of polymeric network structures, 2009, ISBN 978-80-5278-783-1. 
 R. Peters, D. Tonoli, M. van Duin, J. Mommers, Y. Mengerink, R. van Benthem, Ch. De Koster, P J. Schoenmakers, 
Sj. van der Wal, Model studies of EPDM peroxide cross -linking reactions using chromatographic and mass -
spectrometric techniques I. Combination reaction of alkanes, J. Chromatogr. A, 1201, 2008, 141-150. 
 B. Wu, W. Chassé, R. Peters, T. Brooijmans, A.A. Dias, A. Heise, C.J. Duxbury, A.P.M. Kentgens, D.F. Brougham, 
V.M. Litvinov, Network Structure in Acrylate Systems: Effect of Junction Topology on Cross -Link Density and 
Macroscopic Gel Properties, Macromolecules, 49, 2016, 6531–6540. 
 B.W.J. Pirok, P. Breuer, S.J.M. Hoppe, M. Chitty, E. Welch, T. Farkas, Sj. van der Wal, R. Peters, P.J. 
Schoenmakers, Size-exclusion chromatography using core -shell particles, J. Chromatogr. A, (1486), 2017, 96 -
102. 
 B. Wouters, B.W.J. Pirok, D. Soulis, R.C. Garmendia Perticarini, S. Fokker, R.S. van den Hurk, M. Skolimowski, 
R.A.H. Peters and P.J. Schoenmakers, On -line microfluidic immobilized -enzyme reactors: A new tool for 
characterizing synthetic polymers, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1053, 2019, 62-69. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
 BIOMADE - FP6 RTN – “Biocatalytic Approach to Material Design”. REFINE - FP7 Marie Curie ITN (4,1 M€) – “ 
Renewable Functional Material”.  The major achievements were the development of the mild and clean enzymatic 
modification and the synthesis of polymers under a variety of conditions, among which the use of supercritical 
carbondioxide. The latter was a green solvent as it circumvented the use of solvents derived from petrochemicals. 
Moreover, researchers in BIOMADE developed enzymatic routes to conductive polymers, which were traditionally 
synthesised using harsh chemicals.  
 MANIAC - NWO TI-COAST (NL) (1,1 M€) – “Making Analytically Incompatible Approach es Compatible”. In this 
project a very fast and effective method of transferring components from one solvent to another – more suitable – 
solvent was developed. This enable the composition and distributions of polymeric samples to be determined 
under optimal conditions.   
 UNMATCHED - NWO CHIPP (NL) (1,7 M€) – “Understanding Materials by Characterising Essential Distributions”. 
The goal is the establishment of new analytical methods that disclose essential (multiple) distributions of complex 
polymers. Ultimately, this project should provide tools and knowledge that allow linking molecular structures to 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 78 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 
  
polymer properties and, eventually, material function, thus enabling the efficient development of new, innovative 
polymeric products. 
 SuperCol - Rational design of super -selective and responsive colloidal particles for biomedical applications -  
MARIE SKŁODOWSKA -CURIE ACTIONS Innovative Training Networks (ITN). Call: H2020 -MSCA-ITN-2019.  
Training a new generation of scientists in modern super -resolution microscopy and particle functionalisation for 
improved colloidal design and nanoscale interfacial control inparticle-based biosensing. 
 INSPEC - Integrating Sensor based Process Monitoring and advanced Process Control (TKI subsidy via ISPT). 
The INSPEC project provides dedicated process control and monitoring solutions that integrate Process Analytical 
Technology, process data, and dynamic models (physics based or data -driven). This enables quantifiable, 
objective gains in efficiency and energy use. A public s oftware solution allows the scientific and industrial 
communities to implement the developed methodology in their processes with the help of e.g. specialized SME’s.  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
The DRF materials are mainly obtained via batch processes, using a dozen batch reactors, located world-wide. One of more 
of these batch vessels will be selected for end use testing of the NanoPAT technoliges being developed in this project. Often 
this batch process is a water-based emulsion polymerization. The size and size distribution over time is key in running these 
processes. They therefore are a very good match for the envisioned novel NanoPAT PWD or TUS techn iques. Especially 
because all reactors are provided with relevant sensors to follow process inputs such as temperature, stir speed and torque, 
dosing speed etcetera. In more detail, often a radical polymerization starts with an emulsion incorporating water, monomer, 
and surfactant. The most common type of emulsion polymerization is an oil-in-water emulsion, in which droplets of monomer 
(the oil) are emulsified (with surfactants) in a continuous phase of water. In case of polycondensation, the polymerization is 
performed in (inert) solvents. 
DRF infrastructure. Polymerization equipment for the manufacturing of polyurethane, polyester - and poly(meth)acrylate-
based coating resins (suspension processes, emulsion polymerization methods or under neat/melt conditio ns followed by 
dispersion). Facilities for syntheses in a wide range of scales, temperatures and pressures. Analytical lab for molecular 
characterisation, studies of film formation and coating properties, e.g. chromatographic approaches (LCMS, GPC, GC, P3S), 
spectroscopic methods (IR, MS, NMR), mechanical testing (rheometer, tensile testing) and microscopic tools (AFM, various 
optical setups). Facilities for testing colloidal properties and functional film properties. Specialised analytical tools (e.g. super-
resolution optical microscopes). 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 79 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 
Participant no. 9 Name (short name)/ Country Evonik Resource Efficiency 
GmbH (EVONIK)/Germany 
Description of the legal entity  
 EVONIK is one of the world’s leading specialty chemicals companies. In fiscal 
2018, the enterprise generated sales of around € 13,3 billion and an operating 
profit (adjusted EBITDA) of about € 2.15 billion. 
EVONIK’S specialty chemicals operations are divided into three chemical 
manufacturing segments. The Resource Efficiency segment brings together Evonik’s activities in specialty chemicals for 
industrial applications. The Resource Efficiency segment supplies high performance materials for environmentally friendly 
as well as energy -efficient systems to the automotive, paints & coating s, adhesives, construction, and several other 
industries. Resource efficiency is the basis for energy-efficient and environmentally compatible products and is therefore a 
key factor in the development of this segment's business. This segment employed more than 10,200 employees, and 
generated sales of around € 5.7 billion in 2018. 
Main tasks 
EVONIK is involved in WP1 to define the requirements for the silica precipitation processes and to define the nano -
monitoring technologies specifications. Evonik suppo rts the WP2 works about Photon Wave Density Spectroscopy 
Developments, providing reference materials, contributing to define analytical reference methods and synthesis conditions, 
representative of the industrial silica case. In WP6, Evonik implements and demonstrates the technology(ies) in silica pilot 
plant. Evonik contributes to knowledge transfer and dissemination in WP7. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
EVONIK RESOURCE EFFICIENCY is a leading global manufacturer of silica. In addition to the fumed silica AEROSIL® 
and the precipitated silica ULTRASIL®, SIPERNAT®, ZEODENT® and SPHERILEX®, Evonik also produces silica based 
matting agents under the brand name ACEMATT® and other fumed metal oxides under the brand AEROXIDE®. Overall, 
Evonik has a global production capacity for all silica-based products of about 1 million metric tons/year.  
The important R&D centre for precipitated silica located in Wesseling wil l take part in this project. It is staffed with 
experienced chemists, process engineers and technicians and well equipped with lab and pilot plant representing small 
scale reactors from several litres up to 1000 litres scale. Standard as well as innovative  analytical methods are available 
and developed here, hence a reliable in-line particle size measurement is still lacking. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Dr. ARNE HEINS (male). PhD Chemistry, Goettingen, Ger many. During his PhD, Arne Heins developed a resource -
efficient synthesis of a Acronycine-Duocarmycine-hybride for cancer treatment. He entered Evonik in 2012, as deputy plant 
manager he was responsible for EHSQ topics as well as for process optimization and implementation of investment projects 
at a highly specialized batch plant. Currently he leads the process and technology group within R&D Silica dealing with the 
development of new processes as well as optimization or expansion of established processes.  
 
Dr. RAINER LAMANN (male). PhD Chemistry, University of Cologne, Germany. During a training as laboratory assistant 
at the Bayer AG in Leverkusen, Rainer Lamann was working at the R&D Department of today’s Saltigo GmbH, in the 
development of intermediates for the pharmaceutical Industry. He also gathered experience in an analytical laboratory for 
active pharmaceutical ingredients in a GLP environment. Afterwards he was making his Diploma at the University of 
Cologne at the Department for Inorganic Chemistry, where he was dealing with the synthesis and characterization of metal-
organic frameworks (MOFs) based on silicon and titanium. Since 2013 Rainer is working at the R&D Department for 
precipitated oxides at the Evonik Resource Efficiency GmbH . He is responsible for the development of Silica for the tire 
and rubber industry and the transfer to the production plants worldwide. 
 
Dr. THOMAS PELSTER (male).  PhD Physics, University of Bonn, Germany. After his studies of Physics in Osnabrück 
and Bonn, Thomas Pelster made his PhD at the department for Physical Chemistry, University of Bonn, on the interaction 
between small organic molecules and single crystal metal surfaces. He joined Degussa in 2002 as a junior researcher for 
Carbon Black. After several positions in R&D and production, dealing with process optimization and being responsible for 
a production plant, he became head of R&D for Precipitated Silica of Evonik Resource Efficiency GmbH in 2016. 
 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 80 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Three relevant active patents of innovative silica grades are depicted to underline the importance of particle size and size-
distribution to characterize these products: 
 EP2448865 (B1) HYDROPHILIC SILICA AS FILLER FOR SILICONE RUBBER FORMULATIONS. Precipitated 
silica, characterized in that it has a BET surface area of 185 to ,260 m<2>/g  a CTAB surface area of 100 to 160 
m<2>/g ,  a BET/CTAB ratio of 1.2 to » 1.6 m<2>/g, a conductivity of < 250 µS) /cm. 
 EP3178887 (B1) HYDROPHOBIC SILICA FOR ELECTROPHOTOGRAPHIC TONER COMPOSITION. 
Hydrophobic silica powder, which has the following physicochemical properties ( - average primary particle size 
(D) is 30 - 2000 nm, - B * D < 430, whilst B stands for weight % of adsorbed water vapor on silica (100 weight %) 
when the partial pressure of water to the equilibrium vapor pressure of water at 25°C is 80 % and D stands for 
average primary particle size (nm) of  the silica powder, - B / C < 2.7, whilst C stands for weight % of adsorbed 
water vapor on silica (100 weight %) when the partial pressure of water to the equilibrium vapor pressure of water 
at 25°C is 20 %, and; - carbon content (weight %) > 0.30.) 
 EP2262730 (B1) PRECIPITATED SILICIC ACIDS AS A REINFORCEMENT FILLER FOR ELASTOMER 
MIXTURES. A precipitated silica having the following physicochemical properties: CTAB surface area ≧150 m2/g 
BET surface area: ≧150 m2/g DBP number 180-350 g/(100 g) half width/peak ≦0.95 d 25%/d 75% 1.00 to 1.80 
relative width γ (pressed) ≦2.8 (gnm)/ml fineness value F.V. (pressed): 100 to 140 Å. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
 Besides several confidential internal projects dealing with enhanced particle characterization, no public funded project has 
been joined so far to address this area. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
At EVONIK, the precipitation process is a batch process with typical batch sizes from 50 to150 m³ and typical batch times 
of one hour or longer. The R&D department is well equipped covering all production related process -steps, scaled down 
by a factor of 10 … 1000. E. g. precipitation can be in lab-scale of 100 litres and in pilot plant scale of 2 m³. 
Typical analytics to determine the product’s key properties are available in the control laboratory: Specific surface area, 
measured by CTAB adsorption or BET, particle structure, measured by DOA absorption, particle size measured by Coulter 
LS. 
 
Participant no. 10 Name (short name)/ Country Fluidinova SA (FLU)/Portugal 
Description of the legal entity  
FLUIDINOVA (FLU) was created in 2005 as a spin-off from the Faculty of Engineering of the 
University of Porto. FLU is a specialized manufacturer and supplier of synthetic nano -
hydroxyapatite and tricalcium phosphate materials marketed as nanoXIM. Our proprietary 
technology (patented in 2005, #WO/2005/077508) is a new concept for mixing liquids and/or gases in a continuous mode 
through a matrixed network of inter -connected micro-reaction chambers allowing for very high degrees of fluid mixture 
control. The registered trade name of this technology is NETmix®. Nowadays we produce nanohydroxyapatite, marketed 
as nanoXIM, in pastes and powders with different concentrations (pastes) and particle size (powders) with high quality 
standards, providing companies around the world that operate in the industries of medical devices, oral care and food. FLU 
has a long and strong experience working with nano -HA and NETmix technology and in participating in national and 
European projects. 
Main tasks 
FLUIDINOVA is involved in WP1 to define the requirements for the hydroxyapatite nano particles synthesis processes and 
to define the preliminary nano -monitoring technologies specifications. FLUIDINOVA supports the WP3 works about 
OptoFluidic Force Induction Developments, providing reference materials, contributing to de fine analytical reference 
methods and synthesis conditions, representative of the industrial hydroxyapatite case. In WP6, FLUIDINOVA implements 
and demonstrates the technology(ies) in hydroxyapatite plant. FLUIDINOVA contributes to knowledge transfer and 
dissemination in WP7.           
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
As manufacturers of nano -hydroxyapatite FLUIDINOVA is able to implement and test the developed techniques in a 
continues process based on NETmix reactor. 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 81 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
PhD P AULO QUADROS  (Male) graduated (1999) and PhD (2005) in Chemical Engineering, FCTUC, University of 
Coimbra, Portugal. Process Engineer in CIMPOR - Cement Industry 2005 -2006. Joined at the early beginning of 
FLUIDINOVA, S.A. in 2006 and coordinated the design, construction and start-up of the industrial plant for producing nano-
hydroxyapatite through the NETmix® technology. Since 2009, he is the Head of Product & Business Devel opment 
responsible for creating new products and developing the international business of nanoXIM® for biomaterials and oral 
care. Participated in twelve research projects in cooperation with academia and industry, attended over a dozen of 
conferences as speaker and published many research papers. Received seven national and international awards for the 
academic and professional career performance. 
ANTÓNIO AZEVEDO (Male) Has a degree in Chemical Engineering from the Faculty of Engineering of the University of 
Porto (FEUP) since 1992. He later attended a postgraduate degree in Quality Engineering at the Portuguese 
Electrotechnical Institute (IEP) and the University of Porto. 1995. In that same year, he joined Pronefro, Produtos 
Nefrologicos, SA as Director of  Quality Assurance, a position he held until 1999. From 1999 until 2004, he assumed the 
position of Industrial Director at the same company. Between 2004 and 2007 he was General Manager and Managing 
Partner at the company “Use Medical, Comércio de Equipame ntos Médico, Unipessoal Lda”. In 2007 he became a 
collaborator of FLUIDINOVA, SA and since then he has been the Process Engineer and Production Manager. As a 
collaborator of FLUIDINOVA, SA he was also involved in several national and European R & D projects. 
GONÇALO RIBEIRO (Male) Has a degree in Chemistry at Faculty of Science of the University of Porto since 2009 and he 
has a Master degree in Medicinal Chemistry, at School of Sciences of University of Minho since 2013. He started working 
in FLUIDINOVA, SA in January 2017 in production department. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
1. C. Santos, S. Turiel, P.S. Gomes, E. Costa, A. Santos-Silva, P. Quadros, J. Duarte, S. Battistuzzo, 
M.H.Fernandes, “Vascular biosafety of commercial hydroxyapatite particles: discrepancy between blood 
compatibility assays and endothelial cell behavior”, Journal of Nanobiotechnology, 16(27), doi: 10.118 6/s12951-
018-0357-y (2018). 
 
2. Y. Ryabenkova, A. Pinnock, P.A. Quadros, R.L. Goodchild, G. Möbus, A. Crawford, P.V. Hatton, C.A. Miller, “The 
relationship between particle morphology and rheological properties in injectable nano-hydroxyapatite bone graft 
substitutes”, Materials Science and Engineering: C, 75, p. 1083 (2017). 
 
 
3. V. Hruschka, S. Tangl, Y. Ryabenkova, P. Heimel, D. Barnewitz, G. Möbus, C. Keibl, J. Ferguson, P. Quadros, C. 
Miller, R. Goodchild, W. Austin, H. Redl, T. Nau, “Comparison of nanoparticular hydroxyapatite pastes of different 
particle content and size in a novel scapula defect model”, Nature Scientific Reports 7, Article number: 43425; doi: 
10.1038/srep43425 (2017). 
 
4. P.J. Gomes, V.M.T.M. Silva, P.A. Quadros, M.M. Dias, J.C.B. Lopes, “A Highly Reproducible Continuous Process 
for Hydroxyapatite Nanoparticles Synthesis”, Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, 9(6), 3387 -3395 
(2009). 
5. V.M.T.M. Silva, P.A. Quadros, P.E.M.S.C. Laranjeira, M.M. Dias, J.C.B. Lopes, “A novel continuous industri al 
process for producing hydroxyapatite nanoparticles”, Journal Dispersion Science Technology, 29(4), 542 -547 
(2008). 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. GIOTTO Active aGeIng and Osteoporosis: The next challenge for smarT nanobiOmaterials and 3D technologies 
(GA 814410), to meet patient specificity and needs, will be provided through the use of functionalised magnetic 
nanoparticles in order to provide, via the application of an external oscillating magnetic field, a remote tool to 
activate mechanotransduction. 
2. IMCOSS Injectable Medical Ceramics for Bone Repair and Augmentation (GA: 315679), The aim of this project 
is to undertake a basic scientific study of new nanostructured bio materials that will underpin the development of 
new nanostructured, injectable bone graft substitutes. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 82 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
proposed work 
FLUIDINOVA has its own manufacturing facilities in Oporto with an industrial plant for producing nano -hydroxyapatite 
through its own proprietary technology the NETmix®. The extensive expertise of FLUIDINOVA on nano -hydroxyapatite 
production processes and its infrastructure will be commissioned for the development and implementation of the NanoPAT 
concept and methodology. The OF2i monitoring technology will be adjusted in the industrial pilot line to enable the online 
monitoring of the particle suspension during the production process. 
 
Participant no.  11 Name (short name)/ Country ARKEMA/France (ARK) 
Description of the legal entity  
ARKEMA France is an affiliate of the Arkema 
Group (www.arkema.com) which is a major 
chemical company with 15 Research centers in 
the world, 7 of them in France. Arkema has activities in several 
industrial sectors (see below). Arkema operates 2 sites produc ing 
zeolites (in France and in Poland) through its Business Unit “Molecular 
Sieves” (in Advanced Materials section in High Performance Materials). 
Arkema has about 20 000 employees worldwide and generated about
8.8 Billion euros of sales in 2018.  
 
Main tasks 
ARKEMA is involved in WP1 to define the requirements for the zeolite synthesis processes and to define the nano -
monitoring technologies specifications. ARKEMA supports the WP2 works about Photon Wave Density Spectroscopy 
Developments, providing reference materials, contributing to define analytical reference methods and synthesis conditions, 
representative of the industrial zeolite case. In WP6, ARKEMA implements and demonstrates the technology(ies) in zeolite 
pilot plant. ARKEMA contributes to knowledge transfer and dissemination in WP7.           
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
ARKEMA has a strong expertise in zeolite synthesis and characterization. ARKEMA owns 2 plants producing a broad 
range of zeolites (in terms of zeolite structures and particle size distributions and morphologies), several pilot plant facilities 
and dedicated teams in the Lacq R&D Center.  
ARKEMA is able to implement and test the developed techniques for Zeolite Particle Size Measurement at different scales, 
from the small batch reactors (less than 1 L) to pilot plant reactor (40 L to more than 1 m3), as well as in continuous reactor 
(Flow reactor). 
ARKEMA is involved in process intensification processes, especially for zeolite synthesis, and looks for techniques to 
measure particle size distribution and morphologies in real-time and process control strategies to tune very finely particle 
size distribution in the production lines. 
In addition, through its other business units, Arkema has also interests in the applications of the online particle size 
measurement techniques developed in the project, for example in polymer field. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
DR. ING. CÉCILE LUTZ (female): R&D BU Molecular Sieves Director; holds a PhD of Institut Français du Pétrole and 
University du Havre for her work on Bitumen Emulsion Destabilization in Porous Media, a Master Degree in Chemical 
Engineering (specialty Materials) of the Institut National Polytechnique de Lorraine (INPL), a Diplôme d’Ingénieur (now 
equivalent to master) of the Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Indust ries Chimiques (ENSIC Nancy), with a specialty in 
Chemical Engineering. She coordinates research and development in Adsorption area and Zeolite molecular sieves for 
different separative technologies by adsorption; since 2012, she leads the R&D Adsorption d epartment in the Lacq 
Research Center. She participates actually to the European Projects COSMIC and SIMPLIFY. She holds 28 patent families. 
HDR. DR. ING. JEAN-LUC DUBOIS (male): Scientific Director; holds an Habilitation à Diriger des Recherches (i.e., 
Habilitation to Supervise PhD students) (2000), a PhD from Institut Français du Pétrole and University Pierre & Marie Curie 
(1991) for his work on Oxidative Coupling of Methane; a Master degree on Petroleum Sciences from ENSPM (School of 
Petroleum and Engines) (1989); a Master degree on Spectroscopy (1986) and a Diplôme d’Ingénieur (now equivalent to 
Master) from the Hautes Etudes Industrielles with a specialty in Chemical Engineering (1986). He coordinates long term 
research in Arkema on Catalysis, Processes, Renewables and Recycling, h-index = 32. http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4968-
5728 and http://www.researcherid.com/rid/R -9835-2017. Jean -Luc Dubois is co -author of more than 100 scientific 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 83 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
publications, and holds more than 150 patent families. He is also a private investor in Green technology start-up companies, 
through the investment fund “Angels for Greentech” http://angelor.biz/siba-8-angels_for_greentech.html 
DR. ING. LEONEL GOMES (Male): Research Scientist; holds a PhD of Institut Français du Pétrole and Ecole Centrale de 
Lyon, a Master Degree in Chemical Engineering and Process Engineering of Instituto Superior Técnico (Lisbon). He is 
specialized in Synthesis of Adsorbents for Oil & Gas an d Petrochemistry, in Adsorption separation processes and in 
Process Modeling. 
PD DR. ING. MAFALDA VALDEZ (Female): Research Scientist; holds a Post-Doc of the CHALMERS University of 
Technology in Chemical Reaction Engineering, a PhD in Chemistry and Physico-chemistry of materials of the Ecole 
Nationale Supérieure de Chimie de Montpellier, a Master Degree in Chemical Engineering of Instituto Superior 
Técnico (Lisbon). She is specialized in zeolite synthesis and zeolite characterization          
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
 Patent EP 0818418 ”utilisation d’un réacteur agité avec un système du type vis d’Archimède pour la synthèse de 
Faujasite LSX”  
 Patent FR 2925478 ”Zéolite de type LSX à granulométrie contrôlée”   
 Patent EP 1223147 ”Procédé de préparation de zéolite A pour l’utilisation dans des formules à base de résines”  
 Patent EP3030521 and Patent EP3041793 ”Zéolithes à porosité hiérarchisée” 
 Patent FR 17 52196 ”Procédé de synthèse de cristaux de zéolithe” 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
 COSMIC Continuous Sonication and Microwave Reactors MSCA-ITN (H2020) (Partner) 
 SIMPLIFY Sonification and Microwave Processing of Material Feedstock CE-SPIRE (H2020) (Partner)                   
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
The research center (GRL) in Lacq (France) will be involved in the project. This facility hosts about 100 researchers and is 
fully equipped with all analytical tools (SEM, XRD, PSD measurement by light scattering, sorption, textural measurement…) 
and has a pilot facility with batch and continuous reactors: broad range of different size batch reactors for zeolite synthesis 
(from 1 to 40 L), of mixing tools, Continuous Oscillatory Baffled Reactor. 
 
Participant no. 12 Name (short name)/ Country Creative Nano (CNANO ) 
/Greece 
Description of the legal entity  
Creative nano is a research and commercialization SME focusing on technological 
product-based solutions specialized in the field of nanotechnology. The company was 
founded in 2013 (as Artia Nanoengineering and Consulting) and has reached its final 
form after merging in summer of 2018. Cnano’s team consists of MSc and PhD level 
scientists and engine ers with high experience on working and collaborating with companies, research institutes and 
universities across Europe to solve technical impasses and create innovations that establish a competitive advantage for 
its clients. Cnano is specialized and wor ks in the field of development, production, sales and application of, high 
performance composite protective coatings.  The technical know -how lies in the manufacturing, deposition, dispersion, 
upgrading and processing of in-organic nano- and microparticles into functional coatings. The company not only targets to 
commercialize coating materials; it also acquires development projects with corporate collaborations producing tailor-made 
solutions for its customers. With the help of nanotechnology Cnano is developing consumer-based solutions in synthesis, 
processing and manufacturing of nanomaterials, composite nanocoatings, nano -particles, hybrid systems and liquid 
systems. Cnano develops products that follow properties such as high corrosion resistant, high transparent, water repellant, 
easy-to-clean, anti-finger-print, abrasion-resistant, high temperature resistance, no delamination and photo catalytic. 
Additionally, Cnano is involved in the implementation of innovation management. The last two decades with the explosion 
of nanotechnology and its penetration to markets covering a variety of industries, innovation management has been 
identified as a very important tool that boosts business and leads to opening new market opportunities. Cnano 
complementary to its technical background and expertise is at the forefront to provide innovation management services 
paving the way to commercialization. Based on technological innovation the company acts horizontal developing and 
putting to use new products and processes. 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 84 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Main tasks 
Creative Nano’s role in NanoPAT on one hand, concerns the technical part of the project by provision of its electroplating 
pilot line and its laboratory facilities for the design and implementation of a beyond the SoA monitoring apparatus/syste m 
that will be adjusted onside the pilot line aiming to monitor the nanoparticle suspension (particles size and concentration) 
within the electrolyte and its behaviour during the production process (TRL 6). Thus, CNANO will collaborate closely with 
MUG early in the project for the design and operation of the OF2i system to its pilot line during WP3 (T3.2). The validation 
and demonstration activities will be performed in WP6 under real production operational environment.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
The tasks that are matched to Cnano for the NanoPAT project are aligned with the expertise and core business orientation 
of the company. The extensive expertise and experience of electrochemical methods (electrodeposition, anodi zation) of 
Cnano has allowed the company to develop, deliver and demonstrate excellent results in terms of composite coating 
production and functionality. Thus, a monitoring system on the semi -production line of Cnano will boost its business and 
increase its market approach.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
DR. ALEXANDROS ZOIKIS  Karathanasis (male) is the CEO of Cnano and has MSc degree in Materials' Science and 
Technology from NTUA and Ph.D. in the field of electrodeposition and construction of nanostructured materials. He 
defended this thesis with title: “Electrolytic codeposition of Ni -P matrix with SiC and WC particles utilizing pulse current 
regime: structural and mechanical characterization”. Dr. Alexandros Zoikis – Karathanasis has been involved for more than 
10 years in Science, Research & Development: from technical development to coordination, project & scientific 
management; participating in various EC funded as well as national projects. His researc h interests are in the field of 
nanotechnology, development of nanostructured materials and coating, utilization of materials for environmental purposes 
etc. He had coordinated 3 FP7 projects. Dr. Alexandros Zoikis – Karathanasis has published more than 30 scientific and 
technical papers in Journals and Conference. 
MR. ALEXIS MELITSIOTIS  (Male) is a Physicist graduate from the Physics Department of University of Crete. He 
completed his Postgraduate studies in “Physics and Technological applications” in 2015  from the National Technical 
University of Athens and his dissertation was related with the magnetotransport properties of multilayered thin films. In 
2014 he joined the INN of NCSR Demokritos as a junior researcher. Since then he has participated in 5 European, industrial 
oriented Research projects (FP7 & Horizon2020) for Research Centers and SMEs, mainly as implementer of the 
experimental work. His main field of expertise is the nanocomposite electroplating and sputtering processes along with 
various materials characterization methods. He has also been involved in project management and coordination of EU 
projects. 
DR. MARIA KARAYIANNI (Female) holds a bachelor degree in Physics from the University of Ioannina (2004). In 2007 
she obtained an MSc diploma in  the field of Polymer Science from the Department of Chemistry of the National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, while in 2012 she defended her PhD thesis entitled: “Polymer Self -Assembly: 
Polyelectrolytes and their Complexes with Proteins”. She has p articipated as a postdoctoral researcher in both national 
and EC funded research projects. Her main research interests involve the physicochemical properties and characterization, 
as well as the self -assembly process of polymeric macromolecules and nanopar ticles, polymer/protein complexation, 
structural studies of proteins, formulation of coatings, and the development of nanostructured composite materials and 
electrodeposited metal alloys towards surface modification. Her technical expertise cover a range of physicochemical (light 
scattering, analytical ultracentrifugation, viscometry), spectroscopic (Infrared, Raman, UV -Vis, Fluorescence, Circular 
Dichroism), thermal analysis (DSC, ITC) and electrochemical deposition (direct and pulse current electroplating ) 
techniques. She has published 11 peer reviewed articles and book chapters, and has participated in 11 national and 
international scientific conferences. 
MRS SOFIA MAKRI (Female) is a Researcher at Creative Nano. She has received her Bachelor Degree in Physics from 
University of Ioannina in 2017. She has been involved in R&D EU and national project in the area of nanotechnology and 
renewable energy. Her thesis was in the field of Laser under the title: “An experimental setup for ultra -fast time resolved 
ToF-Mass Spectrometry: femtosecond VUV pump (160nm) - 400nm probe”. Her research interests include: (a) 
nanomaterials, (b) laser, (c) atomic and molecular physics and (d)renewable energy.              
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
 Q. Wang, M. Callisti, A. Miranda, B. McKay, I. Deligkiozi, T. Kosanovic Milickovic, A. Z. -Karathanasis, K. 
Hrissagis, L. Magagnin, T. Polcar, ‘‘Evolution of structural, mechanical and tribological properties of Ni –P/ 
MWCNT coatings as a function of annealing temperature’’, Surface & Coatings Technology 302 (2016) 195–201 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 85 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 A. Z. Karathanasis, E.A. Pavlatou, N. Spyrellis, “The effect of heat treatm ent on the structure and hardness of 
pulse electrodeposited NiP-WC composite coatings”, Electrochimica Acta 54 (2009) 2563 
 P. Santa Coloma, C. Agustín, P. Benguria, I. Deligkiozi, N. Hari Babu, U. Izagirre, A. Zoikis - Karathanasis, A. 
Melitsiotis, T. Kosanovic Milickovic, “Anti-microbial & self-cleaning copper based composite coatings applied in 
metallic objects against infections transmission” 2015 E-MRS Spring Meeting and Exhibit (Strasburg, France, 11 
- 15 May 2015) 
 T. Kosanovic Milickovic, M. Karayianni, P. Tsatsoulis, “New protective nanocomposite coatings by pulse current 
electrodeposition”, EuroNanoForum, Valletta, Malta, 2017. 
 M. Karayianni, A. Melitsiotis, A. Zoikis -Karathanasis, I. Deligkiozi, G. Timmermans, D. Drees “Upscaling    of    
pulse    electrodeposition    process    for    the    production of Ni-P/SiC nanocomposite protective coatings”, 12th 
Panhellenic Conference of Chemical Engineering, Athens Greece (29-31 May 2019)                                        
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
 PROCETS (686135): PROtective composite Coatings via Electrodeposition and Thermal Spraying – Call: H2020-
NMP-PILOTS-2015. PROCETS (8 M€) main target was to deliver protective coatings covering a wide range of 
applications such as automotive, aerospace, metal -working, oil and gas and cutting tools industries via thermal 
spray and electroplating methods by utilizing more environmental friendly materials, compared to the currently  
used. Cnano had a major role in the project targeting in delivering a sustainable electroplating method for applying 
hard protective coating, alternative to hard chromium, in applications such as rods for shock absorbers in 
collaboration with Tenneco and in cutting links of chain saws for Husqvarna. All specimens were coated in the 
pilot line of the company. (http://www.procets.eu/). The duration of PROCETS was 42 months and ended on June 
2019. 
 SOLUTION (721642): Solid lubrication for emerging engineering applications – Call: Marie Curie Innovation 
Training Networks 2016. SOLUTION (3Μ€) project combines theoretical approaches represented by advanced 
nanoscale simulations, laboratory design and fabrication of novel solid lubricants supported by simulations, and 
the up-scaling of promising solutions and their application in selected emerging engineering applications. The 
SOLUTION project has a duration of 48M and ends at January 2021. Cnano responsibility is to develo p and 
characterize an engineering electrodeposited composite coating based on Ni or Ni -P matrix reinforced by 2D 
nanoparticles, presenting low friction and high wear and corrosion resistance. (http://www.itn-solution.eu/) 
 NANOBAT (691061): Enhanced brown adipose tissue activity using nanotechnology approaches. – Call: H2020-
EU.1.3.3. Marie Skłodowska-Curie Programme (https://www.nanobat.org/). For the NANOBAT project, Cnano’s 
main role is the implementation of innovation management activities. Several workshops and training sessions 
were organized and performed in the premises of the beneficiaries of the project (e.g. Univeristy of Brussels, 
University of Padova,  Creative Nano) with considerable amount of participants that included professors, 
entrepreneurs and students at MSc and PhD level. 
 PureNano (CE-SC5-01-2018): A purification/regeneration process of spent plating baths based on functionalized 
magnetic nanoparticles. -Call: CE-SC5-01-2018: During Purenano (4Μ€), Cnano will work on the early stage of 
the project providing all the necessary specifications for the chemistry of the plating baths. Cnano will provide 
specifications of the plating process and set end user requirements on industrial baths and their chemistry since 
this is in direct relation to the used functionalized NPs. Cnano will also provide their Pilot scale facilities in order 
to make a marked based evaluation of the purification process in real  plating baths. They will work on 
demonstration activities for the purification process in real operational environment of electroplating. Furthermore, 
Cnano will provide data regarding LCA/LCCA and eco -efficiency evaluation. As end users Cnano will have a  
relevant role on the industrial exploitation, communication and IPR aspects. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
Cnano has its own manufacturing facilities in Athens with a state -of-the-art equipped laboratory (microscopes, 
spectrometers), along with the semi-industrial pilot plant (18 tanks with effective volume of 120 L per tank) for development 
and characterizatio ns of functional nanomaterials and coatings. The extensive expertise of Cnano on electroplating 
production processes and its infrastructure will be commissioned for the development and implementation of the NanoPAT 
concept and methodology. The OF2i monitor ing technology will be adjusted in the semi -industrial pilot line to enable the 
online monitoring of the particle suspension during the production process. At the same time, Creative Nano provides 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 86 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
technical support for material characterization and data an alysis and processing, based on existing standards, for the 
characterization of nanomaterials, according to quality and safety control procedures. Creative Nano performs 
characterizations on chemical composition, solubility, etc., as well as determining fu nctional surface properties, shape, 
stability, wettability, adsorption potential, concentration, adhesion, etc. In addition, Creative Nano has great expertise in  
determining mechanical properties, tribology and surface features, ensuring functional real -time evaluation. Techniques: 
Electrochemical techniques [(photo)voltammetry, photocurrent spectroscopy, chrono -amperometry, optical 
characterization methods (reflection /absorption spectroscopy of solid films, photoreflectance), UV -Vis spectroscopy, 
mechanical properties of solid surfaces (micro-hardness), thermal treatment, chemical and mechanical treatments of solid 
surfaces. 
 
Participant no. 13 Name (short name)/ Country TEMAS AG (TEMAS)/CH 
Description of the legal entity  
TEMAS AG is a private SME (service prov ider) in 
Switzerland, strongly engaged in technology transfer and innovation -oriented programmes and projects as well as open 
innovation consulting. TEMAS has developed specific processes for knowledge transfer, invention, and innovation 
management in vari ous fields including Nanosafety. On this front, TEMAS works in close collaboration with the Federal 
Office for Public Health in Switzerland (BAG), in particular, in the adaptation of the OECD guideline 442D for nanomaterials 
and in the development of the S wiss Precautionary Matrix. TEMAS is a member of the Swiss Medtech supporting the 
development of safe innovation, and the Swiss Standards Agency (SNV) for nanotechnologies, steering current efforts to 
the standardization of Safe-by-Design under the CEN TC/352 call.  
Main tasks 
TEMAS will be mainly involved in WP7, in developing training and capacity building for the knowledge transfer of the 
NanoPAT technologies to the case studies in the project as well as to external potential users. This task is linked to TEMAS 
role in WP8 (WP Leader), which will consist in the transfer of innovation developed in NanoPAT to other potential users, 
and through this action, to identify, evaluate, and propose models to assure exploitation of the technologies. TEMAS will 
also have a strong role in the standardization of the technologies, by managing the interaction with standardization bodies, 
and promoting the development of standardized methods for technologies integration, use, and maintenance.           
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
TEMAS has a strong expertise in supporting safe innovation for advanced materials and especially nanotechnology. 
Combining regulatory affairs knowledge with technical and risk/safety competences, TEMAS is capable of supporting 
implementation of innovative solutions in different value chains.  
TEMAS team has training experience in academia and industry context, preparing workshops and demonstrations of its 
Safe-by-Design platform to researchers, technology developer, as well as to industry. This expertise will help in the design 
of capacity building activities for the technology implementation by different targets/users. In addition, TEMAS has a strong 
experience in management of change, which will support an effective and safe implementation of the new technologies. 
Standardization is a key step in nanosafety assessment, and TEMAS involvement in the standardization processes of Safe-
by-Design as lead partner, in validation of testing methods in OECD context, and as experts of nanosafety and medical 
devices for the SNV, represents an excellent position to support standardization of the NanoPAT technologies. 
TEMAS experience in financial sustainability assessment and development of business plan for nanosafety -related 
products (e.g. NanoInf ormatix platform, Safe -by-Design Platform) and organizations is central in the support of open 
innovation and efficient exploitation of the technologies developed in this project. 
 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
BLANCA SUAREZ -MERINO (Female) (DPhil Biochemistry, Oxford, UK). She is a toxicologist by training and was 
previously in charge of the Biotechnology Laboratory at Gaiker Technology Center (Spain), where she was leading several 
projects regarding in vitro testing to be used in reg ulatory/safety testing and functionality assessment of Pharma and 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 87 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Cosmetics products mostly under GLP conditions. Currently she runs her expertise in Switzerland as TEMAS AG head of 
Technology. Dr Suarez-Merino is the author to several publications in high impact journals, she works actively at different 
European Platforms regarding in vitro activities and has presented her achievements at OECD meetings and International 
Conferences. Currently she is adapting the OECD 442D guideline to nanomaterials in collaboration with the Federal Office 
of Public Health (Switzerland) as an OECD effort. Dr. Suarez -Merino is also an active expert in the Swiss National 
Standards Body (SNV) under the Nanotechnologies group. 
CHRISTIAN MICHELETTI (Male) (PhD Environmental Scien ce, Venice, Italy) Project Manager. Dr. Micheletti is a risk 
assessor, with at least 10 years of experience on safety of nanomaterials and chemicals for human health, the environment, 
and consumers. He has experience as researcher in academia, as expert an d researcher at the JRC (European 
Commission), and in recently in the private sector (consultant services). He has expertise in regulatory affairs in different  
industrial sectors, including food, cosmetics, biocides, and medical devices. He participated in the set-up and management 
of National and EU research projects on decision support systems development and (nano)safety assessment. Dr Micheletti 
is an active expert in the Swiss National Standards Body (SNV) under the Medical Device Group. 
ANDREAS HALBLEIB (Male) (MSc Mechanical Engineering, Darmstadt, Germany) Owner of TEMAS AG. He has 25 
years’ experience in the international industry environment, with managerial roles and large project management, and vast 
experience in research and development. He achieved a successful implementation of the industry 4.0 and big data in 
manufacturing processes. He is a passionate staff leader with a strong focus on staff development and unleashing their 
strengths, with a high degree of creative strategy combined with  an unconditional mind to deliver, and a strong customer 
orientation. He is also expert in change management processes / integration / transformation and paradigm shift, and a 
certified LIFO coach, and certified systematic organizational developer.     
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
 Kraegeloh A, Suarez-Merino B, Sluijters T, Micheletti C. Implementation of Safe-by-Design for Nanomaterial 
Development and Safe Innovation: Why We Need a Comprehensive Approach. Nanomaterials 8(4) 2018 
 Gottardo et al. NANoREG framework for the safety assessment of nanomaterials. JRC Research Centre 
EUR28550 2017 
 Micheletti C et al 2017. Implementation of the NANoREG Safe-by-Design approach for different nanomaterial 
applications. J. Phys: Conf. Ser. 838 012019. 
 Dekkers et al., 2016. Towards a nanospecific approach for risk assessment. Regulatory Toxicology and 
Pharmacology, 80:46-59, ISSN 0273-2300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yrtph.2016.05.037. 
 Höck et al. Guidelines on the Precautionary Matrix for Synthetic Nanomaterials. Version 3.1 October 2018. 
Published by the Federal Office of Public Health and the Federal Office of the Environment. Switzerland 
Relevant Products: TEMAS developed a Safe-by-Design implementation platform as a web -based application, freely to 
use, which can be applied to develop safer and performing nanotechnology applications and processes, taking into account 
regulatory and non-regulatory requirements. 
Relevant Services: training on Safe-by-Design concept and application; development of training practices for nanosafety; 
consultancy on safe-by-design products and processes. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
 NanoInformaTIX: Development and Implementation of a Sustainable Modelling Platform for NanoInformatics 
(H2020, Grant 814426, 2019 - 2023) TEMAS is involved in this project to develop a sustainability plan for the 
NanoInformaTIX platform, and to support dissemination. Up to now, TEMAS is engaged in building the mission, 
vision, and value document, based on internal and external surveys. The main aim is to propose an exploitation 
plan to make the platform financially self-sustainable, and exploitable by project partners, models developers, as 
well as users. The platform will be built with complementarity and compatibility with other nanosafety existing 
platforms in mind. 
 Gov4nano: Meeting the needs of NanoTechnology (H2020, Grant 814401, 2019 - 2022) TEMAS is involved 
in the development of the Nano Risk Governance Council, supporting the definition of its role and mission, as well 
as services to the users (e.g. industry, competent authorities, tools developers). On the basis of services, and 
relationship with other established regulatory organizations, a business plan of the NRGC will be developed, 
taking into account other similar subjects. TEMAS will propose a plan to make the Council financially sustainable, 
and work toward establishment of the legal entity. Cooperation with other two projects in the same call is foreseen 
to achieve one shared Council. TEMAS is leading the task focusing on the training and education of civil society 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 88 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
and insurance companies in the nano risk governance.  
 NanoReg2: Development and implementation of Grouping and Safe -by-Design approaches within regulatory 
frameworks (H2020, Grant 646221, 09/2015 – 02/2019) TEMAS was leading the liaison WP, focused on sharing 
information and data with different stakeholders, e.g. regulators, research organizations, industry, research 
projects, etc. Agreements were drawn and signed with different projects to use the data generated into NanoReg2. 
Material was designed to describe project products and generate interest. TEMAS organized training for interest 
parties for the Safe by Design concept and platform during the duration of the project engaging project partners 
and external stakeholders. TEMAS was involved in Database design and testing, including definition of metadata 
for materials description. TEMAS was leading the task aiming at evaluating the impact of the application of Safe 
by Design measures on industry production processes and products. 
 ROMEO: Replacement and Original Magnet Engineering Options (FP7, Grant 309729, 12/2012 – 11/2015) 
TEMAS was leader of the dissemination, exploitation and networking WP, supporting the identification of non-
confidential results to be exploited to target audience. TEMAS was also in charge of the financial and 
administrative management of the project.  
 TOP NANO 21 On a national level, TEMAS has developed the concept for the Swiss nano related funding 
programme of the ETH board. Subsequently, TEMAS has managed the implementation and financials of this 
programme 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work 
TEMAS owns all necessary materials to perform the work 
 
Participant no. 14 Name (short name)/ Country BioNanoNet 
Forschungsgesellschaft mbH 
(BNN)//Austria 
Description of the legal entity  
BioNanoNet Forschungsgesellschaft mbH (BNN) is a non-profit scientific network that 
specializes in the Key Enabling Technologies nanotechnology and biotechnology, with 
emphasis on (1) nanotoxicology, (2) sensor technology, as well as (3) health, (nano -) 
safety and (nano -) medicine. Standardisation and regulatory aspects of 
nanotechnology (e.g., safety data sheets, exposure scenarios , REACH context, etc.) 
are key topics in the research of BNN. Therefore, BNN continuously interacts with national and international stakeholders, 
as well as policy makers and regulatory and legislative authorities (e.g., in the context of NANoREG, EURO -NanoTox, 
standardisation committees, etc.). 
BNN is European key player in the field of nano -safety, specialised in developing nanorelated Safe -by-Design strategies 
together with researchers and industry, and coordinates international nano -safety and nano -innovation activities (e.g., 
NanoSafety Cluster, Industrial Innovation Liaison i2L, Closer-To-The-Market, etc.). On national level, BNN coordinates the 
Austrian NanoMedicine, NanoToxicology and NanoSafety -research-community and therefore has access to key 
technologies for nano-safety assessment along the value chain. Through the close collaboration with industry, BNN has 
gained expertise in translating scientific knowledge into real-life industrial innovation processes. Additionally, BNN provides 
communication and dissemination activities (its newsletter reaches 850 members and 12000 external ―nano -
professionals‖ worldwide) and has experience in organizing workshops and scientific trainings. BNN is/was partner and 
part of the Management Teams of the H2020 project R2R Biofluidics (646260) and FP7 project SPIDIMAN (305343). Within 
the industry -focused H2020 pilot li ne projects Hi -Response (646296) and INSPIRED (646155), as well as in the 
nanomedicine H2020-project Smart 4 Fabry (720942), BNN is responsible for nano -related safety assessments and the 
development of project-tailored Safe-by-Design strategies. In the H2020 projects BIORIMA (760928) and NanoCommons 
(731032), BNN is key partner within the dissemination team. Additionally, BNN is Austrian contact and dissemination point 
as local NANOfutures lighthouse. 
Main tasks 
BNN will lead WP7 and the training, communication & dissemination management. They will be responsible of the creation 
of the website and the confidential repository as well as leaders of all the communication and dissemination activities related 
to stakeholder engagement. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
BioNanoNet has promoted innovative research by supporting cooperation, creating synergies in Austria and initiating 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 89 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
national and international research projects in the fields of nanotechnology. The success of the BioNanoNet stems from 
the “network platform” and the coordination among leading key players from this platform, which is the engine that drives 
interdisciplinary and innovative processes in these research areas. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
ANDREAS FALK (male), is CEO of BNN, studied biomedical sciences, and business administration (University of Graz); 
was/is part of >15 completed/ongoing national and European projects in the thematic fields of medicine, nanotechnology, 
nanotoxicology, nano-health, and sensor solutions. He is active within several national and international working groups 
(NanoSafety Cluster (NSC) coordination team member; chair of industrial innovation i2L working group, ETPN (executive 
board; chair of working group toxicology & characterisation), SusChem (member of NTPs -leader board; chair of national 
technology platform SusChem -AT), NANOfutures (Austrian lighthouse), COST -Actions, advisory board member of 
European Pilot Production Network EPPN, etc. In the field of nano-safety/ nanotoxicology and industrial innovation support, 
he contributed >75 oral and >20 poster presentations on international scientific conferences. 
DR. CHRISTA SCHIMPEL  (female), studied Molecular Biology/Molecular Mic robiology (University of Graz). Her PhD 
research focused on investigating nano -safety aspects and interactions/nanotoxicity of nanostructured materials using 
diverse cell culture models. Additionally, she gained expertise regarding nano -safety risk assessment in the course of a 
national research project within the Austrian NANO Initiative (i.e., ISOTEC) with the aim of new innovative materials in the 
sensor industry. For BNN she is working on the development of nano-safety strategies tailored to real-life needs (i.e., R2R 
Biofluidics, Hi -Response, INSPIRED, Smart -4-Fabry). She is active in national and international working groups (i.e., 
member of the NanoReg 2 International Advisory Panel, Member of the Austrian Nano Information Commission (NIK), 
standardisation expert and co-chair of Austrian Standards International Working Group ASI-AG 052 73, co-coordination of 
the BioNanoNet´s expert group nanotoxicology, COST-Action MultiComp). 
MAG. PHARM. SUSANNE  RESCH (female), studied Pharmaceutical Sciences at Unive rsity of Graz; focused on 
pharmaceutical technologies, including novel drug delivery systems like various nanoparticles/nanocarriers. Worked for her 
thesis on the intestinal uptake of nanoparticulate systems, including the interactions of nanoparticles wit h cell surfaces in 
different cell culture models. Within BNN she is working as scientist addressing the key topics nano-safety & safe-by-design 
(i.e., EU H2020 pilot line projects Hi -Response, INSPIRED, R2R Biofluidics; national project SbD -AT), regulations and 
standardisation in the field of nanotechnologies, as well as modeling nanomaterials toxicity (i.e., EU H2020 MSCA -RISE 
NANOGENTOOLS). In addition, she is responsible for dissemination actions and coordination of training schools (ie.e, EU 
H2020 BIORIMA). She is part of national and international working groups (e.g . ―Task Force Safety‖ for High Level Group 
of EU Member States and Associated Countries on Nanosciences, Nanotechnologies and Advanced Materials; EU -U.S. 
Building Bridges NanoEHS; COST-Action AMiCI; NanoMedicine-Austria). 
NIKOLAUS LADENHAUF (male), Project manager of the H2020 project R2R Biofluidics and the FP7 project SPIDIMAN, 
scientific assistance in the national FFG project ―NanoProdEx – Identification and Exposure", scientific contribution in the 
CE and ERDF co -funded project ―NANOFORCE - Nanotechnology for Chemical Enterprises – how to link scientific 
knowledge to the business in the Central Europe". 
MAG: SIMONE JAGERSBACHER-UHL. (female), administrative project coordinator of Nano-Health-project (2005-2012): 
reporting, organization of project meetings; communication and dissemination activities in CE-project NANOFORCE, FP7-
projects SPIDIMAN, NANoREG; H2020 -projects R2R Biofluidics, Smart -4-Fabry, ACEnano, NanoCommons (website 
updates, design and compilation of factsheets, posters, newsletters, organisation of project meetings).                 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
 Schimpel, C., Resch, S., Flament, G., Carlander, D., Vaquero, C., Bustero, I., & Falk, A., 2017, ―A methodology 
on how to create a real-life relevant risk profile for a given nanomaterial.‖, Journal of Chemical Health and Safety.  
 NanoSafety Cluster-publication: Falk A., Schimpel C., Haase A., Hazebrouck B., Fito López C., Prina -Mello A., 
Savolainen K., Sips A., Lopez de Ipiña J. M., Lynch I., Charitidis C., Visser G., 2016, ―Closer to the market ‖-
Roadmap (CTTM), NanoSafety Cluster 2016, p.1-43.  
 Task Force Safety Report to the European Commission: Valsami -Jones E., Booth A., Gouveia H., Hankin S., 
Moya S., Navas J. M., Nilsson M., Packroff R., Pogany A., Puzyn T., Resch S., Tanasescu S., 2016, ―Task 
Force Safety Report September 2016‖, currently European Commission internal document. 
 Falk A., Hartl S., Sinner F., 2013, „Regulation and Safety Implementation of Nanotechnology for Chemical 
Enterprises in the Central Europe Space ‖, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 429 012068, DOI: 10.1088/1742 -
6596/429/1/012068. 
 Roblegg E., Falk A., Froehlich E., Zimmer A., Sinner F., 2011, European Center for Nanotoxicology EURO -
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 90 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
NanoTox – An Austrian Activity, Academy of Science Malaysia Journal, 5 (1).  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
 R2R Biofluidics (H2020-NMP-PILOTS-2014 GA 646260): Large scale micro-and nanofabrication technologies for 
bioanalytical devices based on R2R imprinting. BNN Effective implementation of dissemination, exploitation 
and training activities. Implementation of a comprehensive SbD concept. 
 SPIDIMAN (EU -FP7-HEALTH 2012.2.4.3 -1 GA 305343): Single -Port Insulin Infusion for Improved Diabetes 
Management. BNN Effective implementation of dissemination, exploitation and training activities. 
 Smart-4-Fabry (EU-H2020-NMP-PILOTS-2014-04 GA 720942): Smart multifunctional GLA -nanoformulation for 
Fabry disease. BNN Implementation of a comprehensive SbD concept 
 NanoCommons (H2020 -INFRAIA-2017-1-two-stage GA 731032): The European Nanotechn ology Community 
Informatics Platform: Bridging data and disciplinary gaps for industry and regulators.  BNN Effective 
implementation of dissemination, exploitation and training activities. 
 Roles in European Organizations: Executive Board Member of European  Technology Platform Nanomedicine 
(ETPN), Chair of ETPN -Working Group Toxicology & Characterization, Co -Coordination of EU NanoSafety 
Cluster, chair of ―Closer-to-the-market-Roadmap. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
BNN owns all the necessary materials and infrastructure to perform the work. 
 
Participant no. 15 Name (short name)/ 
Country 
EXELISIS 
(EXEL) /Greece 
Description of the legal entity  
Exelisis is a startup company (SME) providing specialized services in the field of innovation 
management, technology transfer and IPR, communication, marketing and design. The 
company is located in Athens, Greece and has started its operation on August 2019. In 
particular, the company activities are focused on innovation management and technology 
transfer targeting business development including patents search and the implementation of 
appropriate exploitation strategies. The company’s personnel has a considerable expert ise in 
the planning of Dissemination and Communication activities such as the preparation of printed 
and digital dissemination material (websites, videos, leaflets, roll ups etc)  aiming to 
communicate all the results to targeted audiences  and stakeholder s.  EXELISIS teams 
consists of a mixture of business analysts, economists and engineers with business development background 
 
Main tasks 
EXELISIS will lead T7.1 that concerns the transversal knowledge transfer and it market oriented implementation. two tasks 
in WP8 that are related with the innovation management implementation. EXEL will lead T8.1 with aim to advance the 
technologies that will be developed and validated during NanoPAT to be adopted by additional market segments. Finally, 
EXEL will lead T8.3 that concerns the IPR management and patent search. IPR handling and management requires careful 
treatment, thus a strategy will be defined and executed that will be based on knowledge management and IP protection. 
The Licensed “PatSnap” Patent Search platform will be used to elucidate the freedom to operate (FTO), enabling thus the 
partners to exploit the business lines without infringing any IP as well as giving competitive value to the enabled 
characterization techniques. The high potentials of NanoP AT technologies and results, beyond the scientific interest will 
also be used for patent application. 
 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
The tasks that are matched to EXEL for the NanoPAT project are aligned with the expertise and core business orientation 
of the company.  The innovation management activities implemented within NanoPAT, perfect matches with EXEL’s 
business plan. The operation of the innovation management wil l boost the products, characterization processes and 
services developed within NanoPAT one step closer to adoption of these technologies from the industry.        
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
DR. IOANNA KATSAVOU (Female) is a Chemical Engineer with a PhD in the field of advance materials and with more 
than 10 years in the area of commercialization of research results. She has been working in collaboration with Universities, 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 91 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Research Institutes and private companies, providing innovation management services, identifying the innovation potential 
of new ideas and concepts, specifically in the field of nano-materials and nano-technologies. She has been also a project 
managers in EC funded research projects.  
Dimitrios Karathanasis (male) holds a BSc in Computer Science followed by MSc degree in Advanced Computer Systems  
from the University of Piraeus. His dissertation was related with the Personalized Meta -Search Engine («smart» Meta -
search engine using  artificial intelligence techniques). He has vast working experience in private companies and public 
organizations as Web Developer. He has been participated in training seminars in the field of Informatics as educator. From 
2011 to 2019  he have worked as administrative employee in Ministry of Education and Religious Affairs, Greece. 
VASSIA KATSIREA (female) is a graphic designer in Exelisis. She holds a bachelor degree in Graphic Design by AKTO 
Art and Design College, Greece and master degree in Electronic Media, received from Oxford Brookes University, UK. She 
has been working in this field from 2000 as freelance graphic designer, creative director in newspeppers and art director in 
advertising companies.   
 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
 
 N/A 
  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
 N/A 
  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
EXELISIS offices are located in Athens, Greece. EXELISIS has licenses for various software applications for implementing 
its tasks in patent search, innovation management and dissemination/communication activities. 
 
Participant no. 14 Name (short name)/ Country TEMAS Solutions GmbH (TEMASOL)/CH 
Description of the legal entity 
TEMAS Solutions GmbH is a consultancy company which specialises in bringing competitive products on the market taking 
into account the dynamic landscape of regulation. Only in Europe, the ever-changing regulatory arena asks for innovators to 
keep themselves active regarding new legislation, directives, regulations, standa rds... TEMAS Solutions has an in -depth 
knowledge in a vast number of regulatory frameworks and specialises into turning this into an opportunity for business. To 
identify the right sector which brings products faster on the market, while paving the way reg arding other sectors, can only 
result in a strategy which is cost -efficient and safe at the same time. TEMAS Solutions guides their customers through the 
diverse needs of different regulations, helping in the review and implementation of product dossiers a nd talking to relevant 
regulatory authorities. TEMAS Solutions works at strategic levels such as the OECD, European Commission or the Federal 
Office of Public Health in Switzerland to make sure we bring the latest and highest quality information to our cus tomers. 
TEMAS Solutions have an extensive network of highly qualified professionals to offer a one stop shop to product success. 
Main tasks 
TEMAS Solutions will be mainly involved in WP7, in developing training and capacity building for the knowledge transfer of 
the NanoPAT technologies to the case studies in the project as well as to external potential users. This task is linked to 
TEMAS Solutions role in WP8 (WP Leader), which will consist in the transfer of innovation developed in NanoPAT to other 
potential users, and  through this action, to identify, evaluate, and propose models to assure exploitation of the 
technologies. TEMAS Solutions will also have a strong role in the standardization of the technologies, by managing the 
interaction with standardiz ation bodies, and promoting the development of standardized methods for technologies 
integration, use, and maintenance. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
TEMAS Solutions has a strong expertise in supporting safe innovation for advanced materials and especially 
nanotechnology. Combining regulatory affairs knowledge with technical and risk/safety competences, TEMAS Solutions is 
capable of supporting implementation of innovative solutions in different value chains. TEMAS Solutions team has training 
experience in academia and industry context, preparing workshops and demonstrations to researchers, technology 
developer, as well as to industry. This expertise will  help in the design of capacity building activities for the technology 
implementation by different targets/users. In addition, TEMAS Solutions has a strong experience in management of change, 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 92 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
which will support an effective and safe implementation of the new technologies. 
Standardization is a key step in nanosafety assessment, and TEMAS Solutions staff has been previously involved in the 
standardisation process of Safe - by-Design as lead partner, in validation of testing methods in OECD context, and as experts 
of nanosafety and medical devices for the SNV, represents an excellent position to support standardization of the 
NanoPAT technologies. 
TEMAS Solutions experience in financial sustainability assessment and development of business plan for nanosafet y-
related  products (e.g. NanoInformatix platform, Safe-by-Design Platform) and organizations is central in the support of 
open innovation and efficient exploitation of the technologies developed in this project. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
BLANCA SUAREZ-MERINO (female) (DPhil Oxford Biochemistry). Dr Suarez -Merino is a trained toxicologist with 
ample experience in nano inspired products for sectors such as cosmetics, pharma and chemicals. Large experience in 
innovation management for private companies and project set -up and management both in National and International 
calls. Dr. Blanca Suarez-Merino is actively engaged at CEN activities (European Standards) T/C352 Nanotechnologies 
through the Swiss Associ ation for Standardisation (SNV), OECD through the “Safe Innovation Approach project”, 
European initiatives, and high impact publications in (nano)toxicology journals. 
 
CHRISTIAN MICHELETTI (male) (PhD Environmental Science). Dr. Micheletti is a risk assessor, with at least 10 years 
of experience in safety of nanomaterials. Expertise in regulatory affairs of different industrial sectors, including food, 
cosmetics, biocides, and medical devices. He participated to the set-up and management of National and EU research 
projects on decision support systems development and (nano)safety assessment. 
  
 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
    Kraegeloh A, Suarez-Merino B, Sluijters T, Micheletti C. Implementation of Safe-by-Design for Nanomaterial 
Development and Safe Innovation: Why We Need a Comprehensive Approach. Nanomaterials 8(4) 2018 
    Gottardo et al. NANoREG framework for the safety assessment of nanomaterials. JRC Research Centre 
EUR28550 2017 
    Micheletti C et al 2017. Implementation of the NANoREG Safe-by-Design approach for different nanomaterial 
applications. J. Phys: Conf. Ser. 838 012019. 
    Dekkers et al., 2016. Towards a nanospecific approach for risk assessment. Regulatory Toxicology and 
Pharmacology, 80:46-59, ISSN 0273-2300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yrtph.2016.05.037. 
    Höck et al. Guidelines on the Precautionary Matrix for Synthetic Nanomaterials. Version 3.1 October 2018. 
Published by the Federal Office of Public Health and the Federal Office of the Environment. Switzerland 
 
Relevant Products: TEMAS Solutions has ample expertise in Safe-by-Design, which can be applied to develop safer 
and performing nanotechnology applications and processes, taking into account regulatory and non -regulatory 
requirements. 
Relevant Services: previousl expertise in Safe -by-Design concept and application; development of training practices 
for nanosafety; consultancy on safe-by-design products and processes. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 93 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
    NanoInformaTIX: Development and Implementation of a Sustainable Modelling Platform for NanoInformatics 
(H2020, Grant 814426, 2019 - 2023) development of a sustainability plan for the NanoInformaTIX platform, and to 
support dissemination. plan to make the platform financially self-sustainable, and exploit by projec partners as- well 
as users. The platform will be built with complementarity and compatibility with other nanosafety existing platforms 
in mind. 
    Gov4nano: Meeting the needs of NanoTechnology (H2020, Grant 814401, 2019  -  2022) TEMAS Solutions 
staff was involved in the development of the Nano Risk Governance Council, supporting the definition of its role and 
mission, as well as services to the users (e.g. industry, competent authorities, tools developers). On the basis of 
services, and relationship with other established regulatory organizations, a bu siness plan of the NRGC will be 
developed, taking into account other similar subjects. 
    NanoReg2: Development and implementation of Grouping and Safe -by-Design approaches within regulatory 
frameworks (H2020, Grant 646221, 09/2015 – 02/2019) TEMAS Solutions staff was leading the liaison WP, focused 
on sharing information and data with different stakeholders, e.g. regulators, research organizations, industry, 
research projects, etc. Agreements were drawn and signed with different projects to use the data generated into 
NanoReg2. Material was designed to describe project products and generate interest. TEMAS Solutions staff 
organized training for interest parties for the Safe by Design concept and platform during the duration of the project 
engaging project partners and external stakeholders. TEMAS Solutions staff was involved in Database design and 
testing, including definition of metadata for materials description. TEMAS Solutions staff was leading the task aiming 
at evaluating the impact of the appli cation of Safe by Design measures on industry production processes and  
products. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
TEMAS Solutions owns all necessary materials to perform the work
4.2 Third parties involved in the project (including use of third party resources) 
 
Participant no. 3 Name (short name)/ 
Country 
Medical University of Graz (MUG), 
Austria  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of 
the project should not be sub-contracted) 
YES 
  
Specialised electronic hardware development (FPGA) for real -time signal aquisition through high -speed line 
sensor camera-systems. Budget: 16,000 €. 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties NO 
N/A 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
N/A 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International 
Partnershttps://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/ - m_57277081626085460__ftn2 (Article 14a of 
the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
N/A 
 
 
Participant no. 4 Name (short name)/ Country Universidad del País Vasco Euskal 
Herriko Unibertsitatea (UPV)/Spain  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
NO 
N/A 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties YES 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 94 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
The Basque Center for Macromolecular Design and Engineering, POLYMAT Fundazioa (Now on, POLYMAT Fundazioa) 
is an international Basque Research Centre legally linked to the University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU) by means 
of a Collaboration Framework Agr eement. This agreement regulates the collaboration rules among the institutions in 
terms of training, research, transference, innovation and knowledge dissemination. POLYMAT Fundazioa is a linked third 
party according to article 14 of the Annotated Model Grant Agreement.  
POLYMAT will be involved in many technical activities . WP1. Tasks 1.1 y 1.2. POLYMAT will update the review on the 
existing monitoring technologies to measure particle size and based on the inputs from the other partners write a report 
on the state of the art (Task 1.1). In collaboration with DSM partner will establish the conditions and parameters needed 
for the production of polymer latexes.  WP2. The setup for monitoring polymerization processes using the PDW sensor 
will be installed and  tested at POLYMAT (task 2.1). Polymer dispersions will be synthesized in batch and semibatch 
conditions using the PDW sensor and the polymer dispersions characterized offline using conventional methods to 
measure particle size (task 2.2 and 2.3). WP4. The setup for monitoring polymerization processes using a Turbidity sensor 
will be installed and tested at POLYMAT (task 4.1). Polymer dispersions will be synthesized in batch and semibatch 
conditions using the turbidity sensor and the polymer dispersions characterized also offline using conventional methods 
to measure particle size (task 4.2 and 4.3  WP5. POLYMAT collaborate with other partners in the development of the 
software and to identify the critical parameters for industrial implementation of the sensors tested at POLYMAT 
WP6. POLYMAT will collaborate with DSM on the implementation of the turbidity and PDW sensors in a pilot plant reactor 
in DSM. Experiments will be carried out in the pilot plant based on the conditions assesed in the lab. 
POLYMAT Fundazioa's fiscal address is located in one of the buildings of the UPV/EHU and shares several premises 
with the University. POLYMAT Fundazioa and UPV/EHU will be in charge of both hiring the personnel (PhD students and 
post docs) and paying the respective salaries. The work will be performed at their premises. 
POLYMAT includes 21 Assistant, Associate and Full Professors and more than 60 PhD students and postdoctoral fellows. 
It is a multidisciplinary research center which includes a wide variety of resear ch teams working in the fields of polymer 
synthesis, polymerization reaction engineering, membranes, polymers for electronic, energy storage and biomedical 
applications, rheology and polymer processing. 
The group has hosted a Marie Curie Training Centre fo r High Performance Dispersed Polymers. They have a broad 
experience in the coordination and participation in national, European (‘Nanostructured Waterborne Polymer Films with 
Outstanding Properties’ (NAPOLEON, FP6 as coordinator), ‘Extended service -life an d Improved Properties of Wood 
Products Through The Use of Functional Nanoparticles in Clear Coating and Adhesive Systems’ (WOODLIFE, FP7) 
‘Nanocomposite materials for photocatalytic degradation of pollutants’ (LIMPID, FP7), Hybrid Models for Tailoring Nano-
architectures of Polymers (NANOPOLY, FP7), Cross -sectorial real-time sensing, advanced control and optimization of 
batch processes saving energy and raw materials (RECOBA, Spire H2020) and industrial research projects.  
POLYMAT overall budget (direct 121,600.00 and indirect 30,400.00)  is 152,000.00. 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
N/A 
Does the participant envis age that part of the work is performed by International 
Partnershttps://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/ - m_57277081626085460__ftn2 (Article 14a of 
the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
N/A 
 
Participant no. 8 Name (short name)/ Country DSM Resins BV /The Netherlands 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
NO  
N/A 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties NO 
N/A 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
YES 
DSM Resins envisages the use of contributions in kind provided by the following organization: DSM NL Services B.V. 
(PIC code 903633959). Estimated budget (mainly for personal costs of involved staff): 137,000 € approx.). The project is 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 95 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
executed within the beneficiary DSM Resins. However, DSM Resins is  not the formal employing legal entity. The DSM 
group in the Netherlands has entered with five trade unions into the Collective Labor Agreement DSM NL Services B.V. 
(the “CLA”). In the CLA it has been regulated that one single legal entity (i.e. DSM NL Ser vices B.V., hereinafter “DSM 
NL”) should act as the formal employer for the employees in the Netherlands of all legal entities that are 100% owned by 
DSM NL, amongst them DSM Resins. 
The actual personnel costs (wage costs including social premiums, without any profit margin) are charged to and paid by 
DSM Resins. 
DSM NL itself is not involved in any project related activities. 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International 
Partnershttps://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/ - m_57277081626085460__ftn2 (Article 14a of 
the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
N/A 
 
Participant no. 11 Name (short name)/ Country ARKEMA (ARK)/France 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
YES  
The addition of the Paticle size sensor to Arkema’s pilot line might require some on -site minor adaptation of the Pilot, 
which will be sub-contracted to one of the companies allowed to work on the site. A budget of 2000 € is anticipated. 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties NO 
N/A 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
N/A 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International 
Partnershttps://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/ - m_57277081626085460__ftn2 (Article 14a of 
the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
N/A 
 
Participant no. 14 Name (short name)/ 
Country 
Bionanonet forschungsgesellschaft 
mbH (BNN)//Austria 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of 
the project should not be sub-contracted) 
YES  
In WP 7 (Task 7.3), a subcontractor will address the specific question on metadata for the description of materials 
characterisation and databases. They will describe the way to participate in the clustering activities and will provide 
protocols for technical developers of NanoPAT regarding what needs to be taken into account according to metadata, 
about storage of data, and how the data need to be described to provide maximum information of the materials 
characterised. Their strong involvement at the aforementioned networks as well as EMMO (European Materials &amp; 
Modelling Ontology) paired with the synergies from other projects (i.e. OYSTER) will support NanoPAT in this 
clustering and metadata work and to also prepare NanoPAT technologies towards pre-standardization activities (e.g. 
CEN-workshop agreement) (20,000 €) 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties NO 
N/A 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
N/A 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International 
Partnershttps://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/ - m_57277081626085460__ftn2 (Article 14a of 
the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
N/A 
 
 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 96 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
5. Ethics and Security
5.1 Ethics 
A self-assessment for addressing any of the potential issues that may arise from Horizon 2020 research projects was carried out in 
line with the relevant European Commission guidelines. No significant issues were identified in the ethics issues table in Part A of the 
proposal. Any personal data (not core for the proposed research but that may arise from mainly the dissemination activities) will be 
treated in compliance with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), Regulation (EU) 2016/679.
5.2 Security 
The project will involve NO: 
• activities or results raising security issues 
• 'EU-classified information' as background or results.ç
5.3 ANNEX: Support letter from Advisory Board 
 
 
Summary of AB members and respective roles: 
 
Name (Short name) Type Country Role 
NIA ( Nanotechnology Industries 
Association) 
Association EU Dr Claire Skentelbery, General Director 
 
SECPho  Association EU Gawel Walczak, EU and International Affair 
Manager 
 
INL, EPPN coordinator  Association EU Professor Lars Montelius 
GDch Association EU Prof. Dr. Christoph Herwig, Chairman of the Board 
of GDCh Arbeitskreis Prozessanalytik 
A.SPIRE Association EU Àngels Orduña Cao, Executive Director 
 
 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 97 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 98 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 99 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 
 
 
 
To the attention of the Coordinator: 
IRIS, Simona Neri 
Date: 22 August, 2019 
 
Re: Letter of Support for “NanoPAT: Title of proposal: Process Analytical Technologies for 
Industrial Nanoparticle Production”  
Call: DT-NMBP-08-2019 
 
Letter of Intent 
 
Whereas the characterisation techniques available to the nanomaterials community are not efficient 
to support the optimal production of nanoparticles, the overriding goal of NanoPAT is to deliver 
three novel, real-time nano-characterisation Process Analytical Technologies (PAT) validated in 
five different industrial manufacturing environments, including real-time data handling for digital 
process monitoring and control. This implies that innovating PATs will be paired with new data-
analytical technologies in order to provide, for the first time, a real-time analysis for manufacturing 
processes of particles in the nanometer scale with sub minute temporal resolution. By overcoming 
the current challenges linked to nanoparticles characterisation, and validating new versatile 
technologies for inline process monitoring in a variety of sectors, as well as thanks to 
complementary transversal activities, NanoPAT will have enduring impacts for significantly 
improving the manufacturing of nanomaterials. 
 
The INL – the International Iberian Nanotechnology Laboratory herein confirms its interest 
in joining the Advisory Board that will be established under the NanoPAT project especially in 
terms of participating in joint clustering initiative. We also have a special interest in collaborating 
in the cross-use of data in modeling activities. Based on our knowledge and market experience, 
we can contribute towards to the project, and we are interested to follow the relevant project results 
(remotely and joining selected project meetings) in conditions that will be agreed in a Non 
Disclosure Agreement.  
 
We strongly believe in the positive impact of this project and we are also willing to inform our 
network about the existence and outcomes of the project and support other dissemination activities. 
 
 
Signed at Braga on Augus t 21, 2019, 
Name: Profes s or Lars Montelius 
Signature 
Lars G östa 
Montelius
Digitally signed by Lars G östa 
Montelius 
DN: c=P T, st=Braga, l=Braga, o=INL 
- International Iberian 
Nanotechnology Laboratory, 
cn=Lars G östa Montelius 
Date: 2019.08.21 09:59:42 +01'00'
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 100 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 
 
 
 
 
To the attention of the Coordinator: 
IRIS, Simona Neri 
Date: August 27th 2019 
 
Re: Letter of Support for “NanoPAT – Process Analytical Technologies for Industrial 
Nanoparticle Production”  
Call: DT-NMBP-08-2019 
 
Letter of Support 
 
Whereas the characterisation techniques available to the nanomaterials community are not efficient 
to support the optimal production of nanoparticles, the overriding goal of NanoPAT is to deliver 
three novel, real-time nano-characterisation Process Analytical Technologies (PAT) validated in 
five different industrial manufacturing environments, including real-time data handling for digital 
process monitoring and control. This implies that innovating PATs will be paired with new data-
analytical technologies in order to provide, for the first time, a real-time analysis for manufacturing 
processes of particles in the nanometer scale with sub minute temporal resolution. By overcoming 
the current challenges linked to nanoparticles characterisation, and validating new versatile 
technologies for inline process monitoring in a variety of sectors, as well as thanks to 
complementary transversal activities, NanoPAT will have enduring impacts for significantly 
improving the manufacturing of nanomaterials. 
 
The GDCh Arbeitskreis Prozessanalytik is not a legal entity, however, we foster innovation. Hence 
we herein confirm our support to will be established under the NanoPAT project especially in 
terms of participating in joint clustering initiative. We also have a special interest in collaborating 
in the cross-use of data in modeling activities. Based on our knowledge and market experience, 
we can contribute towards to the project, and we are interested to follow the relevant project results 
(remotely and joining selected project meetings) in conditions that will be agreed in a Non 
Disclosure Agreement.  
 
We strongly believe in the positive impact of this project and we are also willing to inform our 
network about the existence and outcomes of the project and support other dissemination activities. 
 
Signed at Vienna, on August 27th 
Name: Prof. Dr. Christoph Herwig, Chairman of the Board of GDCh Arbeitskreis Prozessanalytik  
 
Signature   

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 101 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 
 
 
To the attention of the Coordinator: 
IRIS, Simona Neri 
Date: 02.09.2019 
 
Re: Letter of Support for “NanoPAT: Title of proposal: Process Analytical Technologies for 
Industrial Nanoparticle Production”  
Call: DT-NMBP-08-2019 
 
Letter of Intent 
 
Whereas the characterisation techniques available to the nanomaterials community are not efficient 
to support the optimal production of nanoparticles, the overriding goal of NanoPAT is to deliver 
three novel, real-time nano-characterisation Process Analytical Technologies (PAT) validated in 
five different industrial manufacturing environments, including real-time data handling for digital 
process monitoring and control. This implies that innovating PATs will be paired with new data-
analytical technologies in order to provide, for the first time, a real-time analysis for manufacturing 
processes of particles in the nanometer scale with sub minute temporal resolution. By overcoming 
the current challenges linked to nanoparticles characterisation, and validating new versatile 
technologies for inline process monitoring in a variety of sectors, as well as thanks to 
complementary transversal activities, NanoPAT will have enduring impacts for significantly 
improving the manufacturing of nanomaterials. 
 
The A.SPIRE aisbl herein confirms its interest in joining the Advisory Board that will be 
established under the NanoPAT project especially in terms of participating in joint clustering 
initiative. A.SPIRE will be represented in this Advisory Board by Mihai Barcanescu (A.SPIRE 
Programme Manager) or any other person A.SPIRE may appoint from its team or its Advisory 
Group. 
 
We also have a special interest in: collaborating in the cross-use of data in modelling activities; 
the adopted approach on addressing sustainability of the proposed solutions; the clustering 
activities with other relevant projects and stakeholders, etc.  
 
Based on our knowledge and experience, we can contribute towards the project, and we are 
interested to follow the relevant project results (remotely and joining selected project meetings) in 
conditions that will be agreed in a Non-Disclosure Agreement.  
 
We strongly believe in the positive impact of this project and we are also willing to inform our 
network about the existence and outcomes of the project and support other dissemination activities. 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 102 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B