4. Members of the Consortium .........................................................................................................................................................59
4.1 Participants (applicants) ........................................................................................................................................................... 59
4.2 Third parties involved in the project (including use of third party resources) ............................................................................ 93 
5. Ethics and Security .......................................................................................................................................................................96
5.1 Ethics........................................................................................................................................................................................ 96
5.2 Security .................................................................................................................................................................................... 96
5.3 ANNEX: Support letter from Advisory Board ............................................................................................................................ 96 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 3 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
List of acronyms 
AB: Advisory Board 
AFM: Atomic Force Microscopy 
CBR: Case Based Reasoning  
CAGR: Compound annual growth rate  
CAPEX: Capital expenditure. 
CEFIC: European Chemical Industry Council 
CFD: Computational Fluid Dynamics  
CHDF: Capillary HydroDynamic Fractionation 
CS: Case Study 
DSS: Decision Support System  
DLS: Dynamic Light Scattering 
EMCC: European Materials Characterisation Council 
EMMC: European Materials Modelling Council 
EPPN: European Network for Pilot Production Facilities & Innovation Hubs 
ERP: Enterprise Resource Planning 
ETPN: Nanomedicine European Technology Platform 
FAU: Faujasite-type 
FBRM: Focused beam reflectance measurement  
GA: Grant Agreement 
HAp: Hydroxyapatite 
HDC: HydroDynamic Chromatography 
IC: Innovation Committee 
IQ: Installation Qualification 
IPR: Intellectual Property Rights 
KER: Key Exploitable Result 
KPI: Key Performance Indicator 
LE: Large Enterprise 
LCA: Life Cycle Assessment 
LTA: Linde Type A 
MES: Manufacturing Execution System 
NIR: Near-InfraRed 
NP: Nanoparticle  
NTA: Nanoparticle Track Analysis 
OF2i: OptoFluidic force induction  
OG&S: Other Goods & Services 
OPEX: Operational expenditure 
OPR: OpenProcessResearch 
OQ: Operational Qualification 
PAT: Process Analytical Technology  
PDW: Photon Density Wave spectroscopy 
PEDR: Plan for the Exploitation &Dissemination of the Results 
PESTL: Political, Economic, Social, Technological and Legal analysis 
PQ: Performance Qualification 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 4 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
PSC: Project steering committee 
RI: Rule Induction 
RIS3: National/Regional Research and Innovation Strategies for Smart Specialisation 
ROI: Return Of Investment 
RTO: Research and Technology Organisation 
SAT: Sustainability Assessment of Technologies  
SAXS: Small-angle X-ray scattering 
SbD: Safe-by-Design 
SEM: Scanning Electron Microscopy 
SME: Small and Medium-sized Enterprise 
SPIRE: Sustainable Process Industry through Resource and Energy Efficiency  
SUSCHEM: European Technology Platform for Sustainable Chemistry 
SVR: Support Vector Regression 
SWOT: Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats 
TEM: Transmission Electron Microscopy 
TRL: Technology Readiness Level  
TUS: Turbidity spectrometry  
WAXS: Wide-angle X-ray scattering 
XRD: X-Ray Powder Diffraction 
 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 5 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
1. Excellence
1.1 Objectives 
Nano-scaled materials are abundant in different stages of industrial manufacturing and increasingly used in a number of applications 
from biomedical to packaging, automotive or energy. Physical and chemical properties of these materials are strongly dependent on 
their size, making the characterisation of mean size, size distribution, and shape of nano-scaled particles a major critical aspect for 
the quality and efficiency of manufacturing processes. Yet, conventional characterisation technologies still display manifold 
shortcomings which represents a major innovation obstacle for manufacturers of nanoparticles. In particular, in most cases, they have 
to be performed via offline testing of sampled materials, which results in very high characterisation times, impossibility of controlling 
product quality and reliability during the process, as well as higher costs derived from resource-consuming laboratory procedures. 
The increasingly demanding market for nano-scaled materials and nanoparticles (NPs) due to the need of guaranteeing product 
quality and regulatory compliance is considered mandatory to stay competitive in the European market and beyond. Consequently, 
the development of new technologies capable of improving the speed and reliability of nanoparticle characterisation in real-time 
industrial applications is a major demand of nano-scaled materials producers. The estimated market size for nano-characterisation 
has been estimated in 573.7 million Euros for 2016, expecting to grow at an expected CAGR of 7.3 % due to the rise of international 
quality standards for materials1. 
 
While focusing on the 
most representative 
chemical production of 
nano-scaled particles in 
suspensions, the 
NanoPAT project will 
bridge this gap using 
three novel, 
complementary real-time 
in situ particle size 
characterisation 
technologies – Photon 
Density Wave 
spectroscopy (PDW), 
OptoFluidic force 
induction (OF2i) and 
Turbidity spectrometry 
(TUS). These 
technologies will be 
advanced from the “lab-status” (TRL 4) to a technology demonstration level for inline/online2 process monitoring at pilot scale in the 
industrial environment (TRL 6) of the NanoPAT industrial partners. This is accompanied by a simultaneous development of a PAT 
(Process Analytical Technology) Software Platform for holistic digital process data storage and analysis, in conjunction with 
process modelling and the development of a Decision Support System (DSS) to fuse the data-rich multi-modal results of the 
nano-characterisation technologies with the industrial production reality, allowing for a digitalized real-time process and quality 
control. Having an even broader potential, the validation of the NanoPAT solution will be performed in 5 different complementary 
application cases in large and small companies for the production of mineral, polymer and conversion of ceramic NPs electrolyte 
suspensions with different shape and aggregation behaviours. 
 
Importantly, our project will deliver a set of recommendations for standards as well as nanosafety activities to demonstrate the 
advantage of the inline monitoring approach. To support the roll out of the project results in the NPs processing industries, the project 
will also cover technical and transversal training activities also used as a vector for cross-fertilization with other related projects 
encapsulated in a clustering strategy supported by the partners’ involvement in numerous EU networks, like SPIRE, ETPN or 
NanoSafetyCluster, as well as in synergistic ongoing H2020 projects. In parallel, NanoPAT will develop a number of outreach activities 
                                                           
 
1 Metrology Services Market Size, Share & Trends Analysis Report By Product (CMM & ODS), By Application (Automotive, Aerospace, Industrial), By Region, And 
Segment Forecasts, 2019 – 2025 
2 Inline monitoring devices (i.e. PDW, TUS) can be integrated directly in the NP production process reactors, while online systems (OF2i) need to be integrated via 
by-pass systems to guarantee proper operating conditions. 
Figure 1:NanoPAT innovation and validation cases (further techniques/NPs combinations will be screened in 
WP2-3-4) 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 6 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
to improve the understanding and acceptance of NP production in Europe among the public. 
The project includes a suite of relevant stakeholders along the supply and value chain to prepare the successful deployment of 
NanoPAT. The NanoPAT consortium consists of 14 members, representing instrument developers, process data and modelling 
experts, academic process researchers, industrial processing specialists, as well as innovation and dissemination experts. NanoPAT 
will intensively contribute to enhancing the innovation capacity of the European nanotechnology sector. It aims at empowering small- 
to large-scale European industrial manufacturers of nano-scaled particles to gain understanding and thus control on the underlying 
particle formation processes during production. This will enable 
them to reduce cost (increased space-time-yield, reduced 
feedstock and energy demand) and to save on time-to-market for 
product development as well as to increase product quality and 
consistency. 
All in all, the overriding goal of NanoPAT is to deliver three novel, 
real-time nano-characterisation Process Analytical Technologies 
(PAT) validated in five different industrial manufacturing 
environments, including real-time data handling for digital 
production process monitoring and quality control. This implies 
that innovating PATs integrated inline (PDW, TUS) or online 
(OF2i) will be paired with new data-analytical methodologies in 
order to provide, for the first time, a real-time analysis for 
manufacturing processes of particles in the nanometre scale with 
sub minute temporal resolution. By overcoming the current 
challenges linked to NPs characterisation, and validating new 
versatile technologies for real-time process monitoring in a variety 
of sectors, as well as thanks to complementary transversal 
activities, NanoPAT will have enduring impacts for significantly 
improving the manufacturing of nanoparticles. 
 
To achieve our goals, a 48-month work plan with the following specific objectives, linked to their specific WPs and related key 
performance indicators (KPIs), which will be used as milestones (MS) for project implementation, have been defined.  
Objective 1: To define the specifications of the processes to be monitored via the tailored NanoPAT technologies (WP1) 
After an updated state of the art patent and market review, the industrial requirements for each of the five nanoparticles production 
and conversion processes involved in NanoPAT will be outlined with the support of the reference RTOs. Detailed specifications for 
each of the innovative in situ nano-monitoring technologies to be coupled with the industrial applications will be confirmed. KPIs: By 
M4 (MS1), the requirements of each industrial process will be summarised, highlighting the specifications for NanoPAT integration. 
Objective 2: To develop an inline monitoring tool based on PDW Spectroscopy for the real time characterization of polymer 
dispersions, nano-silica and zeolite NPs (WP2) 
Photon Density Wave (PDW) Spectroscopy will be applied to the selected relevant nanoparticles for the inline, real-time monitoring 
of the concentration and the dimension of the nanosized structures with an expected error of less than 1% of the measured value 
and a measurement range from 25 nm to 250 µm at concentrations from 0.1% to 50% in less than a minute. KPIs: By M14, in linkage 
to MS2, the new optical equipment sets based on PDW will be delivered to responsible RTOs for the monitoring of nanostructured 
polymers, silica and zeolites. By M24 (MS3), the technology will have been tested and calibrated in the relevant RTO pilot scale 
process as input for the subsequent industrial validation.  
Objective 3: To develop an online monitoring tool based on OptoFluidic Force Induction (OF2i) for the characterization of 
hydroxyapatite and ceramic NPs (WP3)  
During NANOPAT project, using the combination and usage of microfluidic environments together with highly defined and accurate 
optical induced forces, the Optofluidic Force Induction (OF2i) based monitoring system will be validated for the characterization of 
at least two selected case studies (i.e. hydroxyapatite, ceramic nanoparticles suspension in electrolytic solutions/baths), providing 
information about nanoparticles shape and size. The feasibility of OF2i for the monitoring of nanostructured hydroxyapatite and 
ceramic nanoparticles within the electrolyte will be confirmed at pilot scale, providing the relevant particle parameters such as size 
(20-1000nm, depending on particle-system properties) and size distributions (accuracy to be defined within the project WP3), 
concentration and basic shape information (aspect ratio, under investigation) in real time (characterisation <10sec latency, and < 
1min including sample dilution latency, depending on sample volume fraction). KPIs: By M14 (MS4) the monitoring system sets will 
be set up in the pre-pilot scale processes in selected RTOs. By M24 (MS5) the nano-characterization technique will have been tested 
Figure 2: Conceptual drawing of NanoPAT characterisation 
technologies approach for nanoparticles production2. 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 7 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
and calibrated in the RTOs at pre-pilot scale process validation as input for the subsequent industrial validation. 
 
Objective 4: To develop monitoring tool based on Turbidity Spectrometry (TUS) for the nano-characterization of silica, ceramic NPs 
suspensions in electrolytes and polymer dispersions (WP4) 
NANOPAT will validate a turbidity spectrometry (TUS) based technology for the nano-characterization of ceramic NPs 
suspensions in electrolytes and silica nanoparticles and polymers dispersion. Following the nature of the materials and their 
refraction index behaviour, simultaneous characterization of the size, size distribution and concentration of the selected 
nanoparticles will be determined. Its suitability to measure individual diluted particles above 100 nm, as well as the size distribution 
of agglomerates up to several hundred nm, within less than 5 seconds (including data treatment time) will be demonstrated. KPIs: 
By M14, coinciding with MS6, TUS testing sets for the monitoring of ceramic nanoparticles suspensions in electrolytes and its potential 
use for silica and polymers NPs  will be built in the selected RTOs. By M24 (MS7), the pre-industrial nano-characterization technology 
based on TUS will be ready for industrial testing and validation in the selected most suitable case study. 
Objective 5: To deliver a PAT Platform for holistic digital process data storage and analysis (WP5) 
NANOPAT will develop a robust data analysis toolkit for gathering, pre-processing, mining and visualising real-time NP synthesis 
and conversion processes data. The combination of nano-monitoring solutions with a software platform capable of modelling the data 
obtained will enable operators to optimise production processes. The conditioning of sensors to make them compatible with 
production line specificities and realisation of the required minor adaptations in the production line are critical steps. Electronics 
hardware and communication network will be designed and developed for ad hoc data collection and exchange. To this end, over 
the course of the project, a PAT Platform will centralise the data coming from the nano-characterization technologies improving the 
monitoring strategies of the NP production industries and providing data-driven tools to boost process efficiency. KPIs: By M48 
(MS10), a novel platform for hosting data for selected process industry operations will be available. System performance such as 
latency and computational time will be quantified against current methods.  
Objective 6: To design innovative data elaboration techniques for PAT applications (WP5) 
Using the PAT platform as a hosting system, several data elaboration techniques specifically oriented at enhancing PAT applications 
will be developed. Advanced data analysis techniques will be provided to allow users to perform accurate and fast evaluation of the 
data obtained from the monitoring technologies. Data fusion techniques will allow to complement different signals coming from the 
nano-monitoring technologies as well as other instrumentation and monitoring devices to maximise its use and increase its accuracy 
while maintaining an adequate cost-efficiency ratio. A decision support system (DSS) based on Expert System will be implemented 
which embodies data, information and knowledge that can be defined and input by material experts or induced automatically on raw 
data from empirical testing. Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulations for each industrial application will be developed to 
optimise the integration of nano-monitoring systems and other instrumentation in production processes, guaranteeing 
representativeness of the measurements. KPIs: By M28, data analysis and visualisation tools will be integrated in the beta version 
of PAT platform. By M42 (MS9), a decision support system will be validated for pilot scale systems By M48 (MS11), CFD simulations 
for the five industrial case studies will be available to support hardware integration. 
Objective 7: To set up the most suitable nano-characterization integrated solution for the production of polymer dispersions in DSM 
(WP6-Case study 1) 
A feasible system not prone to signal saturation for the characterization of highly concentrated polymer dispersions (up to 60 wt%) 
will be delivered. DSM will perform the pilot-scale monitoring tool demonstration for the monitoring of the particle size and size 
distributions of relevant polymer dispersions. KPIs: By M27 (MS12), the process will be set up at pilot scale unit at DSM. By M36 
(MS13), UPV will validate the most adequate monitoring solution at DSM facilities. By M48 (MS14), the validation of the nano-
characterization system will be carried out in DSM (200 L scale). 
Objective 8: To set up the tailored nano-characterization integrated solution for the production of silica nanoparticles in EVONIK 
(WP6-Case study 2) 
The most robust and durable monitoring technique designed to resist the extreme pH conditions needed for the silica nanoparti cle 
synthesis will be implemented in EVONIK at a pilot scale unit in a 2 m³ batch size. KPIs: By M27 (MS12) , an ad hoc nano -
characterization system will be implemented in EVONIK for the production of silica in a 2 m³ batch. In M36 (MS13), the monitoring 
system will be operative in the industrial site. At M48 (MS13), the new monitoring tool for the characterization of real time size and 
size distribution of the silica nanoparticle synthesis process will be validated in EVONIK and the time-saving quantified and proved. 
Objective 9: To set up the tailored nano-characterization integrated solution for zeolites production in ARK (WP6-Case 3) 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 8 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
ARK will validate the potential of the continuous, inline nano-characterization tools developed in NANOPAT for the continuous 
manufacturing of zeolites. KPIs: By M27 (MS12) the most promising system will be installed in 40 L/batch or continuous reactor in 
ARK and in M36 (MS13) real-time acquisition of the data set up. By M48 (MS14), the validation of the NanoPAT solution against the 
current approach will be confirmed by guaranteeing a time saving in particle size measurement by at least 1 day. 
 
Objective 10: To set up the tailored nano-characterization integrated solution for the production of nano-hydroxyapatite in FLU (WP6-
Case study 4) 
NANOPAT will demonstrate the feasibility of a high temporal resolution, continuous nano-monitoring tool for the continuous 
manufacturing of hydroxyapatite (approx.18 tons/year in FLU facilities). KPIs: MS12 (M27), will confirm the operative integration of 
the selected monitoring tool. By M36 (MS13), the validation of the monitoring systems will be confirmed in a pilot of 350 L/h. The 
implementation of the solutions vs. the current approach will confirm we reach a time saving by at least 10 business days by M48 
(MS14). Moreover, it will enable the reduction of the development time of future formulations. 
Objective 11: To set up the combined nano-monitoring technology to the semi-industrial electroplating pilot line in CNANO. (WP6-
Case study 5) 
A monitoring system able to characterize size and size distribution, shape real time overcoming the limits of the current technology 
such as sampling, low sensitivity, low specificity, lack of accuracy will be selected for the specific detection of the selected ceramic 
nanoparticles employed at electroplating pilot industrial scale. CNANO will provide the semi-industrial pilot line that is established in 
its premises in Athens for the demonstration activities in the framework of NanoPAT reaching TRL6. Two different types of NPs 
suspensions in electrolytes  will be investigated: (SiC, 100nm) and TiO2 (50 nm). KPIs: At M27 (MS12) the most suitable nano-
monitoring technique will be delivered to CNANO facilities. By M36 (MS13) CNANO will demonstrate the feasibility of the new tool 
acquiring real-time data about size and size distribution. At M48 (MS14) will be, finally, validated, permitting the operators of the 
industrial pilot line to intervene if the monitoring results dictates it. 
Objective 12: To maximise the dissemination and innovation of NANOPAT outcomes through Open Innovation to benefit the 
NANOPAT consortium and the wider European process industry and Academia (WP7, WP8) 
A set of measures will be undertaken to establish a positive framework to stimulate the uptake of the NanoPAT innovation. The 
outcomes in the form of metadata will be shared with other projects and stakeholders. An aim is for active information exchange 
amongst the key-players in the emerging nano-characterisation technologies with the final goal of promoting a wide diffusion of the 
know-how acquired during the project that could be applied to many others industrial nano-production. KPIs: By M4 (MS15), the 
project website will be launched as one of the main communication channels to addressed the identified stakeholders (MS16, M15). 
By M48, both an educational training materials (MS17) and a final PEDR (MS18) will be generated  
Objective 13: To maximize the impacts of NanoPAT, including growth and job creation, via post project industrial commercialisation 
of the project outcomes (WP8) 
The business models for the three nano-monitoring technologies developed in the project, together with the PAT platform will be 
defined and the value proposition of our NanoPAT innovation will be formulated. The logistics and investments for the industrial 
implementation of the monitoring processes will be studied. The project knowledge and results will be managed and protected. 
Business plans and exploitation paths will be elaborated for all Key Exploitable Results (KERs) to map the post-project phase. 
Business and marketing strategies will be established. KPIs: By M36, final plans will be in place for the transition to the post-project 
phase and reaching the market, as well as the plan to successfully integrate NanoPAT in future waste management practices and 
circular value chains. Patent applications will be filed by technological providers and/or industrial partners to support partners’ optimal 
competitive commercial position. (MS18 M48), (MS19, M40)
1.2 Relation to the work programme 
How the project relates to the specific challenges and scope addressed by the topic DT-NMBP-08-2019 Real-time nano-
characterisation technologies (RIA), as part of ‘Leadership in enabling and industrial technologies – Nanotechnologies, Advanced 
Materials, Biotechnology and Advanced Manufacturing and Processing' work programme are outlined in Table 1 below: 
Table 1: How NanoPAT relates to the scope and challenges of the DT-NMBP-08-2019 topic 
Scope/challenges How NanoPAT addresses them 
Enterprises using and producing 
nanomaterials face a constant 
increase of requirements in regard to 
fast process and product quality 
control, regulatory compliance and 
NanoPAT aims to unite industrial manufacturers of NPs with academic research partners and 
innovative SMEs capable of leveraging the transfer of novel characterisation technologies into 
industry. The application of three innovative real-time nano-monitoring technologies (i.e. PWD, 
OF2i, TUS) will guarantee faster process characterisation and real time product quality 
assessment while addressing major industrial challenges, such as: 1) avoiding signal 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 9 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
quicker market introduction of high 
quality products. This calls for real-
time measurements, necessitating 
process-adapted nanoscale 
metrology for the manufacturing 
industry 
saturation in extreme particles concentration processes; 2) designing robust, durable and 
fouling-resistant probes for extreme pH and viscosity conditions; and 3) establishing a 
continuous maintenance-free measuring strategy for continuous manufacturing. Accurate and 
precise evaluation of the properties of the NPs in suspension are directly related to the 
parameters involved during the production process. Thus, enhanced control of the factors that 
incur during the process.(i.e. hydrodynamics, current distribution, pH, etc.) can be correlated 
with the quality control of the final NPs and significantly increase the productivity of the line in 
terms of reproducibility, efficiency and high throughput while the quality and performance of 
the coated components is improved. 
Tools and devices for materials 
characterisation need increased 
speed and reliability, suitable for 
industrial demands, while at the 
same time retaining the same or 
better measurement accuracy and 
precision 
The implementation of novel monitoring technologies will substantially increase the speed for 
the characterisation of nanomaterials due to the possibility of performing measurements 
directly inline (PDW, TUS) or online (OF2i) with time resolutions in the sub minute regime. This 
will allow to save the sample conditioning time required for the offline methods employed 
nowadays and eliminate often laborious offline measurements in more or less remote 
laboratories while maintaining precision in the sub percent scale. Furthermore, the use of a 
PAT data-analysis platform capable of treating and analysing the data obtained from the 
different monitoring technologies in real time will also contribute to the minimisation of the 
overall characterisation times. 
Proposals should advance and 
establish nano-scale, multimodal 
and multi-scale materials 
characterisation tools and methods, 
allowing rapid and reliable high-
resolution analyses.  
Physical and chemical properties of NPs are strongly dependent on their size. Characterisation 
of mean size, size distribution, and shape can be achieved either by particle ensemble 
measurements (as by PDW, TUS) or by single particle characterisation (as by OF2i). While 
the first approach is of fundamental statistical benefit for mean sizes, the second is especially 
well suited for size distribution, D-Values and basic shape information. NanoPAT aims at 
developing the three complementary real-time nano-characterisation technologies to an 
industrial demonstration level for the given nanoparticle manufacturing processes, providing a 
complete multi-modal methodology. Furthermore, the combination of more than one 
complementary NanoPAT technique will be assessed to guarantee the measurement of all 
NPs characteristics defined by the industrial end-users.  
Suitable for characterisation during 
processing and manufacturing of 
advanced materials, i.e. real-time 
and reliable. Optimisation of existing 
or the development of new 
technologies, characterisation 
equipment, data processing routes 
and data analysis strategies, or a 
combination of these. 
The innovative nano-monitoring technologies proposed as a cornerstone of NanoPAT will be 
integrated into the existing monitoring and control architectures available at the five different 
industry partners. The PAT data-analysis platform will allow data analysis and data fusion 
techniques to be performed to guarantee that all the information obtained in real-time from the 
processes is effectively integrated and used for properly monitoring and controlling the 
nanoparticles production. Data-driven strategies based on predictive model development will 
also be explored aiming at generating a Case Based Reasoning in which successful process 
configurations are stored in a historical database for use by subsequent similar processes. 
The main objective of NanoPAT is to have the data delivered from the online/inline monitoring 
devices ready to be interpreted by the end-user in real time, i.e. sub-minute intervals.  
Proposals should deal with one or 
more industrial applications 
The NanoPAT consortium will focus on five different industrial case studies. Our industry 
partners DSM, EVONIK, FLU, ARK, and CNANO will share and provide their samples to the 
consortium, exchange process knowledge and provide access to their production lines. All 
industry partners have expressed their deep interest in applying our technologies and to assist 
in developing new strategies for a broader application of PDW, O2Fi and TUS in the European/ 
global market. Also, they are clearly committed to the consortium with a willingness to engage 
in our steering committee and providing advice at all levels during the project development. 
Moreover, NanoPAT is based on the engagement of another four SMEs, which are crucial 
technology providers and/or dissemination partners. Our SME partners will benefit from 
NanoPAT in a way that they will find new market access and broader connection to European 
innovation networks. In particular the technology providers of PDW (PDWA as SME), O2Fi 
(MUG, with clear intention of creating a spinoff during the project) and TUS (IRIS as SME) will 
harness NanoPAT as an invaluable opportunity to validate their technology in relevant 
industrial cases, but also to extend their application sector to the growing market of 
nanotechnology. In this way, NanoPAT will not only strengthen the position of European SMEs, 
but will also improve existing industrial processes.  
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 10 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
In addition to the characterisation 
speed (relative to the manufacturing 
process), cover the requirements for 
real-time nano-scale 
characterisation during 
manufacturing (e.g. in situ 
characterisation, multiple 
acquisition) 
Testing the three real-time innovative technologies in a laboratory scale environment with real 
industrial streams will allow the proper pre-selection of the most adequate strategy for each 
production process considered. As mentioned before, the combination of the complementary 
techniques will also be considered in keeping with the industrial specifications. At a 
demonstration level, NPs characteristics obtained through the tested nano-monitoring tools 
will be fused with process-specific data from the operational production plant (e.g. pH, 
temperature, stirrer speed, feeding strategies, solids content) with the help of the PAT platform, 
allowing for direct quality control and space-time-yield improvement. 
Proposals should demonstrate 
measurable improvement with 
respect to the state of the art of 
nano-scale characterisation 
technologies adequate for industrial 
use (adaptability to the industrial 
process, product quality, etc.) 
The adaptation of NanoPAT technologies to real industrial processes will be guaranteed 
through the deep involvement of five industrial nanoparticles producers and converters in the 
NanoPAT consortium right from the specifications definition stage. Particular needs regarding 
technological integration and/or quality monitoring requirements will drive the whole project 
technological development and will be validated at a relevant pilot industrial scale, aiming at 
reaching TRL 6 for all three nano-monitoring technological solutions, as well as for  the PAT 
platform by the end of the project. More in detail, the first application will look into the dispersion 
of polymer nanoparticles (polyurethane and polyacrylate) with dimensions of approx. 80 nm, 
used e.g. as binder dispersions in paints. Three of the other industrial applications will be 
related to mineral nanomaterials production studying size and size distributions for silica 
nanoparticles in scales of 80 nm for tires or concrete and calcium phosphate (as 
hydroxyapatite) as nano-medical component with scales at around 50 nm. In addition, shape 
will be monitored for sub micronic zeolites, e.g. being used in medical oxygen concentrators 
or other separation processes, due to the significant influence on the material performance for 
these non-spherical particles. The status of the nanoparticles in a dispersed status will be also 
monitored in the production of Metal Matrix Composites by reinforcing a metallic coating with 
ceramic NPs. SiC of 100nm and TiO2 of 50nm will be employed for the production of two types 
of composite coatings. The Ni-P/SiC coatings can find potential application in the automotive, 
oil and gas and metal industry, since they exhibit excellent performance in terms of mechanical 
properties (hardness, wear resistance, anti-corrosion behaviour). On the other hand, the TiO2 
NPs will be used for the production of composite coatings that can be applied in everyday 
objects (e.g. handles, door knobs) and lead to photocatalytic properties. 
Developed characterisation 
protocols should consist of faster 
methods to be exploited in close 
connection with manufacturing 
enterprises, or be suitable online or 
inline use in the factory 
PDW spectroscopy will determine parameters inline in real-time, such  as: quantitative 
absorption and reduced scattering coefficients at multiple wavelengths, their error estimates, 
parameter of total data quality, mean particle sizes, and particle size distributions in different 
representations. In addition, OF2i will provide online real-time parameters as: particle 
hydrodynamic radius, high-resolution size distributions as frequency distribution curves 
(precise particle numbers also for size bins with low populations). Particle aspect ratio 
information will also be considered. TUS will provide online size, size distribution and 
concentration of nanoparticles cores ensuring accurate determination in comparison with TEM, 
AFM, and dynamic light scattering. 
Detailed training and dissemination 
activities should be planned to 
ensure appropriate transfer of 
knowledge and/or expertise to 
industry, and SMEs in particular 
The knowledge transfer of NanoPAT will be directed to both internal and external audiences. 
Firstly, NanoPAT will ensure the education and training of the next generation of scientists and 
technologists. Internally, the training will be addressed to guarantee the user to safely and 
efficiently operate the new solutions in their industrial site. 
Furthermore, the dissemination activities will aim to also engage the key-players involved in 
NPs productions for the exploitation of the services that can be provided by the test beds and 
the commercialization of the technology developed in the project (by SMEs and RTOs). 
Furthermore, associations playing an important role in chemistry, nanomaterials science and 
in photonics will be involved as members of AB as support to increase the scientific and 
commercial impact. 
Funded proposals will be invited to 
participate in clustering activities, to 
agree on metadata for the 
description of materials 
characterisation and databases. 
The NanoPAT project will build on prior state-of-the-art as well as Intellectual/Industrial 
Property belonging to several of the Consortium partners. The Consortium is strongly 
committed to innovation and its Partners are participating to several national and international 
activities that will be captivated during the project evolution. Identified networks and platforms 
include the European Network for Pilot Production facilities and Innovation hubs, the European 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 11 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Materials Characterisation Council, European Factories of the Future Research Association, 
NANOfutures and the NanoSafety Cluster (with a focus on data collection projects and FAIR 
principles). 
include actions designed to facilitate 
cooperation with other projects; 
enhance user involvement; ensure 
accessibility and reusability of data  
The project includes a number of actions in WP8 to generate a broad collaboration framework 
with relevant initiatives, such as other projects funded in the same topic call (NMBP-08) and 
other calls identified in the EU nanotechnologies and advanced manufacturing and processing 
initiatives like EPPN, as well as with ongoing projects where partners participate. 
Start at TRL4, achieve TRL6  Three different technologies: PDW, O2F, TUS will be advanced from “lab-status” (TRL 4) to a 
technology demonstration level for in/online process monitoring at pilot scale in the industrial 
environment (TRL 6). See Table 2. 
EC contribution of € 4-5M  The requested EC contribution is of approx. 5 M€ providing high value for money in view of 
the expected technical breakthrough and generated impacts.
1.3 Concept and methodology 
a) Overall concept underpinning the Project 
A number of technologies exist for the characterisation of nano-scaled particles in suspension. Widely applied methods are, for 
example, static or dynamic light scattering and electron microscopy. However, these existing approaches do not allow for high particle 
concentrations, as present in industrial processes, and/or for real-time in situ measurements. Characterisation with respect to size, 
size distribution, and shape still requires sampling and mostly offline analysis, incorporating cost-intensive and time-consuming steps 
of sample preparation and often temporally delayed offline data handling. In many technical processes, results are already outdated 
when they are finally obtained. 
 
The NanoPAT concept is based on taking innovative, promising technologies, which do allow real-time inline/online measurements 
in industrial environments by their first principles, on the next technological levels rather than trying to adapt established offline 
techniques for their use as Process Analytical Technology (PAT). The number of fundamentally new approaches for nano-
characterisation at around TRL 4, is low, considering actual industrial requirements regarding practical feasibility. NanoPAT selected 
3 very promising, complementary approaches, namely PDW, OF2i and TUS spectroscopies. While the OF2i is most sensitive to the 
size, concentration and basic shape information of individual particles, the other two can give indication on the size of particles as well 
as of the aggregates thereof. 
 
The underpinning intellectual properties (IP) are secured, through patents granted in EU, US, and/or JP for the main technologies 
proposed, or the basic technique is not novel (but its inline integration with PAT control as for the purpose of the project is) and allow 
for future exploitation in all cases. More details on current states of the art and planned improvements of each technology are 
discussed in section 1.4. 
The information 
provided by the 
complementary PAT 
needs to be processed 
to allow for a model-
driven and controlled 
nanoparticle 
manufacturing 
environment. This 
includes devices 
readings, data 
gathering and fusion, 
model development and integration, process monitoring and product quality control, as well as knowledge-based predictive and 
adaptive learning that is capable of describing and analysing the given situation and taking smart actions based on the available data. 
In NanoPAT, a PAT software Platform will guarantee a centralized approach for data gathering, analysis and management of the 
different nano-characterization technologies. Advanced data analysis techniques will support the accurate and fast elaboration of the 
data obtained from the monitoring devices, providing inline outputs fundamental for the industrial applications. The PAT platform will 
comprise an edge computing infrastructure capable of collecting the data coming from the different data streams (PAT and other 
sensors in place) and elaborating them based on several data analysis tools and models developed within the project, a user interface 
affording a user-friendly visualization of the key parameters affecting the industrial processes, and cloud computing availability for the 
Table 2: NanoPAT technologies for real-time nano-characterisation 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 12 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
real-time data storage and elaboration. While this digital interface for complex monitoring devices has been proprietary of IRIS since 
the ProPAT project (GA 637232) termination (in December 2018) , the embedded method based on Rule Induction algorithm and 
Case Based Reasoning Approach for Decision Support Systems design is currently under assessment for patenting. 
All the technologies that will be  further developed in NanoPAT have in common that beyond offline analysis, they allow inline 
measurements of NP characteristics directly at the production plant. This means that devices will be installed in the production vessel 
or a by-pass connected to it, providing direct information from the NP synthesis or conversion (Figure 23) without any need for 
sampling, pre-treatment and offline analysis. This is a main innovation characteristic of the NanoPAT action, enabling the industry to 
directly monitor NP characteristics at any production level.  
Our test cases 
NanoPAT has a very broad potential for monitoring the synthesis and conversion processes involving an infinite variety of NPs and 
media types. As a subset representative of this potential, we will validate the combination of different nano-characterization 
technologies in 5 industrial case-studies, demonstrating the viability of the proposed PAT solutions for the industrial NPs production 
of polymers, silica, hydroxyapatite, zeolites and for the dispersion of ceramic NPs into coatings via electrodeposition method. Each is 
described below in terms of NPs, process conditions, current analysis used and related control challenges. 3 of them are hosted by 
large companies and the other 2 by SMEs. 4 of them are batch processes while 1 is continuous. As further described in the 
methodology paragraph below, an RTO was assigned to support each case by pre-validating the PAT (selected based on the existing 
TRL4 results discussed in section 1.4) in downscaled process (TRL5) before moving to semi industrial process also illustrated below 
(TRL6). 
 
Case Study 1 End-user: DSM 
Nanomaterial: Polymeric dispersions (Polyurethane and Polyacrylate) 
Tested Technologies: PDW/TUS 
RTO involved: UPV 
Industrially polymer dispersions are mainly obtained via batch radical emulsion polymerization processes. The most common type of 
emulsion polymerization is an oil-in-water emulsion, in which droplets of monomer (the oil) are emulsified (with surfactants) in a 
continuous phase of water. After the addition of a radical initiator, polymerization occurs finally obtaining polymer particles (ranging 
between 80-350 nm; Figure 5) presents a bimodal latex with two populations of acrylic polymer particles) dispersed in water. Most 
polyacrylate emulsion polymers are produced by this method. Another important polymer dispersion is made of polyurethane or hybrid 
acrylic-polyurethane. These dispersions are produced using a process known as the “isocyanate prepolymer process” and are carried 
out in two stages in two different vessels. In the first stage, a prepolymer is formed and, in the second, the prepolymer is dispersed 
and further polymerized in water to achieve the final dispersion. Typical reactor sizes are in the range of 10-30 m3 (Figure 4). Particle 
size and particle size distribution of the dispersions determines several final application properties of the dispersions; e.g. viscosity of 
the dispersion, film homogeneity, gloss. Therefore, the monitoring and control of the particle size during the process is of paramount 
importance for the polymer dispersion industry. 
A typical industrial batch process runs between 6 and 24 hours. As the reaction progress cannot be easily monitored over time, each 
batch process includes additional reaction time to secure finalization of the polymerization reaction. Currently, polymer particle sizes 
can only be measured using offline techniques. Usually Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) or Capillary HydroDynamic 
Fractionation/HydroDynamic Chromatography (CHDF/HDC) techniques are used, but both require diluting the original dispersion to 
concentrations in the range 1-5% for accurate values. In addition, DLS is not able to provide meaningful particle size distribution of 
bimodal latexes when the ratio of the modes is equal or below 3/1. CHDF/HDC provide accurate particle size distributions but the time 
required to get the distribution is above 15 min and its implementation for online analysis is challenging. Microscopic techniques such 
as Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) or Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) can also be used but they are time consuming 
and expensive. Furthermore, for soft polymers, cryo-TEM analysis is necessary which makes the analysis extremely impractical for 
industrial process control purposes. By online monitoring the reaction progress, it is expected that approximately 10-20% of the 
reaction time could be saved, which includes costs-saving in terms of heating costs, manufacturing, etc., and will easily sum up to 
saving over several millions/year. The inline characterization of critical process parameters such as particle size, shape and 
concentration could help to stir the process. The main challenge is to deal with the complex reaction medium (heterogenous/turbid). 
Moreover, the inline characterization will optimize the process in terms of product specification and reaction time. 
In the proposed test case, the inline characterization of particle and particle size distribution, and concentration will be evaluated for 
different polymerization processes (polyurethanes, polyacrylates or hybrids of them). The correlation between the PAT outputs (size, 
shape and concentration) and process parameters (pH, temperature, solids content, monomer feeding strategies) will be the main 
focus in order to achieve a real time control of the reaction process and to control particle size and distribution.  
                                                           
 
3 In progress: the technology has been already fully demonstrated and in literature there are solid exam ples to support it. Under assessment: 
technical and scientific validation still needed 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 13 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Initially, UPV will implement the PDW and TUS solutions on the downscaled process at their facilities (1L batch reactor, Figure 3) and 
later the validation of the selected system will be performed in the pilot plant of DSM (20-200L). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Lab scale polymer synthesis reactor  Figure 4: Industrial polymer synthesis reactors Figure 5: TEM image of bimodal acrylic latex 
 
Case Study 2 End-user: EVONIK 
Nanomaterial: Silica 
Tested Technologies: PDW/TUS 
RTO involved: UP 
The most common procedure for the synthesis of silica-based nanoparticles contemplates wet processes based on solutions of alkali 
silicate, preferably sodium silicate, from which amorphous silica is precipitated by adding acid (Figure 6). After filtration, washing and 
drying steps, the precipitated product is obtained as 86-88% SiO2 and 10-12% water, the latter being present both in the molecular 
structure and physically bound on the surface. 
At EVONIK, the precipitation process is a batch process lasting typically one hour or longer, during which several main and side 
reactions are taking place simultaneously. Nonetheless, the process can be distinguished into specific stages supersaturation: 
nucleation, aggregation and growth. All these stages determine the final physical characteristics of the nanosilicas and are strongly 
affected by the process parameters. This means that the process conditions (e. g. geometry, flow conditions, level and uniformity of 
concentration, temperature) deeply influence the final product properties, especially distribution, size, surface area, pore volume and 
geometry of the nanoparticles. 
So far, no inline analytical method is available to determine particle properties. Thus, the need for reliable monitoring process tools 
for inline characterization of nanoparticles seems at the basis of the further growth of this specific area.  
During the project evolution, the coupling of different optical techniques (i.e. PDW, TUS), will provide essential support to produce 
controlled and reproducible batches of silica nanoparticles in a more efficient way. Indeed, the samples under investigation present 
the appropriate characteristics in terms of transparency of the suspension and size range (nucleation 30 nm, final particle size 200 
µm, Figure 8). PAT implementation will permit the fine tuning of the process parameters for the inline optimization of the NPs synthesis, 
avoiding losses in time and resources. It will also improve current product quality control, which is done only once the final product is 
analysed offline. 
In our project, the most promising solution  will be validated on a semi-industrial scale at the pilot plant for precipitated silica in 
Wesseling, Germany (Figure 7) after an initial test campaign of PDW and TUS techniques is performed at UP (1-5L scale). Based on 
a consistent inline measurement, new control strategies can directly be implemented. Their impact on process stability for production 
of standard grades as well as for effectively synthesizing particles with new analytical properties will then be tested. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Nanosilica solutions Figure 7: Industrial polymer synthesis reactors Figure 8: SEM image of silica nanoparticles  
 
Case Study 3 End-user: FLU 
Nanomaterial: Hydroxyapatite 
Tested Technologies: OF2i 
RTO involved: MUG 
Hydroxyapatite (HAp) is one of the most attractive calcium phosphates and it is widely used in clinical applications such as restorative 
dental and orthopaedic implants due to its close resemblance to natural bones and teeth, excellent bioaffinity and its osseointegration 
enhancement. FLU developed a proprietary technology that allows the continuous production of nanohydroxyapatite (nHAp) with high 
quality standards by wet chemical precipitation method. The nHAp is a milky-like solution (Figure 9) with particle concentration of 4 % 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 14 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
(w/w) in water. The nanohydroxyapatite particles are nanorods shaped with mean particle size of 30-40 nm length and 10-15 nm width 
(Figure 11). The monitoring solutions will be tested in industrial scale with a continuous monitoring of D-Values (size-distribution) 
during production process inline with NETmix reactor (Figure 10). 
nHAp has been extensively characterized in terms of its physicochemical properties and morphology based on offline analytical 
technologies characterization (e.g. SEM, TEM) that take at least 2 weeks to obtain results. During continuous nHAp production, 
changes in process parameters (e.g. reactants concentration, temperature, pH) can modify the material morphology, so real-time 
detection/characterization methods would enable to improve product quality and allow developing new products and processes faster. 
During the NANOPAT project, real-time in situ particle size characterization technology will be used. The OF2i technique proposed in 
NANOPAT will be tested at both pre-pilot scale at MUG facilities (600 mL/h) and industrial scale at FLU (300L/h) in order to reach a 
continuous, precise high-throughput multiparameter measurement with single-particle accuracy in real time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Nanohydroxyapatite Figure 10: Fluidinova NETmix reactor Figure 11: TEM image of nHAp 
 
Case Study 4 End-user: ARK  
Nanomaterial: Zeolite 
Tested Technologies: PDW 
RTO involved: ZHAW 
Zeolites are crystalline aluminosilicates composed of SiO4 and AlO4 tetrahedral structures, assembled to form 3D porous materials4. 
The assembly of tetrahedrons creating a porous structure results in regular arrays of apertures and cavities (microporosities), enabling 
some molecules to be selectively taken up in the micropores, while others are rejected due to steric effects or affinity differences5. 
Linde Type A (LTA) zeolites and Faujasite-type (FAU) zeolites for example are well known for their selectivity and/or large pores (0.8 
nm for FAU zeolites) becoming an attractive material for adsorption and catalytic applications. Zeolite crystals are non-spherical 
particles, produced with a large variety of mean sizes and size distributions (from submicronic to micronic size) depending on the 
targeted applications (Figure 14). 
Zeolites are synthesized by hydrothermal methods, in which aluminate and silicate solutions are mixed to prepare a “synthesis gel” 
(Figure 12), which is rather concentrated and viscous to achieve high yields. Those gels are submitted to an induction period (aging), 
while nuclei formation occurs, before being heated to relatively high temperatures for crystal growth1,3. Instead of the induction period 
at low temperature (between 10 and 40°C), seeds can also be added to the “gel” to induce quick crystallization of the desired zeolite 
phase. This process is carried out in closed vessels or in a continuous reactor between 60 and 100°C under atmospheric pressure or 
even at temperatures above the boiling point if the reactor can be pressurized. It takes variable times to complete crystallization6, 
depending on the recipes and on the operating conditions.  
The targeted crystallinity and crystal size of the zeolite is obtained if the process conditions are well controlled. The continuous tracking 
of the particle size and particle size distribution during the crystallization will help to properly tune the process conditions and  the 
residence time, in order to produce small submicronic crystals and to minimize aggregates. Furthermore, real-time measurements will 
be much quicker and more efficient than the usual offline technologies (SEM, XRD), which require time-consuming sample preparation 
and analysis (few hours to days).  
In the proposed test case, the PDW technique will be implemented for zeolite synthesis. The concentration of the submicronic particles 
is around 15% wt. PDW characterization techniques, developed in lab scale (1.5 L) reactor at ZHAW facilities for three model zeolite 
synthesis, will then be validated at industrial scale pilot (40 L batch or continuous reactors) at ARK and will allow real-time adjustments 
of the process (Figure 13). 
 
                                                           
 
4 Grand J. et al. (2016). Mechanism of zeolites crystal growth: new findings and open questions. CrystEngComm, 18, 650-664 
5 Dyer A. (1988). An introduction to Zeolite Molecular Sieves. Wiley, New York 
6 Cundy C. S. and Cox P.A. (2005). The hydrothermal synthesis of zeolites: precursors, intermediates and reaction mechanism. Micropor Mesopor 
Mater 82, 1–78. 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 15 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12: Zeolite gel synthesis 15%wt  Figure 13: Continuous reactor installation at ARK (pilot scale) Figure 14: SEM image of FAU zeolite 
 
Case Study 5 End-user: CREATIVE NANO 
Nanomaterial: Ceramic NPs electrolyte suspensions 
Tested Technology: OF2i//TUS 
RTO involved: MUG 
Electroplating is a well-established technique for the production of coatings providing custom functionalities depending on the End 
User application. Nevertheless, composite electroplating is less widely adopted despite the enhanced properties exhibited by 
composite coatings. The main barrier that prevents the large-scale production is the lack of detection/characterization methods for 
the nanoparticles (NPs) status in the electrolytic bath. Knowledge of the nanoparticles suspension (e.g. particle size, 
agglomeration effect, zeta potential) is of high importance as the final quality of the coating is directly related to this. While well 
dispersed nanoparticles can lead to coatings with greatly enhanced properties, when agglomerated particles or non-well dispersed 
particles are included in the coatings, the latter present defects (e.g. inhomogeneity of a property across the surface, voids, cracks). 
In the proposed test case, the OF2i and TUS characterization methods will be applied to the composite electrolytes. The concentration 
of the particles in the electrolyte varies from 5 g/L to 20 g/L, whereby the mean particle size of the NPs ranges from 50nm to 100nm 
for SiC and TiO2 respectively (Figure 16, Figure 17). The circulation of the electrolyte in the plating tank is active during plating and 
prior the deposition, the particles suspension is ultra-sonicated for 30 min to dis-integrate the aggregates. Accurate and precise 
evaluation of the properties of the suspension can be associated to the plating parameters involved during the production. Thus, 
enhanced control of the factors that are active during plating (hydrodynamics, current distribution, pH, etc.) can be correlated to the 
quality control of the plated components and increase significantly the productivity of the line in terms of efficiency and high throughput 
while the quality and performance of the coated components is improved.  
The finally selected monitoring solution will be validated at lab (0.5 – 3.5L, TRL4, WP3), RTO scale (10L-40L, TRL5, WP3) and 
industrial scale (120L, TRL6, WP6) (Figure 15). By controlling sensitive and important parameters related to particle suspension 
behaviour in the electrolyte will increase the quality in terms of quality, reproducibility and productivity. By monitoring the particle 
suspension inline, will allow the operator to intervene and resolve any issues detected instantly (e.g. application of ultrasonication to 
disintegrate agglomerates), reducing the scrap plated components, leading to reduction of costs, energy and resources. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15: Pilot electroplating line of CNANO Figure 16: SEM image of SiC NPs Figure 17: TEM image of TiO2 NPs 
 
In terms of interdisciplinary considerations and use of stakeholder knowledge, our trans-disciplinary team combines all the 
relevant skills and organisations needed to address the full extent of the challenge of validating 3 innovative real time nano 
characterisation technologies in 5 industrial applications. The participation of a number of leading industry players will maximise the 
consortium’s capability of transferring this know-how to enable further post project qualification towards commercial solutions. 
Transversal knowledge is also given very important consideration. NanoPAT will enable technical and market know-how transfer 
among technology institutes (4 RTOs with core expertise in nanoparticles production processes: UP, ZHAW, UPV, MUG) and industry 
participants (6 SMEs, 3 large enterprises, 1 association). The latter cover the required supply and value chain: technology providers 
of process monitoring systems and simulation (DSC, IRIS, PDW, MUG), minerals, plastic and metal NPs manufacturers/converters 
(ARK, DSM, EVONIK, FLU, CNANO), as well as partners specialised in nanosafety assessment, standardization, innovation & IP 
(BNN, TEMASOL, EXEL). Furthermore, additional stakeholders will be involved in the Advisory Board (AB) consisting of well selected 
members, each with a specific role (support letters annexed to the bid after Section 5). It includes associations with potential end 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 16 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
users like GDCh (the society of German chemists), INL (International Iberian Nanotechnology Laboratory, coordinator of the EPPN) 
that showed particular interest in joining clustering activities and in the cross-use of data in modelling activities. They will help the 
market uptake of the technologies both addressing the results towards the market needs and supporting the scientific outcomes. 
Furthermore, the direct involvement of SECPho (a technological innovation cluster focused on pushing innovation throughout the use 
of phonics-based technology) and A.SPIRE the European Association which is committed to manage and implement the SPIRE 
(Sustainable Process Industry through Resource and Energy Efficiency) will buttress the decision making during the project growth. 
They will be consulted as necessary for both technical (possibly providing samples, assessing the relevant of the results for their 
case), policy and business-related insights and further AB members may also be appointed if needed. 
¡Error! No se encuentra el origen de la referencia.  displays the consortium structure, having the nano-monitoring technology 
providers as nucleus of NanoPAT’s approach. RTOs are shown at a second level, positioned between these providers and the 
industrial end users where the three technologies will be tested. They will act as open access test beds in the project and beyond 
allowing the long-term ability for companies handling NPs to pre-validate the novel monitoring techniques developed in the project in 
representative downscaled processes. Finally, the digital technologies for data handling and elaboration, as well as technology 
dissemination within and beyond the consortium ensure successful and multilateral transfer of the knowledge related to novel nano-
characterisation technologies, are considered as complementary actions to this central technological and industrial oriented core. 
Positioning of the project 
In terms of TRL, the main activities performed in NanoPAT span from technology screening and  validation in lab (TRL4) to 
demonstration in operational environment (TRL6). The technologies involved in the project have been developed building on prior 
research from involved partners and, in some cases, already tested on other relatively similar materials. As such, the project will build 
on prior state-of-the-art as well as IP belonging to several project partners. This will help to focus the efforts where required. It is 
therefore deemed realistic to state that all the main project results will reach TRL6 to reach the ambitious project goal. Table 3 
summarises the TRL advances that will be achieved for the key components of the project (generally referring to initial inputs from 
projects listed in Table 4). 
Table 3: Summary of the TRL advancements that will be brought about as a result of the NanoPAT project 
NanoPAT 
outcome 
TRL 
advancement 
Comment 
PDW  46 PDW spectroscopy was developed at UP together with the SME PDWA to monitor turbid dispersions with 
respect to the optical properties, i.e. reduced scattering coefficient and absorption coefficient, respectively. 
These can be used to determine particle size distributions. The inline technique is applied in a lab scale, 
and a preliminary prototype is currently built at PDW Analytics GmbH to introduce the PDW technology 
into real world processes. Therefore, the device has to be further developed with respect to device footprint, 
adaptation to extreme process conditions, and short measurement times. In addition, analysis times will 
be shortened and robust models for particle size distribution will be implemented. During the NanoPAT 
project, PDW spectroscopy will be applied to industrial case studies in a RTO environment, to develop a 
prototype and reaching TRL5. This will be followed by transferring the PDW technology into industrial pilot 
plants to achieve TRL6. 
OF2i 46 Through the national funding agency FFG Project LightMatters, the technology is evaluated within lab 
environments using MUG-internal characterisation methodologies (DLS, NTA) available through the PA-
Lab-Graz (particle characterisation Lab). Basic measurement process automation, continuous and fast 
data-acquisition as well as minimizing the device footprint are carried out. Further, a first approach to 
relevant industrial environments of the generated alpha prototype  is currently ongoing, and work in 
progress. The planned further development within the NanoPAT project: determining traceability, accuracy 
and precision; developing clear equipment hardware, including industrial-proof enclosures, fast and online 
sample preparation to directly connect to critical measurement points in production lines. Further 
specifications for materials, software, interfaces and data analysis will help bringing OF2i from TRL 4 to 
TRL 6, to test the equipment in industrial relevant, real-time nanoparticle characterisation environments. 
TUS 46 Current TUS systems are at TRL 4, comprising individual benchtop light source and spectrometry units, 
with free-space optics for light delivery and collection. Results in section 1.4 show lab scale trials on 
different materials relevant to the project. The system will be developed to TRL 6, that is as a self-contained 
unit with enclosure of the necessary IP-rating for the processing environment, and optomechanical 
interfaces customised for integration with the process at the preferred location, whether on the reaction 
vessel or pipeline. A control and acquisition software package will be developed for the monitoring system, 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 17 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
and situated locally on a suitable computer, or within the proximity of the monitoring device with wireless 
access, if required by considerations of GMP and ATEX rating, and physical constraints of the process. 
Algorithms will be developed to analyse the data and provide real-time process monitoring information. 
Algorithms will be developed using data acquired from samples synthesised and sampled from the pilot 
plant, calibrated against established offline nanometrology techniques. 
PAT 
Platform 
56 The PAT platform has been developed in IRIS with the main aim of integrating multiple sensor data streams 
(including complex monitoring devices) into a versatile global control tool for data acquisition, data 
processing & mining and User Interface in order to measure properties of process streams and products, 
accurately and in real-time. The platform will also integrate the specific models for each case study and 
will provide self-learning and predictive capabilities aimed for dramatically reducing overcosts derived from 
even slight deviations from the optimum process. 
National or international research and innovation activities linked to the project 
The NanoPAT consortium is heavily engaged in numerous regional, national, and European research activities (selection in Table 4, 
further listed in the partners’ profiles). They scale from research on early stage novel process monitoring technologies and theories, 
projects with very strong industrial background, innovations asking for academic and industrial process research excellence, 
engagement in knowledge dissemination, including transfer into wider societal aspects, and activities in research clusters, networks, 
and councils. To a large extent, these further activities that will be leverages and mobilised by the NanoPAT consortium facilitate 
the achievement of the ambitious general and specific objectives as outlined above. Examples include technical aspects like the 
deployment of the real-time characterization instruments, scientific achievements like new raw data analysis theories, and knowledge 
exchange aspects such as participation in numerous relevant conferences. Thus, the NanoPAT consortium has effective mechanisms 
and know-how in place to scale instrumental (technology) development from the lab up to industrial reality in consideration of 
technology and educational transfer into other (industrial) segments. Furthermore, NanoPAT also addresses todays’ 
economical and societal challenges and needs, such as cost-efficiency, process intensification and resource optimization, 
as well as acceptance, safety, and opportunities with respect to nanoparticle manufacturing and conversion.  
A dedicated task in WP7 related to clustering, as well as information exchange with other projects and partners, and facilitated through 
the open research data pilot that NanoPAT will participate in (see section 2.2) all aim at actively seeking information exchange, 
illustrating academic NPs processing excellence as test bed environment, amongst others, for emerging nano-characterisation 
technologies (cf. part 2.1). Technically, the NanoPAT platform will act as an implementation interface to capture initial interest for such 
novel developments. Our open access data management strategy also aims at providing metadata for the description of materials in 
linkage with the European Materials Modelling Council (EMMC), e.g. with respect to the optical properties of the nanomaterials under 
investigation.  
A selection of relevant projects that the NanoPAT partners are participating/have participated in are listed in Table 4 (further projects 
can be found in the respective partner profiles) along with the derived expertise, methodologies, pilot processes that will feed into 
NanoPAT.  
Table 4: National or international research and innovation activities linked to the project  
topic Project (Funding programme, reference), 
Description 
Partners 
involved 
Opportunity for carryover to NanoPAT 
NPs characterization 
OPTINANOPRO (H2020-NMP-PILOTS-2015 GA 
686116): Processing and control of novel 
nanomaterials in packaging, automotive and solar 
panel processing lines. 
IRIS 
(coord) 
Development and industrial integration of tailored online 
dispersion and monitoring systems to ensure a constant 
quality of nanomaterials. 
LIGHTMATTERS (FFG SpinOff Fellowship, 2018-
Q2 2020): OptoFluidic NANO-particle 
characterization. 
MUG Project for OF2i Technology Transfer to mitigate 
technological risks, and maximize translational output. 
LDLPRESS (FWF/ANR, 2013-2017): Impact of 
pressure over structure and molecular dynamics of 
low-density lipoprotein particles  
MUG Low density lipoprotein nanoparticle characterisation 
under high pressure conditions 
NANO2CLINIC (COST Action CA17140): Cancer 
Nanomedicine - from the bench to the bedside 
MUG Cancer nanomedicine - from the bench to the bedside, 
2018-2022 
Adva
nced 
chara
cteriz
ation NIR-CLOUD (BMBF-project incorporated into 
innoFSPEC 2018 – 2021). 
UP NIR-spectroscopy for characterization of light propagation 
in opaque ultra-concentrated dispersions. 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 18 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
3DZR“ (BMBF-Verbund 2018 – 2021): Optic 3D - 
Multiparameter Reader for process control. 
UP Optical 3D-Multi Parameter-Reader for process control 
(cell-based therapeutics). 
ProCuPro (BMBF-Verbund with Canada, 2019 – 
2022). 
UP Process control sensor systems for copper production 
(pyrometallic, fiber optical sensing, LIBS and light 
scattering. 
Industry digitalisation 
ProPAT (SPIRE GA 637232), Robust and 
affordable process control technologies for 
improving standards and optimising industrial 
operations. 
IRIS (coord), 
ZHAW 
PAT platform to uptake new sensors and adjusted to the 
target process cases. 
IbD (SPIRE GA 680565): Intensified by Design® 
for the intensification of processes involving solids 
handling. 
IRIS (coord), 
DSC, ZHAW 
Development of methodologies to analyse complex 
processes related to flow and particles. Development of 
digital tools for process intensification design tools. 
ECOBULK (CIRC GA 730456): Circular Process 
for Eco-Designed Bulky Products and Internal Car 
Parts 
IRIS Development of Quality Assurance System based on 
expert systems improved with rule induction algorithm, 
case-based reasoning to retrieve historical knowledge 
which is most adequate for a new situation and agent-
based process for knowledge organization. 
Self-sustainability and 
nanosafety 
NanoinformaTIX (H2020, GA 814426): 
Development and Implementation of a Sustainable 
Modelling Platform for NanoInformatics. 
TEMASOL Development of sustainability plan for a nanosafety 
modelling framework (TRL6). 
Gov4nano (H2020, GA 814401): meetings the 
needs of Nanotechnology. 
TEMASOL Business, operational model and self-sustainability of a 
nanosafety risk governance council 
BIORIMA (EU-H2020-NMBP-2016-2017 GA 
760928): BIOmaterial RIsk Management.  
BNN Effective implementation of dissemination, exploitation 
and training activities 
Industrial processes 
SIMPLIFY (SPIRE GA 820716): Sonication and 
Microwave Processing of Material Feedstock 
ARK Continuous production of zeolites and process control 
TRACKWAY-EID (Marie Sklodowska Curie 
Actions) as Coordinators 
UPV Production of functional water-based coatings 
RECOBA (SPIRE GA 636820): Cross-sectorial 
real-time sensing, advanced control and 
optimisation of batch processes saving energy and 
raw materials 
UPV Modelling of particle morphology evolution during 
emulsion polymerization processes 
R2R Biofluidics (H2020-NMP-PILOTS-2014 GA 
646260): Large scale micro-and nanofabrication 
technologies for bioanalytical devices based on 
R2R imprinting. 
BNN Effective implementation of dissemination, exploitation 
and training activities. Implementation of a comprehensive 
SbD concept. 
SPIDIMAN (EU-FP7-HEALTH 2012.2.4.3-1 GA 
305343): Single-Port Insulin Infusion for Improved 
Diabetes Management. 
BNN Effective implementation of dissemination, exploitation 
and training activities. 
Smart-4-Fabry (EU-H2020-NMP-PILOTS-2014-04 
GA 720942): Smart multifunctional GLA-
nanoformulation for Fabry disease. 
BNN Implementation of a comprehensive SbD concept 
In-CheM (DFG-Forschergruppe FOR 2177, 2018 – 
2021). 
UP Organic reactions in complex and confined environments. 
Clusters, councils, 
networks 
COSMIC (MSCA GA 721290): European Training 
Network for Continuous Sonication and Microwave 
Reactors 
ARK Zeolite synthesis with Microwaves and Ultrasounds in 
continuous operation 
NanoCommons (H2020-INFRAIA-2017-1-two-
stage GA 731032): The European Nanotechnology 
Community Informatics Platform: Bridging data and 
disciplinary gaps for industry and regulators.  
BNN Effective implementation of dissemination, exploitation 
and training activities. 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 19 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Center for innovation competence inno­FSPEC 
Potsdam. Innovative fibre-optical spectroscopy 
and sensing, winner in BMBF-contests 2008 and 
2015, since 2009). 
UP Fiber based chemical sensing and optical multichannel 
spectroscopy, multiple scattering, photon density waves, 
Applied Analytical Photonics. 
Innovative Hochschule, (BMBF-excellence 
program: Innovative University with technology 
campus Golm,  Fraunhofer IAP, Joint Labs, 2018 – 
2022). 
UP Technology transfer into industrial processes. 
 
In addition to these projects, during Task 7.3 of the work plan, we will build links with numerous other synergistic initiatives and projects 
from H2020 (e.g. SPIRE, FoF, NMBP OITB calls where improved monitoring and control strategies could be of mutual interests), as 
well as national and regional schemes RIS3, SUSCHEM, CEFIC, and other associations from the nanomaterials, plastics, coatings, 
composites, among other end users sectors for exchange of information and best practices. 
b) Methodology 
Our approach and methodology involve 
two main components: 
1. Laboratory and pilot scale testing & 
validation: Figure 18 below summarises 
the methodology for the technological 
development in the project. Industrial 
nanomaterials producers define the 
specific technical needs to guarantee 
industrial acceptance and 
implementation, nano-monitoring 
technological providers screen industrial 
samples for pre-selecting the most 
adequate techniques for developing and 
continuously improving the 
characterisation solutions to meet the 
industrial requirements, while academic partners act as both enablers for the former and leverage for latter. This involved initial 
downscaling of the industrial process with the support of the respective RTO (see Fig. 19) and later upscaling of the trials with the 
nanomonitoring solutions up to industrial pilot. Complementary methods such as simulations and modelling (embedding in the PAT 
platform) are developed in close collaboration among all actors. Other sustainability, performance and benchmarking assessment 
methods will be involved.  
 
2. Innovation: This work will accompany and cross-cut the research and innovation action with the aim of preparing for post-project 
industrial uptake and further market penetration of the project outcomes. It consists of the following activities: 
 analysis of the market, regulatory, social & nanosafety aspects that could impact the future industrial acceptance and 
commercialisation of the proposed technologies leading to the drawing of guidelines and recommendations for further upscaling 
and standardization. 
 dissemination & training of the project results following our previously described open data management methodology, including 
a series of activities to exchange knowledge between the relevant actors to validate their interest in the results of the project and 
with standardisation bodies who will be a perfect window to echo the relevance of our new solutions. A training programme will 
be delivered. 
 exploitation and business planning to plan the investments needed for full scale production and implementation of NanoPAT 
solutions to carry them over the notorious ‘valley of death’ towards commercial adoption. 
How sex and/or gender analysis is taken into account in the project’s content 
NanoPAT will consider the gender dimension and cater for the needs, motivations and differences of females where applicable, 
inspired by how taking gender into account has yielded new research results and sparked creativity, opening new avenues for future 
research for those who give it serious attention. In addition, although the processing industries consist of a majority of males, women 
are and shall be increasingly involved. As such, our project will consider the relevance of the gender dimension in communication & 
training, to ensure this is picked up in the right message as appropriate to reach both males and females. The user-friendliness of the 
NanoPAT devices and platform will also be assessed and optimised for both genders. This is important in ensuring the education of 
Figure 18: Methodological approach of NanoPAT (iterative feedbacks and improvements may also 
be involved but have not been represented for simplicity) 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 20 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
the current professional and next generation of scientists, technologists and others needed in the EU to foster the future of the CE 
and maximise its creativity and innovation potential. The gender dimension of our consortium and our measures to align with article 
16 of the H2020 programme are presented at the end of section 3.3.
1.4 Ambition 
Achieving Beyond-State of the art solutions for inline dispersion monitoring of nanocomposites 
As discussed before, a suite of offline characterisation methods is available in order to characterize the NPs properties (Figure 197). 
In liquid media, they are usually evaluated by measuring particle size distributions with optical techniques, such as dynamic light 
scattering (DLS), Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) and/or laser diffraction. In contrast, in solid matrices, X-Ray Diffraction (XRD), 
as well as scattering at different angles (SAXS, WAXS, etc.), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), Transmission Electron Microscopy 
(TEM), Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) are most commonly used. Further indirect methods are also sometimes employed when 
dispersion is the key driver for target properties (e.g. rheology in case of liquids). However, all of those techniques are performed 
offline and do not provide the spatial nor temporal resolution for NP characterization. Accordingly, they are not suitable for the 
real-time analysis of nanoparticles during the production process. 
NanoPAT will overcome this lack of opportunities with the development of real-time, inline/online analytical tools to allow a dynamic 
process optimization. NanoPAT will provide new technologies suitable for industry production to improve the control of nanoparticle 
characteristics, incl. the size dispersion in real time. NanoPAT’s suite of optical monitoring techniques has the potential to be applied 
for real-time monitoring and to substitute current time-consuming analysis requiring sampling at specific process times.  
In more detail, our technologies improve nano-monitoring PAT in the following way: 
Photon Density Wave (PDW) spectroscopy 
Inline fibre-optical PDW spectroscopy8 (see Table 
6 for patents already filed for this development) is a 
contamination- and calibration-free PAT suitable for 
highest concentrations (i.e. above 40 vol%), stirred, 
or flowing systems, and for potentially explosive 
environments. It allows for the independent, absolute 
quantification of the absorption and scattering 
properties of disperse materials, i.e. the absorption 
and reduced scattering coefficients, respectively. 
The absorption coefficient exhibits information about 
the chemical composition and/or the temperature of 
the material. The reduced scattering coefficient, 
however, is related to the number and size of the 
dispersed particles. Sizes are determined applying 
Mie theory and theories of dependent light 
scattering9. Providing a time resolution in the sub 
minute regime and data precision in the sub percent 
scale, PDW spectroscopy has been demonstrated to 
act as novel, dilution-free PAT for chemical10,11, physical12, and biotechnological13 processes in highly concentrated liquid 
systems. Accordingly, PDW spectroscopy reached TRL 4. During NanoPAT, PDW spectroscopy will be enhanced to fit the 
increasing requirements of industrial scale synthesis, particularly in the case of very high/low pH conditions. In addition, the software 
integration for transforming raw data into real-time NPs quality control parameters (i.e. particle size, particle distribution) will be 
                                                           
 
7 Bugnicourt et al. (2016). Recent prospects in the inline monitoring of nanocomposites and nanocoatings by optical technologies, 
Nanomaterials, Review, 6 (8), 150 
8 Bressel et al. (2013) Particle sizing in highly turbid dispersions by Photon Density Wave spectroscopy. J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf. 126, 122–129. 
9 Bressel et al. (2015) Particle sizing in highly turbid dispersions by PDW spectroscopy: Bidisperse systems. J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf. 162, 213–220. 
10 Kutlug, et al. (2018) Inline characterization of dispersion for mation of a solvent -borne acrylic copolymer by Photon Density Wave spectroscopy. Coll. Surf. A, 
556, 113–119. 
11 Häne et al. (2019) Real-Time inline monitoring of zeolite synthesis by Photon Density Wave spectroscopy” Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, vol. 288 
12 Hartwig, A. et al. (2018) Monitoring lactose crystallization at industrially relevant concentrations by Photon Density Wave spectroscopy. Chem. Eng. Technol. 41 
(6), 1139–1146. 
13 Hass et al. (2015) Optical monitoring of chemical processes in turb id biogenic liquid dispersions by PDW spectroscopy. Anal. Bioanal. Chem.  407(10), 2791-
2802 
Figure 19: Conventional characterization techniques to evaluate nanoparticles 
dispersion in different media (elaborated from ref 6,8) 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 21 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
developed to demonstrate the industrial feasibility (TRL 6). 
In contrast to existing measurement techniques (see 
above) PDW spectroscopy is able to determine optical 
parameters without calibration and enables determination 
of particle size distribution in highly concentrated 
suspensions in real time, as well as the concentration 
determination with the help of the absorption coefficient at 
specific wavelengths. Unlike focused beam reflectance 
measurement (FBRM), which can only measure chord 
lengths at medium concentrations and large particle sizes, 
or Raman spectroscopy, which needs to be calibrated and 
has trouble with highly scattering materials, PDW 
spectroscopy provides an easy to use approach and gives 
access to physical parameters without dilution or 
calibration, while having access to a wide range of particle 
sizes (25 nm to 250 µm). To date, it seems to be one of 
the most promising technologies meeting such industry 
needs.  
 
Beyond the state of the art, in NanoPAT: “We have been focussing on the development of Photon Density Wave spectroscopy as a 
unique advanced process analytical tool for inline nano-characterisation over nearly two decades. After rigorous theoretical and 
experimental work in academia, PDW Analytics GmbH was spun off in 2013 to commercialize this fascinating technology for chemical 
and biotechnological processes – presumably as the only company in the world. Successful proofs of concept and validation in several 
labs (TRL 4) have led to a strong demand for industrially applicable systems. The NanoPAT consortium with its excellent academic 
and industrial partners from key European industries is perfectly fitting our needs for the next demanding steps ahead: the 
development of instrumentation tailored to industrial needs and its demonstration in such environments. Here, the diversity of chemical 
processes, analytical questions, and technical environments within the NanoPAT consortium is of paramount importance to us.” Dr. 
Lena Bressel, CRO, PDW Analytics GmbH, SME, Germany 
OptoFluidic Force Induction (OF2i) 
OptoFluidic Force Induction (OF2i)14 is an 
online and continuous particle 
characterization and analysis technology, 
arranged as a high throughput counting 
method. The principle is based on the 
combination of very defined fluidic- as well as 
optically induced forces acting on particle 
streams15. Minimal photonic forces are 
sufficient to deflect and/or (de)accelerate 
small particles from their fluidic induced 
motion. As a result, the particle trajectories 
contain size and shape information16. 
Through modern diffractive optics, OF2i traps 
and actively sets the motion of thousands of 
particles simultaneously by a counterflow 
                                                           
 
14 Hill, C. (2018) Optofluidic force induction (OF2i) - Platform technology for particle characterization and active manipulation in microfluidic environments (Doctoral 
dissertation). Medical University Graz 
15 Kaneta, T. et al. (1997) Theory of optical chromatography. Analytical Chemistry, 69(14): p. 2701-2710 
16 Helmbrecht, C. et al. (2011) Photophoretic velocimetry-a new way for the in  situ determination of particle size distribution and refractive index of hydrocolloids . 
Figure 21: Schematic for OF2i analysis.  
Particle experience trajectory-deflections through fluidic vs. optical forces, NP being 
tracked via an ultra-microscope setup, evaluated to calculate sizing data. (Data example: 
Investigation of diffusion-differences in nanostructured S-layer biopolymer coated 
particles 
Figure 20 Schematic for PDW spectroscopy. Data example for polymerization of 
polyvinyl acetate with a volume fraction of 42 vol%. 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 22 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
approach shown in Figure 2117. Using an ultra-microscope setup, particle trajectories can be determined and evaluated with respect 
to sizes, size distributions, and particle numbers with very high statistical significance. Shape distribution (particle aspect ratio) 
determination is under development. The OF2i technology operates as online and calibration-free PAT. It is well established at 
the MUG particle lab and tested in cooperation with industry (e.g. feasibility for monitoring continuous high pressure homogenization 
processes; pharm.-industry cooperation project) and academia (e.g. continuous d-value investigation of ovalbumin complexed 
proticles (vaccines) and comparison to NP-Tracking Analysis and DLS performances18) in the laboratory environment (TRL 4), 
measuring hydrodynamic radii ranging from 20nm to >10µm. Further, preliminary feasibility has been studied measuring NanoPAT 
use case relevant hydroxyapatite particle synthesis, generating data for the extraction of d-value determination. 
Within NanoPAT, technical progress will be made referring to adaptive, fast and high throughput sample preparation (e.g. online 
dilution factors 1 – 10,000), performant and automated data-acquisition (continuous read out sizing data 20x faster in contrast to other, 
offline counting-single particle tracking techniques) and generalized automated data evaluation routines to fit individual industrial 
needs. Furthermore, general system optimization towards low internal dead-volume to drastically reduce maintenance cycles and 
increased measurement speed. This will guarantee a versatile and fast applicability of the method for further industrial system 
integration, reaching TRL 6 and up as a flexible PAT technology. 
Beyond the state of the art, in NanoPAT: “The possibilities in the nanoworld are endless, and we are still in the midst of discovering 
them. Our OF2i technology has created the revolutionary possibility to measure online and continuously particles and samples 
on the nanometer scale using biophotonics. Enabled by our former industrial experience, online and continuous nano-
characterisation was within reach. The last few years, we have been able to test and validate the procedure, and we are now at a 
stage where OF2i has developed into a functional nanoparticle measurement tool in laboratory environments (TRL 4): tested 
and evaluated in different applicational fields. Beyond the state of the art, the NanoPAT consortium will provide us with the possibilities 
to dive deeper into the development of real time nano-characterisation equipment, bringing it to the field where it belongs.”  Dr.-Ing. 
Christian Hill, coordinator of the OF2i technology project, Medical University of Graz, Austria.  
Turbidity Spectrometry (TUS) 
TUS is a flexible technique for monitoring the evolution of colloidal suspensions. Measurement of turbidity, including spectral 
analysis19, can be performed on suspensions of particles with minimal contact or perturbation, and does not require modification of 
the liquid flow either to control motion or isolate particles. A wide range of particle types may be examined, including materials that 
are inherently transparent or opaque, and covering a wide particle size range, from 10s to 1000s of nanometres. TUS has been 
already used to study the size and dispersion of latex particles in water, including its suitability to monitor agglomeration or 
crystallization20,21,22 and its feasibility for the on-line measurements.23 Further studies demonstrated its suitability for the determination 
of the size and concentration of silica nanoparticles in the range of 90-250 nm, directly linked to the refractive index of the solution 
investigated.24 Results were well-matched with values obtained by DLS. The size and polydispersity of vesicles for drug-carrying have 
been investigated.25 Silver nanoparticles have also been studied.26 In the case that particles have strong plasmonic behaviour, such 
as metals used for conductive inks, then plasmon absorbance bands will be present in the collected spectra and can also be analysed 
to yield information about size, shape and aggregation.27 Measurements of the refractive index and the scattering coefficient of 
                                                           
 
Analyst., 136, 1987 
17 Hill C. et al. (2016) unpublished data 
18 Hill, C. et al. (2017) Proceedings of the BioNanoMed [oral communication] 
19 Crawley, G. et al. (1997). Size analysis of fine particle suspensions by spectral turbidimetry: potential and limits. Powder Technology, 91, 197-208 
20 Irache, JM. et al. (1993). Determination of particle concentration in latex by turbidimetry. D. Int. J. Pharm. 90, R9–R12 and Quintanar-Guerrero, D. et al. (1997) 
A mechanistic study of the formation of polymer nanoparticles by the emulsification-diffusion technique. Colloid & Polymer Science, Vol. 275, No. 7  
21 Elicabe, G. et al. (1989), Latex Particle Size Distribution from Turbidimetry Using Inversion Techniques. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 129, No. 1,  
22 Llosent, MA. et al. (1996), Particle size distribution of SBR and NBR latexes by UV-Vis turbidimetry near the Rayleigh region. Rubber Chemistry and Technology, 
69 (4), 696-712 
23  Kourti, T. et al. (1990). Particle size determination using turbidimetry: capabilities, limitations and evaluation for on-line applications. Polymeric Materials Science 
and Engineering, 62, 301-5 
24 Khlebtsov, BN. et al. (2008). Determination of the Size, Concentration, and Ref ractive Index of Silica Nanoparticles from Turbidity Spectra . Langmuir 24 (16), 
8964-8970 
25 Mustafa, M. A. Elsayed & Grego,r Cevc. (2011). Turbidity Spectroscopy for Characterization of Submicroscopic Drug Carriers, Such as Nanoparticles and Lipid 
Vesicles: Size Determination. Pharm Res, 28, 2204–2222 
26 Le Blevennec, G. et al. (2013). Detection limits for nanoparticles in solution with classical turbidity spectra . Proc. SPIE 8819, Instrumentation, Metrology, and 
Standards for Nanomanufacturing, Optics, and Semiconductors VII, 881905 
27 Zhanget, XF. et al. (2006). Silver Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Characterization, Properties, Applications, and Therapeutic Approaches. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20 16, 17, 
1534 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 23 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
different nanoparticles are linked to non-absorbing nanoparticle suspensions and the sensitivity of TUS depends on the scattering 
intensity of nanoparticles, which decreases as the size of particles becomes smaller. The smallest polymeric nanoparticles that have 
been quantified by turbidimetry are around 70 nm.28  
As opposed to DLS, which requires a very stable suspension where particles only movement is due 
to Brownian motion, TUS is suitable for inline monitoring of active processes, where perturbations 
of the particles, due to mixing, stirring, convection, are an aspect of the process. TUS provides 
information about particles composition, as well as size and dispersion and may be used with a 
greater range of particle concentrations. For dilute or translucent samples, a transmission 
configuration is favoured, so that extinction is within the range of 10% to 90%. For concentrated or 
highly scattering samples, a back-scattering configuration is advantageous, with a displacement 
angle of > 10°. 
Multiple physical properties contribute to the collected signal, including scattering and absorption, 
so that with careful modelling of the optical interaction, including a comprehensive understanding of 
the material properties of the nanoparticles and the medium, and calibration to offline reference 
measurements, a wide range of particle sizes, material types and concentrations can be 
characterised. By establishing a close correlation between turbidity spectral features acquired from 
inline optics, and the nanoparticle synthesis processes under study, real-time process monitoring 
can be achieved. 
Beyond the state of the art, in NanoPAT: “We will apply TUS for real-time monitoring in process as opposed to most prior art using 
it in lab configurations. We will focus on PAT with consolidated results at TRL4. TUS requires no sample preparation or control of the 
particle flow, and so can be applied at different locations in the process. It will provide useful information over a wide range of dilutions, 
as long as care is taken to maintain the intensity of the measured signal. In the proposed pilot systems, where large volume glass 
reaction vessels are used, a back-scattering configuration will be investigated. For IRIS, which has in the recent years, developed 
some optical techniques specifically designed for nanostructured materials, this is the occasion for expanding our monitoring 
techniques solutions portfolio offered as turn-key solutions to the industry.” Dr. Tim Kehoe, team leader optics, IRIS Technology 
Solutions, Spain. 
 
Modular PAT software platform 
In terms of data managing, the global process control platform developed by IRIS in the SPIRE project ProPAT (GA 637232, http://pro-
pat.eu/), will be adapted to the new nano-monitoring techniques and challenges considered within NanoPAT. It is the aim of the project 
to reach beyond state-of-the-art software capabilities: a PAT platform based on the previous development (TRL5) will be designed to 
be a user-focused customisable platform, where data gathering, handling and display is provided in a user-friendly interface tailored 
to the needs of the end user (Figure 23). Stochastic predictive models developed applying data mining tools to the analytical data are 
hosted to process the acquired data and optimize the process. Previous applications of this digital tool validated during the ProPAT 
project were related to controlling processes in pharma, metals, mining and chemical industries, and it is currently employed by IRIS 
in additional processes, such as organic photovoltaic materials production, plastic recycling and fermentation processes, etc. This 
tool is already equipped to host NIR sensors, granulometers, flow sensors (air and mass), temperature sensors. It connects to logic 
controllers and communication platforms to retrieve data and process parameters. It also hosts Partial Least Squares Regression and 
Multivariable Statistics Process Control models using single or multiple inputs.  
In NanoPAT, the PAT platform will be equipped with an advanced data processing approach integrating chemometric models and 
machine learning predictive models in an ensemble configuration. The outputs of the chemometric models will provide high information 
value inputs to the predictive model, based on the raw and synthetic data from offline sources as well as from all sensors and 
production process parameters. Ensemble methods29 use multiple learning algorithms (and/or statistical methods) to obtain better 
predictive performance than could be obtained from any of the constituent methods alone. Supervised learning methods such as SVR 
(Support Vector Regression)30 and RI (Rule Induction)31 are candidate algorithms: the SVR is a black-box technique adequate for 
numerical data, whereas RI generates a model as explicative rules which can also be used for data exploration/interpretation (including 
                                                           
 
28 Gao, X. et al. (2006) Biomaterials, 27, 3482–3490 
29 Polikar, R. (2006). Ensemble based systems in decision making. IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine.,6 (3), 21–45 
30 Fan, RE. et al. (2005). Working set selection using second order information for training SVM. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6, 1889-1918 
31 Holmes, G. et al. (1999) Generating Rule Sets from Model Trees. In: Twelfth Australian Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 1-12 
Figure 22: Turbidity 
Spectrometric system scheme 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 24 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
the chemometrics model from data fusion of available information using the ensemble approach). Finally, a CBR (Case Based 
Reasoning)32 approach can be adopted in which successful configurations (i.e. machine control parameters and different 
compositions) are stored in a historical database, and when a new case is presented, first it is matched with the historical cases to 
identify similar ones which can be reused. This can reduce unnecessary retraining and calibration of machine learning models. The 
combination of these different machine learning approaches can provide high value to the manipulation of large amounts of data. This 
approach is already under investigation in the project ECOBULK (GA 730456) and its patentability currently under assessment. 
 
Figure 23: Key features of the PAT platform (illustrated with NanoPAT analysers) 
Beyond the state of the art, in NanoPAT:  “IRIS has been involved in developing Process Analytical Technologies (PAT) and 
data gathering systems for more than 6 years now. Derived from this initial know-how, the EC conceded the ProPAT project in 2015 
where the PATBox tool was developed to establish a data management system capable of dealing with complex sensors. This tool 
has been proven to be a versatile global control platform for PAT data acquisition, data processing & mining and User Interfa ce in 
order to measure properties of process streams and products, accurately and in real -time. The platform w as developed and is 
connected to take readings from a series of novel sensors, and analysers, such as our Visum NIR solutions, for providing 
measurements on composition, particle size and local bulk properties. The platform also provides self -learning and predictive 
capabilities aimed for dramatically reducing overcosts derived from even slight deviations from the optimum process. Our aim now is 
to further develop the platform towards market readiness extending the range of embedded analysers and sensors. I t was initially 
validated in the chemical, ceramics and mineral sectors but is now also being implemented in new projects in the scope of fil ms 
processing, biorefinery, plastic recycling, etc. The high potential market uptake thanks to facilitating industr y access to and use of 
PAT solutions is a strong motivator to commit resources to expand analysis capabilities of the data gathered to provide substantial 
added value to both PAT providers and industrial clients. In NanoPAT, the platform will be deployed i n a highly relevant process 
industry area and the PAT software integrating advanced models will provide high added value predicting the suitable process 
parameters adjustments to process/convert target nanoparticles. The feedback signals providing recommendations to the operators 
could be used for closed -loop control in the future full-scale deployment of the project results.” Oonagh Mc Nerney, Cofounder and 
CEO, IRIS Technology Solutions, SME, Spain 
Innovation potential 
The broad innovation potential of NanoPAT arises from delivering solutions tapping into currently unmet NPs production market needs, 
as well as facilitating enforcement of new nanometrology standards that will furthermore improve the nano safety of NPs production 
by reducing worker exposure during offline characterisation. The expected derived growth potential in terms of jobs and revenues are 
discussed in Section 2 along the supply and value chain. Importantly, our project has a strong industrial involvement and is extremely 
well positioned for a successful post-project phase towards commercial use of the results through: 
a. Sales of equipment, PAT Platform software 
b. Provision of calibration, maintenance, safety, support to upscaling and validation services 
c. Improvement in NP production processes and possible new product development in the sectors covered in the consortium 
and beyond along the value chains. 
Real-time particle sizing of highly concentrated nanoparticle suspensions in differing industrial processing environments has not yet 
been achieved. Numerous attempts have aimed at adopting existing, conventional offline technologies to levels of higher suitability 
                                                           
 
32 Agnar, A. et al. (1994) Case-Based Reasoning: Foundational Issues, Methodological Variations, and System Approaches. Artificial Intelligence Communications 
7, no. 1, 39-52 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 25 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
for concentrated particle suspension systems, making it completely unfeasible to consider inline or even online integration alternatives. 
Yet, such approaches have not been adopted in industry, often due to the fundamental lack of theory-based suitability to high 
concentrations, systems under flow or stirred conditions, or necessary time resolution. 
As seen at the beginning of section 1.4, the commercially available solutions for monitoring NP suspensions are more linked to offline 
analysis or those with inline potential cannot meet the very high demands of our case studies. As such, no further benchmarki ng is 
provided here to avoid redundancy with section 2, in terms of expected impacts in the call (section 2.1.1) featuring comparative tables 
for our planned solution versus the current process control approaches at DSM, EVONIK, CNANO, FLU and ARK in terms of speed, 
cost savings, sustainability benefits and other advantages etc., and section "Market/Competitors Analysis & Segmentation" discussing 
the overall players with different nanometrology solutions (different from NanoPAT). 
          Table 5: Process conditions (simplified) for the industrial case studies, outlining current challenges for PAT integration 
 
Demonstrating the technology readiness at an industrial scale for this selected range of chemical and physical processing conditions, 
generates an extraordinary proof of feasibility within the actual large-scale industrial representatives of the consortium as well as 
beyond into other European industrial segments. 
Nanotechnology is listed as one of the Key Enabling Technologies for the H2020 work programme due to its cross-sectorial 
applications, including diverse industrial domains such as communication, medicine, transportation, agriculture, energy, materials & 
manufacturing, consumer products, and households. Emerging use cases and applications are expected to be among the key factors 
contributing towards the growth of the nanotechnology global market, currently valued at 1,055.1 M$ in 2018, and is projected to 
reach $2,231.4 million by 2025, growing at a CAGR of 10.5% from 2019 to 202533.  
As further detailed in terms of market potential in section 2, NanoPAT will meet the individual requirements of each individual NP 
monitoring solution. Thus, innovation potential is provided predominantly in terms of improved processes but also improved and new 
products to the 5 industry cases showing significant market relevance and growing trends as outlined below. Yet, as seen above, the 
NPs manufacturing and converting market are much broader, and the ability to disclose the full potential of our nano-monitoring 
techniques for such a large sector will be empowered by a broader screening of NP/technology compatibility in WP2-4. 
1) Polymers dispersion (DSM): Global demand for emulsion polymers has reached 13.3 million metric tons (dry basis) in 2018 
(without considering styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR) and Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) emulsions which sum another 11.5 million tons) 
and is growing at a 4.6% annual rate. The Coatings Resins business of DSM employs more the 2000 people, generating an annual 
turnover of nearly a billion EUR, to a large degree derived from the sales of nano-scaled polymer particles. 
Advances in NanoPAT will support increased production of water-based paints, coatings and adhesives, which are displacing solvent 
borne formulations because of the more stringent environmental regulations in relation to the emission of volatile organic compounds 
(VOCs). Acrylics are the largest and fastest growing emulsion polymer type, comprising 40% of the global market in 201834. Industrial 
water-based coating resins are mainly obtained via batch processes, using a dozen batch reactors located worldwide. This batch 
process is frequently a water-based emulsion polymerization. 
2) Silica Nanoparticles (EVONIK): In 2018 the forecasted global market for precipitated silica was around 2.85 million tons/y. The 
expected global CAGR from 2016 to 2020 is 6.2 %.  
Precipitation of silica takes place in a batch process with typical batch times between one and three hours. The process is controlled 
via the main quality relevant parameters, e. g. pH and flow rates of educts. Especially pH control is quite challenging as the long-time 
stability of pH devices is not sufficient and the measuring point has to be chosen carefully in order to be representative for the whole 
batch. Product quality is measured off-line. Main quality parameters are specific surface area (e.g. by means of CTAB and BET 
analysis) and others, with a typical lead time of hours. Thus, process control by product quality is very indirect with a hold-up of 
                                                           
 
33 Nanotechnology Market by Type (Nanodevices and Nanosensors) and Application (Electronics, Energy, Chemical Manufacturing, Aer ospace & Defense, 
Healthcare, and Others): Global Opportunity Analysis and Industry Forecast, 2018–2025 
34 The World Emulsion Polymers, The Freedonia Group Inc https://www.freedoniagroup.com/brochure/29xx/2929smwe.pdf 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 26 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
hundreds of kg silica produced. A reliable and robust inline analytic of particle size would open a new control strategy where the 
particle properties of each batch could be adjusted on-time to specification, which would lead to significant reductions in quality 
fluctuations. In addition, the development of new products will also benefit with respect to speed and efficiency by the ability of in-situ 
particle control. 
3) Hydroxyapatite (FLU): The hydroxyapatite (HAp) market is projected to grow from USD 2.22 billion in 2018 to USD 2.97 billion by 
2023, at a CAGR of 5.9% between 2018 and 2023. The g rowing geriatric population, increasing healthcare expenditure, and 
increasing demand for medical implants are some of the drivers fuelling the growth of the HAp market across the globe. HAp 
production in FLU is 18 tons of nano-hydroxyapatite annually, generating a turnover of approx. 900,000 EUR, and is continuously 
growing towards a total target turnover of 2M EUR in HAp. However, some of the major restraints for the growth of the HAp market 
are unfavourable healthcare reforms in the US and unmet performance benchmarks by HAp such as its low fracture toughness. 
During continuous nanohydroxyapatite production, changes in the process parameters (e.g. reactants concentration, temperature, 
pH) can modify the material morphology, so real-time detection/characterization methods would enable improved product quality and 
allow faster development of new products and processes, therefore supporting market growth. 
4) Zeolites (ARK): In 2013, the global synthetic zeolite market amounted to 1.8 million tons/y, of which zeolite adsorbents entailed 
220 ktons/y (a quarter of which is in Europe). Other products include detergent builders and catalysts. ARK has an 11% share of the 
worldwide market of zeolite adsorbents (20% in value). The adsorbent market is expected to grow at 4.5% per year. Lately, 
prices of zeolites for adsorbent applications in Europe are in the range of 1.3 €/kg. As such, the European market value for zeolite 
adsorbents in gas separations and other industrial applications like xylenes separations is about 70 million EUR. 
Despite the fact that the targeted zeolites crystallinity and crystal size are well known, the capability of continuously tracking these 
parameters via NanoPAT innovative nano-monitoring techniques will be of utmost importance to tune the process conditions and 
residence time, as well as for substituting currently used time-consuming offline technologies (SEM, XRD). It could also support the 
shift to continuous production as discussed in section 2.1. 
5) Ceramic particles suspension in electrolytes (CNANO): CNANO is a research and development company specializing in the 
development of nano-enabled metallic surfaces through electroplating of nanoparticles and metal ions on different types of substrates. 
The company operates a pilot line and a fully equipped laboratory for surface characterization and testing. Currently, the production 
process involves the dispersion of nanoparticles in the electroplating bath (aquatic solution of metal salts) and the co-deposition of 
NPs and metal ions on the treated surface. The physicochemical state of the NPs in the electroplating bath is unknown and quality 
control is only implemented on the final product, after the completion of the plating process. Through the implementation of the 
NanoPAT technology, CNANO will acquire close-to-real-time information about the physical-chemical state of NPs in the electroplating 
bath and will be able to apply corrective measures when for example the concentration of the NPs runs low, or when the particle size 
distribution falls out of range for optimal co-deposition on the substrate. CNANO will thus gain pre-emptive control on the quality of 
the final product, achieving the highest product quality, reducing faulty products, and optimizing the use of resources in the production 
process. 
Intellectual property assessment 
As seen above, to date there is no suitable real-time characterisation solution for monitoring industrial NPs processing available on 
the market. It is thus the objective of NanoPAT to enable our industry partners to enhance their capabilities of NP monitoring and to 
provide marketable solutions for additional applications in European industry and beyond. In order to do so, preliminary screenings of 
industrial samples for the different techniques will confirm the most promising applications to be evaluated during the project. The 
establishment of NPs production processes testbeds will promote the replication of the RTO-technological provider collaborations of 
NanoPAT beyond the project lifespan in order to explore new marketable applications for the nano-characterisation techniques 
considered within the project. 
To maximize our innovation commercial potential, standardization and regulatory aspects, as well as business planning, value 
proposition design and knowledge/IPR management will be undertaken. While in recognition that it is important to Europe that future 
projects build on previously funded efforts and outputs in the spirit of open dissemination and sharing, NanoPAT’s intention is to open 
source a fair amount of innovation and technology advancements. That said, NanoPAT also intends to protect its innovations (mainly 
already the case in terms of the core spectroscopic techniques), with a view to protecting our most strategic/valuable innovation within 
Europe. This, in turn, will secure freedom of use, exploitation and commercialization for members of the consortium, as well as 
protecting competitive commercial advantages in Europe in these strategic areas.  
Taking into account existing patents from partners that will be used in the project as a basis for the planned advances in the project 
(see background Table 14 in Section 2), we have a very strong IP position which will help to ensure our results stay under our control 
and benefit EU growth. Besides the involved large and medium size end users, the member base of the participating associations in 
the consortium and in the AB are all potential early adopters/licensees of the new technologies.  
Already, freedom to operate has been given major attention in that it is vital for the commercial exploitation of the results. A patent 
search has been performed around each of the target technologies on which our new NanoPAT monitoring solutions are based by 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 27 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
the respective technology holders and experts (reflected as relevant in the state of the art). The prior art is indeed rich, as has been 
seen throughout Section 1.4. While certain areas are covered by patents- which will be taken into account throughout the project 
development-, there is certainly space for further innovation. Whenever possible, the project will consider not only developing 
confidential know-how, but also innovative aspects that could be protected by patents following a deepening of the IP search 
performed at proposal preparation stage and ascertaining the business opportunity- as is further explained in WP8 and Section 2.2. 
In particular we expect to derive IP from the combinations of the core spectroscopic techniques, specific configurations allowing their 
inline integration, data processing and fusion approaches, etc.). In terms of relevant patents in our main innovation areas, Table 6 
summarizes the key ones of relevance and our differential factors are also highlighted (when relevant these patents will be further 
monitored during our Technology Watch activities to see the evolution of their approval and enforcement status):  
Table 6: Results of the patent search focused on the main innovation area of the novel IP considered to be generated in NanoPAT 
Patent (title, reference) Relevance to NanoPAT Conclusion in terms of impact on the project 
Measuring arrangement for an optical 
spectrometer (PCT/EP 2008/007828), EU 
patent at 07.03.2012 (2040050), US patent 
at 25.12.2012 (8,339,599), Japanese patent 
at 14.02.14 (5473919) 
Measurement approach of PDW 
spectroscopy 
This PDW patent owned by UP and provided as 
NanoPAT background assures the use of this 
technology and its further development in the 
project without infringing on other’s IP (indeed no 
online PDW patent had been found) 
Method and device for analyzing a fluidic 
sample with dispersed particles, 
EP3422364A1 (Priority Date: 2017-06.27, 
Patent Pending) 
Basic measurement approach for 
OF2i technology 
Response to the Extended European Search 
Report has been given, EPO-reply is pending 
Separation of colloidal suspensions using 
laser optical pressure fluidic devices  
US20130319954A1 
A method based on optical 
chromatography used for the 
separation and retainment of particles 
against an orthogonal placed wall 
Closest patent to OF2i technology, No impact, 
the technology is used for the retainment of 
particles. 
Methods and apparatuses for stretching 
polymers 
US6696022B1 
Invention for stretching polymers 
comprising OF2i relevant tapered 
channel geometries 
No impact, since no particle size/shape 
information is extracted 
System and method for optically driven 
separations using fluid filled core optical 
fibers 
US20090032730A1 
Optical chromatography system 
using waveguiding structures for 
particle separation 
No impact, OF2i uses no waveguiding structures 
for the particle characterisation 
Methods for modifying interaction between 
dielectric particles and surfaces  
(US 2002108859 A1) 
A method based on biophotonic 
forces and trajectory changes for 
particle characterisation 
Used as optical tweezer setup in an orthogonal 
approach. OF2i specific counter-flow is not 
mentioned 
Spectrophotometric system and method for 
the identification and characterization of a 
particle in a bodily fluid, US7027134B1 
Use of turbidimetry spectroscopy for 
diagnosis 
No impact, the technique is applied for disease 
diagnosis. 
Method for measuring particle size of a 
dispersed phase in a fluid stream, 
US5377005 
A method of determining the mean 
particle size using turbidimetry 
Used for immiscible liquids. Not used specifically 
for nanoparticles production 
A method and a system for determining gel 
firmness values from inline optical 
measurements, EP3036527A1 
A method of determining gel firmness 
using turbidimetry 
Not suitable for determining size and PSD. 
Measuring device and method for the 
determination of particle size distributions by 
scattered light measurements, US5438408A 
A method based on scattering light 
measurements for size distribution 
characterization 
Turbidimetry not mentioned. Especially for 1 to 
1000 μm so not suitable for smaller particles 
considered here. 
2. Impact
2.1 Expected impacts 
End user driven impact 
The results from NanoPAT will be transferred and commercialised within the EU nanomaterials manufacturing sector and beyond. At 
the same time, the innovation capacity and market development opportunities of companies producing process monitoring equipment 
will grow considerably. All this helps to push Europe further to the forefront of nanotechnology by strengthening its industrial landscape, 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 28 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
raising turnover and employment in this sector, as well as providing explicit positive environmental benefit s, especially in terms of 
savings in energy and raw materials resources and derived greenhouse gas emissions, as further justified below in our different CS. 
CS1 - Case Study DSM: In particular, the ability to control the quality and reliability of products is extremely enhanced by the real - 
time nano-characterisation technologies of NanoPAT, since all industries represented by the CS of NanoPAT currently rely on post 
process and/or sampling-based nanoparticle size analy sers. Without the NanoPAT technologies, the present manufacturing reality 
will not be enabled for direct process and quality control of the nanoparticles during manufacturing: The current state -of-the-art 
characterisation of nanoparticle size as key material performance indicator simply exhibits too large lag times. 
“The new developed technologies of NanoPAT will provide to DSM a useful tool for fast and accurate monitoring of the PSD (Particle 
Size Distribution) and other particle properties such a concentration. In the production environment, the new technology will  mainly 
contribute to production efficiency. DSM has quantified the benefits from the adoption of the technology in production as follow. The 
batch processes are running between 6 and 24 hours. As the reaction progress is not monitored over time, each batch process 
includes additional reaction time (to secure finalization of the  polymerization reaction). By monitoring the reaction progress, 
approximately 5-10% of the reaction time can be saved (and thus a 5 -10% capacity/efficiency increase for their case in Waalwijk), 
which includes cost savings in terms of heating costs, manufac turing etc. and will easily sum up to approx. 2 -5 M € per year.” Prof. 
Dr. Ron Peters, Principal Scientist, DSM Coating Resins, The Netherlands. 
 
CS2 - Case Study EVONIK: The novel nano-characterisation technologies will stimulate the efficiency of the existing manufacturing 
processes with respect to productivity (yield, reduced raw materials, improved consistency of product quality and reliability ) and will 
provide explici t positive environmental benefits by reducing resources used and waste generated. Moreover, they can provide 
fundamental impact as enabling technologies, promoting a complete change in nanoparticle production concepts.  
“For the first time we see the potential to overcome our sampling processes. Overall, Evonik has a global production capacity for all 
silica based products of about 1 million metric tons/year with a  current time-lag from sampling to data availability of 1 h., Thus, the 
reaction time on quality fluctuation is bigger than one hour, in which the process may run out of specification. The potential of reducing 
quality related costs can additionally also sum up to several 100,000€ per year.” Dr. Thomas Pelster, Vice President R&D Precipitated 
Oxides, Evonik Resource Efficiency GmbH, Germany: 
 
CS3 - Case Study FLU: The new NanoPAT technology will enable a continuous, precise high -throughput multi -parameter 
measurement with single -particle accuracy in real time. This technology will improve quality an d productivity and will provide cost 
reduction. 
“Fluidinova produce approx. 18 tons of nano-hydroxyapatite annually, generating a turnover of approx. 900.000 EUR and we estimate 
that the turnover generated by the production of nano -hydroxyapatite can easily achieve to 2 million  EUR. Based on the analytical 
technologies outlined on nanoPAT project, for the first time we would overcome the  sampling processes we have performed so far. 
From the point of sampling until the analytical data is available, it  nowadays outsourced and requires approx. 10 business days. If I 
could provide my company with real -time data, it would not just help to improve the quality of our existing processes and products 
(estimated to 15%), we would also  be enabled to develop new materia ls and new processes much faster. Based on such tools, I 
estimate to increase the productivity by 10% in comparison to the international competition. With respect to typical development costs 
(time and resources) for some of our products in the past, I env ision a cost reduction of 20% in the future”.  Dr. Joao Santos, CEO, 
Fluidinova SL, Portugal: 
 
CS4 - Case Study ARK: ARK aims at transferring the current batch mode production of zeolites into continuous-flow manufacturing 
with reduced CAPEX. Here, real -time in situ nano-characterisation technologies are a key enabler for breakthrough change s in the 
manufacturing processes. 
“The implementation of the online & inline particle measurements is foreseen to be made first in our existing plants using ba tch 
processes which is a low risk option. However, the implementation of a new continuous process which is higher risk – higher reward 
option which would generate higher energy savings (estimate of 40 % or 13600 MWh/y), would lead to a significant CAPEX reduction 
of 45 %, and will enable higher environmental impact reduction by a greater recycle of water and reduction of consumption of raw 
materials.” Dr. habil. Jean-Luc Dubois, Scientific Director, ARK, France: 
 
CS5 - Case Study CNANO: The NanoPAT technologies allow academic and industrial sectors to significantly speed up the scaling 
from conceptual phase to the prototype operation of new NP production plants, since they allow for direct performance evaluation: 
monitoring, understanding, improving, and finally controlling of nanoparticle processing, thereby contributing to facilitatin g new 
products to the market. NanoPAT applies to b oth large companies and SMEs, particularly when overcoming economic and 
administrative barriers and opening new markets. To achieve a suite of real time nanomonitoring solutions that endures the li fetime 
of the project, a sustainable future business plan w ill be developed together with the industry partners and verified with EU 
stakeholders. In addition to economic issues, the business plan will also consider sustainability aspects (CO2 consumption, energy 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 29 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
costs).  
“In the last two decades, with the explosion in the development of nanostructured materials to a variety of applications, new markets 
and possibilities for growth have been identified. Despite the promising results, the industry struggles to adopt these technologies in 
their production lines. For electrochemical methods of production, the coating formation via electrodeposition is a well -established 
method. In CNANO, we advance the electroplating method by the addition of NP in the electrolytic baths in order to produce nano 
composite coatings for a variety of components covering a series of industry sectors, and help the manufacturing business and market 
adopt these technologies as an intermediate step between the research groups (Universities, Research Institutes) and the indu stry. 
Better controll ing the NP dispersion can also enable tailored coating development” Dr. Alexandros Zoikis-Karathanasis, CEO , 
CNANO, Greece. 
 
Expected impacts mentioned in the Work Programme 
Measurable improvement of speed by at least a factor 2 of nanoscale characterisati on procedures, in comparison to already 
established performance and reliability for the application leading to a significant increase in industrial competitiveness 
Nano-characterization procedures that have to be applied for product quality of nanostructured materials, is often a time and 
resource consuming process. Additionally, the adoption of monitoring technologies during the manufacturing process does not 
follow the same pace and cannot cover the production yields to meet market demands. Thus, the ability to monitor the process in 
a time efficient way is of utmost importance especially with the view of performing timely corrective actions. In NanoPAT, the 
proposed monitoring technologies have the capacity to ensure speed and efficiency in the delivery of the results, since they will 
be installed inline/online during production, leading to digitisation and derived intensification of production and work affordability. 
Furthermore, artificial intelligence -enabled decision support will support closed loop process control for automatic process 
optimisation. The NanoPAT monitoring technologies that will be installed in the industrial case studies are foreseen to incre ase 
the productivity by increasing the quantity and quality of the as produced nanostructured materials. The improvement in terms of 
characterisation speed thanks to the NanoPAT technologies for the monitoring of the production processes is summarized below 
showing speed improvements well above a factor of 2. For example, PDW spectroscopy provides a maximum time resolution of 
≈ 4.6 min -1(data every ≈ 13 s), thus a speed improvement factor of > 250. A very similar factor results from OF2i, and TUS 
expected to provide reliable and close to real -time nano-characterisation data (within 10 s). The performance of the TUS, PDW 
and OF2i to characterise the size of NPs under study is already validated at TRL4 (see section 1.4) and they will be calibrat ed 
against other offline reference techniques during the project to demonstrate sufficient reliability for their substitution even in inline 
configuration. Derived improvements in productivity arise from reduced scrap and waste but also from the optimised process cycle 
time driven by the rapid acquisition of quality control results (e.g. by up to 2 0% in the case of DSM as previously discussed). 
Overall, this can have a significant effect on the competitiveness of NPs manufacturers and converters. 
 Table 7: Benchmarking of the current and future monitoring strategies in terms of speed for each use case  
 
Case study Current speed NanoPAT speed (factorial improvement) 
CS1: DSM, 
Polymers 
6h-24h/batch with post process 
characterization 
Improved characterization speed > 10.000 & 10%-20% 
improvement in the reaction time 
CS2: EVONIK, Silica 1h for sampling process Increase by a factor 250 in respect with the NP 
characterization 
CS3: FLU, HAp  10 days The factor of speed improvement is estimated to > 
10,000 
CS4: ARK, Zeolite Post process, within several days The factor is > 10.000 for NanoPAT monitoring 
technology 
CS5: CNANO, 
Ceramic 
Post process, within 5-7 days The factor is > 10.000 for NanoPAT monitor ing 
technology 
Significant reduction of the time and resources needed for nanomaterial development and upscaling, and for nanomaterials-based 
product development, which should be quantified with respect to established conditions for specific market sectors, with a re turn 
of investment in less than 5 years 
 Most of the NanoPAT industrial partners (SMEs and LEs) that will incorporate the new technologies in their production lines, are 
global leaders in their fields. They are thus in a position to serve a large range of manufacturing sectors, such as pharmaceuticals, 
cosmetics, construction, automotive, metal industry, etc. As far as nanostructured materials production is concerned, the current 
conditions dictate that for the upscaling of the processes, generally trial and error experiments as well as offline, time consuming 
characterizations, have to be performed resulting in a  huge amount of time and resources expenditure for the companies. Real -
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 30 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
time data would not just help to improve the quality of our existing processes and products, we would also be enabled to develop 
new materials and new processes much faster. In the foll owing two examples are provided in details about the benefits of the 
NanoPAT concerning upscaling, development and production of new type of materials. 
CNANO is operating in the market of surface finishing producing composite multifunctional coatings via the electroplating method 
and the use of composite electrolytic solutions. These electrolytes are water-based dispersions of diluted metal salts (e.g. Ni) and 
reinforcing means (e.g. carbides or oxide NPs). The new developed technologies of NanoPAT will provide to CNANO with a useful 
tool for fast and accurate monitoring of the NPs status in the solutions inline. More specifically CNANO will invest in the TUS and 
OF2i solutions, an investment that will reach ~225,000€ (see part 2.2.2.4D). CNANO has quantified the benefits from the adoption 
of the technology as follows: 
Development & Upscaling phase: The development phase starts with experiments in beakers and small tanks of maximum volume 
of 1lt and continues with the upscaling phase in tanks of 10, 40 and 12 0lt (Pilot Line). Currently CNANO is characterizing the 
dispersion utilizing off -line instrumentation such as: DLS, UV -Vis, and SEM. This approach leads to delays and high costs  as 
shown in the table below. Moreover, currently the average time for getting the results is ~ 1 week per batch of measurement (15 
samples) while, with the adoption of NanoPAT, it will be 4 weeks faster per case.  
Description of current status Current cost Investment ROI 
CNANO develops 15 new types of compositions 
per year. Each composition has a need of 60 DLS 
and 20 SEM tests 
DLS: 80 €/measurement 
SEM: 150 €/measurement: 
Total:7,800€/case  115.000€/year 
TUS, OF2i, PAT 
Total: 225,000 € 
2 years 
Production phase:  The current practice of the company is to evaluate the status of the composite electrolyte by an internal 
measurement protocol combining UV-Vis, Cyclic Voltamerty and drying and weighing measurements. By regular sampling from 
the production line (one per day) the personnel carry out the tests and an assessment is delivered at after 2 days. This involves 
the risk of production being run out of limits for a period of 2 days (scrap products). The table below shows the significant savings 
from the NanoPAT.  
Description of current status Current cost Investment ROI 
CNANO applies an internal protocol for 
characterization based on UV -Vis and Cyclic 
Voltametry. The process provides assessment after 
2 days. 
On average it is found that the bath 
is operating off-limit 8 times per 
year with a total cost of 80,000€. 
TUS, OF2i, PAT 
Total: 225,000 € 
2.5 
years 
Similarly, FLU produces hydroxyapatite nanoparticles. The main barrier step in the development phase is the characterization of 
shape and size of the NPs. Currently this is done by TEM, a relative high cost and time consuming (due to the sample preparation) 
method. For the proper evaluation of a new product in the development phase ~10 TEM measurements are needed with a delivery 
time of 5-6 weeks. FLU will invest 130.000€ in order to acquire a OF2i system with the PAT platform. Besides the time saving (up 
to 5 weeks) the following savings in costs are provided: 
Description of current status Current cost Investment ROI 
FLU develops 15 new type of compositions per 
year. Each new composition needs 10 TEM 
analysis 
TEM: 300 €/measurement including 
preparation of sample 
Total: 45,000€/year 
OF2i 
Total: 130,000 € 
3 years 
When evaluating the production phase: 
Description of current status Current cost Investment ROI 
FLU is applying an internal protocol for product 
characterization based on TEM. The process 
provides assessment after 10 days 
At an average it is found that the bath is 
operating off-limit 2 times per year with 
a total cost of 40,000€/year 
OF2i 
Total: 130,000 € 
3 years 
Finally, concerning the 3 large enterprises, the benefits are multiple and the investment relatively low vs. the turnover man aged. 
For all three, the ROI will be in the range of one year in production.  
Currently all the evaluation of the NPs is done post-process. With the adoption of NanoPAT technologies, the characterization of 
NPs will be done in-line, saving costs from post-process characterization at R&D and production phase and reducing cycle times.  
In the case of ARKEMA, when applied in continuous process <1 year of product development is needed leading to ⁓9-12 M€ of 
expanses. Although NanoPAT would only partly reduce this cost, it will have a payback well below 5 years. Importantly, the 
development of NanoPAT technologies will support the transformation of a batch production process to a continuous one leading 
to significant advantages (as discussed previously) for ARKEMA.  
In case of EVONIK, during product development, one key parameter is matching the desired particle size properties, e. g. specific 
surface area which can be verified after the whole batch is processed, including filtration and drying. Despite intensive process 
knowledge, it occurs that , in the first run , the targets are not matched.  A new analytical method to determine  the particle size 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 31 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
distribution in -line would help to significantly increase the number of development batches which are within the desired 
specification at first time. That would lead to cost savings of the staff involved in the sampling, drying, filtration and testing of the 
test runs and therefore more valuable R&D outputs. The cost reduction is in the range of 20% allowing saving 500,000€ in 5 years 
leading to a ROI in 1-2 years. 
In case of DSM, in the R&D environment, the new technology will contribute to more insights of the polymerization reaction and 
possibly in better and new products (quantification of the return depending on the results of the project). In the manufactur ing 
environment, vs. the previously discussed cost savings in terms of heating costs, manufacturing etc. summing up to approx. 2 -5 
M € per year, the costs for installation of NanoPAT in production is estimated at 2.5 M €/onces (considering the investment i n at 
least 10 systems comprised of TUS, PDW and PAT platform software) will result in a “payback time” of 1-2 years. 
Quantifiable enhancement of the ability to control the quality and reliability of prod ucts, with consequent improvement of product 
lifetime and associated environmental benefits.  
A positive environmental will be gained in that after the installation of the monitoring equipment in the production lines, there will 
be increased control over the process. As such, less waste will be produced as the monitoring results will define which actions 
can/will be taken so that early intervention can be taken to resolve any detected default (e.g. improper size, agglomeration.), which 
previously would not have been spotted resulting in scrap, downgrading or rewo rking. Moreover, improved quality will translate 
into improved product reliability and in some cases even improved material properties (e.g. coatings with increased durabilit y/     
product lifetime). Another outcome of the monitoring process is the optimisation of the cycle time, whereby industry will no longer 
have to wait lengthy periods for characterisation of the NPs being synthesized, leading to a reduction in the energy footprint of the 
processes. In addition, the resulting process optimisation will  save resources not only in terms of raw materials (less scrap) but 
also in terms of water consumption, etc. Additionally, the gain in cycle time will directly transfer into reduced CO 2 emissions. The 
saving in energy and consumed resources are presented below.  
Table 8: Benchmarking of the current and future monitoring strategies in terms of sustainability  
Case study Environmental and resource benefits with NanoPAT technologies 
CS1: DSM, Polymers Energy savings of ⁓37TJ/year with CO2 reduction of ⁓ 1800 tones/year 
CS2: EVONIK, Silica Under assessment (linked to previously discussed cycle time reduction) 
CS3: FLU, HAp ⁓ 5k€ /year savings by reduction of input resources 
CS4: ARK, Zeolite The energy savings in energy resources in continuous process ⁓13.6 GWh/year, with up to 
50% reduction of raw materials and water consumption costs 
CS5: CNANO, Ceramic ⁓4 k€ /ton from disposal wastes costs ⁓20% year reduction of input resources (chemicals, 
additives, NPs). Reduction of the concentration of the NPs that end up in the wastes which 
needs further treatment with hazardous chemical processes 
 
Other expected impacts 
Social jobs creation 
NanoPAT will promote the creation of new jobs in the areas  of real -time nano -characterisation addressing a need of the 
manufacturing industry. Referring to CEFIC 35 the anticipated growth of sales generates more than 20 direct and 100 indirect 
additional jobs in Europe already by ARK. New employment will be generated thanks to the wide adoption of the novel techniques 
that will conclude in the creationN of new or upgraded value chains (embedding inline vs. offline monitoring solution providers) 
and creation of new SME startups. In summary, the target market is expec ted to be hailed as the next wave in our economic 
development, this also will positively affect the new Key Enabling Technology providers of the value chains and provide end users 
with unique opportunities for innovation, jobs creation, and growth. NanoPAT will promote the nanomaterials manufacturing value 
chain that will create a multidisciplinary technology-driven partnership strongly contributing to the creation of new jobs in the area 
of real-time in situ nanometrology. Assuming that an additional high-value permanent job will be created for every 80,000 € profit 
sustained annually thanks to the project‘s success, according to the project’s business plan, the estimated total direct job creation 
within the EC will be in the region of 170 new jobs within 5 years of project completion.  
Cross-Cutting Open Innovation  
NanoPAT addresses a major market shared by world -leading industrial (DSM, EVONIK, ARK) and leading SME (CNANO, FLU) 
end users, technology (IRIS, PDWA, DSC) and Innovation based SMEs (TEMAS OL, BNN). Thus, a major asset that NanoPAT 
can uniquely provide is its access to cross -cutting and multi-disciplinary innovation activities opening up a wealth of innovation 
                                                           
 
35 www.cefic.org (The European Chemical Industry Council)   
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 32 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
opportunities that more conventional organisations of institutions, cannot offer. Th is in turns results in complementarity of 
knowledge and technologies, especially in that the PAT software platform is a shared asset by all monitoring techniques and can 
fuse the data of several of them, research and industry cases included. This is the va lue proposition offered to the existing and 
future market potential. It is crucial for NanoPAT to develop and support highly effective knowledge transfer so that neither  time, 
nor finance is wasted. As an example, from 2018 onwards, UP started to boost its competences for innovation, entrepreneurship, 
and knowledge transfer by implementing Joint Lab -cooperations with partners from industry and selected users 36. These Joint 
Labs serve as open innovation test beds to foster the validation and prototyping of ne w developments with focus on 
nanotechnology, chemistry, biotechnology, optics and photonics, as well as physics. As a further focus, the RTOs having hosted 
NanoPAT downscaling trials will provide open test bed environments for new processes willing t o adopt inline nanomonitoring 
solutions (as will also be facilitated by the interaction with different clusters, EPPN in our AB and other open innovation test beds). 
Strengthening the competitiveness and growth of companies 
NanoPAT will ultimately contribute to: (A) encouraging material manufacturers, converters/end-users to work closely together by 
means of a structured and scalable approach enabled by a PAT systems with potential to be used at several steps of the value 
chain, (B) NanoPAT will work clos ely with EMMC to define metadata that are easily used for cross mining between them and 
embedding in a Software Platform which connects experimental data up to the execution of real scale trials – with the goal of 
implementing solutions in real application  scenarios and reduce market barriers , (C) enable different end users to benefit from 
easy access to advanced ICT tools, process and modelling approaches validating at a transversal market environment, (D) raise 
awareness and provide a solid marketing platform to extract, consolidate and broadcast the progress achieved towards the wider 
community of material, product manufacturers and research organisations in EU and beyond. 
Social acceptance of nanomaterials and NanoSafety 
NanoPAT will address occupational safety, as well as Safe-by-Design approaches in collaboration with the EU NanoSafety Cluster. 
BNN is active within the EU NanoSafety Cluster (member of coordination team, NSC working group E: Safer by Design, Innovation 
and Regulation) and will therefore promote Safe-by-Design for NanoPAT solutions which themselves are expected to contribute 
to lowering workers’ exposure to NPs during off lines controls. Safety assessment following the Safe -by-Design approach is 
promoted to boost innovation capacity by reducing late development failures. Moreover, this approach puts high impact by avoiding 
that consumer scepticism and the lack of confidence and acceptance of nanotechnology by the industry hinder the benefits of 
nano-enabled technologies. 
Barriers that might affect the achievement of the expected impacts 
The consortium has dedicated effort to examining all the possible factors and scenarios that might prevent us from reaching the 
project’s goals. The technical risks have been taken into consideration and contingency plans have been devised. According to  the 
technical risk analysis demonstrated in Section 3, even if a worst-case scenario result occurs, the activation of the contingency plans 
would still be superior to the state of the art. Of course, the possibility of this happening is really low, because the likelihood of these 
risks occurring has been reduced through the mitigations applied. Other fact ors like new EU legislation or policies that may change 
the market have also been examined. The project partners are requesting EU funding under the awareness of the commercial risks 
and barriers that might additionally affect the exploitation of NanoPAT. Possible barriers and obstacles are presented in Table 9. 
Table 9: Barriers 
Barrier How the project will help on its reduction 
Barrier 1: Lack of available 
infrastructures 
It is very challenging to install inline/online nano -monitoring systems directly from technology providers into a 
real industrial manufacturing environment. In addition, large industries, are not eager to stop their production 
lines and tests new monitoring solutions. As such the consortium has included RTOs with pilot line facilities to 
downscale the industrial process to ensure laboratory results can be transferred to pre -industrial level by 
developing robust characterization technologies. Indeed, such pilots are not always available to companies 
since their acquisition cost is high, require extra expertise in monitoring and control of lines. NanoPAT will 
provide a variety of flexible characterization processes e.g. PDW, OF2i a nd TUS for rapid characterization, 
monitoring and process optimization for the production of nanomaterials. For that reason, the implementation 
plan set for NanoPAT will advance the TRL scale from 4 to 6 by careful design and development of progressive 
nanometrology approaches, that will address and resolve any challenge before the application of the monitoring 
technologies to the production lines of the end users. The set -up methodology is expected to be readily 
replicable to other industry case studies. 
                                                           
 
36 www.uni-potsdam.de/de/innovative-hochschule/technologiecampus/projekte.html    
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 33 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Barrier 2: Need of 
expertise in 
characterization 
Characterization of materials and evaluation of the corresponding results is essential for developing and 
upscaling new and improving existing products. However, it is a common remark that this expertise exists mainly 
in universities and research centres who often are even performing the off line tests outsourced by the industry 
currently. NanoPAT experts will provide not only technological expertise, but also training on the use of the new 
nanometrology appr oaches, accurate and fast characterization methods along the manufacturing cycle of 
nanomaterials, to be operated especially through a user -friendly PAT platform software, combined with 
modelling techniques linking the crucial parameters of production steps with the final properties. 
Barrier 3: Industry needs 
standardization 
Standardization activities have an intrinsic impact towards nanometrology aspects that need to be carefully 
considered for the market deployment. 
Through Task 8.5, TEMASOL will explore all the necessary services related to standardization, compliance in 
order to assure existing regulatory framework and safety/nanosafety/standardization aspects of upscaling. 
Therefore, innovation management services will boost the technology  adaption of the industrial stakeholders. 
Participation in standardization activities and collaboration with standardization committees will therefore help 
to reduce any existing or future barrier from the standards side that could affect the project impact. Furthermore, 
the Standardization system constitutes in itself an efficient and fast information and knowledge transfer structure. 
Barrier 4: Industry 
acceptance/investm
ent 
Industry is constantly seeking more sustainable methods in the production of materials with enhanced properties 
or multifunctionality in order to widely satisfy the demands of end users. Multiple actions are expected to raise 
the investment interest of the industry: dissemination of the standard testing results; feasibility studies on  the 
techno – economic aspects of the materials production and usage.
2.2  Measures to maximise impact 
 
NanoPAT will address all issues related to dissemination, exploitation, management of intellectual property, data management and 
communication activities at the earliest possible stage. The dissemination and exploitation of the project’s results , as well as the 
management of knowledge and intellectual property , are critical issues , not only for the success of the project , but also for the 
protection as relevant of the knowledge and results generated by each of the consortium partners.  
 
Therefore, it is of the utmost importance to develop a strategy with clear and robust policies at the earliest stages of the project. First 
of all, a consortium agreement will be drawn up, accepted and signed by the partners, which will further address all issues of ownership 
and use of Intellectual Property, including “IPR for the Results of the project”, “foreground” and “background” knowledge  in order to 
support the information contained in this document. Moreover, an Exploitation Plan (Task 8.2) has already  been created and will be 
constantly updated so that it encompasses all the progress that is made during the project. Finally, a dissemination plan has  also 
been prepared with input from all partners and will be updated during the project. Further analysis is provided in the fol lowing 
subsections. 
 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 34 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
a) Dissemination and exploitation of results 
Dissemination strategy 
Dissemination activities will begin in the 
early stages of the project (M1) . Already, 
we have worked on designing a detailed 
dissemination plan , and will be further  
elaborated on and advanced to ensure we 
reach the largest groups possible with the 
aim of inform EU stakeholders about the 
NanoPAT project’s objectives and results.  
Dissemination activities will aim at paving 
the way towards the future market 
penetration of the NanoPAT concept and 
to ensure the successful exploitation of the 
project outputs (see Draft Business plan). 
Moreover, the consortium members will 
promote the p roject’s approach and 
encourage interested stakeholders to 
adopt the solution s developed. 
Dissemination will address different target 
groups at various levels and actions 
across European, national, regional, and 
local geographies, especially since nanomanufacturing is strongly supported within the framework of the Smart Specialization (RIS3). 
The dissemination strategy will build on a clear understanding of the characterization methods regarding the production of 
nanomaterials through its stakeholders (e.g. end users of various value chains). The effectiveness of the proposed approach will also 
be guaranteed thanks to the presence in our consortium of important players representing the NanoPAT value chain and who can 
take leverage their networks of contacts to raise awareness. For an effective public outreach, both standard dissemination activities 
dedicated to public information, and more targeted engagement activities- where dialogue (communication) and alliances are created-
, dynamically co-exist.  
The strategic steps in our dissemination approach are depicted in the figure above. Step by step, the methodology includes (a) the 
definition of the subject to be disseminated, (b) the identification of the target audiences that will be interested in, or could impact from, 
project results and findings, (c) the definition of the most effectives ways (methods, channels and tools) to reach the audience, (d) the 
most appropriate time to disseminate, and (e) the dissemination policy and rules. In line wi th the EC Guidelines , dissemination 
activities will include all the best practices that have been successfully tested to date by the experienced partners in other projects.  
 The results and/or reports will be reviewed and sent to the relevant partners of t he project before being published or 
disseminated.  
 On a bi-monthly basis there will be an informative public file to promote the forthcoming events to the partners  
 All the consortium members will contribute to the project activities and will be informed about the final outcomes and the 
implication stemming from project results 
 All public results will be accessible from the project website and usable by all parties who could benefit from them 
 
 
Table 10: Dissemination outline and strategy 
Item Description 
Target 
Audiences 
Specialized audience (scientific and technical); general public; engineers; chemists, technology industry; policy 
makers, regulatory bodies; stakeholders from value chain (machine manufacturers, material providers, chemical 
companies, end users from chemical sectors and other processing industries, etc.) 
Key messages Nanometrology enhancing the production yield and product quality applied by easy procedures in existing 
industrial environments, Real-time in situ NP size characterisation technologies, In/on line process monitoring 
operating full--scale industrial environment. Facilitating the use of Nanotechnology in applied market sectors. 
Dissemination 
channels 
Scientific publications in peer review journals; publications in technical journals (e.g. polymer and nanomaterial 
science); engagement activities; Conferences;  social networks; school classes, press releases; poster 
presentations in conferences; marketing material; videos; e-newsletters. 
Figure 24: Dissemination roadmap 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 35 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 
A dissemination plan targeting these groups and adequate for diffusing the strategic impacts of the project has been designed and 
will be coordinated on a regular basis between all partners. The plan will identify information about events that are relevant and 
important for the project and are in line with the proposed dissemination strategy in each case. For a maximum dissemination impact, 
specific information for the target groups will be produced taking into account the needs/interests and scientific background  in each 
case. All partners will actively contribute in order to meet the target KPIs for dissemination (Table 12). 
Table 11: Dissemination strategy targeted groups 
Category Target group 
Industry 1) Producers/Providers of raw materials, including chemicals and processing industrie s, 2) Providers of 
characterization machines and process solutions (e.g. equipment providers and manufacturers), 3) ICT 
sector (software and hardware) 4) Companies involved in synthesis, formulation and scaling up of 
processes, 5) End users in the fields o f polymers, chemicals and metal manufacturing sector and other 
associated sectors, 6) Research centres and Universities  and 7) High technology SMEs interested in 
adopting new technologies starting new business models. 
General public Environmental NGOs, citizen organizations, students, individual citizens, Non for  Profit organizations, 
Schools, public initiatives. 
Research & education 
communities 
Universities and research centres, participants in related EU projects, research societies, Academia, 
Research institutes, applied technology, open innovation hubs, clusters (EMMC, EMCC, NanoSafety, A 
SPIRE, OITBs, etc.). 
Regulatory authorities Ministries, organisations, associations, regulatory authorities, NGOs, ISO. 
Media Magazines, social networks, websites, web, TV, local TV stations, newspapers, radio stations. 
Private sector Supply/service chain (converters of nanoenabled materials, contracting surface finishing and plating 
shops, in -house facilities, raw material providers, nano -particle producers, end users), Sector 
associations, investment groups.  
Policy makers Authorization and permitting bodies, regulators, standardization bodies. 
Public bodies European and regional authorities. 
 
A draft Dissemination Roadmap has already been developed (Figure 24) and will be updated frequently during the implementation 
of the project. Based on this roadmap, adequate indicators (Dissemination KPIs) for measuring the impact of the dissemination carried 
out are also shown (Table 12). 
 
Table 12: NanoPAT Dissemination Roadmap activities and relevant KPIs  
Dissemination 
activity 
Target audience* Expected Impact Measure/Target (KPIs) 
Project Website GP HT, TC, EU, 
RNA, BIC, RC 
Awareness of the NanoPAT 
project and its scope 
- 50 visits per day after year 3 
- Receive 5 emails via website per week 
Printed material HT, TC, EU, BIC, 
GP, RC 
Attract interest from industry, 
including equipment 
manufacturers as well as end 
users  
- Development of 10 printed concepts (leaflets, 
posters) 
- Distribution of 2000 leaflets at events 
- Expression of interest from 150 stakeholders 
Presence in 
social me dia 
(SM) 
HT, TC, EU, BIC,  Attract interest of industry and 
connect with stakeholders ’ 
pages and accounts in Social 
Media (SM) 
- 1000 connections in LinkedIn account by end of 
project 
- 5 posts per month in social media accounts 
Videos posted in 
website, 
YouTube 
GP, HT, TC, EU, 
RC 
Attract interest of industry and 
investors by showing the 
capacity of NanoPAT  
- 2 videos presenting the manufacturing lines of 
NanoPAT (videos of integrated nanometrology 
tools & success end user test cases) 
Press Releases GP, RC, RC, PM Awareness of the NanoPAT and 
capacities of it 
- 2 issues per year in printed publications 
- 2 releases in TV in 3 different countries 
Participation in 
events 
RC, BIC, HT, TC, 
EU, RNA, PM 
Liaison with stakeholders and 
present NanoPAT  
- Participation in 30 events (fairs, conferences, etc) 
during the project, having booths in at least 3 of 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 36 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
them 
*HT: High-tech companies, TC: Tech companies, EU: End Users, RNA: Regional networks and accelerators, PM: Policy makers, 
BIC: Broader innovation community, GP: General Public, RC: Research Community. 
A number of target conferences and tradeshows, as well as peer-reviewed journals to disseminate project results over the course of 
the project have already been identified and presented in the Dissemination Plan next table.  
 
Table 13: Dissemination Plan  
Main dissemination  
instrument 
Type* Expected impact/Size of audience Measure/ Target 
(KPIs) 
Dissemination through Exhibitions, Conferences, Demonstrations at leading trade fairs 
Trade fairs / exhibitions: * Demonstration for all relevant stakeholders. Presentation of 
project results in at 
least 4 exhibitions 
ACHEMA I, 
SC, 
PM, 
IN 
One of the largest global flagship forum s for the chemical process 
industry. The ACHEMA worldwide approach with its focus on emerging 
markets gives this forum a regional platform in the world's most dynamic 
growth region.  
Sensors Europe 2020 I, 
SC, 
PM, 
IN 
IDTechEx Show. Sensors Europe is the meeting and show empowering 
the commercialisation of problematic sensor advancements, attended 
by 2500 professionals and 200 exhibitors - material providers and 
segment suppliers. 
Industry conferences:  Size of audience: 8 presentations 
(oral or poster)  NanoTexnology I, 
SC, 
PM, 
IN 
NANOTEXNOLOGY explores the opportunities in the emerging fields of 
Nanotechnologies, it brings together over 2000 researchers, scientists, 
engineers, business, technical and policy professionals annually.  
NANOMETROLOGY I, 
SC, 
PM 
Today's global economy depends on reliable measurements and tests, 
which are trusted and accepted internationally. The conference is 
annually attended by more than 1000 professionals and key industrial 
actors and companies. 
International Conference 
on Physics, 
Nanotechnology and 
Nanometrology ICPNN 
I, SC The International Research Conference is a federated organization 
dedicated to bringing together a significant number of diverse scholarly 
events. The attendance is around 1000 professionals including 
sponsors and stakeholders.  
Nanotech France I, SC The conference provides an unprecedented opportunity to discover 
innovation in the area of nanotechnology and new business 
opportunities. It is among the most im portant events in terms of 
international regulatory policies and it is open to the participation of 
private companies. 
Platforms, clusters, 
associations: 
* Members (Goals) Project 
presentation in at 
least 6 events 
from technological 
platforms, clusters 
or associations 
during the project 
A.SPIRE (IRIS, ARK, 
EVONIK, DSM) 
I, 
SC, 
PM 
A.SPIRE is the European Association it represents innovative process 
industries, 20% of the total European manufacturing sector in  
employment and turnover, and more than 130 industrial and research 
ETPN I, 
SC, 
PM, 
IN 
The European Technology Platform on Nanomedicine (ETPN) was 
established in 2005 as a joint venture of the European Commission and 
CEOs of large industrial companies, SMEs and academic research 
institutions to investigate and advance joint activities in the area of 
nanotechnology in medicine. 
NanoSafetyCluster 
(BNN) 
I, 
SC, 
PM 
The EU NanoSafety Cluster maximises the synergies between 
European-level projects addressing the safety of materials and 
technologies enabled by the use of nanoparticles. 
Conferences on innovation management 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 37 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Innovation, Management 
and Technology 
Conference 
I, 
SC, 
PM 
FR: Premier interdisciplinary platform for technology providers to 
present innovations, trends, adopted by Innovation, Management and 
Technology. 
Project 
presentation in at 
least 4 events 
during the project ISPIM INNOVATION 
CONFERENCE 
I, 
SC, 
PM 
DE: 700 innovation professionals, 50 countries 250+ presentations with 
innovation management insights from industry  
Dissemination with other research projects 
Networking with other 
H2020 as listed in Sect
1.3 
SC, 
PM 
Cross fertilization of results through joined workshops and meetings. 
Liaison with related projects in similar fields. 
5 related projects 
for synergies 
NanoPAT workshops I, 
SC, 
PM, 
PU 
Engaging dialogue between researchers, EU, national policy makers 
and other stakeholders (the impact of these results for end -users, the 
society, research with an outlook on the future, scientific and 
technological aspects). Size of audience: < 100 
2 workshops  
(TEMASOL, BNN) 
for at least 50 
participants 
* I: Industry, SC: Scientific Community, PM: Policy makers, PU: Public, IN: Investors 
Journals related with NanoPAT 
Journal Impact factor Journal Impact factor 
Journals on Materials and structures 
ACS Nano 13,709 Applied Nanoscience 2.951 
NANO LETTERS 12,080 Nanomaterials And Nanotechnology 1.730 
Nanomaterials 3504 Chemical Engineering Journal 8.365 
Applied Surface Science 4439 ChemNanoMat 3.173 
Business Management related Journals 
Creativity And Innovation 
Management 
2.015 Journal Of Entrepreneurship, Management 
And Innovation 
3.905 
Journal Of Innovation 
Management 
2.305 Innovation-Management Policy & Practice 0.955 
 
Standardization activities: A dedicated Task 8.5 is included to facilitate the consortium to make use of existing standards and to 
contribute to generating new ones. This helps to guarantee that the results will respect existing practices, enhance interope rability, 
and reach better market applications. Moreover, promoting the research results to be included into future standards (e.g. in terms of 
nanometrology) can facilitate the market uptake of the innovations. To this end, standardization activities are considered as a valuable 
tool for suppo rting the exploitation of the project outcomes, by facilitating future replicability and widest use and reducing market 
acceptance risks. The bidirectional implication of corresponding technical committees at international, European and national levels 
will ensure that any information available for immediate widespread dissemination, is channelled to the interested stakeholders in 
every country. 
Data management plan 
Partners have given due consideration to issues related 
to the management of research data with a view to 
ensuring data security, accessibility and validation of 
results. In addition, we aim to ensure that the funding and 
regulatory body requirements are met, and the research 
data remains accurate, authentic, reliable and complete. 
A data management plan will be drawn up as part of a 
concrete research data management strategy, which will 
minimize possible duplication of effort and the risk of data 
loss and will offer integrity to the data. In turn, the research 
efficiency will increase, time and resources will be saved 
in the long term and compliance with practices conducted 
in industry and commerce will be achieved.  
The data management plan will describe plans for creating, organizing, documenting, storing and sharing data. It will take into account 
issues such as data protection and confidentiality, data preservation and curation and will provide a framework that will sup port 
Figure 25: Data Management Plan strategy of the project 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 38 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
researchers and their data throughout the course of their research and beyond. It will be constantly updated describing what kind of 
research data will be generated and potentially what policies apply to the data. Funding and legal policies and data manageme nt 
practices as backups, storage, access control, archiving will be determined as well. It will be clear who will own and have access to 
what data and who will be responsible for each aspect of the plan. Moreover, partners will clearly describe which data will retain value 
after the end of the project and how its reuse will be enabled and how the long-term preservation ensured after the original research 
is completed. While opting into the Open Research Data Pilot, in particular the academic partners will share research data generated 
allowing others to replicate, validate, or correct their results, thereby improving the scientific record, which will be facilitated  by the 
definition of metadata in NanoPAT (WP7). The different process and monitoring data from the industrial partners will be screened in 
case some could, after an optional anonymisation, be made available in open access data basis (under a license). This will increase 
the research’s integrity and replication, as those who make use of their data and cite it in their own research and will disseminate the 
results possibly in other disciplines, sectors, and countries. Moreover, in the future partners will be able to identify, ret rieve, and 
understand the data themselves after they have lost familiarity with it, perhaps several years hence. Partners will not share specific 
parts of their research data if this could jeopardise the achievement of the project's main objectives. Moroever, they will also not share 
data for which they do not have the legal right to share, for example, maybe because parts of them belong to other authors or entities.  
Knowledge Management and IPR Protection 
Consortium Agreement: A Consortium Agreement (CA) will be agreed and signed before the signature of the Grant Agreement and 
prior the commencement in order to further define the important points necessary for obtaining the best possible management of the 
project (financial conditions, IPR, planning). The DESCA H2020 template will be used as a reference. Based on the CA definition, the 
main guidelines for IPR management will be defined, in keeping with the content of this bid . As one of the keys for project success, 
the background knowledge of each of the partners that may be used to achieve the project objectives will be updated as necessary 
from Table 15 belo w, along with the measures for dealing with the use of Intellectual Property  according to H2020 rules and the 
measures already established at proposal preparation stage . Moreover, the consortium agreement will build on the key steps that 
need to be taken for the optimal management and exploitation of the project.  
The Training, Communication & Dissemination Manager, the IPR & Innovation Manager, and the Data & Exploitation Manager will be 
responsible for the management and exploitation of Intellectual Prope rty Rights (IPR). The IPR  & Innovation Manager will evaluate 
under the innovation management plan actions related to technology transfer promoting all technologies validated to existing 
customers of the consortium members and also identifying additional re lated stakeholders. Following a recent search, it has been 
concluded that the proposed technology does not contravene any existing patents (see section 1.4). During project meetings, the 
internal results will be reviewed with the goal of identifying import ant ideas and defining an individual strategy for the positioning of 
these ideas in the standardization, training and commercialization processes.  
The following principles will regulate the aforementioned issues: 
Management of knowledge and foreground IPR: The consortium agreement will ensure the protection of the Intellectual Property 
of all existing partners and products. The IPR arising from the results of the project will be the property of the partner(s) that has(have) 
developed it. However, knowledge needed for the completion of the project will be made accessible among partners. Procedures and 
tools that will be produced will remain with their respective owners for exploitation. If the results of the project are eligible for patenting, 
actions will be  taken at the earliest possible date. In cases of joint inventions, the ownership will be shared in accordance with a 
notified agreement. In order to ensure clear and efficient project management and communication, the Project Coordinator (PC)  will 
establish internal web resources for communication among the partners and for the dissemination and transfer of knowledge and 
information as required. All project participants will cooperate in order to reach the most efficient process of knowledge management. 
The know-how exchanged between the partners may include, in certain cases, background knowledge (Table 15). Finally, the partners 
agree on the principles for the management of intellectual property. 
Strategy on the availability of research data: The “open access” model will be followed for all scientific publications resulting from 
the project. Partners’ will maximize public and researcher access. In this way, free universal access will be given immediately upon 
publication for academics - and the public alike- to the final published versions of articles. It has been agreed amongst the project 
partners to investigate the possibility of opting the Open-source, License free and maintainable model for the developed technologies 
in order to ensure re -use, maintainability and further development by the entire research and industrial community. Project results, 
which will be provided as open -source components, will be protected under open source licenses, while the project results that will 
be commercially exploited will be copyright-protected.  
Patents Submission: If considered appropriate the “results” IP on new prototypes/products/processes/software etc. developed will 
be patented in Europe and in any relevant region of the world.  
Rules for governing access rights for the jointly executed research: Partners working together for achieving specific objectives 
of the project will enjoy access rights to (A) The knowledge arising from work carried out under the joint activities and (B)  The pre-
existing know-how of the other participants when it is necessary for the project implementation. 
Background IPR: Each partner has performed an initial identification of t he Background knowledge (as per Table 15). Background 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 39 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
IPR will remain the property of the Originator Company or organisation. However, where needed, during the period of the project, all 
“background” knowledge belonging to the partners and established as  necessary for carrying out the project  will be made available 
for use by any other partner of the con sortium. Access rights will be granted royalty -free by the owning partner. In terms of post -
project exploitation, access will be once again granted by the owning partner, either royalty -free or by charging a license fee under 
reasonable terms, promoting in that way the post project collaboration among partners. For better protection of the knowledge shared, 
a Non-Disclosure Agreement could be signed between the involv ed partners. Finally, all knowledge will be managed in accordance 
with the Grant Agreement and a Consortium Agreement. 
  
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 40 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 
 
Table 14: Background knowledge of NanoPAT Partners  
No. Name Background 
1 IRIS Optical monitoring devices, including characterization of nanostructured material. Artificial intelligence for 
process optimization. Platforms design, including the integration of the software/hardware and the user friendly 
interface. Proprietary PATBox software for generic PAT applications. DSS service based on Machine Learning 
pending to be patented. 
2 UP UP's research and innovation centre innoFSPEC (www.innofspec.de) pursues multidisciplinary research in the 
field of optical fibre spectroscopy and sensing, of new, sophisticated fibre -optical sensors and their 
implementation in physical, chemical, or biote chnological processes in real -world scenarios, often at industrial 
partner sites. To NanoPAT they bring their deep knowledge if Inline fibre -optical PDW spectroscopy that is 
registered globally (PCT/EP 2008/007828), EU2040050.  
3 MUG The MUG offers cutting-edge technology in Mass Spectroscopy, Ultrastructure Analysis as well as general and 
special laboratory facilities including cell culture and tissue facilities. Their background knowledge is positioned 
on the owned EU-Patent: „Method and device for analysing a fluidic sample with dispersed particles“, EP 17 178 
099.2 
4 UPV Experts on synthesis of novel polymers,  polymerization reaction engineering, membranes, polymers for 
electronic, energy storage and biomedical applications, rheology and polymer pr ocessing. More specifically, 
world-class expertise on polymerisation in dispersed media with special emphasis on waterborne systems.  
5 ZHAW Expertise in performing inline particle size measurements for zeolite synthesis in lab scale under hydrothermal 
conditions, experience with PDW spectroscopy.  
6 PDWA The only commercial source of Photon Density Wave spectrometers worldwide, IP licensed from UP 
7 DSC Analysis and scale-up of complex industrial processes using different advanced numerical tools. 
8 DSM Supplier and leader of innovative high -quality resins solutions for paints and coatings and fiber optic coatings. 
DSM supports the coating industry with resins that allow the manufacture and application of sustainable coating 
technologies.  
9 EVONI
K 
 Emphasizing at the business line of Silica is one of the world’s leading manufacturers of high-quality silica and 
other metal oxides and particle design is the core competence of the business line Silica.  
10 FLU Well recognized and specialized manufactur er and supplier of synthetic nano -hydroxyapatite and tricalcium 
phosphate materials marketed as nanoXIM. 
11 ARK Global manufacturer of zeolites, mostly for adsorption applications with 2 production sites and a research facility. 
ARK has several zeolites on its portfolio with continuous and batch production pilot equipment  
12 CNAN
O 
Expertise in electrodeposition of Ni- and Ni-P composite coatings utilizing organic additives in their formulations 
for stabilization of the baths.  
13 TEMAS (TERMINATED) Engaged in technology transfer, with target groups are SMEs and larger industries, as well as 
research teams, public authorities, promotion agencies, business associations and interest groups. 
14 BNN Experts in nanotoxicology, sensor te chnology, as well as medicine. Standardisation and regulatory aspects of 
nanotechnology (e.g., safety data sheets, REACH context, etc.). 
15 EXEL Experts in innovation management, patent search and marketing and training activities 
16 TEMAS
OL 
Engaged in technology transfer, with target groups are SMEs and larger industries, as well as research teams, 
public authorities, promotion agencies, business associations and interest groups 
 
Table 15: Background knowledge of NanoPAT Partners  
Expected Key 
exploitable results 
(KER) 
Expected 
exploitable 
items 
Targeted Market 
Expected 
Foreground 
Holders (IP) 
Exploitation route 
KER1: Photon Density 
Wave (PDW) 
spectroscopy 
Monitoring 
Technique 
Polymer 
dispersions, silica 
and zeolites 
PDWA 
      
i) Direct sales of systems. ii) Maintenance services. 
iii) Favourable agreements for NanoPAT end users 
(EVONIK, ARK, DSM) by providing discounts on 
devices. 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 41 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
KER2: OptoFluidic 
force induction (OF2i) 
Monitoring 
Technique 
Hydroxyapatite, 
Ceramic (SiC, 
TiO2) particle 
suspension 
MUG 
 
i) MUG will create a spin off, undertaking direct 
sales of the system ii) Collaborative research in 
research and industrial project. ii) Technical 
assistance services. iii) Favourable agreements for 
NanoPAT end users (Fluidinova,  CNANO) by 
providing discounts on devices. 
KER3: Turbidity 
spectrometry (TUS) 
Monitoring 
Technique 
Polymer 
dispersions, Silica 
and 
Ceramic 
nanoparticles 
IRIS 
 
i) Direct sales to end -users, ii) Commercial 
agreements with external 3 rd parties, iii) Licensing 
to industrial partner(s) for sell and 
commercialization end users (EVONIK, DSM, 
CNANO) will benefit from discounts on machines. 
KER4: Combined 
monitoring Technique 
(KER1-3) 
Compleme
ntary 
Monitoring 
Technique 
Cross sectorial 
applications 
combining 
previous KERs 
PDWA, 
MUG, IRIS 
i) co owned spin off ii) Collaborative research in 
research and industrial project. ii) Technical 
assistance services. iii) Licensing to companies.  
KER5: PAT Software 
Platform with 
embedded DSS 
Software 
Platform 
Material 
manufacturers 
IRIS i) Software commercialization , ii) licensing to 
PDWA and MUG spin off to be able to serve it with 
their monitoring systems, iii) expansion to other 
sectors and nanomonitoring techniques 
KER6: Process 
Modelling & Simulation 
methodology 
Simulation 
Software 
Material 
manufacturers, 
engineers 
DSC i) Further internal research, collaborative research, 
ii) Commercialization of Simulation Software, ii) 
Implementation in own company/ internal 
exploitation 
KER7: NanoPAT end 
products/Processes 
Improved 
Processes 
Pharmaceuticals, 
Cosmetics, 
Construction, 
Automotive 
FLU, ARK, 
EVONIK, 
CNANO, 
DSM 
i) Sales of Polymers, silica and zeolites, 
Hydroxyapatite, ceramic particle suspensions in 
electrolytes with improved qualit y, ii) Internal 
product development, iii) Technical services for 
materials manufacturing industry 
 
Draft Business Plan 
Based on the above mentioned expected Key Exploitable Results ( Table 15), a draft business plan has been drawn up by the 
NanoPAT consortium. This business plan will be further developed, actualised and customized based on the needs and expectation 
of each of the partners, which the aim of delivering the maximum benefit for each of the participants, as well as for the wider European 
Nanotechnology Industry (WP 8). 
Business Model Canvas: 
 
The NanoPAT partners have already defined initial business plans that will be further developed and finalized during the project. To 
simplify the process, a Business Model Canvas has been designed and is presented below including all the aspects of the value 
chain. During the project, each partner will continue with the updating of individualized business plans, under the activities of WP8. 
Each industrial partner with established sales network and distribution channels will approach the relative market. Thus, for  each 
partner involved, it will be necessary to identify the total number of potential customers based on the current trends of the market. The 
new monitoring systems and software , as well as the improved end -user processes and products will present technical and 
commercial advantages which will be exploited during and after the project.  
 
Table 16: Canvas Business model for NanoPAT  
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 42 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 
 
SWOT & PEST analysis: 
The NanoPAT consortium members have lengthy experience in their market fields , and especially concerning the utilization of real 
time characterization techniques for nanomaterials manufacturing. The consortium has discussed the NanoPAT concept at length 
and have analysed the internal and external factors that could influence or have an effect on NanoPAT, as well as the external macro 
environment in which the characterization methods will be positioned. The following table presents the SWOT and PEST analysis, 
where it has been concluded that the concept of the NanoPAT approach is aligned absolutely with forces of change affecting its 
positioning environment.  
Table 17: SWOT and PEST analysis of the NanoPAT concept  
  The SWOT-PEST analysis  
Strengths 
- Strong technological and 
upscaling capacity for providing 
nano characterization  
- Real time monitoring  
- Central data acquisition and 
processing 
- Cross sectoral new market 
approaches and opportunities 
Weaknesses 
- New concept with 
uncertain acceptance 
- Further Investments are 
required 
-  Necessity of strong IPR 
policy  
Political 
- European strategic goals for 
global com petition in key 
enabling technologies [37] 
- EU policy and legislation for 
nanomaterials [38] 
- Regional and local 
legislation  
- Special focus of EC and 
governments on the use of 
nanomaterials in health 
sector 
Economic 
-  Availability of funds for 
investments through national or 
EC grants 
- Relative low cost of machinery 
and real time monitoring 
- Favourable environment in 
Europe for investing in new 
technologies (e.g. tax -
reductions in specific countries) 
                                                           
 
37  https://ec.europa.eu/growth/induurestry/policy/key-enabling-technologies/european-strategy_en 
38  https://publications.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/be32dfc7-1499-4328-b54f-a9f024805f59/language-en 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 43 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Opportunities 
- Provide solutions and se rvices 
for additional manufacturers of 
nanomaterials- market need is 
currently unmet   
- Clustering with relevant industry 
stakeholders and associations 
-  Extremely high market 
potential with growing trends 
- Scope of product line expansion 
Threats 
- Threat of new entrance of 
competitors in the EU 
market 
-  Fuzzy regulatory context 
concerning nanomaterials 
- Materials manufacturers 
are relatively reluctant to 
accept new technologies 
Social 
-Multidisciplinary professions 
(technician, scientists, IT, 
etc) and jobs will be created 
-After the installation of the 
monitoring configuration, 
faster inline monitoring 
methods will be sold to the 
market benefiting the 
customers  
Technological 
- Upscaling of manufacturing 
lines of nanomaterials due to 
rapid real time monitoring  
- Materials and processes 
logistics 
- Knowledge transfer from 
technological solutions 
providers and pilot lines to 
industrial processes 
 
Market/Competitors Analysis & Segmentation 
The Global Nanoparticles Market is 
expected to reach 106 bn € by 2025, from 
70.3 bn € in 2018, growing at a CAGR of 
5.5% during the forecast period of 2018 to 
2025 [ 39] This boost in the use of 
nanoparticles intensifies the need for 
methods able to provide fast and accurate 
in-line monitoring and characterization of 
nanoparticles in industrial processes. 
Indeed, the global nanometrology market 
size valued at 573.7 million Euro in 2016, 
is registering a CAGR of 7.3% over the 
next 6 years 1. The m arket is gaining 
prominence owing to increased demand 
across industrial, chemical, automotive, 
medical and pharmaceutical among other 
end-use sectors. This rise in demand can 
be attributed to growing adherence to 
international quality standards for better 
services and products to imp rove the materials performance and optimize processes. The rise in international quality standard s for 
precision and quality management across the supply chains results in demand for nanometrology equipment and services 40. The 
consortium has already conducted market search and the Geographical market distribution as well as global competitors have been 
identified (Figure 2.2)41. More specifically, the nanometrology market in Europe is expected to be one of the leading markets, whereby 
in coming years it will meet a fast development of inventions and patent filing rates42. The demand for new nanometrology approaches 
will result in exponential growth moving towards the maturity stage where new market opportunities will be established. The North 
American market for nanometrology is a competing market and in its growing phase, the national metrology institutes of most 
industrialized economies are developing nanometrology infrastructures for dimensional measurements. A Patsnap Discovery market 
search has been conducted to map the global market situation of nanometrology and is presented in  Figure 27.The major 
players/competitors in the industrial metrology market include Accu-scope (US), Leica (DE), Olympus (US), Glenammer (UK), Keison 
(UK), Precision Eforming (US), Hexagon (SE), FARO Technologies (US), Carl Zeiss Optotechnik (DE), Jenoptik (DE), and Creaform 
(CA).  
Eventually, the entire spectrum of measurements, including electrical, optical, magnetic, mechanical, chemical and biological  
measurements, will be part of these nanometrological infrastruct ures and advances have to be achieved to penetrate in this Key 
Enabling Market. It is evident that the sector is very fragmented as the needs are very variable, since large players may be less flexible 
to provide and integrate custom-made solutions that exactly suit specific industry needs. Nano Metrology market segmentation has 
                                                           
 
39 “Nanoparticles Market Global Market Share, Trends, Segmentation & Forecast to 2025”, Ustramedia.com, August 2019  
40 https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/metrology-services-market  
41 https://discovery.patsnap.com 
42 Nano Metrology Market Research Report - Forecast to 2027, ID: MRFR/ME/0286-HCRR | May, 2019 | Region: Global | 110 pages 
| Half-Cooked Research Reports 
Figure 26: Geographical distribution of nanometrology sector43. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 27: Global major players of nanometrology sector6 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 44 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
been performed and it can be split into three main categories of segmentation by: (A) product type: (B) application; and, (C) monitoring 
technique. 
 
NanoPAT technologies will revolutionize this demanding market as they will offer an inline /online, real time monitoring and 
characterization capacity. The real -time monitoring is particular ly important in both for both nanoparticles producers as well as 
processing industries utiliz ing nanoparticles in their production lines. On time detection of the nanoparticles status can have a 
significant positive impact on the preservation of raw materials (increased efficiency of processes) as well as on the quality of the final 
products (nanoparticles or nano -enabled products). NanoPAT has recognized that nanoparticle producers utilizing wet production 
methods (both industry and research institutes) is the primary market for the new systems, while processing industry utilizin g 
nanoparticles (e.g. pharmaceuticals, paints and coatings, catalysis as illustrated below among many others) constitute the secondary 
market. An outline of the targeted markets is provided as follows: 
Nanoparticles Producers: As mentioned, the nanoparticles market is estimated to surpass €100bn by 2024. More specifically , wet 
methods of production (e.g. precipitation processes and sol-gel methods) represent 42% of the total production of nanoparticles. [43] 
Pharmaceuticals: The global pharmaceutical market will exceed 1 .5 trillion € by 2023 , growing at a 3−6% CAGR over the next five 
years. However, according to Coherent Market Insights, the global nanopharmaceuticals market was valued at 25.6 bn € in 2017, and 
is projected to exhibit a CAGR of 22.1% over the forecast period (2018 – 2026). [44]  
Nano paints and coatings : Nano paints and coatings provides complete protection from heat, UV rays, corrosion, and wear due to 
presence of nano particles. The increasing technological advancement such as in military and defence will have increasing application 
of nanotechnology-based paints and coatings. Such factors tend to drive the growth of the market. Other sectors of economy like 
construction, automotive, marine, rail, aviation and packaging , among others, provide immense opportunities for the application of 
nano paints and coatings majorly in the developing regions of the world. Goldstein Research analyst forecast that the global nano 
paints & coatings industry is expected to grow at a CAGR of 4.1% during 2017-2025 period. [45] 
Catalysis: The global catalyst market is expected to grow from 21.8 bn € in 2017 to USD 32.1 bn € by 2025, at a CAGR of 4.91% 
during the forecast period from 2018-2025. Rising demand from the end user industries such as petroleum refinery, chemical synthesis 
industry as well as polymer and petrochemical industry are fuelling the market growth. More specifically , the global market for 
nanocatalysts is forecast to reach 7.6 bn € by 2024, driven by the important role occupied by catalysis in the field of chemi stry and 
the opening up of a new era in green chemistry46. 
Financial Projections: 
In addition to the afore discussed market analysis, the NanoPAT consortium has also conducted a search concerning the number of 
companies and research institutes that could be interested in the technologies offered by the project. Based on the findings through 
search in different websites and commercial catalogues concerning nanotechnology companies (e.g. www.nanowerk.com, 
www.azonano.com, www.crunchbase.com, www.statnano.com, www.nanotech-now.com, www.understandingnano.com), an 
estimation of the targeted markets in numbers was made. The result is that NanoPAT products could be addressed to ~3500 
commercial companies and ~2400 research institutes and academia, leading to a total of ~6000 potential customers. This is a rather 
modest estimation as it is based on entities registered in online catalogues. Nevertheless, the consortium has used these estimations 
as the basis for drawing up draft financial projections. The following assumptions have been made: 
 The estimated commercial prices for the developed monitoring systems will be: 
TUS: 95,000€ and 2000€ for annual maintenance 
PDW: 100,000€ and 2500€ for annual maintenance 
OF2i: 102,000€ and 2500€ for annual maintenance 
 Inflation rate of 2.5% per year 
                                                           
 
43 Tzuzuki, T. (2009). Commercial scale production of inorganic nanoparticles. Int. J. Nanotechnol, Vol. 6 
44 https://www.bloomberg.com/press-releases/2019-02-15/global-nanopharmaceuticals-market-to-surpass-us-168-91-billion-by-2026 
45 https://www.goldsteinresearch.com/report/nano-paints-market-coatings-industry  
46  “Rapid demand from refineries, petrochemical, and environmental sectors drives the global nanocatalysts market”, Global industry analysts Inc, 
May 2019. 
by product type by Application by techniques type 
Microscopes, particle size 
analysis equipment, Sieves, 
Surface area analysis 
equipment, scanning mobility 
particle sizers 
Commodity Chemicals, Automotive, 
Aerospace, Industry, Food Industry, 
Polymers, Computer Science Industry, 
Transport Industry, Pharmaceuticals, 
cosmetics, Coatings, Security 
XPS (X -Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy), 
Raman Spectroscopy, Photoluminescence 
Spectroscopy, Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS), 
photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS) 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 45 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 Initial penetration rates based on existing clientele and projected marketing/dissemination activities  (according to the 
expected respective compatibility to a more or less broad range of materials): 
o TUS: 0.1% 
o PDW: 0.08% 
o OF2i: 0.15% (assumed greater due to ability to measure shape and size) 
 The PAT platform is a support for the different systems. A client that might purchase 2 or even 3  systems, will just need to 
purchase the PAT platform once. Also, once successfully implemented in one pr oduction line, then a given end user may 
invest in additional inline monitoring devices for its other lines (not accounted for in the initial assessment). 
 The consortium assumed a rate of increase of sale s of 35% per year. This is a rather modest rate  when we consider the 
benefits that the NanoPAT technologies could offer to the clients.  
 
Table 18: Financial projections for the NanoPAT technologies 
 
The commercial prices are provided given a 40% profit margin. Thus, the ROI will be achieved between the 3 rd and 4th year of the 
project. Moreover, by assuming one new job position for every 200.000€ of increased revenue, the NanoPAT will lead to the creation 
of 116 new jobs in the involved partner. Taking into account also the parallel job creations (e.g. distribution, support services, etc.) 
at a level of 50% of the overall NanoPAT project will lead to a total of 170 new jobs. 
Exploitation timetable:  
The exploitation and commercialization of the project outcomes will take place in several distinct phases, covering product 
development, initial exploitation, European expansion and global expansion. The exploitation strategy is outlined below and w ill be 
revised as we progress through the project and at the end of the first year of exp loitation, which will be the responsibility of the Data 
& Exploitation Manager. The exploitation strategy of NanoPAT project will follow four main stages of expansion:  
1) Project Duration (2020-2024): NanoPAT project will last for 48 months. The results will be presented in conferences and selectively 
published in scientific journals. 5 demonstrators will be installed in pilot lines. Companies that participate in this project will disseminate 
the results within their business unit and transfer the knowled ge and experiences gained in manufacturing using the developed 
techniques.  
2) Further Development and Initial Exploitation (2024 -2026): The technology will be upgraded in higher TRLs. The first beta -
version (real industrial demonstrators will be installed) will be installed and evaluated (i.e. operational at the early adop ters in the 
consortium). A higher number of potential customers will be reached, bringing new real time monitoring techniques and test cases in 
the field of raw materials producers such as NPs in the chemical, ceramics, metals, mineral sectors, polymers, coatings, metal matrix 
and the associated products. The members of the consortium will continue to disseminate the results of the project in a wider audience, 
investors and stakeholders and will publish the 
results of the project in technical magazines and 
magazines. 
3) European market (2026 - 2027): The results 
of the project regarding the monitoring and nano-
characterization devices, as well as associated 
services and other possible opportunities, are 
now commercialized in European 
Nanotechnology companies. 
4) Rest of the Developing World (2028 +):  The 
monitoring systems will be sold throughout the 
rest of the world as partners will be sourced and 
new distribution agents will be required to sell the 
technology in secondary markets. In addition to 
existing sectors, the NanoPAT technology may be 
applied to several secondary (spin-off) markets. 
  1st year 2nd year 3rd year 4th year 5th year 
Technology Commercial 
price 
Units 
Sold 
Revenue Units 
Sold 
Revenue Units 
Sold 
Revenue Units 
Sold 
Revenue Units 
Sold 
Revenue 
TUS 96,900.00€ 6 581,400.00€ 8 798,456.00 € 11 1,130,813.31€ 15 1,588.278.69€ 20 2,181,236.07 
OF2i 105,000.00€ 5 525,000.00€ 7 757,050.00 € 9 1,002,550.50€ 12 1,376,836.02€ 16 1,890,854.80€ 
PDW 85,000.00€ 9 765,000.00€ 12 1,050,600.00 € 16 1,442,824.00€ 22 2,043,399.49€ 30 2,870,047.47€ 
PAT 25,500.00€ 12 306,000.00€ 16 420,240.00 € 22 595,164.90€ 29 808,071.62€ 40 1,148,018.99€ 
Yearly total 2,177,400.00€ 3,026,346.00€ 4,171,352.71€ 5,816,585.82€ 8,090,157.33€ 
Cumulative Revenues 2,177,400.00€ 5,203,746.00€ 9,375,098.71€ 15,191,684.53€ 23,281,841.86€ 
 Figure 28: NanoPAT Exploitation timetable 

                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 46 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Individual exploitation plans 
It is not just the technology providers who will benefit from the project. As such, the way that each partner individually aims to exploit 
the project’s results and derive benefit through its involvement in the project is described in the table below. Competition is also taken 
into consideration for industrial partners. A product commercialization phase will be planned to turn the project’s component s into a 
suite of commercially viable products. The key elements involve: 1) Early identification of key sup pliers, local suppliers, 2) Local 
supplier Chain Support- formalisation & record keeping, 3) Educate stakeholders about new product Opportunities, 4) Connect local 
enterprises to national & global value chains, 5) Create community-based development professionals and 6) Measure Impact, not just 
accounting for expenditure. The following table presents the foreseen exploitation routes for each partner. This table will be updated 
during the project and will become more detailed. 
 
Table 19: Foreseen individual exploitation routes (Timeline after project finalization) 
Entity Core business Foreseen individual exploitation routes Timelin
e 
IRIS Industry 4.0 solutions 
and spectroscopy 
KER 3, will make direct sales and commercial agreements with third parties for 
TUS market uptake in the mid -term KER4 will be co -owned in  close 
collaboration with KER1, 2 and 3 providers combining measuring protocols, they 
will make contracts in order to commercialize KER5 PAT Platform to other 
chemical converters. 
2-3 
years 
UP RTO PDW 
development 
Contribution to KER1, license companies with PDW technology in order to be 
installed in their production lines with priority to NanoPAT partners (DSM)   
4-5 
years 
MUG RTO OF2i development MUG with KER2 targets to penetrate the market with a Spin Off that will provide 
technical assistance services and direct collaborations through commercial 
agreements. KER4 will be co-used making contracts in order to commercialize 
the Platform 
1-2 
years 
UPV RDO on polymer 
synthesis and 
engineering 
UPV will gain knowledge of PDW and TUS technologies and offer expertise in 
terms of polymers production.  
1-3 
years 
ZHAW RTO PDW 
spectrometer to 
processes 
Contribution to KER 1. License companies with PDW technology for zeolite 
synthesis with priority to NanoPAT partners (ARK)   
2-3 
years 
PDWA Nanometrology 
analytical equipment 
manufacturer 
PDWA through KER1 & KER4 will disseminate and distribute into the European 
market and beyond the Spectrometer developed making direct profit.   
4-5 
years 
DSC Dynamic & security 
computations 
KER6 will be combined with the other services that DSC offers in engineering 
industrial solutions and expand its business to more sectors 
2-3 
years 
DSM Supplier of high -
performance 
engineering 
thermoplastic solutions 
DSM will adopt the NanoPAT monitoring technology (KER1, KER3 and possibly 
KER4) to its production line improving their polymer manufacturing process. 
Therefore, the potential return of the investment in this project will be quite fast. 
2-3 
years 
EVONIK Nanomaterials 
manufacturer 
EVONIK will adopt the NanoPAT monitoring technology (KER1, KER3 and 
KER4) to its production line. They will make direct sells from KER7 . The 
intention is to gain higher process stability which leads to furth er improved 
product quality and efficient manufacturing. 
4-5 
years  
FLU Medical care 
manufacturer 
FLU is deeply involved in KER 2 and KER4, they will adopt the NanoPAT 
technology to its production line. They will make direct sales with KER7.  
4-5 
years 
ARK Polymers Manufacturer Will contribute on the development of KER1 implementing the system in their 
production line. KER7 will give direct sales to the company. 
4-5 
years 
CNANO Metal matrix 
nanocomposite 
manufacturer 
CNANO will contribute to KER2, KER3 and KER4 and which are intended to be 
adopted by CNANO at their production line. Commercial agreements with third 
parties are expected, since deagglomerated composite coatings will open new 
functionalities and access to wider markets. Direct sales with KER7. 
4-5 
years 
TEMAS Data management, TEMAS will develop further know how on the technology transfer to various 1-2 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 47 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
(terminat
ed) 
standardization, 
business plans 
sectors (materials, specialized RTDs etc.).  years 
BNN Dissemination, 
nanosafety, clustering 
BNN will develop further know how and subcontract meta data to EMMC. They 
will gain knowledge on the field of nanometrology and disseminate results 
towards industry and public.  
1-2 
years 
TEMASO
L 
Data management, 
standardization, 
business plans 
TEMAS will develop further know how on the technology transfer to various 
sectors (materials, specialized RTDs etc.). 
1-2 
years 
b) Communication activities 
A broader general public will be reached by top level messages that reflect the 
project’s holistic impact, as well as particular segments of society where 
isolated actions have been already planned, .The communication campaign 
will use multiple channels to deliver a clear and consistent message to a variety 
of audiences in a way that they can be understood by  non-specialists 
intending to actively  engage with citizens, seeking their views and 
promoting a permanent dialogue and inform the society of EU invested 
money. As alreadyAsalready stated, communication activities are of high 
importance in order to reach a wide audience, through which citizens will be 
disclosed concrete examples. NanoPAT will implement a detailed 
communication plan, as part of the NanoPAT Dissemination Plan, aiming at 
explaining the project rationale and objectives. To this end, the consortium has 
developed an initial communication strategy/ plan including Key Performance 
Indicators (KPI) (Table 20). During the project implementation, it will be further 
enriched to include ways of promoting the project ideas before its end, as well 
as after the project to support marketing and further commercialization. 
Partners will start by identifying the objectives of the communication campaign, which will differ according to each partner’s role in 
the project. A graphical identity (branding) will be designed, to ensure consistency throughout the project duration, producing project 
documentation, which will reinforce the tangible and far-reaching benefits of the solutions, along with incentives for involving different 
stakeholder groups. Moreover, activities will include organising project events to raise awareness among a targeted public, analysis 
of project activ ities, establish ment of  personalised interactions and provid ing project partners with useful inputs from target 
stakeholders to further improve the NanoPAT solutions. We will also c ontributing to external events, to raise key stakeholders’ 
awareness and facilitate knowledge sharing, thus increasing the project impact. Targeted events include events organised by the EU 
Commission’s Unit supervising the project, other EC Conferences and thematic clustering meetings, annual events organised under 
the aegis o f the EC, and key events in the domain of circular economy.  Consistency with the dissemination key message will be 
ensured, and the communication campaign will ensure content is tailored and appropriate for the different target audiences, as is 
effective for attracting the interest and increasing the understanding of the general  public. Therefore, during each 6-month project 
meeting, a dedicated section  will be reserved in the agenda  to review the existing communication strategy, evaluate the obtained 
results and identify threats or opportunities.  
An intended future course of actions has been planned driven by the aim of communicating the key message of the project, creating 
awareness about the work performed and demonstrating the benefits it provides to the general public. The strategy constitutes from 
two comprehensive audience-oriented communication pathways: The first communication pathway-internal cycle foresees proper 
communication within the consortium fostering optimal interaction of the partners and internal stakeholders as this comprises a critical 
success factor of the project. The internal communication cycle includes several means for the frequent and open communicatio n 
among the partners: (A) Collaborative workspace: The collaborative workspace in an internet-based workspace hosted in the project’s 
website offering the opportunity for all the NanoPAT partners to share and exchange information. (B) Conference calls: Conference 
calls are used for meetings among partners without spending time and bu dget. Teleconferences would be programmed following a 
set agenda. To hold the conference Skype can be used as a mean. (C): Regular project meetings with partners will be scheduled so 
that the entire project team can meet to exchange ideas and experiences. Additional dedicated technical meetings in order facilitate 
intra and inter- WP’s cooperation on specific matters are held as appropriate. Short scientific reports: Short reports will be produced 
every 6M months by the WP leaders and reviewed by the Techni cal Manager to ensure validity and non -confidentiality of content. 
The second communication path is the External Communication Cycle, whereby the strategic targeting of appropriate activities has 
been identified to effectively engage a wider audience and  effectively promote and diffuse the project within a predetermined 
timeframe. The several means of external communication with the project are summarized in the Table 20. 
 
Figure 29: Communication Cycles 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 48 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Table 20: NanoPAT Communication strategy and KPIs (from all partners activities) 
Communication Path Expected impact/Size of audience Target audience Measure/ Target (KPIs) 
Short articles in 
newspapers & 
magazines 
Such articles will describe the idea behind NanoPAT 
addressing future technological developments that might be 
triggered through the overall scientific impact of the project. 
M, I. PM, SH  At least 2 x 
year a nd in 
total no less 
than 8 
launched 
Project website & 
Partner website, 
Internet platforms  
Awareness created for the project, its expected results and 
its benefits; knowledge of the project disseminated to the 
public. Size of audience >1,000. The project graphical 
identity and a logo, that will be consistently used for all 
communications. Open access Publications, as defined in 
the consortium agreement will be published. The public 
deliverables of NanoPAT will be made available at the 
webpage. 
I, PM, PU, SH  50 visits/day 
(target set for 
last year) 
 30 
downloads/day 
of reports & 
dissemination 
material, more 
than 1.000 
during 
project’s 
Press releases 
(printed and online) 
Periodic reporting activity on achieved milestones reaching 
a high volume of potential customers. Size of audience> 
1,000. A leaflet summarizing the project objectives, targeted 
results and presenting the consortium. This leaflet will be 
used in various occasions to provide basic information 
about the project and links to additional details and contact 
info (e.g. workshops, events, contacts with other projects, 
organizations or experts) 
M, I, PM, PU, 
SH 
 At least 2 x 
partner and in 
total no less 
than 20 
launched. 
Publications To raise awareness among relevant target audience and 
highlight project global scope. Resources will also be taken 
into consideration for the campaign‘s implementation for 
services as advertising, photography, printing, design, 
copywriting, editing, web and media relations management. 
M, I. PM, SH At least 1 x partner and 
in total no less than 15. 
Posters, newsletters Presenting briefings of project to general audience. Size of 
audience > 500. A poster summarizing the key information 
about the project will be produced for events attended by 
the NanoPAT partners. 
I, PM, PU, SH 2 newsletters x year, 4 
posters in international 
conferences 
Facebook, Twitter, 
LinkedIn Groups 
Creating large online community of interested parties 
through social media platforms for the exploitation. Material 
will be periodically updated with information about the 
project results. 
PU, M, PU  At least 2 
updates every 
month 
 Size of 
audience > 
1,000. 
Printed material Posters and leaflets with the general description and targets 
of the project to be distributed in conferences and 
national/international fairs 
M, I. PM, SH  2000 leaflets 
and 15 posters  
* I: Industry, PM: Policy makers, PU: Public, M: Media, SH: Stakeholders 
 
  
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 49 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
 
3. Implementation
3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables 
Brief presentation of the overall structure of the work plan 
A competitive work plan has been devised in order to deliver on the objectives of the NanoPAT project providing real-time monitoring 
technologies for five different production processes for minerals, polymers and metallic nanoparticles. This will increase the speed 
and reliability of nanoscale characterisation procedures, minimising NP production upscaling time and resources needed while 
improving the process quality control and product reliability and lifetime in order to reach a substantial increase in industrial 
competitiveness of European nano-scale production industries. The project objectives (from Section 1.1) have been used as the 
starting point for planning the work that needs to be implemented in the work plan. All the actions that are required to fulfil the project 
objectives have been collectively analysed by the interdisciplinary consortium. It was agreed how best to distribute the workload 
among the various experts in keeping with their relevant fields of knowledge, capacity, infrastructure, resources and in the context of 
involved production processes and nano-monitoring technologies. This bottom-up planning process has greatly facilitated the task of 
arriving at a clear, comprehensive and realistic work plan (see Gantt Chart and Pert Diagram). 
 
The work plan is split into 9 WPs logically distributed from requirements definitions to laboratory and industrial scale validations, each 
with clear tasks that will enable the project’s objectives to be fulfilled through a coherent structure that will also facilitate 
implementation. To ensure the clear focus towards the state-of-the-art development target of this Research and Innovation Action 
building upon past successful basic research, all technical WPs are led by RTO or technology providers SME partners. Our key 
industrial partners will provide sectorial expertise throughout the development process, i.e. DSM for polymer dispersions, EVONIK for 
silica, FLU for hydroxyapatite, ARK for zeolite and CNANO for ceramic nanoparticles in electrolyte suspensions.  
 
In the first phase (WP1) we will translate 
industry-led PAT challenges into a 
catalogue of lab specifications to guide the 
following innovation work. The second phase 
(WP2-4) deals with the laboratory and TRL 5 
RTO pilot scale testing and validation of the 
three nano-monitoring PAT technologies, 
whereas the third phase (WP5) deals with the 
integration of monitoring technologies and 
data analysis for each case study. In a fourth 
stage (WP6), testing and validation at 
demonstration scale (TRL6) for our 
monitoring technologies is performed in the 
pilot plants of our industry partners. To 
complement the first 6 WPs, in the fifth phase 
(WP7 and WP8), the project is dedicated to 
knowledge transfer, dissemination (WP7) as well as market strategy and Innovation impacts (WP8) with transversal activities 
like value chain study, exploitation, business planning and dissemination of the results to prepare the market uptake and maximise 
the project impact. WP 9, running in 
parallel to all other activities is dedicated 
to project and innovation management 
(¡Error! No se encuentra el origen de 
la referencia.).  
                                                                                    
 
 
Figure 30 PERT diagram 
                DT-NMBP-08-2019 
Page 50 of  97 
862583-NanoPAT-Part B  
 
Gantt chart showing the timing of the different WPs and their components outline 
No WPs and Tasks Del. & MS 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48
1 ■ #
1.1 Updated review of the state-of-the-art including commercial solutions 
and patents of the relevant monitoring technologies ■
1.2 Industrial requirements for dispersed polymers production processes
1.3 Industrial requirements for silica production processes monitoring
1.4 Industrial requirements for hydroxyapatite production processes
1.5 Industrial requirements for zeolites production processes monitoring
1.6 Industrial requirements for ceramic production processes monitoring
2 ■
2.1 Laboratory test rig setup
2.2 RTO pilot tests for each relevant nanoparticles production case study ■ # #