4. Ethics Self-Assessment ......................................................................................................................................... 44 
 
 
  
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 7 of 45 
1. Excellence
1.1 Objectives and ambition  
Introduction: The respiratory illness coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) that has gripped the world in a global 
health and economic crisis since early 2020, is caused by an enveloped RNA virus known as severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Despite strict lockdowns and confinement measures that were quickly put 
in place, the disease has spread across the globe; to date World Health Organization (WHO) reports > 228 million 
confirmed cases of COVID -19 and nearly 4.7 million deaths . The enduring pandemic has thrown the global 
economy into its worst economic crisis since World War II, with crippling impacts on healthcare and socioeconomic 
costs.  
Potential routes of infection according to the WHO are droplet, contact, fomite (contaminated surfaces, whereby 
SARSCoV-2 remains stable on these surfaces for many hours) and airborne (aerosol) transmissions. In the case of 
aerosol transmission, the air filtration and  disinfection efficiency of air filtration/circulation units plays an 
important role in minimizing the virus transmission, especially in areas with limited external air supply (e.g., 
public transportation vehicles) or in clinics and nosocomial settings 1. On the other hand, in the case of fomite 
transmissions, laboratory studies have discovered that the SARS -CoV-2 remains active on soft plastic 
materials up to 72 h2, and on the surfaces of metals, plastics, cottons, or surgical masks for tens of hours to even 7 
days3. Beyond laboratory evidences, studies in controlled hospital environments4 and common environments, 
showed that SARS-CoV-2 with infectious capacity can be found in furniture elements in the environments of 
infected people. Beyond SARS-CoV-2, other viruses, such as norovirus, have proven their ability to transmit 
by fomites5 and the WHO estimates that millions of patients each year around the world are affected by nosocomial 
infections (mostly bacterial) while receiving healthcare in hospitals. It is therefore vital to improve the protection 
for our healthcare systems, including workers and patients. 
The race to reduce the spread of the virus has catalysed research and development in the field of antiviral 
nanocoating developments, which has seen  a wave of antimicrobial/virucidal coating s and coated products 
entering the market making numerous claims in relation to effectiveness and durability. However, the reality is 
that current products are marketed without a robust science -based evidence in relation to their real efficiency, 
durability in relevant environments for the applications or other effects such as toxicity; at best, testing is based on 
current standards that cannot clearly define or guarantee the claimed properties of the products. Even when 
supported by standard tests, some commercial claims are obscure and doubtful  as there is simply insufficient 
evidence to support some claims in relation to the functionality on applications. 
 
In this context, NanoBloc’s aim is to provide reliable Antimicrobial, Antiviral, and Antifungal Nanocoatings, 
by sustainable synthesis methods, suitable for application on all surfaces and textiles. 
To do so, NanoBloc® is mobilising a n interdisciplinary (materials, coating processes, microbiology & AI) 
cocreation alliance between 4 world-class universities & institutes, and 5 leading industrial companies (3 
SMEs & 2 large enterprises) who together will cocreate, develop and upscale (from TRL3 to TRL6) reliable 
‘Made in Europe’ antimicrobial, antifungal and antiviral coatings manufactured with industrially scalable, 
versatile and green technologies suitable for application on a variety of different substrates : filter materials 
(air filtration units, face masks), textiles (protective clothing, mattress covers, aprons, wallpaper), and also on diverse 
high-traffic solid surfaces (door knobs, handles, handrails, sanitaryware-taps, etc.).  
Building on previous encouraging results obtained by the consortium partners, NanoBloc® coatings will be 
tested in working co nditions for each envisaged application, with particular emphasis on their health & 
environment safety. 
NanoBloc® and HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-20 are a unique opportunity for Europe to take the 
lead in the development of r eliable Antimicrobial, Antiviral, and Antifungal Nanocoatings that respond to 
market needs in terms of efficiency, durability and sustainability/ecofriendly properties, and that are backed with 
claims that are validated by solid science -based evidence on a ntimicrobial and virucidal mechanisms of 
nanocoatings. In doing so we will help Europe to build resilience against future global health crises.  
 
Figure 1 below presents a schematic overview of the R&D work that will be performed during the 36 months 
duration of the project to advance the technology readiness levels of our chosen coating technologies. It also maps 
the involvement of the consortium of research-industry partners and illustrates the products that will be the focus of 
                                                      
1 Verdenelli, M.C. et al. (2003). Efficacy of antimicrobial filter treatments on microbial colonization of air panel filters. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2003, 94, 9 –15 
2 Van Doremalen, N. et al. (2020) Aerosol and Surface Stability of SARS-CoV-2 as Compared with SARS-CoV-1. N. Engl. J. Med. 2020, 382, 1564–1567 
3 Chin A.W.H., Chu J.T.S., Perera M.R.A., Hui K.P.Y., Yen H., Chan M.C.W., Peiris M., Poon L.L.M. Lancet Microbe. 2020;1 
4 Liu, Jie, et al. "The duration of SARS-CoV-2 positive in the environments of quarantine rooms: a perspective analysis." Intl. Journal of Infectious Diseases (202 1). 
5 Canales, Robert A., et al. "Modeling the role of fomites in a norovirus outbreak." Journal of occupational and environmental hygiene 16.1 (2019): 16-26. 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 8 of 45 
this application -oriented R&D cocreation partnership. We will pursue a n exciting  series of groundbreaking 
research lines to develop industrially scalable, versatile and green technology in order to obtain innovative products 
that will be brought to market by our industry participants. 
 
Figure 1- Schematical overview of the Nanobloc® Project 
 
Measurable and verifiable objectives that are pertinent to the call topic and realistically achievable 
Within the framework of this ambitious overall goal, the experienced and relevant consortium has codesigned 
NanoBloc establishing a series of 8 objectives and 5 measurable and verifiable Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) 
to be fulfilled within the project timeline  (Table 1), and which will allow the long term expected outcomes also 
beyond Nanobloc project (discussed in Impact section). 
 
Table 1- Project objectives and Key Performance Indicators 
Specific Objectives (O) Key Performance Indicators  
O1-To develop new nanocoatings and processing routes: build on 
previous work in obtaining coatings effective against a range of pathogens 
(including virus & bacteria) using a novel and versatile platform of diverse 
nanocoating technologies - namely Physical Vapour deposition (PVD) 
nanocoatings (RF co -sputtering nanoAg/Silica,  Sputtering & Cathodic 
arc of Ag doped nitrides, Cathodic arc, magnetron sputtering & HIPIMs 
for Cu doped nitrides and oxides), Organic/inorganic nanocomposite 
coatings ( Nanoparticle doped UV lacquers) , Wet Chemistry coatings 
(Electrophoretic d eposition of biobased formulations, Sol -Gel hybrid 
coatings)-, enabling application on a variety of substrates relevant for 
different applications incl. metallic, plastic & textiles. 
O2-To acquire a deeper understanding of the mechanisms of 
antiviral, antibacterial and antifungal effects: to be able to reach O1 by 
tuning the coating properties to a) act fast against pathogens, b) have 
adequate durability for the application, and, c) avoid toxicological effects 
or environmentally harmful releases.  
O3-To acquire and apply new knowledge to guarantee the durability 
and functionality of the coatings: by characterizing structural, 
compositional and morphological features of the coatings and testing 
under different ageing and wear conditions to feedback t he development 
of coatings and how ageing affects the functionality. 
O4-To obtain scientific evidence of impact of the new Nanobloc 
coatings in relevant environments: although many biocide coatings 
have proven their efficiency in laboratory testing, their  real impact on 
KPI1- High effectivity coatings 
against different pathogens in 
laboratory tests. 
Target: High reduction of a wide 
range of pathogens , including virus 
(enveloped & not -enveloped), 
bacteria (Gram positive and negative) 
& fungi, with target values of 
99.9999% reduction (log 6). 
KPI2- High durability and safety of 
the coatings functionality. 
Target: Biocide functiona lity in 
laboratory tests must remain at  high 

 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 9 of 45 
relevant environments has never been tested for coatings and has only 
been poorly addressed for Cu alloys 6. It is therefore necessary to 
demonstrate the relevance of laboratory results in terms of impact on 
relevant environments. As such, NanoBloc will deploy a 1-year campaign 
to perform validation trials in relevant environments such as hospitals and 
shared areas in workplaces (toilets, meeting rooms…) to gather evidence 
(and open data) of the real effectivity of the coatings. 
O5-To demonstr ate the viability of industrialization and the 
application of the new NanoBloc coatings in relevant substrates & 
products: by scaling  up the selected processes and technologies in 
industry for the development of effective & durable biocidal/virucidal 
coatings. Contribution to generate new standards will support these 
industrial applications. 
O6-To boost developments, reliability & sustainability of the 
processes ‘by-design’: by using data-driven strategy enabled by Process 
Analytical Technology (PAT) -based real-time monitoring for obtaining 
critical material composition and process data, using Machine Learning 
techniques for predictive model control for process optimization, as well 
as for Life Cycle Analysis inventory to ensure the sustainability. 
O7-To pro duce relevant demonstrators for different substrates & 
applications: applying the new effective & durable biocidal/virucidal 
coatings on porous filter materials (air filtration units, face masks), textiles 
(protective clothing, mattress covers, aprons, wallpaper), on diverse high-
traffic solid surfaces (doorknobs, handles, handrails, sanitaryware-taps).  
O8-To validate the developments under relevant conditions & 
environments: by assessing the performance of the demonstrators over a 
12 month period by testing under standards for each application, as well 
as testing performance in application environments ( San Luigo Hospital 
that hosts the UNITO laboratory , high traffic areas - air filtration units 
(POLITO, UNITO), Offices and toilets (TEKNIKER) -, to vali date 
efficiency, durability, environmental friendliness and that there are no 
toxic effects for health & ecotoxicity impacts for the environment. 
levels of reduction - 99.99% (log4) - 
after long -term exposure to relevant 
aging and wear conditions for the 
applications.  
KPI3- Rapid action. 
Target: Reduce the possibility of 
infection in between routine cleani ng 
procedures and or increase the time of 
use of disposable personal protection 
equipment- reach 99.99% (log 4) 
reduction of pathogens in less than 15 
minutes and 99.9999% (log 6) in 1 
hour. 
KPI4- Non-toxic and Ecotoxic 
effects of the coatings. 
Target: Demonstrated toxicological 
safety for human health <30%  cells 
dying on viability cell assays & non -
ecotoxicity >50% survival of 
luminescent algae, following 
standards 
KPI5- Proven effectivity and 
durability in relevant 
environments. 
Target: >70% reduction in pathogen 
load vs. non -coated controls in 
surfaces in relevant environments 
while ensuring the durability of the 
effect over a 1 -year long testing 
campaign. following successful lab -
based weathering trials to guarantee 
their safe validation in situ. 
Table 2 shows how these objectives respond to the call topic requests and how they are realistically achievable. 
Table 2- Mapping of the call requests vs. the Nanobloc objectives and how they are realistically achievable 
Pertinence with WP topic  How this is realistically achievable 
‘Sustainable synthesis of 
nanocoatings/nanocomposites 
(including bio -based materials) with 
effectiveness against a range of 
pathogens’: 
KPI1 High effectivity against 
different pathogens in laboratory 
tests 
KPI3 Rapid action 
KPI4 Non-toxic and Ecotoxic effects 
of the coatings 
O1 To develop new nanocoatings 
and processing routes 
O2 To acquire a deeper 
understanding of the mechanisms of 
antiviral & biocidal effects 
O6 To boost development, reliability 
& sustainability of the processes 
• One of the selected technologies for the synthesis of nanocoatings/  
nanocomposites is Physical Vapour Deposition, considered one of the 
“greenest” and environmentally friendly coating technology, due to 
the lack of waste products to be disposed, to the “dry” process 
characteristics (no liquid involved) and to the low consumption of 
starting materials (coatings are few nanometres thick). 
• All coatings proposed in NanoBloc® have been already 
demonstrated effective against several bacteria and fungi.  
• POLITO’s Ag/silica co-sputtered coating is effective on viruses 
including respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), influenza virus A 
(FluVA)7. The POLITO Ag/silica co -sputtered coating 8 & 
TEKNIKER Cu based coatings have already been tested & resulted 
effective against SARS-CoV2  
• Use new knowledge on antiviral mechanisms to select the most 
suitable technology for each application. 
• We will develop and/or scale up new synthesis (including bio-based 
materials) with a specific concern to process sustainability. 
• Up-scaling of  the selected technologies in industry for the 
development of effective & durable biocidal/virucidal coatings w ill 
be facilitated by Process Analytical Technology (PAT)-based real-
                                                      
6 CHYDERIOTIS et al. New insights on antimicrobial efficacy of Cu surfaces in the healthcare environment: a systematic review. Clin Microbio  Infec, 2018, 24 (11) 1130-1138. 
7 Nanostructured composite coating endowed with antiviral activity against human respiratory viruses deposited on fibre -based air filters. C. Balagna, R. Francese , S. Perero , D. 
Lembo, M. Ferraris, Surface & Coatings Technology 409 (2021) 12687. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfcoat.2021.126873  
8 Virucidal effect against coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 of a silver nanocluster/ silica composite sputtered coating  
Cristina Balagna, Sergio Perero , Elena Percivalle, Edoardo Vecchio Nepita ,Monica Ferraris, Open Ceramics 1 (2020) 100006, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocera m.2020.100006 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 10 of 45 
time monitor ing & Machine Learning for predictive model 
control for process optimization 
‘Application methods (both on 
surfaces and textiles)’: 
O1 To develop new nanocoatings and 
processing routes 
O5 To demonstrate the viability of 
industrialization and the application 
the new Nanobloc coatings in 
relevant substrates & products  
O7 Produce relevant demonstrators 
for different substrates& applications 
• All coatings proposed within NanoBloc® have been alrea dy 
successfully applied to several surfaces and textiles. 
• Thanks to the participation of a very strong and relevant industrial 
value chain, we will be able to apply coatings on surfaces and textiles 
thanks to the expertise in: coating and surface technology (PRIREV); 
coating equipment provider ( INTERPANE); air filtration and face 
masks producer (GVF; industrial textiles coatings (SIOEN) for 
mattresses, protective clothing, UV coatings for wallpaper and 
furniture; coatings for high-traffic objects- handles, handrails, etc., and 
sanitaryware-taps, etc. (PRIREV).  
‘Surface adhesion and durability via 
assessing performance against wear 
(e.g. abrasion, washing, etc.) and 
degradation in the application 
environments on a variety of surfaces 
(e.g. glass , metals & various alloys, 
copper & steel, marble & stone slabs, 
ceramics & tiles, textiles & plastics)’: 
KPI2 High durability of the coatings 
functionality 
KPI5 Proven effectivity and 
durability in relevant environments 
O3 To acquire and apply new 
knowledge to guarantee the 
durability and functionality of the 
coatingsO4 To obtain scientific 
evidence of impact of the new 
Nanobloc coatings in relevant 
environments 
O5 To demonstrate the viability of 
industrialization and the application 
the new Nanobloc coatings in 
relevant substrates & products 
O8 Validate the developments under 
relevant conditions & environments 
• Some coatings (e.g. POLITO Ag/silica co -sputtered coating) have 
been already tested against abrasion and washing and 
degradation in working conditions  on several substrates (glass, 
metal, polymers, ceramics, wood, textiles)  for different 
applications (food processing tools, mobile phones, medical vests, 
face masks, air filters, biomedical devices,… ), giving very 
encouraging results. They can withstand temperatures up to 450 °C 
without altering their antimicrobial properties, thereby suited for 
thermal regeneration9. 
• In NanoBloc®, we will perform exhaustive studies to produce 
relevant demonstrators and to assess their performance by testing 
under standards for each application, as well as testing performance 
in application environments, with the guidance of the end -users 
actively participating in NanoBloc®. Moreover, we will develop new 
testing protoc ols that will serve as base to contribute to the 
development of new standards. 
• In NanoBloc®, thanks to the participation of a very strong and 
relevant industrial value chain, we will be able to produce 
prototypes that will allow us to perform testing and v alidation work 
to assess the performance of the coating against wear and degradation 
in their working environment.   
• Demonstrators will be porous filter materials (air filtration units, 
face masks), textiles (protective clothing, mattress covers, aprons, 
wallpaper), and also high-traffic solid surfaces (doorknobs, handles, 
handrails, sanitaryware-taps, etc.).  
‘Toxicity of nanocoatings’ 
KPI4 Non-toxic and Ecotoxic effects 
of the coatings 
O2 To acquire a deeper understanding 
of the mechanisms of antiviral & 
biocidal effects 
 
• Some coatings (e.g. POLITO Ag/silica co -sputtered coating) have 
been already demonstrated completely environmental - and 
human health - safe: Ag nanoparticles are safely embed ded in a 
strong silica matrix. These coatings allow a gradual release of ions 
without dispersing the nanoparticles in the surrounding environment. 
Studies on skin penetration have been done, demonstrating no 
permeation of Ag nanoparticles both in health and wounded skin10. 
• We will perform exhaustive studies to ensure there is no negative 
impact of NanoBloc® nanocoatings on human health or the 
environment, and in particular to substantiate with an evidence base 
of the corresponding Unique Selling Points of the NanoBloc® 
coating system  being completely safe for human health and 
environmentally friendly.   
Going beyond the state-of-the-art   
STATE-OF-THE-ART BASELINE  
Antibacterial and biocide coatings ha ve been a very active field of research due to their interest for applications 
such as implants and antifouling. The incorporation of biocidal agents in the coatings is also one of the most used 
strategies to inhibit the biocontamination of various materials , as the  agents can be gradua lly released into the 
surrounding environment and minimize or inhibit the colonization of microorganisms on its surface 11.Various 
additives and biocidal agents have been studied in order to avoid biocolonization of surfaces . These include 
antibiotics, quaternary ammonium ions, inorganic compounds and particles ( e.g., Ag, ZnO, TiO2, nano carbon, 
                                                      
9 Chemical, Mechanical, and Antibacterial Properties of Silver Nanocluster –Silica Composite Coatings Obtained by Sputtering, Monica Ferraris et al, Adv Eng Mat 2010, 12, (7). 
10 Antimicrobial functionalization of cotton fabric with silver nanoclusters/silica composite coating via RF co -sputtering Technique. Irfan et al.a, Cellulose (2017) 24:2331–2345 
11 Olmo et al (2020). Antibacterial coatings for improving the performance of biomaterials. Coatings, 10(2), 139.  
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 11 of 45 
graphene oxide, SiO2, carbon nanotubes, etc...) 12.  The use of nanomaterials is also an option, such as silver 
nanoparticles, zinc oxide, titanium oxide, iron, gra phene, copper oxide and metallic nanocomposites 13.Although 
significant efforts have been made to develop antibacterial surface coatings, the literature remains scarce for 
a systematic study on broad -range antiviral coatings . The scientific literature on bio cidal coatings is mostly 
based on antibacterial mechanisms; there are only a few pre -pandemic results on viruses . Copper alloys have 
shown potential to inactivate Murine Norovirus in less than an hour14 and can be effective for eliminating human 
coronavirus 229E15 in the range of minutes. A few approaches in the literature have explored the possibilities of 
using coatings with biocidal agents to eliminate virus. In this sense,  cold spray has also shown its effectiveness 
against influenza virus 16 and the potential of Cu, Ag and Zn combined as dopants embedded on sol-gel coatings 
against enveloped virus17 have been shown to be effective in reducing the time in which the virus remains active on 
the surfaces. POLITO, who is leading NanoBloc®, has developed Ag/Silica nanocoatings by PVD co-sputtering 
and demonstrated their efficiency (99.99%) to inactivate viruses, including SARS-CoV-2, which is just one 
of the innovations in our nanocoatings technology platform.    
Products in the market with doubtful claims unacceptable shortcuts & gaps on their development cycle 
While there have been no significant previous research effort s focused on coatings to be specifically effective 
against viruses, the global COVID-19 pandemic has attracted considerabl e attention towards innovative methods 
and technologies for suppressing the spread of viruses, and the past 18 months has seen a range of antiviral coatings 
reach the market. As examples, Table 3 provides an overview of a selection of these products classified according 
to technology type. The testing of most of these products has been performed against known antibacterial agents 
with positive results and consequently products have been promoted to market based on a number of basic standard 
tests, sometimes  including testing against virus es. Standard tests, while they do give an indicator about the 
effectivity, are not enough18: more solid evidence is necessary to have reliable coatings, to support the claims 
and to offer guarantees on a solid base. 
A few of these products have been tested against SARS-CoV-2, according to different protocols; most of them claim 
antibacterial/antiviral properties. However, while they do provide antiadhesion properties, i.e. microorganisms do 
not adhere on their surfaces, they are not killed ; and this is a very important limitation.  In other cases , their 
claims on efficiency against virus, although supported by lab oratory reports, do not clearly show the efficiency 
when compared to controls . They acknowledge durability of less than 1-2 years, or simply stat e that they are 
durable without providing any support- or poor justification- of durability claims. 
 
Table 3- Nanotechnology-based antiviral products 
Technology Brand Country Applications 
Silver ion 
technology 
Biomaster  UK Textiles, Plastic, Surfaces, Coatings - e.g. SafeTouch (masterbatch, 
liquid and powder formulations) 
Microban®/ SilverShield® USA Simple spray application 
Italtherm Italy Air filtration systems  
Serge Ferrari Group  Italy Composite membrane to be applied to various substrates 
Copper-
based 
technology 
HeiQ MetalliX 
 
Switzerland Vapour deposition process suitable for application on textiles only- 
air filters, medical gowns, curtains, drapes; clothing, upholstery, 
mattresses 
Sonovia Technology Israel Ultrasound application that impregnates fabrics with Cu and Zn 
oxides suited for textile finishing 
Bio-BlocXTM Israel Face masks  
MedCu  Israel Face masks 
Pharm2Farm Pro-Larva UK Face masks 
Other 
technologies 
Maya Sticker  Israel Adhesive film for application on face masks composed of nano -
fibres soaked with the antiviral agent povidone iodine 
ViriMASK  Israel Face masks based on mechanical multilayer filtration 
AIRDAL®  Germany Coating based on silica 
Ti-energy® yarn  Italy Textiles  (zinc oxide nano particles in yarn fibers). 
Although supported with some laboratory tests, none of these products on the market have been validated in relevant 
environments (TRL6), such as hospitals, as such studies have so far only been done with copper alloys. Such shortcuts 
to introduce products in the market have been driven in pursuit of short term benefits, and marketing impact & 
positioning; this would never be accepted in sectors such as automotive or aeronautics, where the development 
cycle and careful steps to validate each TRL for the specific application and use are always mandatory.  
 
                                                      
12 Zhang E, Zhao X, Hu J, Wang R, Fu S, Qin G. Bioactive Materials Antibacterial metals and alloys for potential biomedical impl ants. Bioact Mater 2021;6:2569–612. 
13 CLOUTIER, Maxime; MANTOVANI, Diego; ROSEI, Federico. Antibacterial coatings: challenges, perspectives, and opportunities. Trends in biote c, 2015, 33 (11), p. 637-652. 
14 Warnes SL et al. Inactivation of murine norovirus on a range of copper alloy surfaces  is accompanied by loss of capsid integrity. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015;81(3):1085 -1091 
15 Warnes SL, Little ZR, Keevil CW. Human Coronavirus 229E Remains Infectious on Common Touch Surface Materials. mBio. 2015;6(6) :e01697-15. 5 
16 Sundberg et al (2015). Effectiveness of nanomaterial copper cold spray surfaces on inactivation of influenza A virus. Journal of Biotechnolo gy & Biomaterials, 5(4), 1 
17 Hodek et al. Protective hybrid coating containing Ag, Cu and Zn cations effective against human immunodeficiency virus and other enveloped viruses. BMC Microbiol. 2016;16  
18 Pietsch, Franziska, et al. "Selection of resistance by antimicrobial coatings in the healthcare setting." Journal of Hospital  Infection 106.1 (2020): 115-125. 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 12 of 45 
There is currently a knowledge gap in the understanding of the inactivation mechanisms, the optimal application 
conditions, the effect of the nanocoating in the virus inactivation process, and the effects and damages on materials 
exposed to these coatings. Three basic mechanisms are responsible for the antibacterial properties of the coatings19, 
namely: Anti-Adhesion/Bacteria-Repellence; Antibacterial Agent Release ; and, Contact-Killing. Most of the 
developments are limited by the early release of the biocidal agents incorporated in the coatings, which reduces 
their protection over time. Also, since biocidal agents pass into the environment, their release rate is a key parameter 
that determines their environmental impact, their potential effects on health, and the rate of onset of antimicrobial 
resistance. As a result, the use of biocides and the corresponding concentrations is restricted.  
Understanding how the properties of coatings and biocides determine their release rate is crucial to understanding 
their durability and enabling the development of effective and safe new products. Erich et al.20 have carried out a 
study with the aim of establishing this connection through modeling of the release process  and some studies show 
works focused on the design of new coatings capable of modulating the release rate of biocidal agents by using 
different technologies 21,22,23. Contact-killing mechanisms have been recently proposed and are a field of active 
research as they have a great potential for higher durability and lower environmental impact. The main ones are 
associated with covalent anchoring of chains on the surface or Cu on the surface.  In the first case, mechanisms of 
action are based on membrane interactions, such as physical lysing or charge disruption, and the most effective 
compounds for contact-killing coatings have been either cationic compounds (Quaternary Ammonium chains, 
chitosan, etc.) or enzymes24. In the case of Cu, the oxidation of Cu generates Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) that 
are able to kill bacteria even without attacking the membrane 25. Although some studies have analyzed this 
approach, contact killing mechanisms are still not clear and must be differentiated from ion release mechanisms. 
 
NANOBLOC®: A GROUND -BREAKING NANOCOATING  TECHNOLOGY PLATFORM   
We are advancing the state-of-the-art via our exceptional ground-breaking R&I in the field of innovative virucidal, 
biocidal and antifungal nanocoatings:  
Physical Vapour Deposition: Scalable, versatile and green technology 
A key technology that will be used in this project is the industrially scalable, versatile in terms of composition / 
shape of the surface to be coated and of the composition of the coating and green co-sputtering technology.  
 
Figure 2- PVD technology and market pathways: example for Ag/silica Co-sputtering 
                                                      
19 CLOUTIER, Maxime; et al.. Antibacterial coatings: challenges, perspectives, and opportunities. Trends in biotechnology, 2015, vol. 33, no 11, 637 -652. 
20 Erich SJF, Baukh V. Modelling biocide release based on coating properties. Prog Org Coatings 2016;90:171–7. 
21 Sikder et al. Development of single-phase silver-doped antibacterial CDHA coatings on Ti6Al4V with sustained release. Surf Coat Tech 2018;342:105 –16 Xu Q et al. 
Antibacterial coatings based on polycaprolactone and polyurethane with prolonged release of ciprofloxacin. Sur f Coat Tech 2021;405:126584 
22 Liu  et al. Polyelectrolyte multilayer coatings for short/long-term release of antibacterial agents. Surf Coat Tech 2020;393:125696  
23 Zhang et al A sol–gel based silver nanoparticle/polytetrafluorethylene (AgNP/PTFE) coating with enhanced antibacterial and anti-corrosive properties. Appl Surf Sci 2021;535:147675. 
24 Babutan, Iulia et al. “Antimicrobial Polymeric Structures Assembled on Surfaces.” Polymers vol. 13,10 1552. 12 May. 2021  
25 VINCENT, M., et al. Contact killing and antimicrobial properties of copper. Journal of applied microbiology, 2018, vol. 124, no 5, p. 1032-1046. 
 

 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 13 of 45 
 
POLITO has patented (PCT/IB2018/057639, POLITO) an 
industrially scalable, versatile and green co -sputtering 
technology that is suitable for deposition on a variety of 
different solid surfaces (metals, glasses, ceramics, polymers), 
porous materials, filters, and textiles. The thin coating (less than 
200 nm) is composed of Ag nanoclusters well embedded into a 
SiO2 matrix. The coating composition can be adapted to the 
application requirements. It is charac terized by a proven 
antimicrobial/virucidal effect and a gradual controlled metallic 
ion release without the dispersion of nanoclusters into the 
surrounding environment or human skin. The coating prevents 
the contamination and proliferation of bacteria, fungi, moulds and it is able to inactive numerous viruses (respiratory 
syncytial virus and influenza virus A, and also towards SARS-CoV226 with a study on disposable FFP3 masks ) 
and withstands up to 450°C (suitable for high-temperature cleaning metallic/ceramic/glass substrates; metallic air 
filters, etc.) retaining its biocidal properties. 
TEKNIKER has developed PVD coatings with different technologies (HIPIMS, sputtering, and Cathodic arc) 
based on metallic nitrides using Cu as biocidal agent, showing that high antibacterial antiviral effects can be obtained 
for applications such as imp lants (avoiding toxicological effects) 27 and high traffic object s28. PRIREV has 
developed PVD formulations containing Ag with antibacterial properties certified by Hohenstein (PRIREV AB20), 
that still require adaptation to different substrates to guarantee durability. It is being applied in door handles and is 
under certification process for food contact to use in cutlery items (to meet hotels and catering demand). The coating 
is currently in “inox” colour and is necessary to develop films with other colours, requested for decorative purposes 
such as Black, Gold, Copper and Dark Chocolate. The same properties need to be achieved in substrates commonly 
used in faucets area, and which are very different in relation to deposition conditions.  
 
Organic/inorganic nanocomposite coatings 
Sioen Chemicals has more than 20 years of experience in formulating radiation curable coatings. Radiation curable 
coatings dry (= polymerize) after exposure to UV-light or Electron Beam radiation. This ecofriendly system is free 
of volatile organic solvents, all components stay within the film. Antibacterial products have also been developed 
                                                      
26 BALAGNA, Cristina, et al. Virucidal effect against coronavirus SARS -CoV-2 of a silver nanocluster/silica composite sputtered coating. Open Ceramics, 2020, vol. 1, p. 100006. 
27 “Desarrollo de una solución superficial antimicrobiana, personalizada y durable que prevenga los procesos infecciosos en impl antología dental: IMPLANTIBAC”. IDI-20191339 
28  “Materiales multifuncionales de GRAN área basados en la combinación de REcubrimientos y teXturización de superficies: GRAN -REX”. IDI-20171116 
Fig. 3- Technology and market pathways for Wet Chemistry approaches & Nanoparticle doped UV-lacquer with self-
disinfecting properties 
 
 
✓ 99.99% effectivity against SARS-CoV2 and other 
respiratory viruses, bacteria & fungi. 
✓ High temperature resistance 
✓ Nanoclusters not dispersed in the environment 
✓ Do not penetrate the human skin 
✓ Successfully sputtered and validated face masks 
(published results) 
✓ Suitable for application on a wide variety of substrates 
✓ Green Technology 

 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 14 of 45 
employing inorganic loads in the polymeric matrix for textile products. 29 Traditionally, additives with biocidal 
properties can be added as a liquid or solid into the co ating system. Conventional products like triclosan, zinc -
pyrethion, quaternary ammonium -based products, carbamates, nano -based Ag, all have disadvantages when it 
comes to durability in the end product application  as they wash out or lose their efficiency after contact with 
cleaning chemicals. 
 
Wet-chemistry coatings 
FAU has longstanding experience researching on wet-chemistry coatings using technologies such as Electrophoretic 
deposition (EPD) and Sol -Gel processing to obtain antibacterial properties. As recent examples, they have 
developed Cu(II)-Chitosan30 and Ga(III)-Chitosan31 complex coatings deposited by EPD with high antibacterial 
activity and mechanical stability. In the case of Sol -gel coatings, they have developed hybrid coatings containing 
borosilicate glass particles that show good antibacterial properties (with and without Cu) and good corrosion 
resistance32. TEKNIKER has also developed sol -gel coatings that have proven their capability to kill bacteria and 
virus using Cu as biocide element33. The combination of sol-gel coating method and EPD has also been introduced 
by FAU as a promising strategy to achieve antibacterial coatings on planar and non-symmetric surface geometries34. 
 
Although the NanoBloc® partners have top level state-of-the art results, further research is necessary in order to 
guarantee the desired biocide functionality, with adequate durability  for the expected conditions of the 
applications and with a non-harmful effect. In this sense, NanoBloc® will advance the SoA via our exceptional 
ground-breaking R&I in the field of innovative virucidal and biocidal n anocoatings by means of a cocreation 
approach that overcomes the main problems of current products in the market while generating solid 
scientific knowledge on the relation between materials science and microbiological behaviour. 
 
Thanks to a powerful cocreation approach and to new knowledge that will be generated during the project in 
relation to the formulation of coatings connected with antiviral, and biocidal and antifungal efficacy of the 
coatings over time and in operating conditions with a higher durability, we will select the most suitable 
technology from our versatile nanocoatings platform  for each industrial application (based on industrial 
specification and market requirements) and develop and up-scale more effective and durable biocidal coatings 
(compared to the state of the art) to relevant demonstrators that will impact the market in a wide variety of 
innovative new products and applications for the prevention of airborne infectious disease: porous filter materials 
(air filtration units, face masks), textiles (protective clothing, mattress covers, aprons, wallpaper), and also on a 
variety of high-traffic solid surfaces  (door knobs, handles, handrails, sanitaryware -taps, etc.) , which will be 
validated in the application environments, including a hospital (San Luigi Hospital that hosts the UNITO laboratory) 
As such, as part of a Cocreation Lab that will be established and run throughout the project, we will drive forward 
an application oriented -development that combines bottom-up with top -down approaches to bridge the gap 
between science and market needs in order to develop new NanoBloc® coatings with scientifically proven 
superior and reliable properties in terms of efficiency, durability, and eco-friendliness. A key innovative feature 
of our project is to implement a ‘Quality -by-Design’ approach to create a Digital Twin of each process for  (i) 
increasing the process understanding thanks to Process Analytical Technology (PAT)-based real-time monitoring 
for obtaining critical material composition and process data , (ii)  using Machine Learning techniques for 
predictive model control for process optimization, which will facilitate the process development and upscaling 
process, and will also provide the template for a PAT-based process monitoring and control platform for ensuring 
the standardized processing of the nanocoating during the future (post project) production stage.  
This science-base in terms of coatings and the Artificial Intelligence enhanced understanding of process 
parameters (also inspired in the PAT -based Quality -by-Design approach), in addition to materials science 
properties testing and microbiological behaviour will generate the comprehensive knowledge needed to inform the 
selection, scaling-up and validation of the most suitable technology for delivering reliable, robust and functional 
products for the intended applications. This will ensure that we can make high ly credible and scientifically 
substantiated claims compared to the current State-of-the-Art, whereby many of the current market entrants 
have been developed to serve a sudden market demand (without sufficiently taking into account the specific 
needs to each product/application), and test ed and validated using simple standards lea ding to products 
flooding the market with doubtful claims on functionality.  
                                                      
29 https://sioen.com/en/news/technical-textiles-save-lives-mattress-covers  
30 AKHTAR, Muhammad Asim, et al. Electrophoretic Deposition of Copper (II)–Chitosan Complexes for Antibacterial Coatings. Int J Mol Sci, 2020, vol. 21, no 7,  2637. 
31 Akhtar, et al. "Electrophoretic deposition and characterization of functional coatings based on an antibacterial gallium (III )-chitosan complex." Coatings 10.5 (2020): 483. 
32 Balestriere, et al. Sol-gel coatings incorporating borosilicate bioactive glass enhance anticorrosive & surface performance of stainless steel implants. J Electroanal Chem 876 (2020): 114735. 
33 https://umbrellatch.com/productos/umbrella-zero/. Coating developed by TEKNIKER and transferred to the company: Internal track of background is kept by  TEKNIKER. 
34 Ballarre, Surf. Coat. Technol. 2020, 381, 125138 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 15 of 45 
R&I Maturity   
In line with the call requirements in relation to Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs), the technologies addressed 
in the project are currently situated at TRL3 (i.e. experimental proof of concept) and will be scaled to TRL4 (i.e. 
technology validated in lab), and then through a Living Lab approach in cocreation with the industrial technology 
upscale partners will be brought TRL5 (i.e. validat ion in an industrially relevant environment) and then in 
collaboration with the early adopters to TRL6 (i.e. technology demonstrated in application relevant environment). 
A key feature of our project is that we are incorporating an AI-driven Quality-by-Design approach to facilitate the 
process development and upscaling process. Table 4 shows TRL levels of the core components of our NanoBloc® 
Technology Platform, with current TRL levels, versus that expected at project completion. Further details on how 
each TRL level is addressed are shown in the methodology section. 
 
Table 4- TRL positioning of the work 
Technology TRL at project start TRL at project end 
Ag/silica co-
sputtered 
coating 
TRL4: POLITO has developed the Ag/silica coatings prove to be antiviral 
& antibacterial and already deposited in face masks at laboratory level. 
TRL6 Selected coatings 
based on their 
performance on go/non-
go decisions will be 
validated under specific 
product specifications 
& shown to be still 
effective under ageing 
conditions, & proven 
performance on 
relevant environments 
such as hospital 
environment & shared 
areas in working 
environments (meeting 
rooms, toilets). Prior to 
the down selection for 
final demonstration all 
the technologies will be 
validated for up-scaling 
at relevant 
environments at TRL5  
PRIREV 
AB20-based 
coatings 
TRL4: Prirev has developed AB20 antibacterial coating in inox colour for 
stainless steel substrates, however films with other colours and in other 
substrates need further research 
Cu based PVD 
coatings 
TRL3: TEKNIKER has developed PVD coatings based on nitrides and 
oxides that are effective against bacteria and virus. Further research needed 
to develop new coatings compositions & architectures guarantee durability 
and non-toxicological effects 
Self-
disinfecting 
Nanoparticle 
doped UV-
lacquer 
TRL3: SIOEN has developments on antibacterial UV -curing lacquers for 
textiles applications. Conventional products like triclosan, zinc-pyrethion, 
quaternary ammonium -based products, carbamates, nano -based Ag, all 
have durability problems in the end product application  as they wash out 
or lose their efficiency after contact with chemicals.  
Coatings 
based on SiO2 
& Ag 
nanoparticles 
by EDP  
TRL3: FAU has designed multi -structured coatings consisting of 
PEEK/BG layers deposited via EPD and coated with Ag/SiO2 nanoclusters. 
Although the slow release of Ag ions resulted in strong antibacterial 
properties and cytocompatibility, further inves tigations against various 
pathogens are required.  
Wet chemical 
sol-gel process 
TRL3: FAU has developed antibacterial  sol-gel organic-inorganic hybrid 
coatings with borosilicate or Cu -doped borosilicate bioactive glass 
particles. Long-term antimicrobial efficacy of coatings still to be verified.
1.2 Methodology  
Overall methodology.  
Cocreation Lab- industry-research codesign innovation 
approach: A key strength of the NanoBloc® project is 
that (through the project partners/consortium) we are 
mobilising a research -industry codesign approach that 
will be implemented via a Cocreation Lab. Cocreation 
relates to strategies of open innovation that actively 
involve the participation of customers in the design and 
construction of goods and services, in which ideas are 
produced, valued by organizations and the customers 
themselves, i.e. cocreation is the  participation with 
customers in order to get value. Our NanoBloc® 
codesign approach  (that can be readily applied to any 
technology) is underpinned by a pioneering ‘cocreation 
cycle’ (figure 4) that will be implemented in the NanoBloc ® project in 3 development loops ( refer to figure 9 in 
section 3.1). A key value of this approach is that it is underpinned by research to gain an advanced understanding 
of the interactions between process parameters, coating composition and architecture, biocidal properties and 
mechanisms, in addition to the durability and other properties of the coating . A major advance will be the 
encapsulation of this knowledge in self -learning algorithms based on data analytics and machine learning, which 
will lead to an enhanced understanding and predictive capability over time.  Since a digital twin -in comparison to 
traditional models and simulation s that are mainly based in first principles and simple empirical data - is a data-
driven multivariate model, particularly suitable for describing complex systems , such an approach is of 
extreme value in the case of processes that involve n ano-scale interactions, which are, by their very nature, too 
 
• NanoBloc© cocreation process initiates with an application-
oriented development philosophy (products ‘ask’). It informs 
the selection of the best assessment of the most suitable 
nanocoating technology in each case.  
• Scientific & inter-disciplinary knowledge in relation to Process 
Parameters/Coatings, Materials Science properties testing, & 
Mechanical Behaviour enables the most suitable technology 
and process to be defined (science ‘answers’). 
• The selected process in scaled up, engineered and validated 
(engineering ‘implements’). 
• The most suitable & adapted technology can deliver reliable, 
robust & superior functionality products for the intended 
applications (‘technology delivers’) to supply the ‘market’.  
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 16 of 45 
complex to be easily described by merely using first-principles-based quantitative descriptions. 
 
 
 
Figure 4- The NanoBloc® cocreation cycle 
In terms of the running of our Cocreation Lab, it will be inspired in t he ‘Living Lab approach’, whereby in our 
codesign and scoping sessions (which will be organised at regular intervals throughout the workplan), in addition 
to the established theories of innovation, which distinguish two forces - ‘technology push’ and ‘marke t pull’-, we 
will also take into account a third force- the ‘contextual push’ or the ‘people insights push’. This ensures that we 
will not only gain the evaluative power (prove/disprove a hypothesis or idea) of our Cocreation Lab, but will also 
benefit from generative value (i.e. that we gain access to insights not yet known to the researchers). For running 
our Cocreation Lab (which will cross -cut our entire R&D workplan through Task 4.1), we will follow the best 
practices of the Living Labs  Harmonization Cube35, which covers the 6 dominant Living Lab perspectives: user 
involvement, service creation, infrastructure, governance, innovation outcomes, and methods & tools. 
Implementation of the NanoBloc® methodology : We will implement the NanoBloc ® methodology (i.e. our 
cocreation cycle) to enable the selection of the most suitable technology for each industrial application (based 
on industrial specification and market requirements). It will also facilitate the development and upscaling of 
more eff ective and durable biocidal coatings (compared to the state of the art), resulting in relevant 
demonstrators that will impact the market in a wide variety of innovative new products and applications for the 
prevention of airborne infectious disease.  
1) Product demands properties 
We will produce a comprehensive suite of demonstrators and the performance requirements of each will be 
defined by the industry end -users in keeping with market requirements . This information will establish the 
KPIs that need to be ve rified by our testing and characterization work. Table 5 provides an overview of these 
demonstrators as well as the expected performance requirements of each product as defined by the industry 
partners. We also indicate the envisaged coating technologies to be applied in each case from among the versatile 
NanoBloc platform of technologies (and which will be verified during the project cocreation cycle).  
 
Table 5- Demonstrators and performance requirements 
Applic. Product Performance Requirements 
Air 
filtration 
Metallic or 
glass based 
filtering 
devices  
▪ Reusable filters made of woven/nonwoven metallic or  glass with proper HEPA 
characteristics and suitable thermal resistance 
▪ Capable of withstanding thermal regeneration procedures from 130-350 °C.  
▪ Antipathogen properties are superior to market available products, especially temp. 
resistance (regeneration after heating up to 450 °C).  
▪ Effective in killing bacteria, yeasts, moulds, and virus  
                                                      
35 Mulder, Ingrid & Velthausz, Daan & Kriens, Martijn. (2008). The Living Labs Harmonization Cube: Communicating Li ving Lab's Essentials. 

 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 17 of 45 
▪ No ecotoxic release of nanoparticles into environment 
Face masks  ▪ Reusable face masks made of woven/nonwoven textiles  
▪ Antipathogen properties are superior to those already existing on the market  
▪ Effective in killing bacteria, yeasts, moulds and virus 
▪ No release of nanoparticles into environment 
Textiles Protective 
clothing 
▪ Biocidal according to ISO 21702 (antiviral), ISO 27447 & 22196:2007 (antibacterial) 
▪ Maintain biocidal properties for 3-5 years 
▪ Temperature/UV stability to hot Xenon testing (black panel temperature of 100°C)  
▪ UV stability by means of QUV-A testing for outdoor applications 
▪ Biocidal properties are compliant with at least 50 washing cycles at 60°C (protective 
clothing) or 95°C (medical applications) 
▪ Chemical resistance against disinfecting agents such as ethanol, bleach, etc. 
▪ Homogeneous biocidal properties at every cm2 over the whole coating width 
Mattress covers 
Aprons 
Wallpaper  
High 
traffic 
solid 
surfaces 
Door knobs ▪ Effective in killing bacteria, yeasts, moulds and virus 
▪ No release of nanoparticles into environment 
▪ Resistance to chemicals (cleaning procedures). 
▪ Resistance to oxidation (humid environments) 
▪ Scratch resistance   
▪ Biocidal properties according to ISO 21702 (antiviral) and ISO 27447 (antibacterial) 
▪ Biocidal properties for at least 10 years 
▪ Temperature stability (hot Xenon testing black panel temperature of 100°C) 
▪ Ageing resistance of matrix for at least 10 years 
▪ Chemical resistance against solvents, cleaning and disinfecting agents 
▪ Homogeneous biocidal properties at the cm2 over the whole surface 
Handles 
Handrails 
Sanitaryware-
taps 
Window glass 
Cutlery (buffet/ 
catering items) 
Tiles/ 
Flooring 
 
2) Preselection of process candidates 
The NanoBloc® project will research and develop innovative virucidal, biocidal and antifungal nanocoatings 
that will provide a technology platform that can be codesigned and scaled up according to industry specifications 
and market requirements. A key value of our project, is that our technology platform is versatile in that it covers 
the most promising (i.e. multiple industrially relevant) coating technologies. The cocreation cycle approach will 
aim to verify the most suitable technology for the different applications . Importantly, our consortium includes the 
necessary scientific and technological partners to validate these technologies in line with  their suitability to 
deliver product specifications and industry & market requirements, ensuring a technology and market pathway. 
The preselection of process candidates has been performed to cover a wide range of technologies on the basis of the 
previous experience and good results obtained in past research efforts performed by the NanoBloc® (Table 6). 
 
Table 6- NanoBloc technologies 
Physical Vapour Deposition Organic/inorganic 
nanocomposite coatings 
Wet-chemistry coatings 
RF co-sputtered Ag/Silica (POLITO) 
Sputtering & Cathodic arc of Ag doped nitrides 
(PRIREV) 
Cathodic arc, magnetron sputtering & HIPIMs 
for Cu doped nitrides and oxides (TEKNIKER) 
Nanoparticle doped UV 
lacquers (SIOEN, POLITO) 
Nanoparticle doped PU & PVC 
coatings (SIOEN) 
Electrophoretic deposition of 
biobased formulations (FAU) 
Sol-Gel hybrid coatings (FAU, 
TEKNIKER) 
 
3) R&D stage (TRL 3-4): understanding the links between process parameters & coating composition/ architecture, 
microbiological mechanisms & biocidal properties, & coating material properties (durability, etc.) 
The properties and functionality of the coatings are determined by their chemical composition, their morphological 
features, their structure and architecture. In this sense, the physico-chemical characteristics of the coating determine 
the mechanical and corrosion resistance while the amount and location (at the surface and/or embedded) of biocide 
elements will determine their antipathogenic functionality in terms of effectivity, depending on the  different 
mechanisms involved, and therefore on the durability and time required to eliminate the pathogens.  The physico-
chemical features of the coatings are in turn dependent on preci se tuning of process parameters  and strategy to 
define architecture (gradient, multilayer, etc.) and to guarantee good adhesion. Some key process parameters for the 
technologies addressed in NanoBloc® are defined in the following table. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 18 of 45 
Table 7- Key process parameter for the NanoBloc technologies 
Physical Vapour Deposition Organic/inorganic 
nanocomposite coatings 
Wet-chemistry coatings 
Target power & co-evaporation 
ratios of the different elements in 
coating composition,  frequency 
& pulse length of the applied 
power, amount of reactive 
gasses, temperature, bias 
voltage, or pre -treatments with 
ion sources for adhesion, etc. 
Type & % of nanofillers, 
dispersion methods, curing 
strategy: radiation curable coating- 
either 100% UV-system (curing by 
“traditional” UV -lamps and/or 
Excimer curing) or water -based 
UV-system (traditional UV or 
LED-curing), etc. 
Electrophoretic deposition : particle size, 
dielectric constant of liquid, conductivity & 
stability of suspension, Zeta potential, 
deposition time, applied voltage, substrate 
conductivity, … 
Sol-Gel hybrid coatings : chemical 
precursors, nanoparticle dispersion, 
extraction speed (dipping), curing temp, etc. 
 
Figure 5. POLITO co-sputtering coatings different composition and morphology leads to different biocide results on SARS-CoV-2 
 
Figure 5 shows POLITO’s results on Ag/silica nanocoatings on face masks and how composition (more - Ag5W- 
or less -Ag3W- silver amount) and morphology lead to different results. Moreover , process parameters influence 
the growth morphology of the coatings leading  to changes on the structure and morphology of the coatings, as 
illustrated in Fig. 6. While both coatings lead to good biocide properties, the one with densified layers is expected 
to have better mechanical properties.  
In order to understand the relation between process parameters and coating physico -chemical features, R&D on 
new coating developments (which will be performed in  WP1) will be fed with the results on testing against 
different mechanical and ageing conditions (WP3)  as defined by the applications (WP4), to determine the 
durability of the coatings, as well as the results on biocide functionality before and after ageing (WP2).  
Moreover, an important contribution of NanoBloc® is to understand the mechanisms of antiviral & biocidal effect 
(WP2) of our coatings in order to improve their efficiency against pathogens, to understand the characteristics that 
allow them to be wide spectrum antimicrobial coatings and to identify the best fields of application. 
 
Figure 6. TiNCu biocidal coatings by TEKNIKER. Bilayer structure with different process parameters: Growth morphology is determined 
by process parameters, leading to nanoparticulated layers(left) or densified layers (center).  Scheme (right) of electrocatalytic effect and 
nanoroughness features of contact killing by generation of ROS. 
NanoBloc aims also to focus on the adequate coating durability or the application and on the absence of toxicological 
effects or environmentally harmful releases. Again, the process parameters and strategies will lead to different 
morphologies and architectures. As an example, the different surface nanomorphologies of the coatings in Figure 6  
lead to different contact angles, and therefore will influence antiadhesion mechanisms, while a control of the coating 
composition and architecture can provide contact killing by positioning the biocide elements as the Cu at the surface 
or generating a layered or gradient structure for controlled ion -release. In turn, surface nanomorphology and 
composition influences electrocatalytic generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) can kill pathogens by contact36. 
To this end, WP2 will not only feed the development of coatings taking into account their efficiency against 
pathogens before and after ageing, but also on the different mechanisms acting by employing variations of standard 
testing to understand touch transfer of bacteria and ion release rates, as well as testing on toxicology and eco-toxicity 
testing of the formulations to ensure that they are safe. By looping between WP1, WP2, and WP3 a fine tuning of 
the coatings will be achieved while generating a deep knowledge on the properties and mechanisms acting that will 
be used to down select the best coatings & processes candidates on go/non-go decisions and selection of strategies 
for up-scaling and validation for each application. 
                                                      
36 D. Monaghan et al. Highly biocidal vacuum deposited transparent coatings for touch surfaces to help in the fight of COVID19&HCAI. SVC bulletin.2020 

 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 19 of 45 
 
4) Up-scaling & validation stage (TRL5-6): process & properties validation in relevant environments 
Thanks to the industry participation in this project, we will mobilise an industry-driven and application-oriented 
development that will not only inform and guide the work performed in the R&D phase, it also affords the 
opportunity to scale up the processes in industry for testing, validating and demonstrating. 
 
Up-scaling and production of demonstrators 
The selected coatings and processes from previous stages will be promoted to up-scaling in order to be validated in 
industrial environments in terms of technologies (TRL5) and to prepare demonstrators to be tested in relevant 
environments for the applications (TRL 6). For this purpose, the selected technologies and coatings will be up -
scaled according to the targeted application, and different approaches will be used depending on the 
substrates and geometries . Thus, different types of processes will be used to optimize the coatings on the 
demonstrators. In the case of 3D dimensional objects, batch processes will be used, and processes parameters will 
be fine-tuned to guarantee the homogeneity of the coatings over the surface of complex shapes such us door handles. 
It will be necessary to study how positioning and orientation of the samples affect the coating homogeneity, and to 
design specific sample holders and ancillary tools to guarantee the homogeneity. On the other hand, roll -to-roll 
processes will be used for 2D applications such as textiles. In this case, controlling web speed together with 
deposition parameters is key to controlling the homogeneity of PVD and Sol -gel coatings. The methodology of 
transferring coating is of utmost importance in the case of nanocomposite coatings for high stretch textiles (knitted 
fabrics and others). In this process, a liquid coating system is applied onto a release paper (temporary carrier) and 
in the last stage of the process the textile is bonded with an adhesive layer onto the “skin layers”.  
Table 8 summarizes the types of up -scaling processes in relation to the different technologies addressed in the 
project and the partners in NanoBloc. 
Table 8- NanoBloc Upscaling processes  
Batch processing: 3D applications Roll-to roll processing: 2D applications 
-PVD sputtering/cathodic arc/HIPIMS (PRIREV-TEKNIKER) 
- Sol-Gel (TEKNIKER) 
- EDP (FAU-TEKNIKER) 
- PVD Sputtering (INTERPANE) 
- Sol-Gel (TEKNIKER) 
- Nanocomposite coatings & lacquers (SIOEN) 
 
In order to speed up the adaptation of process parameters to industrial environment up-scaling and to guarantee the 
quality of coatings a data-based strategy using digital twins, in-line process monitoring and machine learning will 
be used, on the basis of the data obtained from the earlier stages of the project. 
Digital twin approach: In-line process monitoring for closed loop control and quality standardisation  
A key innovative feature of our project is to implement a ‘Quality-by-Design’ approach to create a Digital Twin of 
each process for increasing the process understanding thanks to Process Analytical Technology (PAT)-based real-
time monitoring for obtaining critical material composition and process data . Machine Learning techniqu es will 
also be used for predictive model control for process optimization, which will  facilitate the process development 
and upscaling process and will provide the template for a PAT -based process monitoring and control platform for 
ensuring the standardized processing of nanocoatings during the future (post project) production stage.  
Based on advances in manufacturing and processing technologies, a key innovation is planned under the Digit al 
Twin/Industry 4.0 paradigm. A digital twin is a digital replica -mainly built on the basis of multivariate empirical 
data- of an artefact, process or service that is so accurate that it can be used as basis for taking decisions 37. The 
concept of the digital twin is one of the big game -changers in manufacturing allowing companies to significantly 
increase their global competitiveness. It further securitizes IP by adding a control layer that relies on decentralized 
decision-making, to support (or even replace) human intervention. Our intention is to implement Digital Twin 
technology for ensuring that the scaled-up processes are optimally controlled based on predictive models or 
protocols that will be developed for the target end products.  
The ‘nano’ tends to ‘live’ at a holistic level that cannot be accessed directly with  spectroscopy (except for very 
specific cases). However, this holistic level in turn influences higher levels, which are accessible through 
spectroscopy and other ‘extensive’ techniques. In order to develop a digital twin for macroscopic levels (i.e., for 
production purposes), it would be very valuable to have access to microscopic information, for which  nanoscale 
characterization techniques provide data source on different physics and insights on nanoscale features. 
A Process Analytical Technology (PAT) en abled control platform (based on the IRIS Scadalytics software 
platform) will incorporate Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  modular engines for keeping the 
process under optical conditions. It holds significant potential for further improving process resource and energy 
efficiency, and for ensuring that a standardised quality product is obtained based on the production protocols.  
                                                      
37 https://www.change2twin.eu/digital-twin/  
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 20 of 45 
The concept is to design, analyse, and control manufacturing processes through the measurement of identified 
Critical Control Parameters that govern product variability, as well as real-time in-line monitoring of analytical 
quality attributes of nanocoating being processed. This concept is enabled by installing PAT tools, particularly 
infrared spectroscopy, in the proces sing equipment. The philosophy behind the PAT initiative is the Quality-by-
Design principle , whereby the design of the process relies on a sound and scientific understanding of the 
relationship between Critical Quality Attributes of the product itself and the control parameters (See Table 7). 
The quality attributes make the product safe and efficacious, and the control parameters influence product quality 
inside the acceptable process limits. In -line monitoring and control of these parameters can better ass ure product 
quality during manufacturing. The quality attributes of a product are directly determined by the control parameters, 
and as such, the quality of products can be incorporated by process design and not by postproduction quality testing. 
Furthermore, a data fusion approach—i.e., combining spectroscopy with traditional parameters and relating them 
to quality parameters of the production —will provide a more robust mathematical model automatic control  of 
processes, improving yields, reducing time, waste and energy consumption, and for predictive maintenance. In 
short, based on real -time data provided by the PAT system in relation to the quality attributes of the nanocoating 
material, the control parameters governing product variability are modified in real-time based on the models to 
ensure optimal product quality with efficient process conditions. Data from the PAT analysers will be processed 
with chemometric (Machine Learning) models in order to extract usable information from the spectral data, and i t 
will be fused with the data from the traditional sensors and processed with advanced models for closed-loop process 
control. It provides information for improved decision making, sending alerts to operators, as well as using data 
historian about the process for improved process understanding, optimisation, predictions, & anomaly detection.  
Validation of demonstrators in relevant environments 
Once the up -scaling stage is optimized, the coatings will be deposited on demonstrators for the different 
applications. These demonstrators will be validated against the specific standards of each application but 
additionally, the NanoBloc solutions will be tested in relevant environments (TRL6) to show their effectiveness and 
durability over 1 year trial campaigns. This will be done by placing coated elements (such as doorknobs) in specific 
places (toilets, meeting rooms, etc) in a hospital (San Luigo Hospital that hosts the UNITO laboratory) and working 
environments- toilets, meeting rooms, etc. (TEKNIKER, POLITO). The elements and samples will be periodically 
analysed by extracting and/or swabbing both coated samples and non-treated samples in equivalent places to analyse 
if there are significant statistical differences on the pathogens found on treated and non -treated surfaces. Cleaning 
procedures will be kept as usual in the chosen environments in order to study the durability under normal operations, 
and in this sense evidence of degradation due to oxidation, cleaning procedures or normal use will be obtained. 
HOW THE METHODOLOGY W ILL ENABLE DELIVERY OF THE PROJECT ’S OBJECTIVES  
User-centric development and validation can play an important role in speeding up effectively the innovation 
process through addressing the actual user needs (European Commission, 2009). Whereas users are typically 
seen as a subject in traditional research, they are seen as co-creators of innovation in a Living Lab approach . 
Our approach ensures that we bring the industry partners and target end-users into the creative process early 
in order to discover new and emerging requirements, expectations, behaviours and user patterns. In this way 
we will bridge the innovation gap bet ween technology development and the uptake of new products and 
services involving all relevant players of the value network through engagement between the innovation creators 
(from our RTOs and coating industry), the innovation adopters (end-user industries, including hospitals), as well as 
citizens (consumers), and enabling stakeholders (standards bodies and policy makers). We will also allow for the 
early assessment of the socio -economic implications of the outputs by performing impact assessment work.  In 
conclusion, the advantages of our methodology  are as follows:  More reliable coatings/products with better 
properties; Potential to define new , future-oriented, ‘fit-for-purpose’ standards for validation ; Potential to easily 
adapt to new demands once key R&D testing are defined, and processing and fundamental knowledge of coatings 
is developed and shared in Open Science practices and databases ; Better social engagement: customer will know 
that products are based on strong knowledge basis and methodology through dissemination actions to wide public.  
From a project management perspective, we will implement the most appropriate methodology in view of our 
Cocreation approach to the implementation of our project. As it is appropriate for our research -industry 
codesign/cocreation approach, we will adopt a hybrid-approach to our project management methodology , 
whereby we will combine both the ‘predictive’ and ‘adaptive’ project management approaches. In the predictive 
approach (also referred to as ‘waterfall’), the project scope, time and cost are defined in the early phases of the 
life cycle (and this is the case for our project), and then any future changes to the scope are dynamically 
managed. While this approach is effective for managing the carefully planned an d budgeted project plan that has 
been drawn up and defined based on a strong base of experience of the project consortium in designing and 
executing large -scale multidisciplinary, multi -actor and multifaceted collaborative R&D projects, in situations 
where projects are dynamic in nature, involve some potentially unknown user requirements, potentially unknown 
cause and effect interdependencies, and complexity, it can present difficulties in responding quickly. To this end, 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 21 of 45 
when we are presented with these situations, we will blend in the adaptive (agile) approach38, whereby the detailed 
scope is defined and approved before the start of each iteration. This approach is very fitting for managing the 
implementation of the 3 development and innovation cycles that will be executing during our workplan. Our hybrid 
approach will ensure that for those elements of the project that are well known, we can follow a robust 
predictive life cycle (waterfall), however (and this is important for the dynamic Cocreation Lab approach), 
for those elements that are still evolving, we have the agility to follow an adaptive life cycle . Such a hybrid 
approach will ensure we can achieve the best outcome.  
HOW THE METHODOLOGY C OMPLIES WITH THE ‘DO NO SIGNIFICANT HA RM’ PRINCIPLE  
In compliance with the ‘do no significant harm’ (DNSH) principle, Table 9 outlines how our project activities 
contribute substantively to the 6 environmental objectives listed in the Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2020  on the establishment of a framework to facilitate sustainable 
investment, and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 (Taxonomy Regulation) . Thus, we confirm that our action 
does not significantly harm any of the 6 environmental objectives  and contributes to reach them. However, 
we will continually monitor this to ensure full compliance, and in particular this will be assessed in Task 2.3 Toxicity 
& ecotoxicity. We will also leverage the expertise of regulatory partner UNE.  
Table 9- Compliance with the ‘do no significant harm’ principle 
No. Enviromental objs.  How NanoBloc® contributes substantively? 
1 Climate change 
mitigation 
Longer life time of products means a reduction of the processes and materials used having 
an impact in the reduction of emissions due to manufacturing processes.  
2 Climate change 
adaptation 
As many of the root causes of climate change also increase the risk of pandemics, the 
NanoBloc® innovation will help Europe build resilience in relation to these risks.  
3 Sustainable use and 
protection of water and 
marine resources 
• PVD technology is a green & eco-friendly method, based on inert gases, and in the absence 
of solvents, wastewater or potentially toxic precursors with health and environmental risk.  
• Nanocomposite and wet chemistry technologies addressed are solvent free solutions. 
• Ecotoxicity testing to ensure no harm caused to marine species (see point 6 below). 
4 Transition to a circular 
economy 
Waste prevention is key for circular economy . One of the main aims of NanoBloc ® is to 
deliver durable coatings. This will extend the operative life and of products such as face 
masks and air filters reducing waste of disposable filters and textiles. Ag/silica coating that 
can be easily regenerated by thermal treatments, will make some products reusable (e.g. air 
filters), decreasing the quantity of waste to be processed as special waste. 
5 Pollution prevention 
and control  
• PVD technology is an extremely green technology. Anti-bio-pollutant properties have been 
proven effective in preventing contamination and proliferation of biopollutants such as 
bacteria, fungi, moulds & viruses.  Radiation-curable coatings dry ( i.e. polymerize) after 
exposure to e.g. UV-light or Electron Beam radiation. As all components stay within the film 
it is free of volatile organic solvents.  
6 Protection and 
restoration of 
biodiversity and 
ecosystems 
Gradual controlled release of ions without dispersing the nanoparticles in the surrounding 
environment is on the targets in the project. Ecotoxicity testing for marine species will be 
performed and any ion release will be strictly analysed for toxicological effects & ecotoxity 
to reduce potential harmful ions & reach a balance between the biocide effect against 
pathogens, while ensuring that no harm is caused in terms of toxicity and ecotoxicity. 
CHALLENGES AND HOW TH EY WILL BE OVERCOME  
The objectives and methodology proposed in NanoBloc are ambitious, in that a methodology that is sufficiently 
versatile for different technologies, coatings and applications is addressed. While such an approach has the 
advantage of covering a diversity of technological solutions , minimizing risks and delivering high value for the 
money invested, it does have a number of inherent challenges to be overcome, as summarized in Table 10. 
Table 10- Challenges associated with our chosen methodology and how they will be overcome 
Challenges NanoBloc approach 
To deliver effective 
and durable coatings 
for a wide range of 
different applications 
and substrates 
Having different applications and substrates implies that there are different requirements. 
While the pre-selected technologies have shown great potential, not all of them may be 
finally su itable for the applications in a reasonable time. As such, NanoBloc has pre -
selected the most promising ones, and the proposed R&D stage of the methodology 
looping characterization against specific needs  (which will be facilitated by the Quality -
by-Design approach) will allow to down select the most suitable technology/coating for 
each application. 
To handle the In order to be able to work on different coatings/technologies and to obtain the expected 
                                                      
38 Böhmer, et al (2015) Open Innovation Ecosystem - Makerspaces within an Agile Innovation Process. ISPIM Innov. Summit, Int Soc Innov Manag, 1-11 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 22 of 45 
development of a 
wide range of 
coatings/technologies 
in project lifetime 
results within the lifetime of the project, leading scientific and technological organizations 
will work on the different technologies, with wide experience and building on previous 
good results on each specific technology  (e.g. POLITO: Co -sputtering, TEKNIKER: 
HIPIMS, FAU: sol-gel and EDP, SIOEN: radiation curing, etc.).  
To characterize a 
high number of 
coatings during 
development. 
Having different technologies and types of coatings could lead to bottlenecks in the 
characterizations to feedback the developments. In this sense, all the partners have basic 
characterization tools (such as adhesion) to pre -screen their coatings prior to be ing sent 
for more complex testing with lower availability. Additionally, laboratory characterization 
techniques such as SEM, XRD, etc. are available at different partners (POLITO, 
TEKNIKER, FAU…), and will be used to cover the physico-chemical characterizations 
loads of all partners. The characterization loops will have a hierarchical structure based on 
the complexity and availability of testing rigs .  Pre-screening and down select ion by 
go/non-go decisions will be used to only promote the best performing coatings in wider 
available simple r tests for further testing. Thus, a ntiviral effectivity  and toxicology 
(UNITO) will be tested on good antibacterial  pre-screened samples (done in parallel by 
TEKNIKER, POLITO and FAU for different coatings).  
To up-scale of a wide 
range of 
coatings/technologies 
in the life time of the 
project 
The characterization loops with coating development will allow to down select the most 
appropriated formulations to be up-scaled. On the other hand, as in the case of the coatings 
development stage, the same is appli cable to the up -scaling stage for which there are 
existing pilots and industrial facilities for the different technologies among the partners in 
NanoBloc, so each technology can be up -scaled in parallel by different partners 
(INTERPANE- sputtering roll -to roll, PRIREV - batch PVD processing, SIOEN - 
nanocomposite coatings, TEKNIKER- sol-gel coatings). The up-scaling process will be 
accelerated by the use of data from earlier stages of development in the project  and 
machine learning strategies (in a QbD approach), especially as simulation tools capable of 
producing reliable predictions about the process behavio ur in larger scales. However, as 
no realistic data from a scaled-up process will be available in the earlier stages, the models 
for such scaling-up simulations should also comprehend first -principle-based algorithms 
robust enough to handle any scale-dependent behaviour.   
To validate and 
demonstrate the 
effectivity and 
durability of the 
coatings for different 
applications on 
relevant 
environments 
This is one of the main challenges addressed by NanoBloc is validation in relevant 
environments. This is one of the main advances regarding the state -of-the-art, as current 
products in the market have not been correctly validated. The cocreation approach is one 
of our key tools to address this challenge, as developments will be driven from application 
requirements to establish the relevant testing, and the results will be continuously 
monitored using hybrid management to address the go/n o-go decisions on each 
coating/technology/application, enabling solid results on the final validation stage, where 
trials will be done to demonstrate the performance of the coatings on relevant working 
environments. 
Feed in from national or international research and innovation activities 
Table 11 summarizes some of the key EU & national/regional research & innovation activities that are feeding 
knowledge and results (background) into the NanoBloc® project. In addition, we will also promote links 
between our project and the other projects funded under this topic (and other relevant Horizon Europe topics), 
in order to establish a common approach with them in relation to defining certain data sets (to guarantee that they 
are interoperable), to identify the synergies for  joint dissemination actions (workshops, events, etc.) and mutually 
leveraging our communication channels towards the general public and common target groups. These links will 
be managed throughout the workplan leaded by POLITO, supported by all the partners. 
Table 11- Relevant projects and the link with NanoBloc®  
Brief outline of the results that are feeding in will be used in NanoBloc®  
BIOKILLER – antiBIOpollutant coating for reusabLe filter", Manunet III Transnational Call (2018)  Deposition 
and characterization of Ag/SiO2 antipathogen nanostructured coatings via co -sputtering for air filters and metalcutting 
filters (GVF coordinator; POLITO partner; TEKNIKER and UNITO R&D subcontractors) 
FLEXPOL: Antimicrobial FLEXible POLymers for its use in hospital environments (H2020 -721062) TEKNIKER 
was a partner in this project in which they have generated knowledge in roll -to-roll production systems for cost-efficient 
manufacturing of extensive antimicrobial adhesive films. 
NABLA: Nanostructured antibacterial layers, Piedmont Region Call Study and characterization of Ag/SiO2 
antibacterial nanostructured coating deposited several substrates for aerospace inflatable modulus, biomedical implants 
and mobile phone (POLITO, coordinator) 
NASLA: Nanostructured antiseptical  layers, EU 7 th FP project  Study and characterization of Ag/SiO2 antiseptic 
nanostructured coating deposited via co -sputtering on several substrates as biomedical implants, cheese container food 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 23 of 45 
handling equipment and textiles used for personnel protective systems (POLITO, coordinator) 
POLYBIOSKIN: High performance functional bio -based polymers for skin -contract products in the biomedical, 
cosmetic and sanitary industries. H2020 -BBI- 745839 Among its objectives was de velopment & scale up of nano -
structured highly skin -compatible textiles for wound dressings. IRIS  (who also coordinated)  will link in knowledge in 
monitoring of distribution & quantification of nanoparticles applied on new textile films using Hyperspectral Imaging.  
MARTe: Antibacterial coating for textiles, Piedmont Region Call:  Development and characterization of Ag/SiO2 
antibacterial coatings deposited via co-sputtering on cotton and high-performance technical textile materials (Kevlar and 
Vectran) for aerospace and civil applications. (POLITO, partner) 
EcoPUR, GreenWin (Belgium): Research into PU coatings for synthetic textile (specifically for hospital mattresses) in 
accordance with future environmental and health legislation and to anticipate future production standards . Project aimed 
to replace organic substances with more sustainable (nano) alternatives. 
 
Interdisciplinarity 
A key feature of our project is the mobilisation technology, scientific, engineering, product and market expertise 
from interdisciplinary fields, along with the cocreation of research and industry partners. Thus, in order to reach 
NanoBloc objectives it is necessary to bring together different disciplines such as coatings, thin film and 
nanotechnologies for new coatings development; microbiology for biocide mechanisms and effectivity and 
toxicological testing; materials science for phys ico-chemical and  durability characterization ; engineering, AI & 
digitalization to ensure the process up -scaling; and industrial partners and end -users to establish and validate the 
requirements for the applications. Importantly, NanoBloc® also pools together complementary expertise and 
competencies of partners representing industrial and academic/research excellence in their respective fields.  
Interdisciplinary R&D, while it improves creative performance and the potential for breakthrough innovations  to 
be generated, is complex to manage. In order to promote the seamless integration of these disciplines during the 
project, the organization structure will include an Interdisciplinary Strategic Committee , involving senior 
researchers from each of the di fferent expert teams. This Committee will be responsible for the definition of the 
internal working strategies of the Thematic Working Groups  from each WP, and for the consolidation of the 
interdisciplinary R&D programme with the aim of by minimising redun dancy, balancing diversity and 
complementarity, and capitalizing on synergies in information, knowledge, cultures and techniques.  This 
Committee- which will be chaired by a Scientific Manager, Dr. Borja Coto, an  experienced researcher and 
scientific coordinator from TEKNIKER and expert in Multifunctional Surfaces, industrial processes and scale up-
will overcome communication barriers, ensure the seamless transfer of strategic information across the disciplinary 
teams, improve the risk management and Scienti fic and Technical decision -making process. Moreover, the tools 
and methods that we will employ in order to enable the fluid convergence  and intersection of these disciplines 
towards the successful accomplishment of the project objectives are as follows: co designed work plan (all teams 
and disciplines have been involved in defining the work plan, and in identifying the necessary interactions required 
among the various disciplinary teams); Cocreation Methodology (as discussed), digital collaboration and knowledge 
management tools; holistic plenary meetings (every 6 months); Thematic Working Group sessions (at least 
monthly); informal breakout meetings and sessions (as often as needed) - with an agile minutes template to be 
completed for every meeting and session); Internal knowledge exchange, demonstration and training workshops.   
 
Integration of social sciences and humanities: Not applicable for this call topic.  
 
Gender dimension 
Gendered Innovations harness the creative power of sex, gender, and intersectional analysis for innovation and 
discovery, and considering these approaches may can add valuable dimensions to research, in that they may take 
research in new directions (which would not have  unveiled themselves had we not have considered gender 
dimension). As such, we will include a ‘gendered innovation’ approach in our project, and throug h Task 7.4, we 
will employ methods of sex, gender, and intersectional analysis as a possibl e source for new knowledge creation. 
We will produce a publicly available Gender dimension Report (D7.5) that will describe how gender dimension 
has been integrated into the project across all its stages and what the main results and outcomes from a gender  
perspective have been. Key areas where gender dimension has been integrated into the content of our project are: 
• Sufficient (at least 40% representation) participation of female stakeholders, citizens and end -users in the 
codesign and cocreation toward facilitating innovative solutions; this will ensure the different needs of women 
and men groups is reflected in the cocreation process for developing the NanoBloc® technologies. 
• Perform a gender analysis to consider if there are any differences in how e.g. NanoBloc® coated masks or 
textile clothing may perform differently through use and different behaviour of women versus and men.  
• D&E (Dissemination and Exploitation) outputs will ensure gender inclusive language and images, as well as 
specific attention to women’s and men’s (potential) different characteristics, interests, roles, etc., revealed by 
the project results and which are or should be taken into account in its applications. Gender stakeholders in the 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 24 of 45 
field, as well as women from intersectional groups related to the project application sectors will be considered 
as participants and targets of the D&E activities. 
 
Open Science Practices 
Open science practices (i.e. an approach based on open cooperative work and systematic sharing of knowledge and 
tools as early and widely as possible in the process) will be implemented as an integral part of our proposed 
methodology and for increasing our chances of delivering our objectives, as follows:  
• Early and open sharing of research: Publications will be made in open access journals and we will ensure 
early sharing of publications (pre -prints) to satisfy open access requirements and to en able a faster way of 
sharing knowledge via deposit in repositories. Participation in open peer-review will also be encouraged.  
• Open access to research data and other related research outputs will be promoted following the principle 
'as open as possible, a s closed as necessary' and operated in parallel with a robust strategy for ensuring 
commercial exploitation, protection of personal data or confidentiality/security are not jeopardized. 
• Research output management: use of lab books and effective (and digitized where possible) documentation 
procedures and effective packaging of research results. 
• Measures to ensure reproducibility of research outputs: Mandatory technical standards will be adhered to 
in order to ensure that scientific information, publications, data and other outputs from our project, as well as 
the metadata about them, is available for re -use in the long term. This will involve the use of persistent and 
unique identifiers, of certified repositories that are compliant to the standards of the European Open Science 
Cloud and in compliance with the FAIR principles for the management of research data produced by projects. 
• Involving all relevant knowledge actors including citizens, civil society and end users in the cocreation 
of content, as well as Citizen Science: we will organize a series of webinars/focus groups seminars targeted 
at Civil Society Organisations (consumer-oriented) and to a wider audience with open sessions for addressing 
questions and concerns of the citizens that can be taken into account in the cocreation circle.  
 
Data Management and management of other research outputs 
Data Management is an integral part of the research process for our project. Table 12 provides an overview of how 
data/ research outputs will be managed in line with the FAIR principles (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, 
Reusable). A full Data Management Plan (DMP)  will be ready by M6 as D7.2 (it will be updated  as project 
implementation progresses and when significant changes occur). It will specify what data is generated by the project 
(purpose of the data collection/generation and its relation to the objectives of the project), whether and how it will 
be exploited or made accessible for verification and re-use, and how it will be curated and preserved to ensure our 
data/research outputs are findable, accessible, interoperable  and reusable. In line with FAIR principles, our DMP 
will address research outputs other than data & will consider aspects related to the allocation of resources, data 
security & ethical aspects. 
 
Table 12- Summary of data management and management of other research outputs 
Types of data/research outputs and their estimated size In our work plan in Task 4.3, we will be acquiring key data 
in relation to process parameters (for process monitoring purposes), and we will also be implementing an AI, applying 
machine learning techniques for model predictive control. In this sense, the man agement of process parameters data, 
which is a highly valuable project output, will be addressed. In addition, we will also gather valuable data from the 
experiments in WP2 and WP3, and the testing protocols themselves . While we may not be able to disclose  sensitive 
process data, we can show ordered data on the results of testing e.g. experimental images, text, numerical, etc. 
Findability of data/research outputs  We will ensure we make the data readily findable. Using different types of 
persistent and unique identifiers (e.g. digital object identifiers) and trusted repositories. 
Accessibility of data/research outputs We will ensure that the data is deposited in a trusted repository and we make 
the data openly accessible, as early as possible in the project and in keeping with robust IPR management (data linked 
to IP will be available after IP protection mechanisms are in place: the aim is making research data available as soon as 
possible). Provisions will be made for providing controlled access to restrict ed data for verification purposes, and we 
will also make provisions for providing access to the EC if requested by the EC in response to states of emergency. 
Interoperability of data/research outputs  We will use open, international and public available st andards, e.g. the 
standards developed by EU and international standardization organizations like CEN and ISO, such as ISO 10303 (for 
CAD, CAE/Simulations, PLM and sensor data (IoT) integrations, in addition to data storage for AI/ML applications) 
that: inc rease interoperability of information technology, addressed by data exchange & sharing solutions; enable 
common enterprise -wide views of information, addressed by data integration solutions; address obsolescence of 
information technology by data archiving solutions; promote freedom from vendor lock -in, addressed by open data 
solution. The participation of UNE (representing CEN and CENELEC) in our consortium is a significant asset. 
Moreover, other proposals approved in the topic (and other relevant Horizon E urope topics) will be contacted to 
establish common definitions on data sets and guarantee their interoperability. 
Reusability of data/research outputs Where possible, we will make the data produced in the project usable by third 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 25 of 45 
parties including after the end of the project. We will provide the documentation needed to validate data analysis and 
facilitate data re-use (e.g. readme files with information on methodology, codebooks, data cleaning, analyses, variable 
definitions, units of measurement, etc.).  Where possible, data will be made freely available in the public domain to 
permit the widest re-use possible. The aim will be for data to be licensed using standard reuse licenses  (e.g. Creative 
Commons, Open Data Commons) . The provenance of the data will  be thoroughly documented using the appropriate 
standards, and all relevant data quality assurance processes will be described. 
Curation and storage/preservation costs Research data/output management will be managed through Task 7.2 (Data 
Management and FAIR compliance)- these costs are for the most part personnel costs for the experts involved. A core 
team with prior expertise in Data Management (and data quality assura nce) will be mobilised under the leadership of 
Dr. David Nettleton from IRIS (a senior Data Scientist) as the Data Manager for the project. A reasonable budget has 
been planned under ‘Other Costs, Works and Services’ for making data FAIR and for long term preservation. 
Data Security The data will be safely stored in trusted repositories for long term preservation and curation. Provisions 
will be made for data recovery as well as secure storage and transfer of sensitive data. 
Regulatory and Ethical aspects  e.g. compliance with GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation) for any personal 
data gathered during the project. 
 
2. Impact
2.1 Project’s pathways towards impact 
 
Unique contribution of project results to (1) the outcomes specified in this topic, and (2) the wider impacts, in 
the longer term, specified in the destinations in the work programme  
 
1. Outcomes and impacts of our project 
 
Table 13- How NanoBloc®  contributes to the outcomes specified in HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-20 
Expected outcomes: NanoBloc®  contribution  
Minimise the risk of 
spread of infections from 
harmful pathogens arising 
from everyday  
human activities 
 
- All the coatings proposed in the NanoBloc® platform of Physical Vapour 
Deposition (PVD), Organic/inorganic nanocomposite coating and Wet -chemistry 
coating technologies  have already  been demonstrated effective against several 
bacteria, fungi and viruses . In particular, POLITO Ag/silica co-sputtered coating 
has been tested and  is effective on a wide range of bacteria and fungi & viruses 
including respiratory syncytial virus, influenza virus A39 and SARS-CoV240, and 
PRIREV AB20 coating was tested against adenovirus and proved to be antiviral. 
- When applied on everyday life, high traffic objects and air filtration systems, they 
will contribute to minimising the risk of spread of infections from harmful 
pathogens arising from everyday human activities thanks to a scientifically proven 
ability to deliver long-term protection and reduction of risks of infection  after being 
validated in critical  environments, such as hospital and healthcare facilities, 
workplaces, …  
Create a healthier living 
and working environment 
and offer holistic 
solutions to people  with a 
diminished immune 
system 
- We will produce relevant demonstrators and assess their performance in living 
and working environment, specifically focused  on people with a diminished 
immune system, such as in hospitals, but targeting future  applications on elderly 
people care residences, kinder gardens, schools, public transportation,… 
- We are offering holistic solutions as d emonstrators will cover all porous filter 
materials (air filtration units, face masks), textiles (protective clothing, mattress 
covers, aprons, wallpaper, furniture, flooring), and also high-traffic solid surfaces 
(doorknobs, handles, handrails, sanitaryware-taps, etc.).  
Improve citizen health 
and enhance the EU’s 
reputation as a public 
health best practice  
Region 
- Nanobloc methodology based on cocreation approach that combines functionality, 
durability in relevant conditions and toxicological/ecotoxicological effects has the 
potential to develop new to protocols to be promoted as new standards, something 
that is clearly recognized as a need41. Thus, direct results from NanoBloc can provide 
a wider impact on the future adoption of self -disinfecting surfaces. The knowledge 
generated during the project will contribute to defining new and better standards 
for validation and will position Europe as a science -based leader on the world 
stage in the field of assessing performance of antimicrobial and antiviral 
                                                      
39 Nanostructured composite coating endowed with antiviral activity a gainst human respiratory viruses deposited on fibre-based air filters.Balagna et al, Surf Coat Tech 409 (2021)  
40 Virucidal effect against coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 of a silver nanocluster/ silica composite sputtered coating.  Cristina Balagna et al. Open Ceramics 1 (2020) 100006 
41 Pietsch, Franziska, et al. "Selection of resistance by antimicrobial coatings in the healthcare setting." Journal of Hospital Infection 106.1 (2020): 115-125. 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 26 of 45 
nanocoatings and will guide consumers, manufacturers, researchers and policy 
makers. 
- Nanobloc coatings developed during the project will serve as a scalable, versatile 
innovation enabling platform for the development of Antimicrobial, Antiviral, and 
Antifungal nanocoated products in the future, whereby the NanoBloc ® registered 
trademark will become synonymous  with trusted levels of high efficiency, 
durability, safe and environmentally friendly coatings.  
Enhance economic 
benefits through reduction 
of lost hours of work 
through illness 
The NanoBloc® coatings will provide antimicrobial/antiviral face masks, air 
filtration, textiles and high traffic objects  that will be applicable in workplaces to 
prevent the spread of illness amongst workers , thus enhancing economic benefits 
through reduction of lost hours of work through illness. Additionally, the potential 
to reduce illness due to nosocomial infections is huge as quantified in section c below. 
Boost research, 
development and 
innovation in the EU 
 
-All the coatings proposed in the NanoBloc® platform are will have been 
cocreated by all-European research, design, production and (future) 
commercialization of innovative products, ensured by a very strong and relevant 
industrial value chain, including: Coating eq uipment ( INTERPANE) Coating 
suppliers (PRIREV); and End -users for air filtration and face masks (GVF) ; 
chemicals producers & industrial textiles (SIOEN ). -Open Science and Data 
Management strategies in NanoBloc are targeting a widespread use of NanoBloc  
results by the scientific and industrial community to ensure a wider impact of the 
project outcomes. Public reusable and interoperable data regarding durability of the 
functionality of the coatings under different conditions are a key requirement in order 
to develop new Quantitative structure−activity relationships (QSAR) models 42 
enabling Quality-by-Design fast developments in the future.   
Provide business 
opportunities especially 
for SMEs 
- 3 technology and manufacturing SMEs are actively present in NanoBloc®: 
GVF, PRIREV and IRIS. 
- Results obtained by NanoBloc® will be intensely disseminated to reach  other 
SMEs interested in the application of the NanoBloc® coatings in their products.  
Pathways to SMEs will be established via outreach to materials and deep tech 
regional, national and European -level Associations and Clusters, such as the 
EuraMaterials cluster , European Advanced Textile Materials’ Cluster, Cat alan 
Advanced Textiles Cluster, among others.  
Sustainable synthesis of 
nanocoatings (including 
bio-based materials) 
especially with  
effectiveness against a 
range of pathogens 
- Technologies for the synthesis of nanocoatings/  nanocomposites in NanoBloc® 
such as PVD, is considered one of the most environmentally friendly coating 
technologies, due to the lack of waste products, to the “dry” process characteristics 
(no liquid involved) and to the low consumption of starting materials (coatings are 
few nanometers thick). 
-Wet chemistry:  we will develop and/or scale up new synthesis (including bio-based 
materials) with specific focus on process sustainability (solvent-free processes).  
Research areas should 
address new antiviral and  
antibacterial nanocoatings 
for a range of applications 
on both surfaces of high-
traffic objects (door & 
window handles in public 
places, public transport, 
hospitals, public 
buildings, elderly homes 
etc) & coatings for 
textiles (protective 
clothing […], laboratory 
coats, face masks, etc.) 
- New antiviral & antibacterial nanocoatings for a range of applications addressing 
use on both surfaces of so called high -traffic objects and coatings for textiles based 
on POLITO Ag/silica co -sputtered coating (published results), PRIREV &  
TEKNIKER Cu coatings are inorganic nanomaterial based coatings with 
demonstrated and enhanced antimicrobial and antiviral activity. 
- NanoBloc® will push toward the highest TRL the co-sputtered Ag/silica & Cu 
based coatings and biobased (chitosan) antiviral and antibacterial nanocoatings 
- Prototypes will be provided, tested & demonstrated to TRL6 in working 
environments for high-traffic objects : door handles, sanitaryware-taps, etc. 
(PRIREV) and coatings for textiles such as mattresses, protective clothing, coatings 
for wallpaper & furniture (SIOEN) and air filtration and face masks  (GVF). 
Validation in real but controlled environments in the project (Hospital & shared 
facilities in offices) will open the path to future applications in public places, (public 
transport & buildings, hospitals, schools, elderly homes) and other  applications as 
food processing plants and others. 
2. Wider impacts, in the longer term, specified in the respective destinations in the work programme 
                                                      
42 Ambure et al. QSAR-Co: An open source software for developing robust multitasking or multitarget classification -based QSAR models. J Chem Inf Mod 59.6 (2019):2538-2544. 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 27 of 45 
NanoBloc® will make a clear contribution to the destination described in the topic: ‘Increased autonomy in key 
strategic value chains for resilient industry’- NanoBloc will contribute to advanced materials value chains that 
are high performance, safe, and sustainable ‘by design’, contributing both health and wellbeing benefits for society 
(reduced spread of bacterial/viral/fungal infections), as well as contributing to meet the challenges of climate 
neutrality, transition to a circular economy and a zero-pollution Europe (as described in Table 9 in Section 1.2). In 
particular, NanoBloc® contributes with a credible pathway to expected impact of Cluster 4: ‘Global leadership in 
clean and climate -neutral industrial value chains, circular economy and climate -neutral digital systems a nd 
infrastructures (networks, data centres), through innovative production and manufacturing processes and their 
digitisation, new business models, sustainable-by-design advanced materials and technologies  enabling the 
switch to decarbonisation in all major emitting industrial sectors, including green digital technologies.’  
 
In particular, and as outlined in the Destination theme in the work programme topic, the COVID-19 crisis has 
shown that global competitiveness and resilience are two sides of the same coin. Considering viral infections 
alone, the world has encountered a number of viral pandemics in recent history (viral infections such as SARS, 
MERS, and the ongoing COVID -19) that have caused tremendous morbidity and fatality, and morbidity among 
people and communities. NanoBloc® will help Europe to be better equipped to withstand and cope with shocks, 
thanks to scientifically validated antiviral, antibacterial and antifungal nanocoatings that can prevent the spread of 
infections, using technology that is green, durable and versatile to ensure wide uptake. Moreover, by being able to 
extend the durable life of protective clothing (such as masks and gowns) we will contribute environmental, cost and 
supply security benefits.  Common surfaces are used regularl y by the public and therefore can be repeatedly 
contaminated following each use . Disinfection of contaminated surfaces using bleaches or similar chemicals  
requires frequent repetition, making it an expensive process that also releases irritant gases (certain disinfectants 
can also trigger asthma and can be linked to other chronic respiratory conditions43), and generates potentially unsafe 
disposal of contaminated plastics and containers after use. It is imperative on the longer term to be able shift to the 
large scale use of self -cleaning surfaces in our everyday life . As most of the available antiviral surfaces only 
work temporarily, our focus is the development of surfaces with long-term stability and durability. 
Thanks to a relevant research-industry cocreation, our NanoBloc®  project includes the scientific, technological and 
commercial actors needed to codesign and provide the key technology and market pathways to ‘New sustainable-
by-design [antiviral, antibacte rial and antifungal nanocoating]  materials with enhanced functionalities 
[reliable, robust, durability] and applications in a wide range of industrial processes [PVD, EPD, sol-gel, UV-
curable coatings]  and consumer products  [face masks, air filtration syst ems, clothing, matresses, wallpaper, 
furniture, door knobs, handrails, sanitaryware].’  
Likewise, we provide a pathway to European  ‘Leadership [based on new scientific validation standards  for 
assessing performance of biocide nanocoatings for guiding consu mers, manufacturers, researchers and policy 
makers] in producing materials that provide clean, toxic/pollutant free environment  solutions[self-cleaning 
surfaces based on a green technology that uses inert gasses, metal and ceramic bulks, nor any chemical precursor 
or solvents or waste critical solutions], decarbonising industry, and safeguarding civil infrastructures.  
We will also contribute to  ‘Leadership in circular economy [use of bio -based materials, e.g. chitosan ] that 
strengthens cross-sectorial cooperation along the value chain and enable SMEs to transform their activities 
and business models.’, as well as to  ‘Increased adoption of key digital and enabling technologies [Photonics 
and Artificial Intelligence based Digi tal Twin and real-time process monitoring technology] in industrial value 
chains and strategic sectors, paying particular attention to SMEs  and start-ups [3 SMEs in our consortium 
and we will create new commercial opportunities for a wider SME-base including startups].’ 
 
Target groups that will benefit 
The target groups that will benefit from the outputs/results of our project are summarized in Table 14: 
 
Table 14- Target groups of the NanoBloc®  project 
Target Group Benefit 
Coating manufacturers & surface treatment 
companies 
Scaled up and validated technologies and processes 
Medical and healthcare systems  New products that are coated with tested and validated antibacterial, 
antimicrobial and antifungal properties with outstanding performance to 
protect patients and healthcare workers from infection & increase resilience 
of our healthcare systems. 
                                                      
43 Dumas et al..Association of occupational exposure to disinfectants with incidence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease among US female nurses,” JA MA Network Open 2(10),  (2019) 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 28 of 45 
End-users (incl. SMEs): e.g. indoor hygiene 
(retail, hotel s, workplace s, homes… ), 
sanitary, textiles, etc.  
New products that are coated with tested and validated antibacterial, 
antimicrobial and antifungal properties with outstanding performance. Greater 
resilience, less impact from sick leave impacts to their workforce.  
Consumers  Science-based claims about the virucidal and biocidal effectiveness, duration, 
safe and environmentally friendly properties of the new protective products  
Standardisation bodies Scientific evidence to inform new standards relevant for virucidal testing. 
Scientific/Research community  (field of 
nanocoatings) 
New knowledge in relation to improved testing methods for validating R&D 
in virucidal effectiveness 
Society, Healthcare workers, Patients, 
Citizens & governmental stakeholders 
 
According to a  study published in ‘Science, Ecology and Economics for 
Pandemic Prevention’ some economists predict that the economic & mortality 
costs of responding to the COVID -19 pandemic could reach $10 -20 trillion. 
The global adoption of the NanoBloc® coatings for air filtration & microbe 
/virus free  surfaces will help  reduce risk of infection and reduce such 
devastating impacts in the future.  
 
b. Requirements & barriers that may determine whether the desired outcomes and impacts are achieved 
 
Table 15 summarises the requirements and potential barriers that could determine the achievement of the desired 
outcomes and impacts of the project and provides mitigating measures in the case of each.   
 
Table 15- Requirements/Barriers and Mitigating measures  
Requirements/ 
Barriers 
Mitigating measures 
Other R&I work 
in & beyond HE  
Continuous literature/patent update, technology watch, participation to conferences and fairs, 
in order to implement mitigation strategies to avoid duplication and to foster collaboration. 
Regulatory &  
standards 
requirements 
Regulatory issues related to validation of the proposed nanocoatings will be duly assessed 
during via the cocreation work that will be performed with industry in Task 4.1 Cocreation for 
an application-oriented development, as well as in WP5 - Validation and Impact. We have a 
regulatory partner (UNE) in our consortium: their role is to address regulatory issues related to 
validation of the proposed nanocoatings.  In the event of regulation prohibiting e.g. metal 
nanoclusters, NanoBloc® proposes a wide range of coatings and we have a range of alternatives 
available. On the enabling side however, a tightening of standards in relation to e.g. antiviral 
validation (which could be promoted by NanoBloc scientific evidence and protocols would 
give us a competitive advantage.       
User behaviour  
& social norms 
towards 
preventing 
infections 
Given the current Covid-19 situation, we have seen a marked shift in user behavior towards 
new social norms (e.g. majority of the population protecting themselves and others against the 
virus). With further pandemics and health risks foreseen by WHO, it seems likely that f ace 
masks and in general protections against bacteria, fungi and viruses are here to stay  and will 
form part o f the New Normal. Indeed,  from the start of this pandemic, there was a dramatic 
drop in flu & other seasonal diseases44,45.   
Existing 
commercial 
products 
There is a vast number of available commercial products claiming their effectiveness against 
viruses & bacteria, which rapidly came on the market to service urgent demand due the 
pandemic. As shown in section 1.2 , the claims made by these products have not been 
sufficiently scientifically validated. NanoBloc® aims to develop a scientifically founded and 
versatile platform of antimicrobial/virucidal/antifungal nanocoatings , with scientifically 
validated and demonstrated effectiveness, stability and environmental friendliness, for a wide 
range of innovative applications by a world-class European consortium.  
 
c. Scale and significance of the project’s contribution to the expected outcomes and impacts 
Key assumptions based on current knowledge and baseline for NanoBloc expected outcomes 
The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control  (ECDPC) estimates that HAI (health care -associated 
infection) burden in Europe has sig nificant health & economic impacts, affecting >4.5 million people each year, 
leading to meaning 16 million extra days of hospital stay at a direct cost of €7 billion/annum and € 30 billion  
associated indirect costs 46. Moreover , 147000 deaths /annum in E U are attributable to HAIs  (directly or 
contributing). One of the main concerns is Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) related to antibiotic resistance 
developed by pathogens that makes it necessary to apply different strategies to reduce HAIs47,48. 
                                                      
44 https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/news/hsph-in-the-news/a-sharp-drop-in-flu-cases-during-covid-19-pandemic/  
45 https://www.the-scientist.com/news-opinion/the-pandemic-crushed-the-flu-what-happens-when-it-returns-68951  
46 Murphy et all Reduction of HAIs with antimicrobial inorganic nanoparticles incorporated in medical textiles: an economic assessment."  Nanomaterials 10.5 (2020): 999. 
47 https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/news-events/ecdc-calls-continued-action-address-antimicrobial-resistance-healthcare-settings 
48 Hall, Thomas J., et al. "A call for action to the biomaterial community to tackle antimicrobial resistance." Biomaterials Sci ence 8.18 (2020): 4951-4974. 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 29 of 45 
Although there is laboratory evidence of effectivity of biocidal coatings against a range of pathogens, there are little 
data available about effectiveness of antibacterial coatings in healthcare environments and potential reduction of 
HAIs49. Studies on copper surfaces50 on real environments account for up to 80% of reduction of bacteria compared 
to control surfaces in real environments and leading a 50% reduction in the risk of acquiring HAIs 51, by placing 
antibacterial copper surfaces in high-traffic surfaces on specific areas of Intensive Care Units. Nevertheless, other 
studies point that only 30% transmission events are environmental, including air52. Specific studies for antibacterial 
textiles in healthcare environment provide values between 20 -40% reduction of HAIs. On the basis of these data, 
and taking into account that NanoBloc targets all high traffic objects, textiles and air filtration , we can assume 3 
scenarios by using biocidal surfaces on specific sites  in healthcare environments: Conservative (20% reduction of 
HAIs), (Medium: 35% HAIs reduction) and Optimistic (50% HAIs reduction). Table 16 shows how w idespread 
adoption of biocidal surfaces for bacteria alone could contribute to a reduction of HAIs, deaths and costs. 
 
Table 16- Reduction of HAIs, associated deaths and costs due to adoption and use of biocidal surfaces 
Scenario Affected people 
millions /per year 
Deaths Cost (€ billion) 
Current 4.5 147000 (direct + indirect) 37 (direct + indirect) 
conservative  reduction of HAIs 0.9 reduction 29400 reduction 7.4 savings 
medium reduction of HAIs 1.57 reduction 51450 reduction 12.95 savings 
optimistic reduction of HAIs 2.25 reduction 78500 reduction 18.5 savings 
 
The ECDPC has so far reported 36,307,572 COVID19 cases and 750,921 deaths in the EU 53. The number 
hospitalizations needs to be estimated as reporting differs in different countries: taking as a baseline the 2nd and 3rd 
waves peaks in Spain 54, the cases/hospitalizations rate was around 7.5% and hospitalization/deaths about 20%. 
Studies on nosocomial COVID19 infections are scarce and differ55 but ranges between 44% and 0.1%56 (1% baseline 
assumed for calculation) with 30% of nosocomial COVID19 infections ending in death . Studies also differ on 
COVID19 hospitalized people acquires a bacterial/fungi HAI during their stay in the hospital, but data ranges from 
50%57 to 8%58 with 5 times higher mortality in HAI affected patients.  That would mean around 65,000 deaths 
occurring in Europe in healthcare environments due to nosocomial COVID19 or combined with other HAIs. 
There are no data about antiviral surfaces efficacy on healthcare environment but assuming similar scenarios as in 
bacteria, that would mean between 13,000 and 32,500 lives of COVID19 European patients saved if we had biocidal 
surfaces to prevent nosocomial infections against virus and bacteria in healthcare environments alone.  
While it is impossible to estimate the overall impact of such bio cidal surfaces being also available in nursing 
homes, public transport, schools and other public places, rough figures for healthcare environments alone give 
an initial quantitative idea on the potential impact of widespread adoption of effective biocidal surfaces in the 
healthcare system. With the above mentioned assumptions between 40,000 and 110,000 deaths could have 
been prevented in Europe since the beginning of the pandemic, while direct reduction of workforce loss 
preventing illness and hospitalizations attributed to HAIs could also be calculated. 
 
Scale of NanoBloc impact and outcomes 
Table 17- Direct scale/capacity of the NanoBloc partners 
Application Partner Scale brought by the NanoBloc partners  
Textiles and 
air filters  
(R2R 
processing) 
SIOEN World market leader in coated textiles with 60+% EU market share on coated textiles 
for e.g. truck tarpaulins and a production capacity of 100+ million square meters/per 
year. Specifically on medical textiles (mattress covers & aprons) provide 5-8 mio m² 
to the market. This corresponds with ~30% of global market and ~50% of European 
market.  
GVF Current capability of 200k filter elements intended for air treatment. Main markets are 
Europe, Middle East and Russia 
INTERPANE INTERPANE is currently manufacturing equipment for large area coating  and for 
glass, are coating about 50 million m2 per annum worldwide. 
High Traffic 
objects 
(Batch 
PRIREV Currently has 9 PVD chambers and are providing coatings for aesthetics purposes on 
parts such as sanitary taps and door handles to different countries in the European 
market with capability to coat 3000 sanitary water taps or door handles per day while  
                                                      
49 https://www.hygiene-in-practice.com/antimicrobial-coatings-a-new-opportunity-for-reducing-nosocomial-infections/  
50 CHYDERIOTIS S et al. New insights on antimicrobial efficacy of copper surfaces in  healthcare environment:a systematic review. Clin Microbio l  Inf 2018,24(11) 1130-1138 
51 Salgado et al. "Copper surfaces reduce the rate of healthcare -acquired infections in the intensive care unit." Infection Control & Hospital Epidemiology 34.5 (2013): 4 79-486. 
52 Danceret al. Tracking Staphylococcus aureus in the intensive care unit using whole -genome sequencing. J Hosp Infect 2019; 103(1):13-20 
53 https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/cases-2019-ncov-eueea. Data at 31/08/2021. 
54 https://www.mscbs.gob.es/profesionales/saludPublica/ccayes/alertasA ctual/nCov/situacionActual.htm  
55 Baccolini et al. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on HAIs in intensive care unit patients: a retrospective cohort study." Antim icrob Res & Inf Con 10.1 (2021): 1-9. 
56 Rhee, Chanu, et al. "Incidence of nosocomial COVID-19 in patients hospitalized at a large US academic medical center."  JAMA network open 3.9 (2020): e2020498-e2020498. 
57 Cox, Michael J., et al. "Co-infections: potentially lethal and unexplored in COVID-19." The Lancet Microbe 1.1 (2020): e11. 
58 Moreno-Torres, Víctor, et al. "Bacterial infections in patients hospitalized with COVID -19." Internal and Emergency Medicine (2021): 1-8. 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 30 of 45 
processing) TEK- 
NIKER 
Has i ndustrial chamber to add 2500 door handles /day. Previous experience 
transferring turnkey solutions for decorative coatings on door handles  delivered 
capacity to coat around 5000 door handles/day < 1 € additional cost for the coating.  
SIOEN Applications in the sanitary flooring and furniture markets are estimated to 250 T 
coating per year (at approx.10 €/kg) 
 
In 2018 there were 2.4 million hospital beds59 in EU distributed across some 12500 hospitals60. Although no data is 
available on square meters consumption of hospital textiles, reference data on daily dirty laundry weight/bed61 can 
provide an indication of the amount of non-disposable textiles to be 18 m2/bed/day with would translate to 86 million 
m2 as the minimum textile surface required to cover all needs in Europe (assuming a minimum of one set of textiles 
in use while another one is in the laundry). If we take into account current capabilities on R2R processing of SIOEN 
and INTERPANE shown in table 17 could potentially cover a significant part of the overall demand in Europe.  
The same is applicable for batch processing and high traffic objects. the supply required to provide each hospital in 
EU with door handles and sanitary taps tabs (baseline estimation: 2 beds/room; 2 doors/room, 2 handles/door, 2 
sanitary taps/room) would be 4.8 million door handles and 2.4 million sanitary taps. Current PRIREV capability of 
supply is > 1 million door handles or tabs per year (to which TEKNIKER capabilities or licenses to third companies 
could be added), so taking into account that these solutions would be long-lasting the demand for all patient rooms 
in Europe could be covered by the NanoBloc consortium in <5 years. 
Therefore, even with rough numbe rs, the consortium capabilities are enough to provide a wide significant 
impact. Even if it is not realistic thinking that all the market share will be dominated by NanoBloc partners or would 
dedicate all their capabilities to this single market, it is clear that covering the potential demand in Europe is 
realistic, as it also assumes the growth and expansion of the NanoBloc companies to meet demand (generating 
increased turnover and jobs). As previously mentioned, further supply outside the consortium could be achieved 
by licensing (and in particular creating opportunities for SMEs ) or by taking advantage of new protocols and data 
from NanoBloc, but also by other technologies that will be up-scaled in NanoBloc, such EDP (no current production 
capabilities in consortium, but this will provide new opportunities for European industry, with a particular 
focus on SMEs, as we pave out pathways to exploitation through Task 6.4) 
Significance of NanoBloc impact and outcomes 
Key needs to adopt antimicrobial surfaces &  technology adoption cycle: Penetration in the market is a key aspect 
for reaching the expected impact. Market expectations are good, as pandemics are forecast to drive demand for 
antimicrobial coatings in the coming years62: the global market is expected to duplicate from 2019 (>3.2 billion $) 
to 2026 (6.3 billion $). It is noteworthy that big shares of this market correspond to silver antimicrobial coatings, 
healthcare applications and indoor air quality markets; all are addressed by NanoBloc. Importantly, additional costs 
due to the coatings are lower than additional cleaning operations to guarantee disinfection as calculated by Schmidt 
et al.63 for copper surfaces and even for biocide textiles when compared to expenditure on antiseptics64.  
In order to realize this potential and growth in the coming years and thereby yield real impact on health, it is vital 
that new products that are brought to market  are solidly built in terms of performance.  Although the potential of 
biocidal surfaces has b een proven at laboratory scale through standard tests, professionals and researchers of 
healthcare systems clearly point to the need of having more data on their real impact on relevant environments 
and their durability and resistance specially to cleaning chemicals and to avoid the need of reapplication 65, as 
well as risk assessment of potential toxicity and ecotoxicity66. All these needs are addressed in our project, so 
it is reasonable to foresee wide acceptance of the NanoBloc  solutions. Although, NanoBloc targets TRL6, the 
advantages of the cocreation approach, and up-scaling and demonstration activities should accelerate further steps 
upwards in the TRL scale after the termination of the project, towards product commercialization  (which will be 
formalised in professional business plans that will be prepared in Task 6.4). The Nanobloc partners are committed 
to a competitive Time to Market (TTM)- 3 to 5 years, depending on the technology and product. Assuming typical 
normal distribution on innovation adoption67, considering that Nanobloc partners are ready to cover a big share of 
demand in Europe in terms of production required, we can consider that Innovators (2.5%) could adopt NanoBloc 
solutions during the fi rst 5 years after commerciali zation ( expected year 8-10 after project  termination), those 
experiences would help to build key dynamics on diffusion of innovation68 such us demonstrate Relative advantage 
                                                      
59 https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Healthcare_resource_statistics_ -_beds#Hospital_beds 
60 https://hospitalhealthcare.com/latest-issue-2020/hope/hospitals-in-europe-healthcare-data/ 
61 Lopes, Catia Milena, et al. "Analysis of sustainability in hospital laundry: The social, environmental, and economic (cost) risks."  Resources 8.1 (2019): 37. 
62 https://www.gminsights.com/industry-analysis/antimicrobial-coatings-market-report 
63 Schmidt et al. November 2019 Appl. Environ. Microbiol. doi:10.1128/AEM. 01886-19 Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology  
64 Murphy et al. Reduction of  HAIs with antimicrobial inorganic nanoparticles incorporated in medical textiles: an economic assessment."  Nanomaterials 10.5 (2020): 999. 
65 Ellingson et al. Impact of a Novel Antimicrobial Surface Coating on HCAI and Environmental Bioburden at 2 Urban Hospitals.  Clin Inf Dis 71.8 (2020): 1807-1813. 
66 Ahonen, et al. "Proactive approach for safe use of antimicrobial coatings in healthcare settings: opinion of the COST action networ k AMiCI." Int J Env Res Pub He 14.4 (2017): 366. 
67 Balas, E. Andrew, and Wendy W. Chapman. "Road map for diffusion of innovation in  health care." Health Affairs 37.2 (2018): 198-204. 
68 Cain, Mary, and Robert Mittman. "Diffusion of innovation in health care." (2002). 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 31 of 45 
of the innovation, Observability of the solution perme ating through Homophilous groups (i.e. those with similar 
characteristics), Compatibility to coexist with current systems and Infrastructure availability to implement the  
solutions. Thus, we can consider that Early adopters (a further 13.5%) could be covered after another 5 years, and 
Early Majority (additional 34%) by year 18-20 after finishing the project. 
Under that assumptions and scale defined previously for EU , Table 18 shows estimations on NanoBloc potential  
impact, assuming 2030 as TTM deadline, from Conservative to Optimistic scenarios in terms of performance of 
the solutions preventing HAIs. Calculations were done only for non-pandemic scenario (typical bacteria and fungi 
HAIs): virus were not considered for the calculations as  each potential pandemic could have their own 
characteristics and there is no way to preclude consistent data on real impact. 
As many assumptions have been made, and due to uncertainties on some basic data, the figures can be considered 
as an estimation of the potential significance of the NanoBloc results and how this potential can be achievable on 
the basis of current production capabilities in the consortium and the scarce current knowledge of potential impact 
of biocide coatings in reducing HAIs in real environments. Moreover, these significance data calculations have been 
made considering only Healthcare systems (hospitals) w ithout pandemic virus scenario or other targeted 
applications such as nursery homes, public transport or other public places that were not considered due to lack of 
consistent initial data for assumptions. As such, even if some of the mentioned figures could be overestimated, the 
overall potential impact will be significantly higher considering other applications. 
 
Table 18- Estimated impact in EU of Nanobloc Outcomes 
Scenario Impact metrics 2035 
Innovators 
2.5% 
2040 
Early adopters 
16% 
2045 
Early Majority 
50% 
Conservative 
(20% HAI 
reduction) 
Patients HAIs affected avoided/ year 22,500  144,000 450,000 
Lives saved/ year 735 4704 14700 
€ billion saved on healthcare / year 0.185 1.184 3.7 
Medium 
(35% HAI 
reduction) 
Patients HAIs affected avoided/ year 39,250  251200 785,000 
Lives saved/ year 1286 8232 25,725 
€ billion saved on healthcare / year 0.323 2.072 6.475 
Optimistic 
(50%  HAI 
reduction) 
Patients HAIs affected avoided/ year 56,250  360000 1,1125,000 
Lives saved/ year 1962 12560 39250 
€ billion saved on healthcare / year 0.465 2.96 9.25
2.2 Measures to maximise impact - Dissemination, exploitation and communication  
 
First version of the ‘Plan for the dissemination and exploitation including communication activities 
We outline hereunder our planned measures to maximise the impact of our project through our initial ‘Plan for the 
dissemination and exploitation, including communication activities’ (hereafter DE&C Plan). Due to the 
dynamic nature of EU collaborative projects (and also considering the time lapse between proposal preparation and 
implementation), this first version of the Plan will be further detailed in Deliverable 6.2 (at M6) . As a central 
element of our project methodology is the cocreation between the research and the industry partners to ensure that 
science meets industry requirements, our DE&C Plan will be periodically updated according to the progress 
and emerging results of the project. 
 
Continuous results assessment and value proposition design : The results of our project will be considered as any 
tangible or intangible output of the action, such as data, knowledge and information- whatever their form or 
nature, whether or not they can be protected - and which can create impact during and/or after t he EU 
funding procedure. An ongoing activity that will accompany the R&D work will be to continually assess and 
catalogue the project outputs as they emerge, and to consider the value and potential unique selling points (USPs) 
of the key results towards our different target groups. 
 
Communication Plan and Toolbox: While the specific details of the communication activities to be implemented 
will be appropriate with the nature of each of the final outputs of our project  and in line with the progress of 
the de velopment of the action, we have defined a strategically planned, holistic approach that will govern the 
different ad-hoc efforts. First of all, we have defined clear communication goals and objectives:  
To reach out to society as a whole- there is an important opportunity to inform the public of the research-industry 
effort being leveraged towards delivering innovative products to the market that will play a high value role in 
protecting the public against the spread of infectious diseases and viruses than ks to high performance and 
scientifically validated new antibacterial, antiviral and antifungal coatings.  We will organize a series of 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 32 of 45 
webinars/focus groups seminars targeted at Civil Society Organisations (consumer -oriented) and to a wider 
audience with open sessions for addressing questions and concerns of the citizens that can be taken into account in 
the cocreation circle. Well known initiatives such as, European Researcher nights, Pint of science festivals and/or 
Local TEDex talks will be contacted to promote talks on NanoBloc results on their events to reach a wider audience. 
 
• To establish synergies with external bodies such as standardization bodies (& contribute to improved science-
based standards), & national/international industry associations (reach adopters of NanoBloc® innovations) 
• To achieve high visibility through the scientific community 
• To show the relevance (in our current Covid -19 era) of our project with the pandemic and its value of 
contributing to mitigate future risks and to demonstrate how EU funding contribut es to tackling the 
societal challenge in relation to our vulnerability in general to bacteria, mould and viruses, and how we can 
protect citizens from such risks, also highlighting socio-economic impacts, and environmental contribution. 
 
We will design and build a Communication Toolbox for achieving our communication goals and objectives:  
• Visual identity and brand (e.g. we have already worked on a project logo during the bid preparation phase, 
and during project implementation we will invest effort in building brand identity and particularly in relation to 
the association of NanoBloc® with trusted science-validated claims; we will work on a brand ‘claim’ or tag 
line that effectively communicates a trustworthy brand value) 
• Project website as an important vehicle for the project Communication (and dissemination) effort, hosting 
project public deliverables and also hosting blog content (e.g. Thought Leadership articles and whitepaper (e.g. 
in relation to the importance of standards, the impa cts of research-industry cocreation), at least 6 newsletters, 
etc., which will also be disseminated via our social media channels (LinkedIn and Twitter (whereby we will 
create campaigns for our different target audiences).   
• Informative material in printable (banners, posters, flyers) & multimedia (videos, digital flyers) formats 
• Engagement with industry- participation in at least 3 tradeshows/exhibitions, face2face meetings, mailings… 
• Achieve at least 6 commercial publications in online/offline magazines and blogs. 
• PR strategy- well timed and prepared Press Releases to coincide with key development milestones and 
outputs (issued through relevant press channels, including the European Commission News Section). 
 
Dissemination of the Project Results: In line with our Open Science Strategy, we will ensure the early and wide 
dissemination or public disclosure of all the non-confidential project results, via appropriate means, including 
scientific publications. As such, our Dissemination strategy will: Identify the results to disseminate and transfer 
the knowledge and results to the stakeholders that can best make use of it; Identify the appropriate dissemination 
channels; Maximize the impact of research, whereby we enable the value of  our results to be potentially wider 
than the original focus; and, Monitor and evaluate the effects of the dissemination activities.  
 
The main dissemination tools, among others, that we will use are:  
 
• Scientific publications (at least 15) in relevant journals- e.g. Journal of Coatings Technology and Research; 
Nano Convergence; Surface and Coatings Technology, Applied Surface Science 
• Participate (presential & virtual attendance) in at least 10 international conferences- oral/poster/papers, e.g. 
World Congress on Materials Science & Engineering; 10 th International Conference on Smart Materials & 
Nanotechnology; Annual ICACC -International Conference & Expo on Advanced Ceramics & Composites. 
• Share results on online media (research data, software, reports)  
• Organize at least 2 training and workshop sessions 
• Mid/Final project event to demonstrate to potential users/customers. 
 
Standardization activities : Standardization in R&I projects supports the translation of the R&I findings into 
marketable solutions. NANOBLOC will build upon existing standards during the development of the novel 
processes and validation protocols ensuring compatibility with market conditions and increasing transparency for 
prospective customers. NANOBLOC will be linked with ongoing standardization work like, e.g., in ISO/TC 229 
‘Nanotechnologies’, ISO/TC 107 ‘Metallic and other inorganic coatings’, ISO/TC 201 ‘Surface chemical analysis’ 
and ISO/TC 194 ‘Biological and clinical evaluation of medical devices’. This will support the dissemination of the 
project and its results, getting feedback from the stakeholders organized in standardization and to contribute to the 
development of new standards by forwarding inputs from NANOBLOC developed protocols. UNE, representing 
CEN-CENELEC, will lead these activities. 
 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 33 of 45 
Exploitation actions: The main goal of the exploitation plan is to make use of the results for commercial/business, 
societal, scientific, contribution to standards & even political purposes (e.g. value & impact of NanoBloc® for 
protecting against the future virus threats and building resilience). Envisaged exploitation actions include (and table 
21 at the end of this section summarises the Exploitation intentions of each member of the consortium): 
 
• Developing, creating & marketing a product or process , or creating and providing a service . The global 
COVID-19 crisis has greatly increased industry demand for antimicrobial & antiviral coatings, especially for 
high touch surfaces in healthcare centres and long-term care facilities, public transport, schools, hotels, offices, 
etc to reduce human exposure and mitigate the spread of infectious pathogens. A clear ambition of the project 
is to bring the NanoBloc® technologies to market.  
• Patent publications (target for at least 3) 
• Utilizing the project results in further research activities other than those covered by the concerned project 
(or use of the results for academic purposes (PhD, post-PhD...) 
• Contribution to new standards- (as discussed above).  
 
Business Model and Go -to-Market strategy: We have used the Business Model Canvas (BMC) approach to 
focus our draft plan of the dissemination and exploitation of the outputs of the NANOBLOC® project.  This first 
version of the BMC (Table 19) is a common Canvas for the project, howeve r in Task 6.4 each of the industry 
partners (INTERPANE, PRIREV, IRIS, GVF, SIOEN) will develop their own BMC based on the results that 
they will be commercialising or adopting. These BMCs will be delivered at Project Interim and in the latter phase 
of the project they will be further elaborated into Business Plans that will be delivered at the end of the project. 
 Table 19- Business Model Canvas 
 
 
 
Strategy for IP Management: Our strategy for the management of intellectual property (IP) to ensure Freedom to 
Operate (FTO)  and to adequately protect our results as relevant to ensure the commercial exploitation of the 
project. We have conducted a first patentability study (using patent libraries- EPO and WIPO) to identify potential 
IPR issues with existing technologies and patents, and we have established our FTO and differentiation points. We 
have a clear understanding and agreement among the partners in relation to Background IP - ownership of 
Background remains with the current owners and is not affected by t he project  & access rights to 
Background needed to implement the project is provided royalty free, and if needed for exploitation of the 
project results it will be either royalty free or under fair and reasonable conditions. Each partner has declared 
their Background IPR (will be formalised in the Consortium Agreement) and necessary access rights to e.g. Polito 

 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 34 of 45 
patent (PCT/IB2018/057639- Novel technique for the deposition of a nanostructured coating with virucidal, 
antimicrobial and antifungal properties via co-sputtering technique). No Background IPR is needed from any Third 
Parties external to the consortium. Our strategy for knowledge management and protection  is to file new patents 
that will come as a result of the project,  with a clear ownership strateg y- developers own their results, and 
joint development will result in jointly owned patents. If one of the parties participating in the project wishes to 
proceed with the protection of the results through a patent or other forms of industrial property rights, the others, if 
not interested in co-ownership, will transfer their share of ownership of the patent under conditions to be defined 
on a case-by-case basis. We will also follow other protection paths as appropriate , such as trademarks, copyright, 
Knowhow, Trade Secrets, etc. Table 20 summarises the key knowledge items that we expect will be generated 
during the project, the foreseen protection measures , the owner(s) and access rights to this key knowledge ( to 
be included in a consortium agreement that will be generated and signed by all partners if our project is selected for 
funding, and the final Results Ownership List will be updated in the Final Periodic Report). 
Table 20- Summary of the IP strategy 
Knowledge Item Protection Owner(s) Access Rights 
New methodologies & protocols for study 
of the biocide mechanism of action  
Open Access  UNITO 
TEKNIKER 
Open Access: Disseminated in peer-
reviewed journals & open databases 
New processes & coating compositions for 
maximizing adhesion, durability, biocidal 
effect, specific for application/product 
New patent or 
Trade secret 
POLITO 
TEKNIKER 
other partners 
Preferential access to partner end 
users & licensing outside consortium 
Process parameters of co-sputtering 
coatings, transferred to upscaling facilities  
New patent or 
Trade secret 
POLITO 
INTERPANE 
End users  
New compositions and process parameters 
of RF co-sputtered coatings 
New patent(s) POLITO End users 
Process parameters of Sputtering & 
Cathodic arc of Ag doped nitrides  
New patent or 
Trade secret 
PRIREV Licensing to Third Parties  
Process parameters for PVD Cu doped 
nitrides and oxides 
Open access TEKNIKER Open Access: Disseminated in peer-
reviewed journals & open databases 
Process parameters of Nanoparticle doped 
UV lacquers  
New patent or 
Trade secret 
SIOEN 
POLITO 
Own commercialisation and 
Licensing to Third Parties 
Process parameters of electrophoretic 
deposition of biobased formulations   
Open Access FAU Open Access: Disseminated in peer-
reviewed journals & open databases 
Process parameters of Sol-Gel hybrid 
coatings 
Open Access FAU 
TEKNIKER 
Open Access: Disseminated in peer-
reviewed journals & open databases 
Nanoparticle doped UV-lacquer with self-
disinfecting properties 
EU patent SIOEN Under license 
New knowledge on Toxicity and 
Ecotoxicity of biocide formulations  
Open Access UNITO 
TEKNIKER 
Open Access: Disseminated in peer-
reviewed journals & open databases 
Real-time PAT monitoring solutions and 
Digital Twins of the processes 
Knowhow in 
software code 
IRIS Preferential access to process owners 
Exploitation intentions of the consortium: Table 21 summarises the core exploitation intentions of each partners. 
Table 21- Exploitation Intentions of the partners 
Partner Exploitation Intentions 
POLITO New publications on reputable international scientific journals: New knowledge/know how about antiviral 
/antimicrobial/antifungal coatings aimed at: students for updating the lectures contents; researchers for new 
collaborations; industrial partners for new collaborations and funded projects 
TEK-NIKER New publications on international scientific journals. IP Protection (patenting coatings and/or processes and 
industrial secret).  Technology transfer to industry: industrial projects for different applications and 
environments (ceramic tiles, automotive, implants, food processing plants). Licensing agreements & coating 
services. 
UNITO  Dissemination of the results to the scientific community and to operators in the sector of antimicrobial 
materials through publications in peer -reviewed scientific journals and presentations at specialized 
congresses in this field. The knowledge generated with the project will be also employed for upda ting the 
lecture contents for students and for the search of new scientific collaborations and funds 
FAU  Development of antiviral & antibacterial nanocoatings by EPD and sol-gel method and their characterization 
GVF  Effective application of a virucidal , antimicrobial and antifungal coating on filtration systems hence 
improving products quality and reliability. 
SIOEN To market coated textiles (incl. protective clothing, mattresses, and mouth masks), radiation -curable 
lacquers and varnishes for high-traffic objects & surfaces. 
PRIREV Upscaling of antibacterial/antiviral PVD films for high -traffic objects. Commercialization of the coating 
service for high traffic objects producers. 
IRIS Real-time nano-characterization Process Analytical Technologies (PAT) inline device to be added to our 
portfolio of photonics analysers for commercialisation, in addition to new AI models that can be integrated 
into our Scadalytics platform giving us access to a new cli ent base in nanocoating production and 
application. Post-project we will continue work towards system prototype demonstration in operational 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 35 of 45 
environment (TRL7), progressing to a complete and qualified system (TRL8) for which we can commence 
commercialisation. 
INTERPANE Post project scale-up, market deployment and commercialization of the industrial coating equipment for the 
final users of the developed coating. 
UNE Participation of UNE as standards body intends to increase the exploitation possibilities for the other 
partners by using the benefits of standardization. This will reinforce the relevance of the European 
standardization system and its recognition as an effective exploitation channel towards the European R&I 
community. 
 
101057597 - NANOBLOC - Part B - Page 36 of 45
2.3 Summary 
SPECIFIC NEEDS EXPECTED RESULTS D&E&C MEASURES 
• Covid-pandemic has triggered demand for new antiviral 
and antibacterial nanocoatings  that offer virucidal 
effectivity, extended durability during use, are safe and 
environmentally friendly, and are suited for a range of 
applications addressing use in air filtration systems, in 
porous textiles (e.g. protective clothing in food processing 
plants, laboratory coats, face masks, etc.), and on surfaces 
of high-traffic objects (e.g. door and window handles in 
public places, public transport, hospitals, public buildings, 
schools, elderly homes etc). 
• Current testing standards are not enough to guarantee 
durability or functionality o n rea l application  
environments. This has led to numerous products reaching 
the market since the covid pandemic making claims that 
are not fully supported by science -based testing and 
validation methods.  
 
• Reliable Antimicrobial, Antiviral, and Antifungal 
Nanocoatings that respond to market needs in terms of 
efficiency, durability and sustainability/ecofriendly 
properties, with claims that are validated and backed by 
solid science -based evidence on antimicrobial and 
virucidal mechanisms of nanocoatings, to build resilience 
against future global health crises. 
• Scaled up processes of PVD, Wet Chemistry and 
Organic/Inorganic nanocomposite coatings  
• AI-augmented PAT process monitoring and control 
platform for facilitating process understanding and 
quality control 
• Demonstrator products:  NanoBloc® porous filter 
materials (air filtration units, face masks), textiles 
(protective clothing, mattress covers, aprons, wallpaper), 
and high -traffic solid surfaces ( doorknobs, handles, 
handrails, sanitaryware -taps, etc.), the virucidal 
effectivity and durability of which have been  proven 
with new fit-for-purpose testing protocols  
Dissemination towards the scientific community, industry 
and health care environments : Scientific publication s with 
laboratory results and demonstration trials on relevant 
environments. Dissemination of the protocols to relevant 
standardization work groups. Participating in conferences and 
fairs; Participation in EC project portfolios to disseminate the 
results as part of a group and maximise the visibility vis-à-vis 
companies. 
Exploitation of the new product:   Patenting the 
antimicrobial antiviral new products : air filters  (GVF) and, 
textiles (SIOEN) and new coatings equipment and technology 
(INTERPANE). Patenting new coatings for high tr affic 
objects (PRIREV, TEKNIKER). Direct exploitation of 
coatings services (PRIREV) . Direct commercialisation of 
Real-time Process Monitoring and Digital Twins to support 
commercial adoption of the NanoBloc® technologies (IRIS).  
Communication towards citizens: Specific communication 
publications for wider audience. Participation on events such 
as Researchers Nights, Pint of science, and TEDex. Specific 
events for general public  to show how the outcomes of the 
action are relevant to our everyday lives. 
TARGET GROUP OUTCOMES IMPACTS 
Coating manufacturers and surface treatment companies 
(access to innovative coating technology that is founded on a 
deep scientific base) 
End users industries for NanoBloc® antimicrobial, antiviral, 
and antifungal nanocoatings, which include: textiles (masks 
and protective clothing -PPE, aprons, work overcoats, 
mattresses, etc.), sanitary, interiors/high traffic surfaces (e.g. 
household, retails, hotels, workplace, business environments), 
indoor hygiene, medical & healthcare, plastics packaging etc. 
Research/Scientific community (field of nanocoatings) 
Standards bodies  (new scientific -evidence to inform 
improved standards) 
Healthcare workers, Patients, Citizens (less risk of catching 
infections) 
Business community and  workplaces (greater resilience, 
less impact from sick leave impacts to their workforce) 
Scaled up processes that can be applied in industry:  
• Batch processing:  3D applications: PVD 
sputtering/cathodic arc/HIPIMS (PRIREV -
TEKNIKER); Sol -Gel (TEKNIKER); EDP (FAU -
TEKNIKER) 
• Roll-to roll processing:  2D applications (PVD 
Sputtering ( INTERPANE); Sol -Gel (TEKNIKER); 
Nanocomposite coatings & lacquers (SIOEN) 
Business plans for the development of at least 9 new 
‘NanoBloc® protected’ product lines - air filtration systems 
(GVF), face masks, mattresses, wallpaper, aprons (SIOEN), 
coating of doorknobs, taps and sanitaryware, handrails 
(adoption by PRIREV’s client-base). 
New knowledge on virucidal and biocidal mechanisms for 
informing new and improved standards (engagement with 
standardization bodies will be commenced) 
High use of the new scientific knowledge (measured with the 
relative rate of citation index of project publications) 
Scientific: New knowledge on virucidal and biocidal 
mechanisms  
 
Economic: Increased resilience to the spread of infections 
leading to less sick leave, reduced healthcare costs, rescued 
confinements, all of which are devastating to the economy. 
 
Technological: more effective, versatile and reliable 
antimicrobial/virucidal coatings respect vs. what is on the 
market; high temperature resistant antimicrobial/virucidal 
coatings for thermal re -generation of filters and other coated 
surfaces 
 
Societal: protection of citizen health and wellbeing against 
the spread of harmful viruses, bacteria and fungal infections  
(reduced incidences of aerosol and fomite infections) . 
Increased consumer confidence in product claims that are 
backed by robust science.   
 
101057597- NANOBLOC – Part B- Page 37 of 45 
3. Quality and efficiency of the implementation
3.1 Work plan and resources  
Brief presentation of the overall structure of the work plan 
Our workplan has been designed to coherently enable us over the course of 3 years to  develop, test, optimize, 
scale-up and validate (from TLR3 to TRL6), innovative, high performance new antiviral, antibacterial 
and antifungal coatings . These industrially scalable, versatile and green technologies are suitable for 
application on a variety of different substrates: porous filter materials (air filtration units, face masks), textiles 
(protective clothing, mattress covers, aprons, wallpaper), and high -traffic solid surfaces ( doorknobs, handles, 
handrails, sanitaryware-taps, etc.). We will also plan and prepare for the post-project impact pathways. 
The workplan is divided into 7 inter -related work packages , each with its own tasks deliver ing outputs 
(deliverables) and culminat ing in a series of milestones that will establish the project critical path and will help 
facilitate project monitoring and management. In Fig. 9 an overview of the development loops in the 3 years of the 
technical activities (or WPs) is shown. 
Figure 9- Development loops to advance the TRLs 
In year 1 of the project, in WP1 (Synthesis of new coatings) and through Tasks 1.1- 1.3, we will develop coatings 
by a) RF co -sputtering and other Physical Vapour Deposition (PVD) such as arc evaporation and combination of 
them b) Doping UV cured lacquers and varnishes with nanoparticles, and c) through other promi sing coating 
technologies, such as sol -gel, Electrophoretic Deposition (EPD) on substrates selected by end users  and the 
development process will be codesigned and guided in close conjunction with the industry upscalers and end-users 
from Task 4.1 (Cocreation for an application -oriented development) . In order to verify the behaviour  of the 
coatings, through WP2 (Understanding of virucidal & biocidal mechanisms and toxicology assessment)  we will 
perform assessment the antiviral & biocidal properties, toxicity & ecotoxicity of the newly developed coatings, as 
well as characterize their physico-chemical, mechanical, chemical resistance and ageing performance through WP3 
(Characterisation) in a complete development loop.  
In year 2, once we have the first loops of development with WP2 and WP3 , we will start with T4.2 up-scaling in 
WP4 (Industry Cocreation and Process Upscaling) . We are looping here T1.4 (coating optimization), T2.4 (we 
will also be able at this point to combine durability and biocide effectivity assessment), T4.2 (process upscaling), 
as well as standards testing (T5.1), to fine tune the coatings formulations & parameters taking into account the 
results from durability+effect (T2.4) and results from up -scaling in which some problems could arise tha t may 
require optimization, and also with data from the machine learning activities from T4.3 (PAT enabled process 
monitoring and digital twinning). 
In year 3, we will continue with the new optimization in task 1.4 and on process upscaling in T4.2, as well as testing 
under standards for each application, testing of performance in application environments , as well as impact 
assessment & verification (WP5-Validation).  
We have depicted these development loops in the schematic above (Figure 9). Cross-cutting the workplan, we will 
perform comprehensive activities to deliver a Pathway to Impact (WP6) for the project outputs via a communication 
and dissemination of the project outputs, IP management, as well as business plan and defining a post-project plan 
for further scale -up towards market entry of the innovations.  Finally, we will ensure a well -run project through 
WP7- Project Management & RRI , which encompasses, in addition to project monitoring, tracking and risk 
management, data management, management of Open Science, as well as Inclusiveness and Gender Dimension.   

 
101057597- NANOBLOC – Part B- Page 38 of 45 
Timing of the different work packages and their components (Gantt chart or similar) 
 
 

 
101057597- NANOBLOC – Part B- Page 39 of 45 
Graphical presentation of the components showing how they interrelate (Pert chart or similar) 
 
 
 
Table 3.1g: ‘Subcontracting costs’ items  
No subcontracting is envisaged.  
 
Table 3.1h: ‘Purchase costs’ items (travel and subsistence, equipment and other goods, works and 
services) and ‘Other costs categories’ items (e.g. internally invoiced goods and services) 
 
1 POLITO Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  21300 Travel fund to cover travel & subsistence for: 2 people @ 1 presential project meeting per 
year (supplemented with virtual meetings)- about €9K; 2 people @ 1 or more International 
conference/exhibition per year (EU or outside EU)- about €12K;  
Equipment  4000 Depreciation cost of equipment for the coating and prototype characterization 
Other goods, works and 
services 
72600 Targets for co-sputtering, technical gases, laboratory consumables, chemicals, 
consumables for antibacterial tests (22000 €); Registration fees for participation in 6 
conferences (average value 600 €: 3600 €); open access publication (5000 €); spare parts 
of sputtering equipment (2000 €); IP cost (2000 €); audit (5000 €); service contract for a 
technician specialized in co-sputtered coating (30000 €) 
Total 97900  
2 TEKNIKER Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  
15000 
Travel fund to cover travel & subsistence for: 2 people @ 1 presential project meeting per 
year (supplemented with virtual meetings)- €6K; 2 people @ 1 International 
conference/exhibition per year (EU or outside EU)- €6K; attendance at national events & 
travel to partner sites & labs (€3k) 
Equipment      
Other goods, works and 
services 
107000 
WP1: Cu, Cr, Ti, Zr targets for PVD coatings (19k€) & Magnetron sputtering (45k€) for 
Cu evaporation to be incorporated in KSA Cathodic arc existing equipment. It is necessary 
to carry out the combination of Cathodic arc Nitride evaporation and Cu magnetron 
sputtering to allow better control on the Cu % in the formulations; WP2 (bio, toxi, biocide 
test): consumables for toxicity tests (different kits, daphnia, algae, v.fischeri) 5k€, 
chemical reactives (2k€), kits for biocide assessment (6k€); WP3 (ageing): consumables 
for mechanical-tribological-ageing lab (5k€), samples preparation (4k€), holders for 
mechanical/ageing configurations (6k€); WP4 ancillary tools 6 substrate holders for 
upscaling (5k€) sol-gel chemicals & precursors (5k€); WP5 (LCA): software license and 
database access (2k€); WP7: audit certificate (3k€) 
Total 122000  
3 UNITO Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 15000 
Travel fund to cover travel & subsistence for: 2 people @ 1 presential project meeting per 
year (supplemented with virtual meetings)- €6K; 2 people @ 1 International 
conference/exhibition per year (EU or outside EU)- €6K; attendance at national events & 
travel to partner sites & labs (€3k) 

 
101057597- NANOBLOC – Part B- Page 40 of 45 
Equipment 25000 
Depreciation cost of Lab equipment for the establishment of a supplementary dedicated 
supply chain: CO2 incubator for cell line culture, virus production and antiviral 
experiments incubation; -80°C refrigerator for viral stock and cell lines conservation; 
biosafety cabinet level II for the execution of the antiviral assays; -20°C refrigerator for 
stock of cell culture reagents; supercentrifuge for the production of viral stocks;  
multimode microplate reader for cytotoxicity assays 
Other goods and services 124300 
Laboratory consumables (flasks, pipets, 96 well plates, gloves, ultracentrifuge tubes, 
scrapers, 50ml and 15ml tubes, eppendorf...) (€ 85000), Reagents for cell culture (cell 
culture medium, fetal bovine serum, antibiotics, trypsin, glutamine, aminoacids) (€ 8000), 
Feline calicivirus and cell line for virus production and antiviral assays (the other 5 viruses 
and cell lines are still available in the UNITO Lab)(€ 1300), antibodies for 
immunocitochemistry assays (€ 3000), MTT kit for cytotoxicity assays (€ 5000), reagents 
for TEM analysis (€ 8000), Instrument Maintenance (€ 10000), audit certificate (€ 4000) 
Total 164300   
4 FAU Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  
9000 
Travel fund to cover travel & subsistence for: 2 people @ 1 presential project meeting per 
year (supplemented with virtual meetings)- €6K; 1 people @ 1 International 
conference/exhibition per year (EU or outside EU)- €2K; attendance at national events & 
travel to partner sites & labs (€1k) 
Equipment      
Other goods, works and 
services 28600 
Consumables (substrates and solvents for EPD and sol-gel method); Open Science costs 
(4k); Registration fees for participation in 6 conferences (average value €600x6= €3600) 
Total 37600  
5 GVF Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  
10000 
Travel fund to cover travel & subsistence for: 2 people @ 1 presential project meeting per 
year (supplemented with virtual meetings)- €4K; 2 people @ 1 International 
conference/exhibition per year (EU or outside EU)- €4K; attendance at national events & 
travel to partner sites & labs (€2k) 
Equipment      
Other goods, works and 
services 40000 
Sintered fibers, wire mesh, Spunbound/Meltblown PP textile, special alloys any raw 
materials and consumables for filters manufacturing. 
Total 50000  
6 SIOEN Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  
15000 
Travel fund to cover travel & subsistence for: 2 people @ 1 presential project meeting per 
year (supplemented with virtual meetings)- €6K; 2 people @ 1 International 
conference/exhibition per year (EU or outside EU)- €6K; attendance at national events & 
travel to partner sites & labs (€3k) 
Equipment  6000 Light cabinet with different wavelengths (depreciated cost) 
Other goods, works and 
services 
105000 
Lab consumables (10k€); Glassware (5k€); Extra tests with ceramic beads at Netzsch 
(8k€); external sourcing NPs (5k€): wear testing (12k); excimer test (15k) Standardized 
assay services for product validation (TRL5) (47k); audit certificate (3k) 
Total 126000  
7 PRIREV Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  
15000 
Travel fund to cover travel & subsistence for: 2 people @ 1 presential project meeting per 
year (supplemented with virtual meetings)- €6K; 2 people @ 1 International 
conference/exhibition per year (EU or outside EU)- €6K; attendance at national events & 
travel to partner sites & labs (€3k) 
Equipment  68800 Calotest: 7 500€; Microhardness Tester: 27 000€; LIS (Linear Ion Source): 31 875€ 
Other goods, works and 
services 
144375 
Sputtering rotatable targets (length 1334mm, diameter 70mm; materials: Ag, Cr, Ti, Zr)- 
35k; Cathodic Arc Targets (diameter 100mm; Cr, Ti, Zr, Cr-Ag, Ti-Ag)- 20k, Gases (Ar, 
N2, CH4, C2H2, O2)-6k; consumables to clean surfaces pre-PVD deposition (solvents 
(ethanol, acetone, propanol), alkaline ultrasonic cleaning products, shot blasting raw 
materials)-12k ; chemical decoating products-6k ; Substrate holders- 12k; Consumables for 
characterization equipments (reagents, silicon wafers, abrasives)-3k. External 
characterization services provided by laboratories equipped with advanced and more 
suitable instrumentation for the evaluation of coating properties 50k€ 
Total 228175  
8 IRIS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  
15000 
Travel fund to cover travel & subsistence for: 2 people @ 1 presential project meeting per 
year (supplemented with virtual meetings)- €6K; 2 people @ 1 International 
conference/exhibition per year (EU or outside EU)- €6K; attendance at national events & 
travel to partner sites & labs (€3k) 
Equipment      
Other goods, works and 
services 
103000 
Analysers - 50 k; QT SOFTWARE LICENSE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE 
APPLICATIONS USED IN THE MONITORING PROTOTYPE - 10K€ Optomechanical 
materials - 10k; computing for prototype (5k); software licenses (4k); Audit certificate 
(4k); IP cost (Patent lawyer & patent application) - 8k; subscription to events & exhibition 
space - 6k; Data Management Cost (6k) 
Total 118000  
 
101057597- NANOBLOC – Part B- Page 41 of 45 
9 INTERPANE Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  
15000 
Travel fund to cover travel & subsistence for: 2 people @ 1 presential project meeting per 
year (supplemented with virtual meetings)- €6K; 2 people @ 1 International 
conference/exhibition per year (EU or outside EU)- €6K; attendance at national events & 
travel to partner sites & labs (€3k) 
Equipment  50000 Depreciation of plant coating equipment 
Other goods, works and 
services 
405000 
Hardware costs: cathode co-sputtering (cathode lid, TMPs, MFCs, control cards, PLC and 
automation, cooling system/chiller, feedthrough, shields, cables, pipes and tubes, valves, 
foreline line modification, end blocks (in case of rotable cathode), etc.) - €297k; power 
supply (PSU + power cable + etc.) - €25k; silver target - €60k; silicum target- €10k; 
Sensors - €10k; Audit Certificate -3k 
Total 470000  
10 UNE Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  7000 Travel to consortium meetings and travel to attend dissemination events 
Equipment    
Other goods, works and 
services 
4000 Free access to standards for consortium partners; fee for registration of CWA(s) at CEN 
Total 11000  
 
Table 3.1i: ‘Other costs categories’ items (e.g. internally invoiced goods and services)  
No partners have budgeted costs under this category.
3.2 Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole  
 
Consortium description, complementarity, access to critical equipment and industry involvement  
 
The NanoBloc® consortium unites a world-class team of 10 partners from 5 European countries (fig. 10)- 
Italy, Spain, Portugal, Germany, Belgium. Pooling together complementary expertise and competencies from 
industrial leaders across a complete European industry value chain and scientifically excellent academic/research 
universities and institutes, the NanoBloc ® consortium converges the different disciplines needed for successfully 
cocreating, developing and v alidating ground -breaking reliable, high performance and scientifically validated 
antiviral, antibacterial and antifungal nanocoating technologies . The NanoBloc ® team has the ambition through 
research, development and innovation to establish European industrial leadership in the field of high performance 
nanocoatings that can help Europe protect its citizens, its healthcare system and its economy from the devastating 
effects of infectious illnesses, such as the current Covid-19 pandemic 
Figure 10- The Nanobloc consortium from 5 European countries 
- RF co-sputtering of Ag/silica (and other metal/ceramics) and their characterization (POLITO) 
- EPD and sol-gel (FAU) 
 

 
101057597- NANOBLOC – Part B- Page 42 of 45 
- HiPIMS, Cathodic arc, and sputtering PVD coatings, sol -gel coatings development and up -scaling and 
tribological/durability characterization (TEKNIKER) 
- Cathodic arc evaporation & sputtering (PRIREV) 
- UV-lacquers coated technical textiles (SIOEN) 
- Antimicrobial/antiviral testing (UNITO) 
- Coating equipment upscale (INTERPANE) 
- Filtration systems, production and commercialization (GVF) 
- Photonics & Artificial Intelligence key enabling technologies for digitization of industrial processes (IRIS). 
- Standardization activities (UNE) 
This is an integrative consortium that includes, four world class universities and institutes (POLITO, UNITO, 
TEKNIKER, FAU), who are leaders in their respective scientific and technological fields , in addition to two 
large enterprises (INTERPANE, SIOEN) and 3 SMEs (IRIS, GVF, PRIREV) and a standardization body (UNE), 
who together will provide a technology upscaling and market pathway for the projects results. The NanoBloc® 
team of partners unites the necessary infrastructure, knowledge, expertise, and industry value chain to succeed 
in delivering on the project’s objec tives to realise the expected impacts of the topic ‘HORIZON -CL4-2021-
RESILIENCE-01-20: Antimicrobial, Antiviral, and Antifungal Nanocoatings’.  
 
As a condition to generate growth, NanoBloc®  is an industry-oriented project. The industrial/commercial 
involvement spans a complete value chain of industrial actors (figure 11), 3 of which are SMEs (IRIS, PRIREV, 
GVF), is imperative for allowing us to implement a research -industry cocreation in our project (according to th e 
methodology described in Section 1.2). Each industry participant will be able to grow their businesses  and 
improve their competitiveness in line with their position on the value chain. This involvement ensures a 
technology pathway for the project upscaling (INTERPANE, IRIS, PRIREV), and a route to market (GVF, 
SIEON and PRIREV); a complete value chain for the exploitation, post-project scale up and commercialisation of 
the projects results. In short, the industry participants have been instrumental in helping to shape this proposal, 
and NanoBloc® is considered a highly strategic for assisting them in gaining a competitive edge and in being 
a pioneering group in driving forward new antiviral, antibacterial & antifungal nanocoating innovations of 
high socio-economic & strategic impact. 
 
In addition, the consortium unites a strong understanding of gender issues and inclusiveness , and also has an 
equitable Gender dimension , whereby there is a strong participation of female researchers , technologists, 
industrialists, business experts and entrepreneurs, as well as policy influencers. Moreover, the majority of our 
partners either have a formal Gender Equality Plan (GEP) in place or are in the process of implementing one, and 
all partners have equality opportunities policies in relation to recruitment and internal promotions. Moreover, our 
Project Coordinator (Prof. Monica Ferraris), is an accomplished, award-winning female scientist- she is a Full 
Professor of Science and Technology of Mat erials at POLITO, with over 200 hundred peer -reviewed journal 
publications and 14 patents.  She is also featured in Successful Women Ceramic and Glass Scientists and 
Engineers: 100 Inspirational Profiles69. She acted as Project Coordinator or Principal Investigator of 27 National 
and EU projects on ceramics, glasses and composite, from 1992 to present: among them, 17 are EU projects, 8 of 
them as Project Coordinator. In relation to open science practices, our research partners have considerable expertise 
in this area, and they are active publishers in open science journals, and also committed to seeing scientific results 
                                                      
69 Lynnette D. Madsen. 2015 The American Ceramic Society and John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc (page 175-179) 
Figure 11- Industrial Value Chain 
 

 
101057597- NANOBLOC – Part B- Page 43 of 45 
being exploited by industry for building competitiveness, growth, jobs, resilience and societal impact.  
 
How each member contributes to the project with a valid role and with the necessary resources  
The table below summarises the core role of each of the partners in the project.  
Table 22- Role of each partner  
Partner Role 
POLITO Coordinate Project. WP1 & WP7 leader. Participant in WP2, WP3, WP4, WP5, WP6. Core role: Co-sputtering 
provider of Ag/silica coatings (and other compositions) . Contributing background in n ovel technique for the 
deposition of a nanostructured coating with virucidal, antimicrobial and antifungal  properties via co -sputtering 
technique, patented by POLITO (PCT/IB2018/057639).  Also perform routine characterization on own samples 
and partners samples upon request. Leader of Open Science and Gendered Innovation approach.  
TEK-
NIKER 
WP3 leader. Participant in WP1, WP2, WP4, WP5, WP6, WP7. Core role:  Contribute vast experience on 
tribological, wear and ageing (UV, Corrosion, oxidation, etc .) behaviour & characterisation for different 
applications, on antibacterial performance & marine ecotoxicity testing, on coatings with biocide behaviour and 
durability (medical implants, anti-fouling) and experience on Life Cycle Analysis (LCA). Leadership of coatings 
characterization (WP3); contribute to R&D on new PVD coatings containing Cu (WP1) using different 
subtechnologies & combinations (cathodic, arc, sputtering, HIPIMS) ; antibacterial testing & ecotoxicity tests 
(WP2); collaborate on up-scaling of PVD batch processing for high traffic objects & Sol -gel upscaling (WP4); 
Validation in relevant environments & LCA (WP5). Role of Scientific Manager to support interdisciplinary mgt. 
UNITO WP2 leader: Participant in WP6, WP7. Core role: Contribute their expertise in the study of the mechanism of 
action of new antiviral molecules and in the study of molecule cytotoxicity to lead the evaluation of the antiviral 
properties of different coatings produced  in the project and the study of their mechanism of antiviral action and 
cytotoxicity. They will also evaluate the influence of ageing processes on the antiviral properties of the coatings.  
FAU Participant in WP1, WP3, WP6, WP7. Core role: Thanks for their world-class experience in the field of bioactive 
materials, coatings and electrophoretic deposition method, FAU will lead the development and characterisation 
of antiviral and antibacterial nanocoatings by EPD and sol-gel method, & the incorporation of bio-based materials.  
GVF WP5 leader. Participant in WP1, WP2, WP3, WP4, WP6, WP7. Core role: As experts in the design, development 
and production of industrial filtration elements, equipment and systems, GVF will work on the effective 
application of a virucidal /antimicrobial/ antifungal coating on filtration systems for improving product quality 
and reliability (WP4). In addition to leading WP5, they themselves will test NanoBloc® on air filtering materials 
following standards and monitoring performance, and measure the impact and success to demonstrate the new 
nanocoating technologies in relevant working environments. Plan post-project pathway to market (WP6). 
SIOEN Participant in WP1, WP3, WP4, WP5, WP6, WP7. Core role: Contribute their experience in the formulation of 
different nanoparticle dispersions for technical textile coatings  & radiation-curable lacquers and varnishes, and 
lead the work in relation to the doping UV cured lacquers & varnishes with nanoparticles to obtain self -
disinfecting properties (Task 1.2). Test & demonstrate the technology (WP5) on coated textiles (incl. protective 
clothing, mattresses, and mouth masks), lacquers, and varnishes. Plan post-project pathway to market (WP6). 
PRIREV Participant in WP1, WP4, WP5, WP6, WP7. Core role: Contribute their 20+ years of PVD coating expertise to 
the up scaling of the deposition process for antibacterial/antiviral coatings  in line with their R&D roadmap to 
develop innovative new products such as the recent development of AB20- a new antibacterial coating, inox 
colour, for stainless steel substrates with antibacterial activity certified by Hohenstein Institute. Main goal is to  
now develop coatings in other colours with antibac terial/antiviral properties, for different substrates (brass, 
zamak, polymers) compliant with the envisaged applications of high traffic objects , and plan pathway to market.  
IRIS WP6 leader. Participant in WP4, WP7. Core role: As an advanced engineering company specialising in PAT 
(Process Analytical Technology) and Artificial Intelligence real-time process monitoring solutions for Industry 
4.0, lead the work in T4.3 in relation to measuring the Critical Process Parameters and the target Critical Quality 
Attributes of the selected processes, and building Digital Twins based on the data historian for improved process 
understanding (based on Quality-by-Design approach) and predictability. They will also occupy the role of Data 
Managers for the project. Lead implementation of the Cocreation Cycle in the project  (T4.1). Lead IP 
Management (T6.3), Exploitation & Business Planning (T6.4) for planning timely routes to market.   
INTERP
ANE 
WP4 Leader. Participant in WP5, WP6, WP7. Core role: Upscaling of the R2R processes: engineering studies, 
hardware modifications for co -sputtering Ag nanoclusters in a silica matrix. Install & commission the modified 
hardware in R2R demo unit & co -sputtering coating deposition on substrates selected by end u sers. Plan post-
project equipment TRL7-9 scale up and market deployment.     
UNE Participant in WP6, WP7. Core role: Leading Standardization activities and procedures 
 
Critical infrastructure. Major items include: POLITO- fully equipped laboratories for research on glasses, glass-
ceramics, ceramics, composites, surface functionalization and nanostructured coatings ; UNITO-Laboratory of 
Molecular Virology and Antiviral Research ; access to San Luigo Hospital (that hosts UNITOs lab) for validation 
work; TEKNIKER-advanced national laboratory in PVD technology , surface chemistry laboratory for Sol -Gel 
coatings, clean room with UV photolithography equipment, plasma etching and electroplating systems, equipment 
for Hot embossing / Nanoimprint and R2RNIL machine, etc., & Tribology laboratory; FAU- facilities for processing 
 
101057597- NANOBLOC – Part B- Page 44 of 45 
and characterisation of biomaterials, including mesoporous materials and composites , powder technology and 
biomaterial preparation and characterisation suitable chemistry laboratories are availab le for sol -gel; 
INTERPANE- Roll-to-roll PVD & PECVD coater for maximum width of 1.6 meter ; Material characterisation 
equipment; PRIREV- PVD deposition chambers (incl. Cathodic arc and sputtering technologies). SIOEN- UV & 
Led-curing equipment , Extrusion co ating lines, calandering lines, overcoat lines, direct coating lines, transfer 
coating lines, dip coating lines, lamination coating lines etc. Hot Xenon UV weathering equipment; GVF- Pleating 
machine, Tig welding machine , Microplasma welding machine , Rolling machine; IRIS- platform of IR (SWIR) 
analysers.  
Adequate resources to fulfil their role, each partner is experienced in building budgets and in planning forward 
required resources and there is a logical budget distribution among the partners. Each has mobilised the necessary 
personnel resources/person months  (Table 3.1f: Summary of staff effort ) that reflect the realistic staff effort 
required to deliver the project objectives . Personnel budget is based on actual costs for researchers, engineering,  
developers and other professionals for each partner organisation . These costs are in line with average staff costs 
within the sectors and reflect differences in cost of living between the participating EU regions, whereby staff costs 
in Northern Europe (namely, Belgium and Germany) are higher versus Southern Europe (namely, Portugal, Spain, 
Italy) and this difference is particularly pronounced for the private sector. Equipment costs included in the project 
are for depreciation only, and as relevant partner s have budgeted and itemised this equipment in Table 3.1h: 
‘Purchase costs’ items (travel and subsistence, equipment and other goods, works and services) . A reasonable 
budget has been allocated under travel and subsistence (a flat travel fund of €15k has b een for each partner) to 
allow for mobility of developers and industrialists between sites, which is important for knowledge exchange and 
building excellence among multidisciplinary and international teams, as well as for practical on -site testing across 
partners. (Importantly, our intention is to facilitate and enable a high level of virtual engagement among the project 
team, to supplement the annual presential/onsite project meetings (as allowed) . In this way we will have high 
resilience to any future travel restrictions, confinements and lockdowns. Moreover, promoting virtual interactions 
and engagements will be positive for our contribution as a project to carbon emissions reduction). No partners have 
budgeted for subcontracting costs, as they each have access to the internal resources and knowledge to perform the 
work. Partners have budgeted for diverse goods and services , e.g. funds for Laboratory and Prototyping 
consumables, publish ing in Open Journals, Patenting fees (attorney and application costs), Subscription to 
Conferences and Events, Open Data Storage, among others (as detailed and itemised in Table 3.1h). Noteworthy is 
€350k by INTERPANE materials for the scale-up cathode co-sputtering cost. This is an important cost that covers 
the price for the PVD lid (material + manufacturing) which is used to close the R2R and fix the cathode targets and 
other parts. Other parts are mainly: MFCs + control system related; TMPs + control sy stem related; Electrical 
feedthrough; Water cooling system for TMPs and cathodes; Shields for cathodes and R2R; Various valves (inline, 
venting, bellows, etc.); PLC and automation system (e.g. Beckhoff); Cables and related; Stainless steel pipes and 
plastic tubes; End blocks (in case of rotatable cathode, etc.). This budget item has been given careful assessment 
collectively by the consortium and it is considered necessary and relevant for delivering a high-end system for 
NanoBloc®. In short, the partners h ave worked very closely together to codesign the workplan and its associated 
budget. All partners are bringing a clear value to the project, are performing a synergising and complimentary role, 
and with the necessary resource to be able to implement this r ole and each partner is highly motivated with a core 
role category as either a knowledge creator  (POLITO, UNITO, TEKNIKER, FAU), a technology upscaler  
(INTERPANE, FAU, PRIREV) or as an innovation adopter (GVF, SIOEN), and a standardization facilitator 
(UNE).  
Other countries and international organisations: Not applicable 
 
4. Ethics Self-Assessment 
In relation to the Ethics Self Assessment table, while the overall ‘Ethics Opinion’ in the Ethics Summary Report 
concluded ‘Ethics clearance (the proposal is ‘ethics ready’)’, its ‘Analysis of the ethical dimension’ concluded the 
following: 
‘The ethics issues relating to Section 4 - Personal Data, Section 7 - Environment, Health & Safety (nanomaterials) 
and Section 8 - Artificial Intelligence are not clearly identified in the self -assessment form, and the beneficiaries  
should consider any potential ethics issues under these sections. In addition, it is not clear whether the mammalian 
cells used in task 2.3 will be human cells which raises ethical issues.’  
The NANOBLOC  consortium confirms that compliance with the ethical principles and the applicable EU, 
international, and national laws for the ethics issues identified in the Ethics Summary Report any ethics issues that 
may emerge in the course of the grant, will be ensured , and for any applicable ethics issue, the guidance provided 
in the European Commission Ethics Self -Assessment Guidelines will be rigorously followed.  In relation to the 
mammalian cells used in task 2.3, we clarify that the term “mammalian cells” includes human cells that we will use 
 
101057597- NANOBLOC – Part B- Page 45 of 45 
in the project. However, it must be pointed out that only widely used (commercial) human cell lines will be used. 
They are purchased from cells banks, such as ATCC (the world’s largest and most extensive product catalogue of 
human and animal cell lines for research purposes ). We will not derive any cells from human donors during the 
project.