3.3 CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE ............................................................................................................................... 46 
3.3.1 Overall description: adequacy, complementarities, representativity of the value chain and synergies. ........ 46 
3.3.2 Industrial/Commercial involvement to ensure exploitation of the results....................................................... 48 
3.3.3 Other countries. .............................................................................................................................................. 49 
3.3.4 Resources to be committed ............................................................................................................................. 49 
4. MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM .......................................................................................................................... 52 
4.1. PARTICIPANTS (APPLICANTS). ........................................................................................................................................ 52 
4.2. THIRD PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE PROJECT (INCLUDING USE OF THIRD PARTY RESOURCES) ........................................................ 101 
5. ETHICS AND SECURITY ......................................................................................................................................... 108
5.1 ETHICS ..................................................................................................................................................................... 108
5.2 SECURITY. ................................................................................................................................................................ 108 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 3 of 110 
 
 
1. EXCELLENCE 
1.0. THE PROBLEM, THE NEED AND THE OPPORTUNITY. 
“We all die, but looking” is the title of the autobiography of Alberto García Alix, one of the most representat ive 
photographers of 2nd half of 20th Century in Europe. It is impossible summarize better, in a few words, the relevance 
of the natural capability of human being of catching everything that surrounds him.  
The human flair of converting images into memorie s contribute on building w hat we were, what we are and surely 
what we will be. Since last 1895 the memories of history of human being ha s being helped by the possibility of 
capturing and saving this part of our evolution into photographs and movies. These physical supports have sav ed 
main part of our global cultural, social and p olitical history. But, looking into each individual, also gav e the 
possibility of recording part of our family heritage. 
Photographs and movies  have helped to preserve the cultural material that is faithful witness of socio -cultural 
European evolution in t he recent era. It encompasses not only the possibility to und erstand the development of new 
arts such as cinema, photog raphy or graphic arts but also the preservation of the socio -cultural memories of citizens 
in major museums, local museums (real testimon y of the history of cities and their people) located in many towns 
worldwide & in a huge number of private collections.  
A huge percentage of the recent European cultural heritage ( CH) can be found in movies , photographs, posters and 
slides produced between 1895 to nowadays were made using cellulose derivatives. More than 75 years of visual and 
audio memories are up to now  in serious danger to be lost due to the natural instabil ity cellulose acetate (CA) and 
cellulose nitrate (CN) materials. The worldwide estimation of such holdings within professional film archives is 
around 18 Mio of film reels on cellulose acetate, where of ca. 5% are in a critical stage or showing signs of 
vinegar syndrome (survey carried out by the OEAW -PhA in 2012, performed with 20 ins titutions, extrapolated to 
125 members of FIAF (Fédération Internationale des Archives du Film). Figure 1.1.a shows an example of such film. 
There have had other technical approaches to solve this real problem that follow the line of replication and copy t he 
original ones in modern digital supports  (for example PIQLBox©- www.piql.com/). But, they do  not give the 
possibility of a real preservation of the original ones. In the actual t echnology age, our duty,  with the people that 
preceded us, pass through help on the preservation of these parts of original memories that built our past history and 
will help on understanding our future. 
Under the technical point of view, conservators cons ider two approaches 
when p lanning treatments to extend the useful lifetime of cultural 
materials: preventive or passive and active or interventive. However in the 
case of cellulose derivat ives and other components of the movie or 
photography, once initiated, degradation cannot be p revented, reversed or 
stopped, but only inhibited or slowed. Inhibitive conservation of cellulose 
derivatives can either involve the removal or reduction of factors cau sing 
degradation including light, oxygen, acids, fungus and re lative humidity, 
or of any  breakdown products which accelerate degradation,  as well as 
cost-sensitive processes such as freeze. The cell ulose derivative 
degradations is autocatalytic increasing constantly the level of 
degradation with the time.  
 
Figure 1.1.a Cellulose nitrate film under 
an autocatalytic degradation process 
induces by moisture and acid off-gassing. 
The storage and the pr eservation of the cultural heritage made on cellulose ethe r or ester –and derivatives- are an 
important issue for the in novation and creativeness of future generations. The degradation of this ma terial is 
significant, fast, and results in the loss of infor mation and values. Some of the main by -products of this pr ocess can 
be acetic acid (AA), nitric oxide (NO), and others. Different solution preservation approaches related to zeolites or 
active carbon adsorbers are well-known. Not only known are the chemica l reactions responsible of degradation (due 
to intrinsic nature of materials), but also the biological processes due to moulds development that spread quickly on 
the gelatin layer. So far we don’t have any easy system to treat moulded audio-visual materials. 
NEMOSINE aims to improve the traditional storage soluti ons, such as freeze storage (below 5ºC), by developing 
an innovative smart package  with the main goal of energy saving and extent conserv ation time of cultural 
objects based on cellulose derivat ives. Beyond the state of the art NEMOSINE plans to develop th e following 
modular and integrated products: i)High O2 barrier and Active packaging using non-odour additives, ii)Active acid 
adsorbers b ased on functionalized Metal Organic Framework (MOFs) integra ted in low density and porous 
structures, iii)Gas detection sensors based on nanotechnology to monitoring AA, water, O 2 & NO, iv) Multi -scale 
modelling to correlate degradation & sensors signals for maintenance prediction and integrate all these technologies 
in v)Packaging with modular design to fulfil the technical & economical requirements of the different CH made by 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 4 of 110 
cellulose derivatives and vi) Curative packages contain ing controlled release of natural antifungal additives. The 
main targets of NEMOSINE project are cellulose derivatives, from photographic, movies and audio substrates. 
The modular solution is one of main a dvantages of the innovativ e package. This design will allow to provide 
different versions of the product with more or less technology in cluded in the solution : PROTECTIVE (basic and 
premium mode l), and CURATIVE  (for damaged products) . In this way, the smar t package can be adapted t o 
different type of final clients –private collector, national museum s, regional collections,  councils and in stitutions, 
schools-, in terms of necessities, balancing re al value of the content and the package cost. The main project  
proposed modular innovations are summarized in figure 1.1.b: 
 
Figure 1.1.b. Scheme of the main innovations proposed in NEMOSINE project. 
In despite of problems of conservation of these materia ls, the European funded R&D projects dedicated to the 
preservation of the European Cultural Heritage have been always focused on the preservation of traditional fine arts 
as architecture, sculpture or painting (such as  NMP H2020 NANOCATHEDRAL or NANORESTART). NEMOSINE 
is the first one that will work on the preservation of the most recent ones, the photography & the cinema. 
1.1. OBJECTIVES 
The main objectives and their means of verification  of NEMOSINE pro ject, defined according to SMART 
principle (i.e. Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Responsible-Partner, Time-lined) are described in table 1.1.a 
Table 1.1.a. Main objectives of NEMOSINE project, potential exploitable results and partners involved and timin g. 
Objective 1:  Preparation of MOFs for the capture of AA in the presence of humidity with a n AA/Water 
selectivity above  three times above common adsorbents (i.e. activated carbons and zeolites).  Selected MOFs 
must be suitable to be incorporated into open cell foams or electrospinning nanofibers. Adsorption regeneration 
will be evaluated by the colour change of the carriers (Linked to WP2 & WP3). 
Structural and chemical characterization of select ive MOFs after synthesis and further s cale-up to reach TRL 
objective and evaluation of the removal efficiency of AA (kinetic profiles) from air with the developed materials 
in contr olled laboratory condition s. Incorporation in polymeric foams cells or nano fibres containing up to 
30%w/w of MOFs with a specific surface area between 5 to 10 km2/dm3. Performance indicators: by M18 and 
M30, a report will be prepared, that will include the fabrication of two generation of MOFs, By M38, a report of 
AA adsorption behaviour of MOF/foam or nanofibres materials will be prepared and  By M42, MOF/foams will 
be incorporated in the final packages and validated . Main Partners Involved : CNRS, PROM, MODISPREM, 
IST, NPH and AIMPLAS 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 5 of 110 
Objective 2: Selection of anti-fungals as we ll as their encapsulation process to be integrated in selecte d foams 
and nanofibers with controlled release for artefacts protection against fungus to develop curative packages (linked 
to WP2 & WP3). 
Incorporation of selected antifungals in polymeric f oams and nanofibres with high specific surface to kill the 
fungal in films or photographs with medium or severe action of fungus. The possibility to have a package with 
control release fungal based on encapsulation technologies could allow a direct intervention optimizing the doses 
of antifungals, avoiding high expense s and time co nsumption. Monitoring control of the growth o f fungal 
(mainly aspergilius, clodosporium and penicillium spe cies). Performance indicators: by M 18, a report about 
the selection of best antifungal additive for CH protection, by M38, evaluate the  effectiveness of systems based 
on specific additives/nanofibers for curative model package at lab level and M42 the antifungals/nanofibres will 
be integrated and validated in the final curative package. Main Partners Involved : MODISPREM, CNRS, IST, 
NPH and AIMPLAS 
Objective 3: To develop an integrated sensor fo r AA, NO & O 2 detection with a range of detection 25, 10 
&15 ppb respectively and a cost lower than 5 €/unit (Linked to WP4). 
Multi-sensor devices based on nanomaterials will be develop. Sensoring capabilities monitoring of selected 
sensors through suitable simulants, checking lower detection levels. Estimation of sensor costs at in dustrial 
production framework. Performance indicators: By M26 Functionalized sensor will be  ready to measure,  by 
M30, a report will be prepared with the results of high sensor sensitivity to gases involved in the cellulose 
derivatives degradation by M44 and M48, the sensors wil l be installed and validated in the premium package. 
Main Partners Involved; BIOSENSOR, NPH 
Objective 4: To develop multi-scale chemometric models to correlate sensors’ signals integrated in the 
package with degradation level of any type of cellulose derivatives CH artefacts (Linked to WP5). 
Hybrid models are the key for an accurate estimation of the evolution of degradation over time and a useful tool 
to design a personalized predictive maintenance . Performance indicators: by M 42, report will be prepared  
based on the optimization of simula tion software about degradation process . Main Partners Involved ; NOVA, 
IST & IRIS 
Objective 5: To equip the packaging with a Radio -frequency identification (RFID) function for the remote 
tracking of the integrated sensors and predicted degradation modules (linked to WP5). 
A tailored receiver for a quick centralised periodic review of the collection and its software embedding the 
predictive maintenance models will be delivered to inform to the conserver when actions  need to be 
implemented. A control platf orm will be developed to achieve this objective.  Performance indicators: by 
M32, a report will be prepared and will include some captures of control platform behaviour  by M44 and M48, 
the full control system will be  installed and validated in the premium package. Main Partners Involved ; IRIS, 
NOVA, IST. 
Objective 6: To design a cost-competitive plastic package with excellent water and oxygen barrier 
properties (less than 0.5 cm3/package day measured according ISO 15105-2 standard) (Linked to WP6). 
Selection of suitable barrier polymeric materials, optimization of multi-layer injection  process and appealing 
design to reach desired propertie s. Performance indicators: by M 30, a report will be prepared to  describe the 
barrier properties achieved by the multi layer polymeric package , by M44, the best polymeric materials will be 
used in the NEMOSINE’s package. Main Partners Involved AIMPLAS, AKUMPLAST & IPC. 
Objective 7: Smart package for cellulose based cultural heritage protection or curative performance must 
be designed according to modularity principles (Linked to WP1 and WP6). 
Modular design to provide different models including only a few or all proposed functionalities, from low cost 
to expensive packages with the objective to impact in a broad range of final users (professionals and particulars). 
Clear differentiation between properties, limitations of each designed model, perfectly oriented to real demands 
of the different kind of clients to reach the maximum co mmercial impact. The physical supports for  absorbers 
and antifungals will be designed to easy removal and replace when the sensors detects (or color change) that 
both system are collapsed. Foams and fibres will be full recyclable. Regeneration of MOFs will  be stud ied. 
Performance indicators: by M9 a preliminary 3D package concept will be proposed , by M24, a report will be 
prepared to  demonstrate the easy removal and change of the different technologic elements integrated in the 
active package. Main Partners Involved AIMPLAS, AKUMPLAST & IPC. 
Objective 8: Construction of three packages prototypes for selected applications (with different 
functionalities and target customers: protective (basic & premium) and curative (section 1.3.1) (Linked WP6). 
At least th ree packages prototypes will be assembled by IPC and AIMPLAS using the materials/components 
prepared by the industrial partners at industrial or pilot plant level to contain movies and photographs and at 
different performance/cost levels. Performance indic ators: b y M 9, a report will be prepared to  detail the 
conservation requirements of cellulose derivative CH artefacts, by M42 the three prototypes are fully built and 
beginning their validations. Several photographs of the prototypes will be shown. By M46 full validation will be 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 6 of 110 
achieved. Partners Involved: All industrial partners. 
 
Objective 9: Economic assessment for  the packages and the entire market products from the cost/benefit 
analysis viewpoint and conservation cost savings for public or private entities (Linked to WP6 and WP8).   
The exp ected impacts will be a significant business opportunities for the NEMOSINE partners by design, 
manufacture and sealing packages adapted to the protection of cellulose derivative cultural heritage artefacts.  
Performance indicators: by M42 , Elaboration of a  set of business models and business plans for each of the 
entities involved in the consortium describing interactions among them. Partners Involved All Industrial Partners. 
Objective 10: Improve the self -life of the CH artefact protection to achieve at  least five years without any 
intervention. (Linked to WP4 and WP5).  
Their viability in terms of long protection-life will be achieved by developing high accuracy sensors, acid and 
humidity adso rbers, antifungals, high bar rier packages and wireless control  and simulation software.  
Determination of duration of effectiveness of AA adsorption will be also assessed to determine the need of refill 
of adsorption module to maintain the functionality protective of the package.  Performance indicators: by M30, 
a report will be prepared evaluating the structures develop at pilot scale under repetitive cycles of high and low 
temperature in controlled conditions (climatic chamber) and by M46 the same will be done at industrial l evel in 
the proposed demonstrators. Main Partners Involved All Industrial Partners. 
Objective 1 1: To demonstrate the safety environmental sustainability & regulatory compliance , of the 
developed processes, equipment and products (linked to WP7). 
LCA and LCC will  be performed on the processes dev eloped mainly in the final demo products vs. selected 
benchmarks. Standard and legislative aspects that apply to the project results will be continuously monitored. A 
safety assessment will be performed during the operation of pilot plant during trials (WP 3), industrial products 
manufacture and demo validation (WP 6). Performance indicators: by M12 , included in the periodic report 
analysing the main regulatory frameworks in place in the EU regions considered in the p roject will be produced. 
By M42, on progre ss LCA and LCC assessments will feed into recommendations for improvements and final 
ones will be taken into account to assess future commercial viability. From M42 to M48, several final reports 
will be produced ba sed on t he data collected during the proje ct development, about environmental impacts and 
socio-economic costs associated to the final packages. Main Partners Involved All Partners. 
Objective 1 2: To maximize the innovation impacts of the project for contr ibuting to the uptake of the 
project results for growth and jobs (linked to WP8) 
The project knowledge and results will be managed and protected. Business and exploitation plans will be 
delivered for all Key Exploitable Results (KERs) to map the post -project phase. A comprehensive dissemination 
and communication campaign will be designed and implemented. Regular knowledge transfer activities will take 
place among partners. Demonstrations of the three prototypes viability through their presentation in at le ast 10 
EU events reaching a potential pack age buyers (end-users /stakeholders) audience of minimum 2,000 (including 
individual citizens, movies or photography experts, small and large SSH organizations, within EU and also 
outside; mainly in Japan, policy m akers, professional or amateur association s related to CH conservation …) to 
ensure the knowledge on best practices is exchanged. Workshops with researchers and participation in educative 
actions of next generations’ stakeholders will be organized. Performance Ind icators: by M1 8, a robust 
dissemination plan to support the recognition of NEMOSINE as a reference in the conservation of cellulose 
derivative CH artefacts to create new opportunities in number of sectors will be in place. By M36, at least 4 
training sessi ons including 2 pilot demonstratio n events will have been held to capture feedback from 
stakeholders, and a suite of complementary training activities will be organized until the end of the project. By 
M48, final prototype packages will be in place  for the transition to the post -project phase to advance the TRLs, 
source of further funding to build full industrial scale cooperative (join ventures, exploitation licensing) will be 
analyzed focusing on applications where a return on inv estment is feasib le based on WP6’s assessment. Main 
Partners Involved All Partners. 
Partners involved in the project have great experience and international reputation in all the required materials and 
processing techniques, as well as world -leading market presence and in terests. They have participated in many 
previous projects related to the use and production of adsorbers, sensors, carriers and software for several industrial 
sectors as shown in section 1.3.3., able to be adapted for the proposed smart package.  Furthermore, some of them 
have previously collabora ted together, such as the case of AIMPLAS, IRIS and AKUMPLAST, guaranteeing 
stronger links within the consortium.  In that way, the well balanced expertise of the Consortium, added to the 
Implementation Plan help on ensuring that the partnership can achieve the specific objectives described. 
1.2. RELATION TO THE WORK PROGRAMME  
NEMOSINE project is related to the challenge and scope addressed by the work programme topic NMBP-35-
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 7 of 110 
2017. Innovative solutions for the conservation of cultural heritage 20th century, as it is shown in table 1.2.a. 
 
Table 1.2.a. Relation of NEMOSINE project to challenge and scope of topic NMBP-35-2017. 
Challenges and scope addressed by 
the topic. Solutions proposed by NEMOSINE project 
Projects should develo p one or more 
innovative solutions (functional materials 
or techniques) for the conservation of 
tangible 20 th century cultural heritage. To 
maximise the impact, the most relevant 
issues and objects should be iden tified and 
addressed.  
NEMOSINE aims to develop new high performance packages with high barrier 
properties, and integrated antimicrobial and AA absorption for long time 
storage protection of movies films, photographic negatives,  audio record  and 
slides mad e of cellul ose derivatives as low cost alter natives to current ones 
based on storage under low temperature conditions, difficult to manage  and to 
control the degradation level. 
Developments should be based on multi -
scale modelling (in the sense of linking  
different types of models such as 
electronic, atomistic, mesoscopic and 
continuum etc.) approaches. Key issues 
such as compatibility, durability, ageing, 
and reversibility of interventions should be 
addressed by the modelling approaches. 
Modelling modules  should be further 
developed if necessary 
Chemometric analysis will enable the development of correlation models of 
materials’ deterioration inside the package and monitored data of released 
gases, e.g. acids, nitrogen oxides, O2 obtained by sensors locate d on it.  
Additionally combining high -throughput non -destructive analysis with 
validated mechanistic models using a hybrid modelling approach is expected to 
provide complementary accurate i nformation on the materials state 
(severity/stage of degradation) a nd forecast ing of degradation evolution for 
conservation purposes. Due to the degradation of cellulose derivat ive materials 
is not reversible, the only possibility to conservate old movies and photographs 
is to have all the tools to initiate the degradation as NEMOSINE proposed or 
well to use a cura tive package that destroy the microorganism that initiate the 
vinegar syndrome. 
The proposed materials/techniques are 
expected to ensure long term protection 
and security of cultural heritage artefacts, 
taking i nto account  environmental and 
human risk factors.  
NEMOSINE’ products will not only protect audio -visual cultural heritage and 
extend its life expectancy by adsorbing off -gassing harmful chemicals, but also 
protect people from breathing acidic gases or man ipulate obj ects acid 
impregnated. Furthermore, the curative smart package will destroy the fungus 
by themselves (controlled release) avoiding the direct contact with the 
pathogens or the synthetic antifungals by the conservation employees. 
An environmenta l impact as sessment of 
the proposed solution s is to be included 
to ensure the development of sustainable 
and compatible materials and methods.  
NOVA and AI MPLAS partners will prepare (WP7 ) a detailed life cycle 
analysis (LCA) of the proposed developments i n compariso n with current 
solutions. Only so lutions with positive LCA will be selected. Others partners 
(CXD and end-user partners) have also a broad expertise in impact assessment. 
Focus on innovative and long -lasting 
solutions in the conservation of cul tural 
assets is expected. 
NEMOSINE is focuse d on the integration of new packages to long -term 
storage for audio -visual artefacts with full monitoring  through a control 
platform development  to minimize the manipulation and ensure safety 
conservation making direct predictions about maintenance actions. 
Projects are encouraged to base their 
modelling software development on on -
going efforts in the development of open 
simulation platforms and to use to a large 
extent existing models. Projects should 
have an el ement of model validation based 
on experimental data. 
The models’ implementation to be developed for unveiling degradation 
mechanisms, state of conservation and risks associated with storage conditions 
will use open platforms for simulation such as the OVP  (open virt ual 
platforms). Contributions to platforms such as the open simulation platform 
handled by The European Materials Modelling Council will be considered.  The 
information provided for the sensors will be used to validate and optimize the 
selected simulation models. 
The majority of resources is expected to be 
invested in the actual material/technology 
development and testing, rather than the 
development of new models. 
All the technologies proposed in the project are used or have been previously 
developed at hi gh TRLs in other industrial secto rs (see section 1.3.2) , beyond 
state of the art, NEMOSINE aims at adapting these technologies to the specific 
problems of storage of cellulose derivative artefacts. 
Standardisation and/or the production of 
(certified) refe rence materials and/or pre -
normative research should be an integral 
part of the project. 
The improvement of the knowledge between the correlation of the physical 
parameters measured in-situ (AA, O2 & nitrous oxides) and degradation signals 
in audio-visual items will be the starting point to define the best materials for 
each type of CH artefacts. Partners such as AIMPLAS, CNRS, NOVA, C XD, 
etc.. , have a broad expertise in participation in standardization committees. 
Enclosures/material will be tested following the preservation ISO standards. 
The projects should present clearly 
measurable objectives for the proposed 
Table 1.1.a shows measured objectives for all of proposed developments in 
NEMOSINE, included their link with WPs, whic h partners will be in charge to 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 8 of 110 
Challenges and scope addressed by 
the topic. Solutions proposed by NEMOSINE project 
developments.  fulfil the objective and when it is expected. 
The core activities regarding the 
materials/techniques are expected to start 
at TRL 4 & target TRL 6 by the end. 
Table 1.3.a clearly explains the current TRL of each of the sele cted 
materials/technologies and the required  research to achieve a TRL 6 by the end 
of the project. 
A participation of relevant SSH 
disciplines is expected. SSH research 
should contribute criteria for targeting 
specific cultural heritage and analyse the 
expected lon g-term societal spill -over 
effects of the project. 
Five SSHs institutions will participate in the project and we have the support of 
9 more. As a specialist in conservation technologies , their main tasks are 
focused on the definition of requirements and needs of the storage CH artefacts, 
to follow the developments in order to avoid any damage of the CH artefacts, 
validate the prototype packages under different conservation scenarios and the 
leadership of the dissemination and communication activi ties to eva luate the 
societal perception against the new developments. 
If the AA or fu ngal degradation is removed, the immediate effect is a better 
long-term physical preservation of cultural heritage. Their induced effects are 
translated into improved pro cess effici ency of safeguarding heritage by 
allowing an individual control of each artefacts, reduced need for restoration 
interventions and less associated costs  (estimated reduction around 50% of 
energy requirements for freezing process) , less need for s pecific infrastructure 
for passive and massi ve conservation of degraded artefacts (by freezing) to 
improved accessibility and dissemination of funds to the researchers and  
general public. The use of integrate package monitoring hardware and software 
degration tools will support the low intervention during conservation tasks. 
Projects are expected to contribute 
actively to on -going activities e.g. in the 
EMMC (European Materials Modelling 
Council), and EU funded clusters. 
The integration of specific models  to handle cellulose derivatives and their 
degradation under distinct storage conditions in the EMMC open simulation 
platform is of upmost importance.  NEMOSINE aims to contribute by actively 
participation in open simulation platform WG of the EMMC. Active 
contribution to the ICME-platform is envisaged. The major contribution will be 
aligned with the multi -scale modelling previously identified in the 2016's 
EMMC roadmap as a major pillar for materials modelling development.1  
A significant participation of SMEs with 
R&D capacities is encouraged. 
NEMOSINE represents a multi -actor approach with a strong and 
complementary (cover all the value chain from MOF manufacture until  
package production) representation of R&D driven SMEs contributing (6 
SMEs + 1 Large of 16 partners) with a strong innovation skill set and dynamics 
to a synergistic collaboration with partner research institutes. The presence of 
SMEs ensures a diverse technological platform and secures subsequent 
continuity and sustainability of the projec t by involv ing SMEs oriented on the 
exploitation of the project results. NEMOSINE’s SMEs have participated in 
previous FP7 and/or H2020 projects. 
 
 
 
1 EC  2014 Materials Modelling: Where do we want to go? document 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 9 of 110 
1.3. CONCEPT AND METHODOLOGY 
1.3.1. Overall concept. 
NEMOSINE aims to develop 
modular and adaptable 
innovative smart packages to 
protect from audivisual 
cultural h eritage based on 
cellulose derivatives The 
modular concept of a whole 
protective device would allow 
to generate three different 
packages with different 
funtionalities and final cost, 
depending on the technical 
protective/ p reventive or 
curative purposes of  cultural 
objects (see figure 1.3.a). 
  
Figure 1.3.a. Scheme of three modular SMART package solutions. 
All the individual elements will be integrated 
in a smart package depending on the CH 
artefact deterioration grade and  other 
requirements for protectiv e or curative 
purposes. The basic design of this package (for 
the case of movies) is presented in figure 
1.3.b: 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.3.b. Scheme of modular SMART 
package. 
 
These levels of technology would be based on the following approaches: 
1. Working on innovative and new acetic adsorbers based on hydrophobic MOFs with high specific surface 
and porosity  supported in different substrates , with high specific surface  and porosity  such as open cell 
foams and electros pinning nanofibers, as well as cellulose based on pa per or matt board due its excellent 
properties as absorber, recyclability and limited cost.  Paper or board ones will be produced in a renewable and 
low acetic acid barrier material. The physical supports for ads orbers and antifungals will be designed for e asy 
removal and replacement when the sensors detect that are exhausted. Foams and fibres will be fully 
recyclable and reusable. Saturation level of foams and nanofibres will be studied to determinate the durability 
and the necessities to change the adsorpt ion modular panel. Visual colour changes will be proposed for Basic 
preventive package users. In the case of PREMIUM model the control platform will determinate the clogging 
and the adsorption panel change deadl ine. The BASIC model will need a color change  indicator based on pH 
acidification. Reusability of the same panel after thermal treatments will be evaluated. 
2. To design high oxygen and moisture barrier injected packages  by combining different plastic materia ls 
with different barrier properties in non-conventional processes such as co-injection, over-moulding or in-mould 
labelling. Materials selected are suitable to be used in the protection of museum artefacts 2, these will include 
thermoplastic materials, coatings and aluminium foils in order to maximize the barrier properties, minimize the 
cost and to allow a easy recyclability. 
3. Active packaging for releasing non-aggressive active substances and moisture adsorbents to minimize the 
growing of fungus  such as nanoparticles and antifungal peptides. Despite the limitations to use chemicals in 
conservation, active packaging could be interesting to store artefacts (and stop further fungal development) and 
possibly to inhibit growths. In this sense, NEMOSINE project will develop two types of dispositives:  
 
 
2 www.morana-rtd.com/e-preservationscience/2010/Bergmair-04-06-2008.pdf 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 10 of 110 
a. Long-term protection, where using antifungal additives are controversial. The current tendency is to control 
the causes beyond the consequences maintaining the moisture content in a safe level. In this way, specific 
MOFs, zeolites, nanoclays or hydrophilic nanosilicas will be introduced in the foams and nanofibers to dry 
the atmosphere of package. 
b. Curative treatment as a kind of “on -field disinfection package”,  when the artefacts or objects are 
contaminated by the mic roorganisms, bacteries or fungus. This is not  a protective package design but a 
“shock treatment” one. Several antifungal additives will be placed instead MOFs, such as peptides, 
essential oils, nanoparticles, or quaternary ammonium. The Antifungal peptides3 and essential oils (used by 
AIMPLAS in pre vious projects related to active food packages) are natural source substances and they 
have diferrent  odour levels and efficiency againts bacteria and fungus. 
4. Design a modular smart package that fulfil all requirements of selected CH (cultural heritage) artefacts, 
such as easy change and recyclable adsorption/antimicrobial systems, exploiting spaces, hermetic seal, vacuum 
to remove all the oxygen after packing for anoxic packaging and competitive cost. 
5. Development of Chemi cal sensors based on the use of na notechnology, including electronic wireless 
devices, for degradation process monitoring, promoting the non -invasive techniques. Sensors integrated in the 
package will be designed to measure the following gases ( acetic acid, nitrogen oxides, moisture and ox ygen) 
all-in-one. There are few detectors/indicators commonly used for AA in conservation (electronic or chemical) 
and for oxygen too (fluorescent sensor). However the most used are A -D strips that measures a pH value and it 
requires to open the package an d direct contact with the movie or other artefact.  There are not in the market or 
related patents of integrated multisensors  based on nanotechnology for continious CH predictive maintenance.  
NEMOSINE proposes t he follow s olutions beyond the state of the a rt: i) O2 detection. ZnO nanorod 
photocurrent and porphyrine photoluminescence gas sensors integrates in optical fibers/waveguides for their 
miniaturization of the sensing devices, ii) NO detection. conductive polymers (polypyrrole and polyaniline) or 
combining ZnO nanostructures with conductive polymers or other metal oxides (such as CuO) for forming p -n 
junction. Resistivity or photocurrent measurements will provide good testing of NO and iii) AA detection. 
Similar conductive polymers than for NO detection and Optical absorbance More information in section 1.4.3 
In addition to the detection of gases planned in the project, the RFID chip will allow wireless communication 
of the integrated sensors results to the CH curators via a tailored software or control platform.  
6. To develop a model to link the measurement of AA and the other vapours to a degradation level . It will 
allow to predict the years before a severe degradation appears, in order to know when other conservation works 
are needed. Thus, the modular s mart package can be adapted and optimized with the required protective 
elements according to the degradative simulation results. In -line data measurements will allow to predict 
undesirable degradative processes and to program periodic maintenance actions. 
1.3.2. Positioning of the Project.   
The activities developed in NEMOSINE project will s tart at Technology Readiness ( TRL) 4 and target TRL 6 , 
because a technology process will be validated and demonstrated along the p roject at industrial level and prototype 
demonstrators will be integrated  according the three defined models: basic preventive, premium preventive 
(including the sensor and simulation control system), and curative . Most the proposed innovations  are based o n 
technologies validated in other relevant environments, as it is shown in Table 1.3. a: 
Table 1.3. a. TRL justification of NEMOSINE developments. 
Technology 
proposed 
Current/ 
target TRL Justify the current TRL  
MOF AA 
adsorbers 4→6 
The synthesis of hydrophobic hydrothermally stable MOFs has already been optimised and scaled up 
from the laboratory to the pre -industrial level (e.g. UiO -66(Zr) or ZIF -8) and both CNRS and PROM 
have seri es of corre sponding patents. Finally, the sor ption properties of these solids (gases, vapours, 
liquids) have already been reported including recently the selective adsorption of acetic acid by IST 
and CNRS at lab scale, which in some selected c ases surpass ed significantly the performance of 
zeolites (undisclosed results).  
Encapsulated 
Antifungals 4/5→6 
AIMPLAS & NOVA have broad experience in the encapsulation of peptides antifungals and other 
volatile substances to produce successful active pac kages for fr uits & vege tables (PLA4FOOD 
project). NPH has  patented and commercialized solutions in the area of nanofiber -driven delivery of 
active compounds and continues developing novel 2D and 3D carrier structures with diverse release 
profiles for the u se in industry (NanoMatrix3D®).  
Nanostructured 4/5→6 Sensors based on metal oxides using current chemical bath deposition and conductive polymers by 
 
 
3 D. Mania et al.,Screening for Antifungal Peptides & Their Modes of Action in Aspergillus nidulans; Applied & environmental microbiol, 76, 2010, 7102–08. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 11 of 110 
sensors for O2, 
NO & AA. 
electrochemical methods has been develop in several projects (E -Lift) by BIOSENS OR partners and 
proposed technologies are well described in previous papers at lab level 4. 
Electrospinning 
encapsulation  4→6 
NPH has previously developed and optimized bicomponental carriers combining nano -encapsulation 
in biocompatible/biodegradable sph eres carryin g an active  agent incorporated within nanofib ers. This 
system was demonstrated for medicine -related active and optimized in terms of maximum loading 
capacity in both spheres and fibres as well as in terms of nearly linear release rate. NPH has developed 
a core/shell (coaxial) nanofibrous structure wi th several release active substances.  
Modelling of CH 
degradation data  4→6 
IST and NOVA have experience on physical -chemical and molecular characterization of CH cellulose 
derivatives using in situ non-invasive analytical and spectroscopic methods aiming at  finding a 
quantitative correlation with analysed artefacts’ degradation stages. These relationships are developed 
by modelling obtained data by hybrid methods and multivariate analysis.  
MOF 
encapsulation i n 
foams. 
4→6 
Previous studies performed by IST have demonstrated the possibility to prepare MOFs inside the 
macro-porous structure of polyurethane (PUR) foams. 5 This is an alternative for standard 
impregnation of foams from slurries of previous ly prepared adsorbents. Modified MOFs will be 
modified to  enhance the compatibility with the PUR, melamine or LDPE and scale up by 
MODISPREM partner.  
MOF 
encapsulation in 
paper (cellulose)  
5→6 
Art conservators are familiar with paper derivatives treated w ith antifung als or mois ture absorbents. 
Several commercia l solutions already exists in the market: MicroChamber©, Artsorb tissue©. 
NEMOSINE project would change the current active absorbing substances by modified MOFs, 
moisture absorbers and antifungals.  
Barrier packages  5→6 
Multilayer barrier packages are use d in several packaging and construction aplicactions (TRL9). 
However, they are not used nowadays in many of CH packaging applications and their integration of 
this technology in a modular concept is not easy. Fi nally, day by day new materials and processin g 
technologies are proposed to offer new functionalities to this active and innovative sector.  
1.3.3. Research and innovation activities linked with NEMOSINE. 
As it has been mentioned in the section 1.1, t he objectives of NEMOSINE are fully innovative from the p oint of 
view that the usual preservation of CH funded research initiatives has been focused on scuplture, architecture and 
painting arts. Table 1.3.b shows some examples of NMP funded projects related to non-audiovisual CH protection. 
Table 1.3.b. Previous projects funded 
Description of experience/project Scope End 
Year 
Website for 
information  
NANORESTART: NANOmaterials for the REStoration of works of ART H2020-NMP 2018 www.nanorestart.eu/ 
NANO-CATHEDRAL: Nano materials f or conservation of European 
architectural heritage developed by research on characteristic lithotypes H2020-NMP 2018 www.nanocathedral.eu 
H-KNOW: Advanced Infrastructure for Knowledge Based Services for 
Buildings Restoring. FP7-NMP 2011 //ieeexplore.ieee.org/do
cument/6365959/ 
NANOFORART: Nano-materials for the conservation and preservation of 
movable and immovable artworks. FP7-NMP 2014 www.nanoforart.eu 
STONECORE: Stone conservation for the refurbishment of buildings FP7-NMP 2011 //cordis.europa.eu/resul
t/rcn/45692_en.html 
HEROMAT: Protection of Cultural H eritage objects with multifunctional 
advanced materials. FP7-NMP 2015 www.heromat.com/ 
PANNA: Plasma And Nano for New Age “soft” conservation FP7-NMP 2014 //cordis.europa.eu/resul
t/rcn/177029_en.html 
We were unable to identify public  European projects with the same research objectives as proposed in 
NEMOSINE. However, there are a number of national and European projects with strong synergy to NEMOSINE, 
and details are summarized  in Table 1. 3.c. No pat ents or patent application have be en found that invalidate the 
innovation and the overall research novelty proposed in the NEMOSINE project (freedom to operate). 
Table 1.3.c. Partners’ projects related to NEMOSINE. 
Description of experience/project Scope End 
Year 
Website(NEMOSINE’s 
Partner) 
POPART: Preservation Of Plastics ARTefacts research project FP7-
Environment 2015 (CNRS)//popart-
highlights.mnhn.fr/ 
PLA4FOOD: Active multilayer p ackaging bas ed on impro ved 
performance PLA formulations for 4th range food products.  FP7 R4SME 2014 www.aimplas.es/proyectos/ 
pla4food (AIMPLAS) 
 
 
4 I Iatsunskyi, et al. Nanostructures J.  Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7164–71; A Chaaya et al. J. Phys. Chem. C 2014, 118, 3811 -19. 
5 Pinto, M. L.; Dias, S.; Pires, J. Composite MOF Foams: The Example of UiO-66/polyurethane. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2013, 5, 2360–2363. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 12 of 110 
Description of experience/project Scope End 
Year 
Website(NEMOSINE’s 
Partner) 
Functionalized biocompatible composite carriers b ased on 
nanofibers for targeted delivery and controlled r elease of bioactive 
molecules  
CZ project 2016 www.NPH.cz/en/r-and-d 
(NPH) 
MACADEMIA: MOFS as Catalysts and Adsorbents: Discovery 
and Engineering of Materials for Industrial Applications  FP7 2013 //cordis.europa.eu/project/r
cn/92878_en.html  (CNRS) 
M4CO2 - Energy efficient MOF -based Mixed Matrix Membranes 
for CO2 Capture FP7 2017 www.m4co2.eu/  (CNRS) 
Crossing borders . History, Materials & Techniques from 
Portuguese Painters 1850-1918- 
Portugal 
Project 2014 //citi.di.fct.unl.pt/project/pr
oject.php?id=116 (NOVA) 
VOCFilter: Development of PU foam composites with adsorbents 
for application as filters with adsorption capabilities in air -
conditioning units. 
Neotec 
Portugal 2008 
www.adi.pt/novasempresas
/areas/materiais/Materiais.p
df (IST) 
E-Lift: Laser printing of organic/inorganic material for the 
fabrication of electronic devices. 
FP7 
STREP 2012 www.e-lift-project.eu 
(BIOSENSOR, CNRS) 
1.3.4. Methodology. 
NEMOSINE is a 4 -year project. It is structured into 9 workpackages, as the PERT diagram below shows (figure 
1.3.d), which are linked to promote the cooperation of partners and to reach the target objective of NEMOSINE in 
the topic NMBP-35-2017. Each WP addresses a specific set of tasks needed to achieve sequentially the different 
goals and milestones set in the workplan  with the clear objective to reach and prepare 3 real prototypes or 
demonstrators where validate the protective and curative performance. WP1, WP2 and WP3 are  focused in the 
combination of different materials and polymeric structures to improve protection of CH artefacts, looking for 
sinergetic effects. WP1 will design the requirements and initial package  structure design; WP2 will develop MOF 
AA adsorbers and antifungal additives –where CNRS, IST and NPH will have a critical role -, while WP3 will 
integrate the active substances in high porosity environments: open cell foams and nanofibers (MODISPREM, 
AIMPLAS, NPH).  WP4 will wor k in the creation of a multisensor  array to monitor degradative gases 
(BIOSENSOR), that will be integrated in a wireless RFID and degradative simulation control system in the WP5 
(IRIS, IST). 
NEMOSINE will reach TRL6 in the WP6 developing and integrating all the systems in a whole smart and modular 
package, developing the defined prototypes and real demonstrators (PROM, IPC, AKUMPLAST), as well as full 
validation in different protective applications (relevant environments). WP7 wil l involve th e environmental and 
economic studies, while WP8 (communication, dissemination and exploitation) and WP9 (management) will act as 
transversal workpackages, supporting the rest ones. 
 
Figure 1.3.d. NEMOSINE partnership (main roles) and workplan structure and planned commercialization 
Moreover, some institutions have already expressed their interest in the NEMOSINE project results, signing a 
Letter of support (LoS), as it can be seen in Annex 1 at section s 4 -5.  These skateholders wi ll ensure tha t the 
development in NEMOSINE project are completely aligned with the current objetives and goals (see complete list 
of nine LoS in page 1). 

NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 13 of 110 
1.3.5. Sex and Gender analysis. 
The technologies, processes and prod ucts develop ed in NEMOSINE are gender -independent. All  NEMOSINE 
Partners have internal gender equality jobs creation and promotion policies. The consortium will foster the presence 
of women in the technical and management teams and decision board implemented to govern NEMOSINE project. 
The approach of NEMOSINE project is fully in line with D irective 2002/73/EC of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 23 September 2002 on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as 
regards access to employment, vocational tra ining and pro motion, and working conditions. A IMPLAS, as project 
coordinator, is currently developing an internal Gender Equality Plan. NEMOSINE project will be coordinated by 
Mrs. Giner. 
1.4. AMBITION 
1.4.1 State-of-the-Art and progress in acetic acid (AA) adsorbers. 
Photographs and cellulosic artefacts are sen sitive to pollutants and particularly VOCs. Certain dyes in color 
photographs are discolored not only by sulfur dioxide and oxidants such as ozone, nitrogen oxides but a lso by 
organic acids such as AA 6. The hydrolysis and oxidation of cellulose and cellulose esters/ethers is catalyzed by the 
AA (which is produced by the cellulose derivative heritage artefact itself) 7. There is an autocatalytic process that 
speeds up the movie film base degradation.  
Vinegar synd rome was asig ned in the beginning of 1980s as an effect of acetic acid emissions after cellulose 
triacetate degradation, reported innitially by Eastman Kodak Company in 19488, where, in a simplified manner, the 
true iniciator of degradation process is the water and accelerated by the continous production of AA.  
To capture this VOC, inorganic adsorbents such as cationic zeolites markedly slow down film deterioration 9, and 
thus allow to extend the longevity of a movie  film by a f actor of three to four. Howev er, this bene ficial effect is 
apparently related more to their ability to dry air than to the neutralization of acid gases 10. Furthermore, this effect 
is not pronounced enough for films that are in the process of det eriorating11a. Commercial systems such as 
MicroChamber®, Alphamat® and Artcare® 1b are composed of an assembly of paper layers, each with a different 
chemical composition, and the released AA is trapped by the zeolites (and active charcoal) dispersed through out 
the fibe rs. The efficiency is neverth eless limited  due to the diffusion process thr ough the fiber and the lower 
accessibility. 
Activated carbons (or charcoals) are another class of porous commercial adsorbents suitable to capture acetic acid. 
Activated Carbon Cloth (ACC) is an activated charc oal produced in a flexible textile form with a  large internal 
surface area (width slit-shaped micropores) with a proven adsorption efficiency. However, those ACC produce dust 
(charcoal powder) that is not compatible with the good conservation of many heritage artefacts.  
An alternative is to consider functionalized polymers, integrated into Static Intercept Films® and Corrosion 
Intercept® Polyethylene Films, originally intended for packaging and protecting electronic  equipment. These are 
made of polyethylen e combined wi th copper atoms that, as they oxi dize, intercept acetic acid. However, these 
systems suffer from diffusion and adsorption limitations hampering their efficiency.  
As stated above, the relative humidity in the air h as a significant (negative) i mpact on the performance of the 
adsorbent materials regarding acetic acid adsorption while the (ideal) storage under very low relative humidity is 
difficult to achieve. Thus, the development of adsorbents that can e ffectively capture acetic acid in the pre sence of 
relative humidity normally found at s torage in museums (40 -60%) is still a challenge and is a key point for the 
success of this project. For this, we will select and/or develop advanced porous materials tha t have the a bility to 
capture significant amounts of acetic acid in the presence of water vapour. 
Porous metal organic frameworks (MOFs) are a recent class of porous hybrid crystalline materials. Their chemical 
composition, structure and pore size/shape ca n be easily tailored in a much more preci se way than i n traditional 
adsorbents (zeolites, silicas, alumina, etc). They are constructed by the connection of inorganic nodes (clusters, 
chains, layers (see Figure 1.4.a)) with organic polycomplexing ligands, t hrough iono-covalent bonds. Their pore 
size can and be varied, from micro to mesopores, leading to several types of cages or channels (Figure 1). If at their 
early stages their practical use was hampered by their low moisture stability, the use of high val ence (III, IV) metal 
cations have recently led to seri es of robust, even hydrothermally  stable, MOFs.12 This is of interest to find MOF 
 
 
6 Fenech, et al., “Stability of Chromogenic Colour Prints in Polluted Indoor Environments”, Polymer Degradation and Stability, 95:12, 2010, 2481-2485. 
7 Dupont et al., J. Cellulose degradation in an acetic acid environment, Studies in Conservation 45, 2000, 201-210.  
8 http://www.kodak.com/motion/support/technical_information/storage/vinegar_syndrome/default.htm 
9 Ram et al. “Molecular Sieves for Film Preservation ,”  IS&T’s 50 th Annual Conference: Final Program and Proceedings (Springfield , Virginia, 1997)  
10 https://www.imagepermanenceinstitute.org/webfm_send/307 
11 a)Cruz, et al. Chem. Eng. Data 2004, 49, 725-731; b) www.nielsenbainbridge.com/eng/products/matboard/quality/quality.html;  
12 Devic et al., “High valence 3p and transition metal based MOFs”, Chem. Soc., Rev., 2014, 43(16):6097-115 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 14 of 110 
candidates highly suitable to adsorb amphiphilic VOC molecules such as acetic acid, even in the presence of water. 
One pa rticularly efficient strategy to further optimise the sorption properties of MOFs is to  consider the use of 
linkers bearing specific chemical surface groups that will allow a strong enhancement of their hydrophobic 
character13 and thus the selectivity of ad sorption within the final structure. Undi sclosed results (obtained by IST 
and CNRS) have indicated that this is a viable strategy, with some selected MOFs exhibiting an acetic acid capture 
efficiency that from far surpasses the ones of zeolites or carbons in the presence of moisture. Note that CN RS can 
produced up to the multi -hundred gram s cale all these MOFs using ambient pressure conditions. It has also been 
demonstrated, through BASF and more recently by SMEs such as MOFtech, MOFgen, MOFapps or PROM 
(among others), that MOFs can easily been pr oduced at the  industrial scale through differe nt synthesis methods 
(batch, thermomechanical, spray-drying, continuous flow…).14 
 
Figure 1.4.a. – Representation of a few topical moisture stable MOFs (in orange or blue, the inorganic node; in black, the 
aromatic organic spacer; in yellow, the accessible pore volume). Two dicarboxylate hydrophobic linkers on the right 
Beyond the state of the art,  NEMOSINE project aims to develop  a new line of AA adsorbers based on MOFs 
technology that will go beyond the state of the art li mitation outlined above will be a vailable to the conservation 
experts. To achieve this goal, two parallel and complementary strategies will be followed to maximize the changes 
of success. Two smart strategies to obtain MOFs highly selective for the capture of acetic acid are considered: 
i)  Hydrothermally stable amphiphilic or slightly hydrophobic MOFs such as the zinc imidazolate frameworks ZIFs 
(e.g. ZIF-8), the metal(III, IV) polycarboxylate UiO -66’s, MIL-53, MIL-88B, MIL-125, MIL-127 and MI L-140’s 
MOFs; note that one might tune their pore size through a modulation of the length of the organic spacer to optimize 
the confinement of acetic acid within the pores .  
ii)  Functionalized analogues of some of  the above-mentioned MOFs bearing fluorin ated or alkyl  groups on the 
linkers in order to further enhance the selectivity of acetic acid vs water. 
1.4.2 State-of-the-Art and progress in MOF polymer composites. 
In recent years, several MOF polymers composites have  been developed in a view of applications , including t he 
adsorption of organic compound s and gases. 15 Furthermore, many approaches have been successfully applied to 
immobilize other classic adsorbed in porous medias to produce filters with air purifying cap abilities.16 The 
following summary will be  focused on t hose more relevant for the envisi oned application of the MOF polymer 
composites for the NEMOSINE objectives. The MOF-foam composites are a good approach, avoiding much of the 
issues of the existing methods of application of adsorbents to the conservation of CH: 
• The MOF particles are immobilized in a polymeric matrix that avoids the dispersion of the particles throughout 
the CH artefacts. 
• Accessibility of the AA vapors to the MOF particles is high because  of the macroporous structure of the foams 
and fibrous substrates.  
• Enhanced interaction of AA compared to water due to the tailoring of the chemical surface properties of MOFs. 
• High adsorption capacity of the MOF composite foams and fibrous substrates due to the high surface areas that 
can be obtained with porous MOFs. 
 
 
13 Serre et al., “Superhydrophobicity in Highly Fluorinated Porous Metal–Organic Frameworks” Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6048-6050 
14 (a) Czaja, et al.. (2011) Industrial MOF Synthesis, in Metal -Organic Frameworks: Applications from  Catalysis to Gas Storage (ed D. Farr usseng), Wiley-
VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Germany; (b) www.moftechnologies.com/; (c) //mofgen.com/; (d) //mofapps.com/; (e) www.prometheanparticles.co.uk/ 
15Li, S.; Huo, F. Metal–organic Framework Composites: From Fundamentals to Applications. Nanoscale 2015, 7 (17), 7482–7501. 
16 Pinto, M. L. The Use of Nanoporous Adsorbents in Filtering Media for Improving Indoor Air Quality. Recent Pat. Nanotechnol. 2008, 2 (2), 120–127. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 15 of 110 
Three different approaches based on the proven methods from the literature will be used in NEMOSINE to obtain 
MOF polymer composites suitable for application in CH conservation packages: 1) to produce polyurethane foams 
with supported MOFs, 2) to produce electrospun fibers with MOFs and 3) to produce paper containing MOFs. The 
current state of the art for each approach is briefly reviewed below. 
Immobilization of powdered adsorbents in foams is usually achieved industrially by soaking foams with a slurry of 
adsorbents in water/ solvent in the presence of a binder (usually a polymer based one). This route gives several 
problems in the properties of the final material (adhesion problems, obstruction of the pores of the adsorbents, slow 
adsorption ki netics, significant decrease of a dsorption capacity) and requires a costly production process with 
several soaking/drying cycles to achieve a high loading of adsorbents. This even might require the surf ace 
functionalization of the MOF particles using polymers to enhance the colloidal stability of the MOFs particles into 
the solvent.  
 
Figure 1.4.b. Activated carbon / foam composite produced by a scaled-up process to obtain a macroporous media with 
adsorption capabilities.17 
Several researchers have already demonstrated the possibility of i ncluding MOF powders of small particle size in 
nonwoven fiber media, using electrospinning methods. 18 The MOF particles in the form of fine powders are 
suspended in a pol ymer solutio n that is then used to produc e fibbers ana logous to a common electrospinnin g 
process (Figure 1.4.a). The obtained fibers are very thin (Figure 1.4. b) and contain the MOF particles attached to 
them (Figure 1.4.c). Up to now the most promising p olymer/solution combination for such proc ess is 
polyacrylonitrile (PAN) in dimethylformamide (DMF). This polymer/solution is already widely used in industry to 
produce electrospinning fibers. Several MOFs have already been tested, like HKUST-1, MIL-100(Fe), ZIF-8, UiO-
66 and MIL -101(Cr). In the N EMOSINE project, the best MOFs developed for c apturing AA will be used in the 
production of the fibbers with MOFs. DMF is a convenient solvent for electrospinning and for MOFs stability. 
However, other more appropri ate solvents will be investigated for up -scaling since DMF is a toxic solvent that is 
more difficult to remove from the final processed material. 
a)
  b)
  
c) 
        
Figure 1.4.c. Electrospinning of fibers with MOFs: a) Horizontal electrospinning setup with rotating metal plate as counter 
electrode used for production of the composite fibers, b) HKUST-1/PS fibers in relation to a human hair and c) HKUST-1 
crystal on a PS fiber analogue to a pearl necklace. 
Finally, the MOF powders can be supported in cellu lose fiber m edia, using a paper like proc ess that was already 
successfully used to support other adsorbents.  
Beyond the state of the art, NEMOSINE will explore other alternatives such as (i) the synthesis of MOFs directly 
inside the macroporous structure of the foam polymer, achieved by adding t he reactants and solvent medium in a 
reactor w here the foam in already present or (ii) to convert the MOF in a first step to macroscopic particles 
(granulated of pellet forms), as discussed in the previous section, and then add  the particles into a foam re acting 
formulation, to obtain a one -shot foam with supported particles evenly distributed . This last strategy was already 
 
 
17 These materials were obtained in VOCFilter, a previous industrial project coordinated by Pinto, M.L. 
18Rose, M. et al. MOF Processing by Electrospinning for Functional Textiles. Adv. Eng. Mater. 2011, 13 (4), 356–360; Ostermann, R. et al. Metal –organic 
Framework Nanofibers Via electrospinning. Chem. Commun.  2011, 47 (1), 442 –444; Ren, J. et al. Elec trospun MOF Nanofibers as Hydrogen Storage 
Media. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy  2015, 40 (30), 9382–9387; Wahiduzzaman; Khan, M. R. et al. Processing and P erformance of MOF (Metal Organic 
Framework)-Loaded PAN Nanofibrous Membrane for CO2 Adsorption. J. Mater. Eng. Perform. 2016, 25 (4), 1276–1283. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 16 of 110 
demonstrated at lab and pilot scale with activated carbon pellets (Figure 1.4a). 
Moreover, in the NEMOSINE project, the best MOFs developed for capturing AA will be used in the production of 
the fibbers with MOFs. DMF is a convenient solvent for electrospinning and for MOFs stability. However, other 
more appropriate solvents will be investigated f or up-scaling since DMF is a toxic solven t that is mor e difficult to 
remove from the final processed material. 
1.4.3 State-of-the-Art and progress in antifungals for conservation and their encapsulation.  
Conservators are reluctant to add chemicals that might da mage or cont aminate a heritage object. Several works 
today are devoted to the removal of pesticides and chemical in museum artefacts. Developing a package that is both 
effective against microorganisms and harmless to humans, the environment, and photograph s is challen ging. 
Numerous chemicals have been tested for their fungistatic or fungicid e properties on heritage artefacts. These are 
generally alkylation agents (formaldehyde, ethylene oxide), organobromines (methyl bromide), quaternary 
ammonium (zinc fluorosilicate and Hyamine 1622), or phenol d erivatives (thymol, orthophenylphenol). The latter, 
which have long been recommended for graphic documents, are not very active on spores and might be harmful for 
photographs. Hyamine 1622, which is apparently usabl e on black a nd white images, is harmful t o certain col or 
chromogenic photographs, since  it reacts with cyan dye. Zinc fluorosilicate does not appear to be harmful to 
photographs, whether black and white or color. There is currently some interest in using e ssential oils extracted 
from plants such as rosemary, thyme, pine, eucalyptus, and citr onella. These natural essences contain phenol and 
terpene derivatives, which have antiseptic, bacteriostatic, and fungistatic properties. Those have to be tested for 
their effective ness against molds and harmfu lness for peo ple, environment and audio -visual artefacts. However, 
encapsulated essential oil has been proposed but it might be some issues with respect to health and interaction with 
objects. In the last years, the re are repor ts19 on the antifungal activit y of peptides  isolated from a broad range of 
medicinal plants that displayed antifungal activity toward several fungal species. They have less effectively than 
essential oils but are odor-less and lower effect to non-fungal items. 
Beyond the state of the a rt, NEMOSINE aims to develop new active packag e by encapsulating odour -free 
antifungals peptides a nd other antifungals to be integrated in high surface area devices (open cells foams and/or 
electrospinning nanofiber ) to maximiz e the action. The encapsulati on will allow  an accurate control of the 
substance release kinetics. Application of antifungals will have a curative  purpose by inhibiting the spread of 
moulds (fungistatic effect) on artefacts or eventually killed them (fungicide effect). 
 
 
1.4.4 State-of-the-Art and progress in sensor for acid vapours measurement using nanotechnology.  
Oxygen detection is normally performed by resistive gas 
sensors20. The main disadvantage of these sensors is their high 
operating temperat ure (300 -600 °C) due to transfer of heat 
activated ele ctrons between metal oxide surfac e and adsorbed 
oxygen. In order to reduce operating temperatures and enhance 
sensitivity, photocurrent -based sensors have been developed 21. 
Typical measurement scheme of photocurrent gas sensor is 
shown in Figur e 1.4.d. Elec tron-hole pairs were generated by  
UV excitation light source.  
Different metal oxides have been used in photocurrent gas 
sensors for oxygen detection. Typical sensor response of oxygen 
gas sensor, based on ZnO nanoribbons is shown in Figure 1.4.e.  
 
Figure 1.4.d. Schematic diagram of measurement 
on gas sensing based on surface photocurrent. 
 
 
19 a)M.J. Abad et al., ARKIVOC 2007 (vii) 116 -145; b)H. THORMAR Editor Lipids and Essential Oils as Antimicrobia l Agents, A John 
Wiley and Sons,2011. 
20 Zhang et al., Adverse effect o f substrate surface impurities on O 2 sensing properties of TiO 2 gas sensor operating at high temperature, 
Ceramics Int., 43, 2017, 5842–46 
21 L.Peng, The characteristic of photoelectric g as sensing to oxygen and water based on ZnO nanoribbons at room temper ature, Applied 
Surface Science,254, 2008, 2856–60. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 17 of 110 
Photocurrent was measured when exposed to oxygen. The tests were 
performed in the range of O 2 pressure form 0.58 Torr to 15 T orr. 
Good repeatability and s tability of t he sensor were observed. Wang 
et al. 2016 reported on oxygen detection using TiO 2 nanorods. The 
developed resistive TiO 2 nanorod oxygen gas sensor showed 
sensitivity to 1-16 % of oxygen with limit of detection (LOD) 0.5%. 
Fluorescence of compl ex organic mo lecules such as porphyrins can 
be used for oxygen detection 22. The increase of oxygen partial 
pressure led to fluorescence quenching. The developed porphyrin -
based systems could simultaneously measure te mperature ch anges 
and oxygen pressure. Po rphyrin based  oxygen sensors have been 
shown g ood sensitivity to 0 -100% concentrations of oxygen in the 
temperature range of 25-65 °C.  
 
Figure 1.4.e. The surface photocurrent of ZnO 
nanoribbons exposed to three cycles of air–
vacuum with the illumination of 361 nm. 
In addition, good compatibility of  porphyrin-based oxygen sensors with commercial laser emitting diodes (LED) 
has been demonstrated.  NO sensing is traditionally performed by metal oxide sensors. Due to n anotechnology 
approaches, operating temperature was decreased to room temperature. However, response time and selectivity are 
still actual problems23. Current-voltage measurements of conductive polymers and metal oxide/conductive polymer 
nanostructures for NO gas detec tion have been reported.  Goo d sensitivity to NO was in the range of 5 -100 ppm 
with detection limit of 5 ppm has been achieved 24. In addition, UV treatment was used for stimulating of NO 
desorption and decreasing recovery time of the sensor. 
Detection of ac etic acid vapours is an actua l topic. Phot oluminescence of optically active  organogels and surface 
Plasmon resonance gold nanostructures, equipped with polypyrrole layer have been applied for acetic acid 
detection in air. The developed sensors showed good signal and stability to 10 -70 ppm acetic a cid at room 
temperature. Prospective approach for acetic acid detection has been demonstrated with optically active conducting 
polymers25. 
The developed conductive polymer layers are sensitive to the pH.  It was show n, that response of the condu ctive 
polymer sensor to HCl was much higher th an to acetic acid. However, modification of the selective layer could 
increase sensitivity to acetic acid. Particularly, it was demonstrated that hybrid inorganic/organi c nanostructures 
showed enhanced sensitiv ity of hybrid  nanostructures for VOC species. Therefore, combining hybrid 
nanostructures for electrical, optical and electro -optical detection of VOCs is a prospective research field. White 
source (torch of smartphone) or UV excitation source (LED) can be also used as the light source. Minimization and 
integration of three types of sensors into one unit will be foreseen. Additional testing of all sensing elements to 
water adsorption, cross sensitivity and selectivity will be performed. 
From the analysis of the recent ac hievements on room temperature de tection of O 2, NO and acetic acid (AA), 
NEMOSINE proposes the follow solutions beyond the state of the art: 
1. Oxygen detection can be performed by using a metal oxide a nd porphyrin nanostructures using photocurrent 
and photoluminescence spectroscopy as a technique to measure the sensor signal, respectively. 
2. NO sensing can be performed by metal oxide and metal oxide/conductive polymer using photocurrent 
technique. 
3. Acetic acid sensing can be performed by conductive polymers using optical spectroscopy. 
4. The detection system can be integrated  on one chip and equipped with UV LED as excitation source 
directly in the modular package design.  
1.4.5 State-of-the-Art and progre ss in mathem atical models to predict degr adation in CH  cellulose based 
artefacts. 
Literature concerning modelling experimental data of the relationship between cellulose derivatives’ degradation 
stages (cellulose acetate (CA) and cellulose nitrate (CN) and  any of their physical or chemical characteristic in CH 
 
 
22 X. Zhou, Platinum (II) porphyrin -containing thermoresponsive poly(N -isopropylacrylamide) copolymer as fluorescence dual oxygen and 
temperature sensor, Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, 159, 2011, 135–141. 
23 Li Luo et al., Gas sensing chara cteristics of novel twin -layered SnO2 nanoarray fabricated by substrate -free hydrothermal route, Sensors 
and Actuators B: Chemical, 218, 2015, 205–214. 
24 Li-Yang Hong et al., NO gas sensing at room temperature using single titanium oxide nanodot sensors created by atomic force microscopy 
nanolithography, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 2016, 7, 1044–1051. 
25 Chiam et al, Dopant Ratio on Polyaniline Coated Fiber Bragg Grating for pH, detection, Synthetic Metals, 211, 2016, 132-41. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 18 of 110 
artefacts is very scarce. The f irst reference deals with chemometrics 26a reports near infrared (NIR) to correlate the 
mechanical behaviour of papers used in paints and photography with their degradatio n condition. Afterwards only 
Strlič’s res earch group 13b described some studies on NIR s pectral data’s multivariate analysis app lied to CA 
negative films and photographic papers. NIR is a very fast in situ, non -destructive technique, easily enabling 
material’s condition assessment, but it is expensive and difficult to integrate in a package. 
IST and NOVA partners27 have the expertise of characterising and modelling the results of more than three hundred 
CA and CN black & white film negatives naturally aged, with different preservation conditions, formats and brands 
belonging to six different ph otographic and movie collections hosted by national archives. These complete set of 
characterisation results (considered to be representative of collections found in a common archive) will be available 
to this project and will be used as reference samples in order to test different modelling procedures prior to test data 
obtained from the sensors developed under this project’s framework.  
The application of hybrid modelli ng to CH inv olving the application of curve resolution methods to extract 
degradation chemically-related data from spectra of c ellulose derivatives was not attempted yet. This methodology 
proved to be very promising as documented in other CH items 28. If tested on data available can provide additional 
accurate insight about degradation levels on different temporal scales. Hybrid mod els will then be simulated 
resourcing to open platforms for simulation encompassing predictable environmental conditions to estim ate the 
degree of degradation expected under different storage conditions. 
In this prop osal modelling will be applied to data a cquired by the developed gas sensors located inside designed 
barrier film packages for cellulose derivatives artefacts. These sensors will monitor released degradation gases such 
as acids, nitrogen oxides and CO 2. Th ese models are expected to suggest recom mendations for predictive 
conservation (e.g. cold, temperature, adsorbents, antifungal agents).  
Beyond the state of the art,  NEMOSINE aims t o develop multi -scale models to correlate sensors’ signals  
integrated in the package with degradation level of any type of cellulose derivatives CH artefacts. The correlation 
between sensor signals and degradation stage will be mainly achieved using multi-scale chemometric tools . 
Hybrid models, the combination of predictive chemo metric methods (e.g., partial least squa res, feedforward neural 
networks) and known chemical degradation mechanisms, are the key for an accurate estimation of the evolut ion of 
degradation over time and will be tested with the available data. 
1.4.6 State-of-the-Art and progress in injection moulding barrier module packages. 
The presence of oxygen accelerates the degradation of old cellulose derivative items. Well known non -
conventional injection moulding techniques that include the combination of two or more mater ials with different 
chemical structure a s over moulding, co -injection (or sandwich injection) and also IML (in mould labelling) can 
help to reduce the entry of oxygen on the package or reduce the vacuum required to remove the initial oxygen 
inside of the package.  
Different polymeric materials a re suitable as high oxygen and moisture barriers 29, taking into account the injected 
thicknes of package layers, and the effective ness of materials. Some potential cand idates for NEMOSINE project 
are: 
Water barrier pr operties: polypropylene (PP), Polyethyle ne (PE); Oxygen barrier properties : PET (polyethylene 
terephtalate), PA (polyamide) or EVOH (Ethylene Vynil Alcohol) , Aluminium foils or SiOx coatings (If in-mould 
labeling technology is employed). 
These materials give together good chemical response with moderated price, and easy processing behaviour. But, 
the most important aspect is the possibility to integrate in a easy way ever y modular technology able to protect the 
CH artefacts. 
Injection moulding is a well kno w and mature process that is used in sev eral industrial sectors (packaging, 
automotive, electric electronic, ,,,) to produce from hundreds to millions of parts at low co st and short  time (less 
than half a minute per part in average). The injection moulding  allows the fabrication of a broad range  of 3D parts 
with a free design and the posibilities to integrate other materials or parts, t oothbrushes or screwdrivers are 
examples of multi-component parts at low cost.  This technology will permit to combine diffe rent materials in the 
same parts by usin g co -injection or overmoulding, or to incorporate a high barrier films (contaings inorganic 
coatings or aluminium foils) by in-mould labeling. 
 
 
26 a)Mecklenburg  M.F. et al, J. American Institute for Conservation, 33,153-170 (1994); b) Strlič et al, Digital Image Correlation (DIC) as a 
novel tool for monitoring response of canvas paintings to variations in environmental conditions. Appl. Physics A, 106, 411–417 (2012). 
27 Roldão et al, Plastics Associated with Photographic Materials, Tucson, Arizona, USA, 2016.  
28 Mas et al, Chemom. Intell. Lab Syst., 134, 147-148 (2014).  
29 www.pod-sabic-ip.com/KBAM/Reflection/Assets/Thumbnail/10620_4.pdf 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 19 of 110 
Furthermore, injection moulding allows to build different sizes or shapes  parts just by modify some parts of the 
metallic mould. For example, it is easy to perform different holes or specific places in the package to integrate 
the sensors or the vacuum system, or internal ribs to easily integrate the foams or nanofibers. Beyond the state 
of the art, NEMOSINE aims to develop the best integration technologies in order to design the best package for 
full protecting of the original audio -visual CH artefacts. Oxygen and moisture barrier, vacuum and suitable 
design for easy mounting a nd dismounting of package elements (sens ors, adsorbers, communications, etc) will 
be proposed. Finally, the objective is to achieve a realistic processing terms of future scale-up. 
1.4.7 Main competitors.  
Some commercial products are available in the mar ket, such as PIQLBox© 30. This solution ad vocate for the 
substitution of original acetate substrate, making a copy of the audiovisual content in a new PET durable film 
substrate, combined with a rigid package of a non -degradable polymer. This solution do not  protect the original 
audiovisual material, but, replacing it by a more resistant support device. Other solutions, such as MicroChamber©, 
Artsorb tissue©, Alphamat®, and Artcare®6b are composed of an assembly of paper layers, each with a different 
chemical composition.  
The release of AA are detected by using colored paper indicator (AD-strip)  and trapped by the active charcoal and 
zeolites that are  dispersed through th e fibers. Th e efficiency is limited due to the diffusion process through the 
fiber and the lower accessibility, as well as huge limitations on durability, chemical, mechanical and environmental 
resistance. 
Sensorized commercial packages, such as DANCAN CINEMA SERVICES, include indicator paper strips for only 
acetic acid detection with very l ow sensitivity, far from the complete so lution proposed by NEMOSINE based on 
multisensoric nanosensors for different gases (O 2, AA, NO) and a control software platform t o simulate 
degradation processes and then predict accurate protective treatments.  
NEMOSINE will offer three types of packages  (BASIC PREVENTIVE, PREMIUM PREVENTIVE and 
CURATIVE) as an innovative solution for the conservation of the ORIGINAL audiovisual co ntent. Proje ct 
model business is based on a double objective:  
a) On the on hand, NEMOSINE  innovative packaging will contribute to  decrease on 4.6 M€/y related to 
economic damages due to work loses that currently take place every year (assuming that NEMOSINE will 
prevent 2.25% of the loses during the first three years of their commercialization). 
b) At the same time, NEMOSINE will open a new conservation market to be exploitaed through a joint venture 
and licenses outside Europe, estimated in a turnover of  35 M€/y (5 years after the project ends). 
2. IMPACT
2.1 EXPECTED IMPACTS. 
The NEMOSINE project is fully in line with the European Call “ H2020-NMBP-35-2017-Innovative solutions for 
the conservation of 20th century cultural heritage" and with the wider objectives, guidelines and policies of several 
EU leading initiatives, as summarized in table 2.1.a. 
Table 2.1.a Contribution to the expected impacts defined in the NMBP-35-2017 topic text. 
Expected Impact in the 
NMBP-35-2017 topic 
Expected contribution of the NEMOSIN E project, f ive years after the end of the 
project 
Practical & affordable 
materials/ technique 
solutions in terms of cost 
and/or complexity  of 
operation by those who 
will use them. 
All proposed products (cellular composite materials, MOFs & antifungals, s ensors, inje cted 
packages, …) will be produced by a scalable technology presenting enhanced functionalities that 
are affordable & will be used in containers for archival of CH. 
A major objective of the project is to make the system easy to use  in a very conventional way, 
i.e. without requiring high handling and using technical specifications. 
To minimize the cost of the packaging for CH (cultu ral heritage) audio -visual artefracts, two 
processes will be used: 1. extrustion/calendering for film barrier production and 2. low cost, high 
throughput and high volume overmoulding, using standard termoplastic materials. Boths process 
are industrial mature & produce low cost products at high output. 
Extrusion/calendering will enables the minimal use of expensive highl y-functional materials, due 
to the film can be used for various geometries of packaging, depending on the type of CH to be 
protected. This approach offers a high flexibility in the manufacturing of smart packages. 
 
 
30 http://www.piql.com/products/protecting-your-data-assets/ 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 20 of 110 
Expected Impact in the 
NMBP-35-2017 topic 
Expected contribution of the NEMOSIN E project, f ive years after the end of the 
project 
In addition, dedicated features will be im plemented in the package design in order to enable an 
easy mounting and dismounting of each component. This fact is for reuse purpose, but s till the 
recycling issue must have to be highlighted, as foams and fibres are fully recyclable. Processes 
such as in jection moul ding or over -moulding allow a free part design by implement a inserts 
change systems in the mould tools. 
The user interface of t he system to control the evolution of the packed artefact will be user 
friendly. To sum up, our system will facilita te improvement of the long-term condition of fragile 
audio-visual heritage and reduce around 50% of energy costs in places where high accura cy 
storage conditions (low temperature and humidity) are required and thus improve cost efficiency 
in the this sector.  
Increased quantified 
efficiency of materials/ 
technique development 
for CH conservation, also 
beyond the specific cases 
selected by the proposers; 
NEMOSINE aims to develop several innovations that can be useful for the conservation of a 
wide range of CH based on cellulose derivative, beyond of the current technique that are based 
on freezing and reparation after damage. It will be useful for preserving any archival document in 
libraries or archives and could be used either by institutions (museums, cin ematheque, e tc.) or 
private users.  All added functionalities will be certified to be compliant to the ISO standard 
18916 (PAT – Photographic Activity Test by the IPI – Image Permanance Institute). 
Increased use of multi -
scale modelling in the 
development of solution s 
for CH conservation; 
Integration of sensors & first principles degradation mechanisms on a single multi -scale 
simulation platform for prediction suitable conservation approaches. The data from the sensor 
will feed models that can act as a ris k assessment system (or predictive maintenance) to avoid 
irreversible degradation by predicting it before it starts so preventive measures can be taken. 
Improved modelling -
based decision making 
regarding conservation 
interventions. 
Sensors integrated  in t he package w ill provide the required information by the NEMOSINE 
developed mathematical model, which will estimate the long -term optimal pre dictive 
maintenance plan for each monitored CH artifact. The real time data from RFID  will feed the 
predictive model s to be used  in the decision support platform for the conservers and make a 
significant step in the knowledge management regarding CH maintenance. 
The use of sensors, which data will be made publically available and be centralised remotely in a 
cloud platform (to feed the proprietary decision support systems used by the CH conservers) will 
contribute to build the IoT (Internet of Things) in th e community of audio -visual archives and 
libraries. 
Clear prospect for 
quantified socio -
economic gains from the 
proposed solutions. 
The proposed solution is economically driven and optimized for efficient preservation and long 
term conservation of fragile  and precious material for future generations. This means better 
financial investments to protect expensive artefact s, and the photographs and films that contain a 
significant part of our common memories and cultural legacy for the future. There are audio -
visual items without value that will be used as samples for the tests, as a baseline, to validate the 
improvements of NEMOSINE solution.   
There is a clear need for inexpensive, reliable and user friendly tools in the CH audio -visual 
sector. The products w ill be suitable for any collection containing cellulose derivative artefacts, 
without limitation to 20th century obj ects. Thus, the market potential is large. By improving 
protection of 20th century heritage through passive enclosures and sensors, NEMOSINE  
contributes to develop the socio -economic gains in the CH sector by ensuring long term access, 
to a larger communit y at a lower  cost. NEMOSINE generates a new sector for conservation 
products.  
 
Effective market uptake 
of the developed 
solutions within f ive 
years after the end of the 
project;  
A preliminary business plan has been prepared by the different partners bas ed on their current 
sales and consumptions, the estimated target cost, their current market share & the expected 
market evolution. This is summarized in tables 2.1.c and 2.1.d. 
Contribution to open 
repository of simulation 
and/or experimental data. 
Extensive collection of fully mapped nitrate/acetate of cellulose movies and photographs infrared 
spectral data and optical coherence tomography. For examples, data on the adsorption isotherms 
of acetic acid on the MOFs (already developed and new ones) and on th e composite MOF foams 
and fibers. Benchmarking data on the adsorbents (MOFs, activated carbons and zeolites) for 
acetic acid removal under the presence of moisture. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 21 of 110 
Expected Impact in the 
NMBP-35-2017 topic 
Expected contribution of the NEMOSIN E project, f ive years after the end of the 
project 
The experimental data collected during the project, including simulation -modelling results 
related to t he early developments at lab level (packaging formats not completely finished), will 
be made public available.  
Contribution to  increased 
citizens' awareness of 
20th century tangible CH. 
Film is probably the most important and characteristic m edium of the  20th century, altogether 
with photography. Even though for example film is being digitized, vast numbers of titles (>90 
%) still rest on analogic carrier.  
NEMOSINE covers actions for dissemination and communication to inform about and 
demonstrate those n ew tools/packaging and their potential to make preservation of film and 
related materials more effective and efficient, (i.e. large amounts of cultural documents are stored 
on cellulose derivative based carriers, such as magnetic films, magneti c tapes, mic rofilms, 
instantaneous discs, as well as numerous objects of arts and cultural value.) thus contributing to 
increased awareness of 20 th century tangible CH. The general public and other target potential 
users will be informed about progress of the project regularly through social media.  
Table 2.1.b shows the proposed innovations in NEMOSINE beyond of the art of current conservati on techniques for the 
suitable conservation of CH artefacts made with cellulose deviate and the associated KPIs. 
Table 2.1.b NEMOSINE proposed KPIs. 
Main NEMOSINE 
innovation 
Current conservation 
system. NEMOSINE proposed Key Performance Indicators (KPI) 
1. Removal capacity for 
acetic acid by the MOFs 
Adsorbents (activated 
carbons and zeolites) 
-Expected 50% above the current adsorbents´ removal capacity 
- Enhanced selectivity for acetic acid capture by at least two times. 
2. High gas barrier (O 2, 
H2O and CO2) packages 
Non high performance 
barrier materials are 
employed nowadays. 
-Project targets OTR 0.5 cm 3/package per  day  and WV TR 1 
g/package per day will be achieved throughout the selction of 
suitable polymers in a multilayer structure  
3. Creation of new 
sensors for cellulose 
derivative degradation 
control. Predictive 
Maintenance. 
- Limited multi -sensoric 
devices. 
- No wireless capabilities. 
-No Modular conception. 
-New easy to use and multiarray multisensors for NO, acetic acid, 
H2O & O2. 
- Modular de sign capable to adjust placement in the package and 
to replace. 
-Wireless communication with the simulation control platform 
(predictive maintenance capabilities).  
Other substantial impacts not mentioned in the work programme are detailed further below, such as the creation in 
the short/medium term of qualified jobs in the SHH  and in the industrial processes from NEM OSINE approach; 
contribution to reduce the GHG emissions and energy use, contribution to the development of standards in the 
promotion of th e ORIGINAL Audio -visual Heritage, as a complementary solution to the digitisation routes (4th 
pillar-‘Safeguarding our cultural heritage sources’ of the Strategic Research Agenda (SRA) of the JPI). The impacts 
of technological investments for conserving ou r cultural heritage to contribute to growth should not be under -
estimated and should be given serious consideration by policy makers. 
2.1.1 Enhancing innovation capacity and integration of new knowledge. 
Being a RIA project up to TRL 6, the NEMOSINE process value chain has been devised as an industry -driven. 
Every partner has understood the whole applied research and technolo gy developme nt cycle ensuring the 
cooperation of entities close to market, end -users and the requirements set by them. No independent tasks are 
possible, going ahead as a “unique company” to pre -marketable CO2 capture product. The project offers all 
partners involved new possibilities to improve their innovation capacities and new knowledge in business, 
technological, social, environmental or some combination of them in a real collaboration to achieve so. 
Article 3.3 of the Lisbon treaty states that the Uni on “shall respect its rich cultural and linguistic diversity, and 
shall ensure that Europe's cultural heritage is safeguarded and enhanced .” There is an ambition at European 
level to make Europe a laboratory for “heritage -based innovation”31. This backdrop is highlight favourable for the 
introduction of cost effective and high performance technologies, such as NEMOSINE, that can assist Europe i n 
realising its ambitions and in preserving our 20th century audio-visual cultural heritage32.  
NEMOSINE´s ultimate g oal has an i ntrinsic utility since the conservation of the CH at long term will result in 
 
 
31 ec.europa.eu/culture/policy/culture-policies/cultural-heritage_en.htm 
32 www.lisbon-treaty.org/wcm/the-lisbon-treaty/treaty-on-european-union-and-comments/title-1-common-provisions/4-article-3.html  
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 22 of 110 
guaranteeing a duty that we all have with the citi zens,i.e. the access to the culture, and what is more important, 
under better and cost -competitive conditions, not o nly for the direct costs, but as a whole approach, i.e. 
NEMOSINE conservation smart solution means less deterioration; hence less restoratio n and digitalization needs 
(or any other technology that can appear in 50 or 100 years).  
To increase the innovation  capacity of the industry, our approach is to capitalise on a valuable opportunity for the 
EU electronic, engineering, chemicals, plastics and other end-user industries to work together in order to substitute 
currently used rudimentary conservation methods  with innovative functional packaging solutions for storage and 
conservation, and to assume a leadership position on the world stage.  
The innovation process is only complete when new innovative knowledge is put to industrial use. The innovative 
potential of NEMOSINE is enhanced by the strong industrial composition of the  NEMOSINE consortium (7 
partners out of 16; 6 of them SMEs and 1 large co mpany). The industrial partners are supported by relevant 
end-users/SSH organizations in the CH EU field ( OEAW, CULTURARTS, DFI and ALINARI). with powerful 
active relations with several national and international networks , such as with German Association o f 
Cinémathèques (Kinematheksverbund), Association des Cinémathèques Européennes (ACE), Fédération 
Internationale des  Archives du  Film (FIAF), AIC (American Institute of Conservation), CEPIC Photo Agency 
Association, Tauvisual (Italian based professional imaging association), etc. (See section 2.2.2.). 
Figure 2.1.a shows the NEMOSINE value chain and the partner`s interac tion. The co mpanies involved in the 
project possess all of the key equipment and know -how to obtain the target products. The required invest ment is 
reasonable and the earn -back time is less than eight years after project finish. Both industrial partners an d end -
users/SSH organizations are altogether integrated into the project decision making structure to ensure that the 
involved industrial an d cultural sectors drive project activities and benefit from the project results. To ensure 
success, they will lead most of the technological WPs (7 out of 9) and enable the steering of project activities from 
the perspective of the whole supply and value chain. The consortium is made up of ‘cultural heritage researchers’ 
who come from numerous different academic fields . Not only f rom the traditional ‘heritage’ disciplines of 
conservation/restoration with an important role, but including other technical fields, such as IT, chemistry, safety.  
 
Figure 2.1.a. Structure and relation between partners in the consortium. 
Taking into acc ount this scenario at global level, the project results can easily be oriented towards the market 
strategies on developing reliable products based on current validated technologies, but redesigned and optimized to 
fulfil the requirements of the wide CH market. However due to their modular configuration and the huge number 
of potential options, it is possible to adapt the package to less requirements levels or just to the cost that the 
end-user can pay. CXD will be in charge of commercializing the tailor-made solutions for audio-visual storage. 
The participation of three SSH -CH end-users (Culturarts, DFI, ALINARI), plus the influent R TD OEAW and the 
large CH company, CXD; who are well -known at national and at EU/international level, guarantees hig h impact 
and the wide dissemination & exploitation of the project results at worldwide level. 
 
2.1.2 Economic impact: strengthening the competitiveness and growth of companies. 
NEMOSINE consortium aims to commercialize after 5 years of the end of the project an innovative s mart 
packaging (3 different flexible designs) based in the latest advancements in conservation -preservation including 
deterioration modellings, to be used in storage of ORIGINAL audiovisual works. New NEMOSINE packaging 
products will satisfy the demanding requirements of their different types of end-users/clients (both the conventional 
citizens and the expert SSH organizations).  Currently, as an example, a ‘ventilating circular box’ (39cm diameter; 
40mm height),  costs around 4-6€. The expected c ost for the NEMOSINE packaging products (BASIC or 
PREMIUM PREVENTIVE, CURATIVE) compared to the current package cost (with lower/non -performance and 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 23 of 110 
the energy cost associated) are summarized in figure 2.1.b. Expected costs are evaluate d based on the exper tise of 
the NEMOSINE’s partners and the methodology proposed to systematically evaluate the techno -economic 
prospects of future detailed in WP8. 
 
Figure 2.1.b. Estimated models package costs for a rectangular theoretical shape of 40x40 cm and 300g of weight. 
Protective package for CH audio-visuals. One of the notorious gaps in the field of audio -visual preservation is an 
estimation of the total amount of materials stored in collections worldwide based on counts or at least serious 
estimations. There are several surveys attempting to finding out for example how many film works are held in EU 
film archives:  EU projects Presto 33a and TAPE 2b, ACE survey 34 or OEAW survey 35. However, to calculate 
NEMOSINE economic impact and the business forecast , the most recent PricewaterhouseCoopers (PWC) study 
(2015) has been used36.  
Audio-visual collections can be grouped as follows: 1) (partly) autonomous audio -visual research archives; 
memory institutions, such as libraries, archives and museums; departments of research or cultural institutions, local 
museums, oral history societies, etc.., 2)  materials privately owned by the researchers, collectors or  audio -visual 
buff that created audio and video documents for their research purposes and  3) private owne rs that keep own old  
family photographs (and/or their negatives), movies or audio. 
The products to be designed within the project are highly interesting for collections of cinematographic materials 
(film archives), as well as audio archives holding historical materials on basis of cellulose derives. Specifically, the 
estimation of such holdings within EU major professional film archives is around 5 Million film items37 or 18 
Mio of film reels (cans) on cellulose acetate.  This value must be multiply by 3 to c alculate all the items made by 
cellulose derivates and that belong to the European Heritage or families or towns memories (~50 Millions). 
As another example of uncertainty, the number of materials based on acetate derivative held within collections 
outside FIAF (Fédération In ternationale des Archives du Film),  the archival community or within private 
collections is unknown, but can be estimated as very high,  as materials on cellulose derivative have been 
produced until ca. mid of 1970’s (audio), respectively until recently (cinematographic materials). Additionally there 
is a huge number of microfilms held in libraries , which were produced on cellulose derivative, now partly 
suffering from vinegar syndrome or other negative effects of material decomposition38, such as migration or loss of 
 
 
33 a) PrestoSpace. http://presto.joanneum.at/projects.asp and b)TAPE project: http://www.tape-online.net/ 
34Association des Cinémathèques Européennes, O rphan Works Survey, 2009, www.ace-film.eu/wp-content/uploads/ 2011/ 
12/ACE_Orphan_Works_Survey_Results_final_1004014.pdf. ACE consists of 44  European national/regional preservation film archives. 
35 Carried outin 2012, performed with 20 institutions, extrapolated to 125 members of FIAF (Fédération Internationale des Archiv es du 
Film). FIAF grouped currently 162 film archives (86 members and 76 associates) from 74 countries. 
36 Based on www.ffa.de/download.php?f=9f584a7ec81e190812964b19bdb9d3a6&target=0. 
37 Defined by EN 15907 as (…) the physical copy of a Work or Variant. An Item may consist of one or more components, i.e. the whole Item 
may consist of 1 reel or 5 reels (…).” Ibid  
38 Richardson, E; (2012) The Physical Effects of Plasticizer Loss in Cellulose Acetate Films. In: POPART: Preservation of Plastic ARTifacts 
in Museum Collections. Le Comite des Travaux Historiques et Scientifiques. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 24 of 110 
plasticiser. The latter is a special problem also in conservation of modern art39.  
Based on these values, the total number of audio -visual artefacts made in cellulose is estimates in 33 million. 
Additionally, in Europe there a re 200 millions of h ouses, from them we estimated that  33% can keep an old 
cellulose artefact that need to be preserved. This means a potential market of more than 66 Millions of basic 
preservative package. To storage these items required a place with low temperature and controlled humidity. It is 
expensive for large museums and archives and difficult to manage and expensive for individual families with a few 
number of cellulose artefacts. 
The expected impact of the predictive package are clearly described in qualitative and q uantitative terms in table 
2.1.c based on an expected market share of the 4 % of the European professional market ( 2.0 Millions packages) 
and 0.8% of the familiar/or particular  market (0.5 Millions packages) in 2028.  From them we expect ed that the 
75% of t he professio nal will use the basic package and the other 25% a premium preventive packages 
configuration. The expected prices of the package will be comparable to current storage solutions based on simple 
packages, curative maintenance and keep under low temperature.  
Table 2.1.c. Preliminary evaluation of NEMOSINE economic impact for Preventive package five years after project ends. 
Potential Products to 
develop 
Expected 
price 
(€/kg/unit) 
Expected 
Turnover 
(k€/y) 
World 
Market 
size40 (year) 
IP management  Required invest ment Profit 
(k€/y) 
MOF based adsorbers  75.0 €/kg 2,676.6 35.5 tonnes Own production in 
SME project partner’s 
facilities and licencing 
for overseas m arkets. 
1-1.5M€ to MOF plant 
technology optimization  401.49 
Active foams/ nanofibres  3.5 €/litre 4,212.4 1203.5 m3 >750 k€ for current 
machine adaptation.  631.9 
Sensors & wireless 
communication.  5.0 €/unit 2,500.0 454.5 kunits >500k€ for equipment to 
produce the sensors.  375.0 
Predictive Maintenance 
software 
250€/ 
licence 1,250.0 5,000.0 
licences Own development  Not required
0.2 
Smart Package  5.5-
12.5€/unit 17,454.0 2.5 Million 
packages 
Own Manufacture or 
licencing technology  
2-3 M€ injection    moul ds 
& assembly lines.  2618.1 
Curative package for CH audio-visuals. According the PWC study36,  5% film prints or negatives (items) are in 
a critical stage or showing signs of vinegar syndrome (unusable due to chemical decomposition processes) or are 
under other types of fungus attach. From the economic impact and based on previous mentioned PWC stu dy the 
damage assessed at EU level is theoretically ca. 23 M€ per year ( 5% of the total works), only for EU film 
archives. NEMOSINE project aims to reduce those losses in 15%, which will potentially reduce economic damage 
by 3.5M€ in Europe annually. 
 This is the result of considering that manufacturing a photochemical substitute costs between 4.000 € (for a short 
film) & 10.000 € (and more) for a feature-length film. These numbers can easily triple when protecting also photos, 
or other media supports. In fact, the estimation does not even include television archives, private collectors and the 
home movie/amateur film market, and the loses costs do not take into account the costs if staff time at CH 
institutions dedicated to detecting and separating film elements in decomposition state. 
NEMOSINE are enablers for innovation in the conservation of all those types of products mentioned 
(films, photos, audios, etc), and will face the existing negative decomposition effects throughout innovative 
curative packaging solution so many different and varied target end -users in Europe and internationally 
(FIAF, private collections and others). The project will reduce those economic loses, by opening a new type of 
conservation market (a new niche market).  
The expected impact of the curative package are quantified in table 2.1.d based on an expected market share of the 
20% of the European professional market of items with some conservation problems in 2028.  The expected prices 
of the curative package will be significant lower to  current storage solutions based on curative actions directly to 
the damaged artefacts. Furthermore controlled release antifungals is a safe curative method for the conservation 
people and less aggressive regeneration for the artefacts. 
Table 2.1.d. Preliminary evaluation of NEMOSINE economic impact for Curative package five years after project ends.  
Potential Products to develop  
Expected 
price 
(€/kg/unit) 
Expected 
Turnover 
(k€/y) 
World 
Market 
size (year) 
IP management  Required investment  Profit 
(k€/y) 
 
 
39 www.getty.edu/conservation/publications_resources/newsletters/pdf/v29n1.pdf, Conservation of Plastics. CGI Newsletter, 29, 2014. 
40 Only is considered in the turnover the amount of material that NEMOSINE industrial partners can produce and commercialize 
(AKUMPLAST, BIOSENSOR, VISUM, MODISPREM, NPH & CXD). We expected to create a new job per each 200k€ of turnover. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 25 of 110 
Active antifungic nanofibres  3.5 €/litre 281.3 80.4 m3 Own production in 
SME project partner’s 
facilities and licencing 
for overseas markets. 
 
>250k€ for current 
machine adaptation.  42.2 
Smart Package  5€/unit 1,875.0 375.0 
kpackages 
0.2-0.5M€ injection    
moulds & assembly lines.  281.3 
In summary, the project will generate five-six years after project finish a turnover of more tha n 30.3M€/year, more 
than 150 employee/year (based on the estimation of 1 job/200 k€ of turnover) and near to 4.5 M€/year of net profit 
(before taxes). High economic impact will be achieved through strengthening the competitiveness of the Industrial 
& End-user Partners in the target market sectors and related ones  (adsorbents-(activated carbons and zeolites), 
gases barrier films, sensors for air control, etc.)  by: 1) promoting the use of NEMOSINE  materials, components 
and systems  in the CH visual and audio m emories new packaging formats, while keeping costs competitive, 2) 
strengthening and differentiating the EU Industry, 3) increasing workers’ skills.  
Move on to the end -user innovation impacts, in our post -industrial economies, the culture and creative sec tors are 
increasingly becoming motors of the economy and indeed of employment. EU -wide data in particular are lacking, 
but sectorial and country -based studies indicate that the heritage sector makes a significant economic 
contribution41, i.e., it is estimat ed that around 20% of tourist trips worldwide incorporate some form of cultural, 
heritage or historical activity. As a global goal of the project, NEMOSINE aims to open up the market to promote 
the usage of this new storage solution in the visual imaging s ector, offering a solution that should be economically 
driven and, at the same time, strong and well -built for long durability, contributing to decrease the current 
economic loses due to audiovisual works which end up unusable every year. 
NEMOSINE’s market analysis based on Porter's five forces tool42 is presented in the following pages:  
Production rate: The production rate highly depends on the acceptance of the product. Archives have to be very 
conservative in the strategy and are generally underfunded an d heavily suffering from lack of staff. Therefore it is 
difficult to enter the market, especially if the product is not convincingly verified and does not represent a real 
proven innovation, which is what NEMOSINE will overcome through the fabrication and fully validation of 3 
DEMO-packages and generated data supporting the product benefits.  
Currently, one of the main reasons limiting the conservation/preservation capabilities is the manual character that 
reduce their implementation and increase costs (e.g . changing a box for a film reel needs manual handling, and 
therefore is time consuming and costly). The same is the case for controlling the climate within boxes etc.  
Some large archives have recently invested huge amounts of funds in the installation of  new storage vaults and 
climate control (e.g. cold storage). Those might have a big problem in argumentation in relation to their funders to 
request further funds for storage optimisation, however, both NEMOSINE’s package solutions are complementary 
to cold storage, due to they can used for new acquisitions or to increase the temperature of storage (energy & cost 
savings). There is still a huge amount of archives and private collections which have no access to cold storage.  
The actual tendency within the a rchival community is related to digitisation and digital restoration of audio/film 
content, which is still very complex, costly and time consuming. As this is on one hand a disadvantage, because 
related activities are proceeding very slowly, this is on the other hand a big chance for new fully proven innovative 
packaging solutions: It is conclusive, that valuable materials that have just been restored and digitised in a time 
consuming and costly procedure should be kept under most protective conditions to s ecure their future long time 
storage. This is the chance to place a highest quality product in the market.  
Therefore, the market will introduce new solutions very slow but steadily, if they are working effectively, 
according to the market acceptance of th e new product. Probably on the first couple of years it will be limited to 
few thousand pieces/year. Especially the conclusive positive verification of such innovative packaging solutions in 
cooperation with well -respected laboratories and high ranking tes t clients can convince future customers, as 
positive recommendations are ultimately valuable within this sensitive market.  
Cost: If the package is sold to replace only the conventional boxes for audio -visual artefacts, we are not 
competitive. However, NEMOSINE must be sold on long time storage of extremely valuable and unique materials. 
In this case costs could be several times higher than conventional boxes, if designed with highly innovative 
conservative and proven long time protective properties.   
Future challenge in the sector:  The complexity of the material is the most challenging factor to evaluate their 
future degradation under different storage conditions. Although a lot of research has been already conducted 
 
 
41 Communication of the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee & the 
Committee of the Regions. Towards an integrated approach to cultural heritage for Europe. Brussels, 22.7.2014. COM(2014) 477 final 
42 It is a framework for analysing the level of competition within an industry and business strategy development //en.wikipedia. org/wiki/ 
Porter%27s_five_forces_analysis. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 26 of 110 
concerning cellulose derivative and rel ated deterioration mechanisms in audio -visual media, especially in 
cinematographic film materials, the microclimate in storage containers is still a relevant topic. Long -time effects 
are very difficult to predict and to measure in a comparative manner. Exi sting data are not public accessible, 
predictive maintenance simulation tools is very useful in these cases. 
Additionally, preservation is very important in our society, however less and less money is available through 
institutions and individuals to inves t on it. The funding situation for heritage institutions such as museums, 
archives, public and private collections, libraries etc. is critical and money is used for copying and digitisation. 
While digitisation is still very expensive and time consuming, th is might change within the next few years due to 
rise of the technology and competitors. Many institutions (e.g. broadcasters) will then even destroy materials of less 
high value (e.g. copies, various stages of intermediate materials) during the process of  copying and digitisation and 
therefore the need of packaging solutions will shrink. However, still it will be of high relevance the cellulose 
supports despite the digitisation, as those cellulose conserve information/contents that are not transferred in 
most cases, and that it will be necessary to repeat in the future. For example, in the case of films, still there will 
be an unavoidable long-term need to preserve millions of film cans.  
There is a tendency where potential competitors can sell low quality products and enter into the market. In a poorly 
educated society the risk is that many people will move their interest away from trusty solutions to poorly and 
cheap products. Therefore, the education will become an essential key selling vehicle.  
Existing Competition, Materials Suppliers& Potential New Entrants: The actual competitors are: 
a)  storage and acidity monitoring solutions developed by the former market leader and therefore most trusted 
company in motion picture film production, Eastman Kodak : mole cular sieves /zeolith www.kodak.com/ 
motion/support/people_and_planet/product_use/molecular_sieve/default.htm 
b) Highly trusted institution: Image Permanence Institute www.imagepermanenceinstitute.org/ 
c) Storage solutions based on these research activities:  http://dancan.dk/-   they manufacture  boxes and acid 
acetic detectors (24 hour test and sensors); www.stilcasing.com/ 
d) Other mentioned competitors of non -functional and simple packages designed for this sector: University 
Products, Light Impression, Container Store, Ryderbox, DyF,etc. 
e) Example of a potential new entrant: It is being introduced on the marke t the use of the photochemical film of 
35mm (Piql company) as support for the long -term data conservation. Technology launched in 2014 as a result 
of a research project, now commercialized in 17 countries, offering Digital Preservation services 43. Despite its 
progressive implementation, the proposed solution does not convince the film archives, not due to the film 
support, but because it is a new technology without any guarantee on its durability at long -term. It could be 
used as a complementary target for the NEMOSINE development. 
f) Other solutions in cellulose paper -sheet supports such as MicroChamber©, Artsorb tissue©, Alphamat®, and 
Artcare®6b with zeolites as acetic acid adsorbers but poor mechanic and long-time resistance. 
In summary, there are not in the market any similar solution for this sector and the possibilities to offer tailor-made 
and modular solutions open a broad range of different customers with different needs of conservation and economic 
capabilities. 
Main customers (end -users): content prov iders, film archives, museums, galleries, photographic archives, 
multimedia repositories, visual imaging institutions, etc. Note that within the consortium there are already two film 
archives (DFI & CulturArts), one audio archive (OEAW) and one photographi c entity (ALINARI), in addition to 
CXD, as Industrial provider of high quality conservation products to all of those  
2.1.3 Business model proposed by each partner for future commercialization of NEMOSINE 
developments. 
A solid business case will facilitate the d ecision-making process during the project execution and in the long term. 
An integral and realistic evaluation of the current status, following by a rigorous design phase will ensure the 
achievement of the expected benefits. Considering the facts and not m ere speculations, NEMOSINE will carefully 
monitor the design, implementation and managing of all components through the innovation manager and IPREB. 
Regarding the segments in the value chain directly represented by the project  partners (see figure 2.1.a), , the 
expected impact is described below, which will result in a strengthening competitiveness, internationalization and 
increased productivity through access to the potential market and an increased high added value product portfolio 
of NEMOSINE’s partners. 
 
 
43 Information published in SEDIC (Sociedad Española de Documentación e Información Científica) 
 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 27 of 110 
• MOFs capable of removing effectively acetic acid and other carbonyl based VOCs and MOF/foam 
composites maintaining the adsorbent properties of single MOFs  (IST, CNRS, PROM, AIMPLAS, 
MODISPREM). The business model proposed by these partners would be to p atent to protect the MOF and MOF 
foam applications, and use the validations in NEMOSINE. PROM will produce the MOF at industrial scale and 
MOISPREM will be in charge OF MOF/Foams. To improve the impact (far markets or for application to removal 
of VOCs in other CH environments), both companies aim to licence and  production of MOF and MOF/foam 
composites to external companies in agreement with IST, CNRS and AIMPLAS. 
• Nanofibre carriers of MOFs and antifungals (NPH & partially CNRS). NPH will develop during the project 
non-functionalised nanofibre carrier produced on a scale used for NPH’s research activities. Moreover, altogether 
with CNRS, antifungals will also be investigated. The validated  functionalised nanofibre carrier of MOFs, 
antifugals will be ready for commercial offering – with evaluation of scale-up requirements, after the project´s end. 
NPH aims to expand their material portfolio by processing of new innovative polymers. They will also generate 
new IP created in collaboration with other partners, which will be protected by means of Trade secret (in the case 
of the formulations of input materials and protocols concerning their processing into nanofiber structures), and 
patent, in collaboration with other partners, if applicable. The exploitation rou tes include the possibility of a) 
Contract R&D for manufacturers interested in using the nano -carrier system (feasibility studies, full development 
studies), b) Contract manufacturing (i.e. series for experimental validation); c) Licensing of the patent to  parties 
interested in integrating an antifungal/antimicrobial nano-carrier system with extended controlled release or placing 
their biaoctive candidated into such carrier. 
• New Air quality control, NO and oxygen sensors (BIOSENSOR, IRIS). BIOSENSOR with the support of 
IRIS (specialist in sensors and monitoring) for the airless integration of the sensor plans to develop a new series of 
sensor concept, with new functionalities. BIOSENSOR (owner of technology) and collaborators will form the 
management structure of the IPR based on the patentability of new developments. Ownership of IP rights will be 
jointly owned by the partners of the project and will be proportionally distributed among the partners according to 
the contribution of research and technological development. IRIS exploitation interest is in RFID based solution for 
CH package including the wireless communication system and control platform . IRIS´s exploitation route is direct 
sales and licensing. Customers would respectively be the mu seums /other archive conservers and the producers of 
equipment for this segment. Possibilities of licensing for outside markets or other detection applications, 
• Degradation software -Simulation models (NOVA/IST). The generated data and the basic models to develop 
at laboratory level for some unfinished packaging formats (software & hardware) are not under IPR protection and 
they will be available free or incorporated in platforms open source. Specifically, for IST and NOVA there will not 
have IPR related with software. IRIS will keep confidential the final versions and incorporate as an element in the 
predictive maintenance tools for the PREMIUM PREDICTIVE package. Future commercial agreements between 
IRIS and IST and NOVA will be possible for further versions with new or improved functionalities. 
• Innovative package for CH audio -visuals (IPC, AIMPLAS and AKUMPLAST): AIMPLAS & IPC will 
own the complex barrier films architectures and overmoulding process to produce the high -barrier packaging. 
Smart packaging design including easy mounting and dismounting of sensors and RFID system will be provide by 
the three partners, i.e., AKUMPLAST will contribute to the manufacturing of injection mould and injection 
moulding of the new packages development, but, the fu ll design adap ted to  the CH customers, simulation and 
initial prototypes will be shared between IPC and AIMPLAS. 
• Integrated smart package (CXD, OEAW): For the final assembly of the different packages, different business 
models will be proposed, since simpl e suppliers (b y excl usive agreement) until to create a new joint venture 
company between NEMOSINE partners. The value chain is the follow: 
Raw materials & product design Components 
manufacture 
Assembly and sales 
CNRS/ PROM NPH and MODISPREM 
CXD/OEAW 
Public or 
private end-
users 
BIOSENSOR & NOVA/IST IRIS 
IPC/AIMPLAS AKUMPLAST 
Once the packages manufactured, their commercialization will be fostered especially by CXD or through the joint 
venture company. Partners will seek for agreements among all of  them, so the in tegrated solution can be 
commercialised. All the different innovations listed below need to be pre -inserted in the package. For 
commercialisation, CXD is the one exploiting this whole integration and product commercialization, and the 
involved partners wil l bring the related knowhow to be exploited through ‘shared patent’, ‘licences, trade secret, 
sales specific component, etc.  
Moreover, the end -users will have provided feedback for the optimisation of the package, then they should be 
rewarded by a discoun ted price and/or by preferential use during 5 years (always taking care of guaranteeing that 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 28 of 110 
the solution chosen does not limit CH preservation), and worldwide commercialization. To reduce transport cost, 
mainly the plastic cover and the ma ts and foams con taining MOF and antifungals, licencing to outside companies 
will be consider, maintain the package concept design, production of MOF and multi -array gas sensors in Europe, 
i.e., the components with high added value. 
Other ways of exploiting  NEMOSINE final products through end –users: they will act as high ranking test client 
for the materials developed, by means of carrying out indirect and at a later stage direct marketing activities, within 
the archival community (conferences, also within training activities). The end-user can also be interested as future 
sales partner, in agreement with  CXD. 
Business models and plans will be developed to support the commercialisation of each key project result and 
partner. The Business Model and Plan deve loped in WP9 wil l integ rate IPR, innovation protection and 
exploitation strategies, and the accompanying techno -economic analysis, associated risks and LCA developed in 
WP7. This will pave the way for the successful exploitation of the project results. The  corresponding CANVAS 
MODEL  ANALYSIS discussed among the NEMOSINE consortium as starting point of the exploitation strategy 
are detailed in figure 2.1.c. 
Additional market research will be carried out in WP8 to assess and quantify the needs of the market:  existing 
competitors, target markets, customers’ profiles etc., this analysis will confirm and validate market opportunities 
and exploitation routes.  
 
 
Figure 2.1.c Business Model CANVAS  
2.1.4 Environmental and Cultural Heritage relevant impacts. 
Environmental impact:  will b e reduc ed because new packages will be marketed using environmentally friendly 
technical solutions compared to the current climatic chambers (controlled temperature and humidity) for the case of 
PREMIUM Preventive & Conservative formats (fo r the SSH organi zations). For example, NEMOSINE package s 
offer less energy consumption, less GHG emissions and less chemicals derivated from refrigeration process. 
The calculations are based on a conservative rough estimation focused only on film archives (although photography 
and other audio -visual archives can also use this conservation methodology, so the impact will be higher). If it is 
assumed that half of the largest film archives (approximately 81) use the climatic conservation option, with an 
energy use each one of 38.400 Kwh/y and a cost of 18,.000 €/y. 
The use of NEMOSINE packages will directly result in annual energy savings of around 9.3 Mkwh and 4.4 M€ for 
the film archive industry at worldwide level. This also results in a reduction of GHG emissions of 1,540 tonnes 
CO2 eq. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 29 of 110 
Moreover, NEMOSINE  products also protect people from breathing acidic gases or manipulate objects acid 
impregnated; the new sensors to be developed will guarantee concentrations non dangerous for health (i.e acetic 
acid concentration: below 10 ppm; NO concentration: below 2 5 ppm.), and fibres are fully recyclable, so there is 
also a positive impact on the raw materials use (promoting the recycled materials versus the virgin ones).  
Employment impact: Europe's cultural heritage is also a precious asset in economic terms 44, wit h over 20,000 
museums45 employing over 100,000 people and contributing over €3 billion in revenue to the economy.  Reduction 
of conservation costs associated to handling, energy consumption, facilities maintenance, etc. will be devoted to 
widen the employme nt of highly skilled technicians in charge of the CH studies. As an example, based on the 
information received from NEMOSINE SSH partners, more than 10% of their annual budget is allocated to these 
functioning costs, that could be destined to contact new personnel or grant students to improve the CH knowledge. 
NEMOSINE aims at a contributing significantly in the number of jobs that CH sector will create in the coming 
years. We expect at least  150 qualified jobs directly  related to the manufacturing and sale  of new smart 
packaging products five years after the end of the project (when TRL8 will be achieved), based on a very 
conservative European market share. Additionally, it is estimated a creation of indirect 500 highly qualified jobs 
in the SSH organizations based on the above detailed data.  
In order to remain competitive and maintain jobs in the light of digitalization challenges and rising low quality 
markets in the developing world, the European CH conservation industry sector needs to innovate and furt her 
diversify. In the addressed CH archives, new skilled personnel will be needed to replace the packages, to control 
the IT sensors and improve the current simulation tools.  
2.1.5 Policy framework 
NEMOSINE scope, covering several types within the audiovisual w orks (audio, films, images, etc.), is in line with 
several Commission Recommendations and Communications launched in the last decade and even previously, with 
the aim of having a common vision for CH, starting for example from the Recommendation for the Sa feguarding 
and Preservation of Moving Images (1980) , through EU Recommendation 2005/865/CE of 16 November 2005 and 
Communciation on State of aid for films and other audiovisual works (14 November 2013), till Council conclusions 
on European Audiovisual Policy in the Digital Era (2014/C 433/02).  
Specifically, NEMOSINE will be complemetnary to Joint Programming Iniative on Cultural Heritage and 
Global Change: A new Challenge for Europe (JPICH ), which covers CH in a widen view (tangible & 
intangible), so NEMOSINE will be included in its the Strategic Research Agenda (SRA) on Cultural Heritage, i.e. 
4th pillar-‘Safeguarding our cultural heritage sources’ and its vision document 46, contributing to its general goals, 
encouraging and providing new solutions, in this case in ORIGINALS audiovisual conservation. 
Furthermore, NEMOSINE will develop a parallel solution (a new conservative cost competitive technology and 
best practices) to the current digitisation trend, focused on the ORIGINAL works. In that way, NEMOSINE will be 
complementary to initiatives as the following EU projects: 1. EFG -European Film Gateway; 2.FORWARD-Rights 
Resgistry for Audiovisual and Orphan Works , where precisacely DFI was  partner; and 3 .Filmarchives Online, to 
organizations such as PrestoCentre; as well as other still ongoing EU projects, with wider scope (under the JPICH), 
such as JHEP-2 (‘Support to the implementation of the Strategic Research Agenda (SRA) of the Joint Programming 
Initiative on Cultural Heritage and Global Change (JPI CH) ) and HERITAGE PLUS Era-net. As the CH is funded 
apart from NMBP and Societal Challenge 5,under Societal Challenge 6 ‘Inclusive, innovative and reflective 
societies’, some other EC potential projects with synergies have been found, with which NEMOSINE will int eract 
through its project life and beyond47.   
More generally, NEMOSINE  fully aligns and supports the EU Innovation Policy for Competitiveness and 
Growth and the EU 2020 strategy , as the outcome of NEMOSINE will have significant impact from the citizens 
as a whole (individual or private collections), through local museums and private relevant collections to major 
museums, as well as all the manufacturers involved in those smart packaging (i.e. industrial producers of MOFs 
adsorbers, active foams and nanofibe rs, encapsulated antifungals, sensors, degradation software, package  and 
functionalities integration) and all industrial other application sectors with the potential of using those new 
separated products. This will contribute to the EU Strategy for Key Ena bling technologies 48 by advancing the 
knowledge in latest technologies to provide advanced materials. High economic impact will be achieved through 
increasing the competitive advantage of EU Industry by promoting the use of NEMOSINE  smart packaging 
 
 
44 http://ec.europa.eu/culture/portal/activities/heritage/cultural_heritage_dev_en.htm  
45 European Group on Museum Statistics 
46 http://www.jpi-culturalheritage.eu/documents/ 
47 E.g. POPART (Strategy for the preservation of plastic artefacts in museum collections)-FP7- 212218-ENVIRONMENT 
48 "A European strategy for Key Enabling Technologies – A bridge to growth and jobs ", COM(2012) 341 final. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 30 of 110 
products in customized applications, at three different levels.  
Other documents have been taken into account as complementary to NEMOSINE, are those related to the Digital 
Era49. NEMOSINE is focused on the preservation of those works which are out of the digital a rea, then resulting 
complementary to those EU current trends, as still there is evidence of the conservation of the ORIGINAL works. 
Throughout the proposal has been made clear that cellulose supports still be of high relevance in the future despite 
the digitisation.  
2.1.6 Barriers. 
The barriers which may affect the expected impacts of the project, and the proposed mitigation measures to remove 
these barriers, are presented in the table 2.1.d. 
Table 2.1.d Main barriers identified and the proposed mitigation actions. 
 BARRIER DESCRIPTION MITIGATION ACTIONS 
Technical 
Technical risks inherent to an R&D 
project, To demonstrate that all 
developments proposed will protect at the 
same level that storage under low 
temperature. (MOF with capacity to 
remove low amounts of AA, keep away of 
humidity and Oxygen, etc..). Several 
barriers need to be lowered and 
streamlined to transfer the sensor 
fabrication into economically viable 
manufacturing processes leading to a more 
competitive market penetration. Scalable, 
repeatable, co st-effective, high -precision 
and low environmental impact 
manufacturing methods are required to 
widely spread the use of the sensor into 
commercial products. 
A risk and contingency plan has been outlined and risk monitoring 
strategies (see section 3.2) hav e been implemented in the work 
plan (see WP9, Task 9.2 Risk indicators definition and risk 
management). 
Market 
Initial Small Market Size : Low demand 
can lead to high unit costs and does not 
allow volumes to grow enough to lower 
the price and to be cost co mpetitive. 
Cultural heritage sector has truly little 
money to invest on anything. Sponsorships 
those days become more and more scarcy. 
As consequence the economic situation 
worldwide is indeed a problem. And 
potential competition from China from 
poor quali ty products could become a 
threat too.  
Important to focus the product delivery toward a clear and very 
specific message: good money spent for a very long investment 
assuring a real long term conservation solution, PAT certified.  
Three different market pro ducts will be proposed, with potential 
demand and affordable cost for each type (5 -15€/unit), and with 
possibility of being used in other alternative sectors, such as the 
case of the sensors as Annex II shows,  which are present in a huge 
market. Due to the ir low cost per unit and its independency /o not 
require to buy a minimum number of items), there is the possibility 
to buy a limited number of products according the available 
budget. Through proactive communication NEMOSINE will 
provide information to po licymakers on project results reinforcing 
the value of using modern materials and modelling development in 
those smart package products and promote CH conservation. 
Social acceptance. Not proper communication of the 
advantages about the new packages 
developed, which may cause end -users 
(specially, SSH organizations) reluctance 
to make the change to the new 
conservation alternative.  There could exist 
a lack of information about service life and 
features of products the new products. 
NEMOSINE will provide w ell documented results, dissemination 
materials, real prototypes and product datasheets including 
characterization and environmental data, etc., that will form a 
sound base to support high level development of regulations. 
During the project extensive test ing social campaigns in 
museums/archives (SSH organizations) and at citizens level will be 
carried out to assess performance and long -term durability and 
realistic estimations will be provided by the main project players. 
 
 
49 Audiovisual Media Service (AVMS) Directive (Directive 2010/13/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 95, 
15.4.2010); European Film Forum (Launched by the Commission Com munication on European film in the Digital Era); Green Paper on 
Preparing for a Fully Converged Audiovisual World: Growth, Creation and Values. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 31 of 110 
Industrial (Financial 
follow-up steps) There is a risk that the processes and 
technologies developed in NEMOSINE 
cannot be scaled up at acceptable costs and 
that no economies of scale are generated 
when industrializing the processes, due to, 
between others, limited demand, low yield 
in so me of the package components or 
large investment requirements. 
Transfer of NEMOSINE innovations to industrial partners during 
the project to test and validate the scalability of the processes. 
Economic projections of the full -scale production will be propo sed 
in WP7, by the engineering companies. Table 2.1.b and c shows an 
initial estimations of investment amounts to start the NEMOSINE 
production. 
Standards 
Need to be fulfil the current standards . 
There are CEN working groups about 
enclosure and environmen tal quality 
preservation for CH, especially about 
mitigation of environmental impact by the 
use of protective enclosures (CEN TC346, 
WG12), ICOM -CC PhotographicMaterials 
Working Group and other ISO/ANSI 
standards to be met. 
 
NEMOSINE Consortium will follow  closely the outcomes of the 
active WGs and whenever a project outcome is considered to be of 
relevance to the on -going work, NEMOSINE Partners will 
contribute to existing standardisation activities in ISO standards 
and giving input to CEN work including e nvironmental impact risk 
assessment, which incorporates the air pollution risk with other 
risk factors, such as humidity, temperature, light, physical impacts, 
human risk factors such as handling. CNRS, NOVA, CXD, 
OEAW, ALINARI & AIMPLAS are already partic ipating in 
standardization and if possible to contribute to the standards (e.g. 
CEN workshop agreements). 
Regulation 
The new products obtained must meet the 
current legislation in terms of the potential 
health, safety and environmental risks. 
NEMOSINE project will review the legislation applicable to the 
developed technologies: i) Regulations REACH and CPL 
(classification, labelling and packaging of substances and 
mixtures) and Legislative Decree EU 10/2011, ii) Directive 91/689 
defining hazardous waste (u pdate: 2008/98/EC), iii) Decree 52/97 
defining hazardous substance: Assessment of the risk to the health 
and safety of workers from the presence of chemical agents, iii) 
Environmental impact assessment (EIA), strategic impact 
assessment (SIA), iv) Nano saf ety, due to the sensor are based on 
nanoparticles. 
Cooperat
ion Not enough impact on the audio -visual 
sector due to lack of contacts with key 
actors at EU level and worldwide.  
NEMOSINE partners will take into account existing relevant 
platforms already me ntioned, to ensure coherent and mutually 
recognised products advantages and help the progressive market 
uptake, by consolidating the potential clients´confidence.
2.2 MEASURES TO MAXIMISE IMPACT. 
Communication, dissemination and demonstration activities are critical for the successful exploitation of 
NEMOSINE research and innovation findings and accordingly a whole WP will be dedicated to these actions 
(WP8). Communication, dissemination and exploitation are linked activities and must be undertaken in a 
coordinated way, thus exploiting synergies and avoiding overlap between them; in NEMOSINE they will be 
coordinated by a Dissemination and Exploitation Board  (IPREB, see section 3.2.). Activities and their impacts 
will be continuously monitored during the projec t and the resulting actions reported in the interim & final Plan 
for Exploitation and Dissemination of the Results (PEDR), due in months 12, 30 & 48. 
NEMOSINE will implement a range of activities to ensure the optimal visibility of the project and its resu lts, 
increasing the likelihood of market uptake of the knowledge it produces, and ensuring a smooth handling of the 
individual intellectual property rights of the involved partners to pave the way to knowledge transfer and 
exploitation. Table 2.2.a summari zes the focus of activities and how the dissemination and exploitation plan fit 
together to produce the overall PEDR. 
Table 2.2.a. Plan for Exploitation and Dissemination of the Results (PEDR). 
Communication 
activities 
Purpose – Raise awareness of project aims and outputs amongst broad stakeholder base. 
• Communication KPIs to measure effectiveness and efficiency. 
• Messaging and visual identity of the project and Stakeholder mapping. 
• Communication channels (website, social media, printed materials, scientific & trade 
journals) 
Dissemination Purpose – Support project exploitation through technical dissemination and industrial outreach. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 32 of 110 
plan • Dissemination strategy: objectives, targets, activities and channels. 
• Dissemination KPIs to measure the dissemination effectiveness and efficiency. 
• Management of the three dissemination activities: 
– packaging knowledge for an effective take up, 
– reaching the selected early adopters to motivate for changes, 
– preparing the effective exploitation of the project results. 
• Dissemination administration (approval, reporting, deliverable). 
• Scientific and trade publications. 
Exploitation 
plan 
• IPR strategy and Exploitation plan for the project results 
• Business models and plans for key project results 
2.2.1 Communication activities  
Communication activities will use a range of communication channels to spread new knowledge and results 
generated by the project. They aim at reaching the dissemination objectives and reinforcing the plausibility of the 
exploitation plan. In order to carry out the project outreach in a comprehensive way, a detailed communication plan 
will be implemented at the beginning of the project (month 6). It will aim to maximize the impact and visibility of 
the project among all relevant stakeholders at European level. 
The clear categorisation of target groups  allows dedicated and targeted dissemination actions to be undertaken 
through specific communication channels and using targeted messaging. 
Our communication plan encompasses a comprehensive series of actions (Table 2. 2.b) to broadcast the non -
confidential results that are generated during the project to as wide and relevant an audience as possible  in 
order to heighten awareness about the results, to contribute to knowledge building in Europe, and to ensure that as 
many actors and citizens as possible have access to these results.  
Table 2.2.b Outline of the NEMOSINE Communication Plan. 
Target Audience  Tools & Channels Expected Impacts 
Public bodies (to foster CH - Green 
Public Procurement, GPP) 
Key customers at the 3 d efined 
packages models (Individuals, 
small/large collections, bookmedia 
shops, local and large 
museums/archives). 
Producers of MOFs for AA and their 
customers (chemistry, automotive, 
agricole). 
Producers of active composite foams 
and their customers (autom otive, 
building) 
Producers of sensors (electronic, 
automotive, manufacturing 
mechanic, energy, optic, medical or 
sanitary) 
Environmental consultancies & 
engineering  
Retailers 
Industry Multipliers - Sectorial 
Associations (e.g. EuPC,FIAF,, etc.) 
Standardisation bodies and policy 
stakeholders, national CH authorities, 
EC, national governmental bodies, 
CEN, ISO, AENOR, 
General public and Mass media 
Project corporate identity tools (logo, tag 
line/slogan) 
Project Website, Project Leaflets, Project Posters, 
Powerpoint Presentations, Press releases 
Video clip (for YouTube, project website,...) 
Trade fairs/exhibitions : PLAST (It), Interpack, 
Hispack, Bio -Europe, FIP solution plastique, 
Kunststoff, Annual Congresses FIAF, Annual 
Bolonia Festival “Il cinema ritrovato”; Biannual 
FIAF Su mmer School; Film archives annual 
Spanish meetings, etc. 
Conferences, seminars and workshops 
(participation in organising, scientific committees, 
with poster, paper, presentation, or chairing):  ICA, 
EuroNanoForum,  Eurosensors, IEEE, EVA 
conference proceedings, etc. 
Standardisation: European Commission CEN/TC 
346 : Conservation of cultural Heritage; IASA 
Technical Committee (International Association of 
Sound and Audiovisual Archives); Audio 
Engineering Society (AES), Standards Committee, 
Subcommittee 03 on  Audio Preservation and 
Restoration (AES SC -03); AES SC -07-01 Audio 
Engineering Society (AES), Subcommittee on 
Metadata, Working group 01 on Audio Metadata; 
JPEG, IPTC Photo Metadata and CEPIC. 
Involvement in networks/clusters : European Film 
forum, JPICH, etc. 
Generation of awareness about 
NEMOSINE and its mission to 
ensuring preservation package 
of the audiovisual works in 
Europe and globally.  
Dissemination of new 
knowledge and technologies for 
transitioning f rom the current 
prevervation methods to the 
smart cost -competitive 
packaging alternative   
Sound communication towards 
policy-makers to increase the 
influence of the project and its 
results in policymaking (which 
will be reinforced by the 
presence of our e xpert partners -
SSH organizations).  
Communication to retailers and 
end-users/clients about the 
efforts being made by the CH 
sector to increase their 
conservation capabilities and 
sustainability environmental 
protection.  
The general public should also 
feel they are getting value for 
money from public funded 
research that will ultimately 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 33 of 110 
Target Audience  Tools & Channels Expected Impacts 
Research and academic stakeholders 
Early stage researchers 
Government & policy makers 
Innovation programs 
Educational stakeholders and 
students 
Other cross -cutting H2020 projects 
and international/ national projects 
Networks, Platforms  
Features in Newsletters and e-bulletins 
Visibility on third party web sites e.g. LinkedIn, etc 
Inclusion in EU dissemination resources  such as 
the EU Horizon Magazine and the Cultural Heritage 
Portal 
Social media: twitter, facebook, utube, LinkedIn, 
Google+ etc… 
Programme meetings 
Policy roundtables  
benefit them as citizens. 
Attract more young people to 
scientific and research careers, 
enriching their curricula with 
knowledge from the project. 
Early stage researchers in spired 
by the results, will be motivated 
to remain in EU - research and 
possibly work in areas that are 
beneficial for society, 
sustainability and innovation. 
Mass media & Magazines : Newspapers, local TV, Packaging today; Plastic additives, Studies in Cons ervation, Restaurator, 
Polymer degradation and stability,  Plastilien (industrial publication dedicated to French polymer industry), Plastique & 
caoutchouc magasine (industrial publication dedicated to French polymer industry); Advanced Engineering Material s, Progress 
in Polymer Science, Materials Science and Engineering, Polymer Degradation and Stability, Studies in Conservation, Surface 
and Interface Analysis, Carbohydrate Polymers, Macromolecular Bioscience, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, Applied 
Catalysis, Catalysis Today, Carbon. etc.  
Open Access Journal Articles: J. Applied Polymer Sci., Journal of Cultural Heritage, Journal of film preservation (FIAF); 
Archivos de la Filmoteca (CulturArts -IVAC),  Materials Chemistry journals (Adv Materials, Che m Mater, J. Mater Chem, 
CEG…) or broader audience journals (Science, Nature, Chem Soc Rev, Angew Chemie, Chemistry, JACS, Chem Sci, Chem 
Comm, Inorg  Chem…) or other domains (ChemSusChem, journals), Materials Chemistry journals (Chem Mater, J. Mater 
Chem, CEG…) or other domains (ChemSusChem, ACS Applied Interfaces), Polymer degradation and stability, Express Letters,  
Journal of Cleaner Production, The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, Waste Management, Resources, 
Conservation and Recycling, Jo urnal of Environmental Management, IASA Journal, Journal of the Audio Engineering Society, 
etc. 
2.2.2 Dissemination 
The main communication activities are focused on the dissemination of technical information to industry . The 
goal is to disseminate NEMOSINE objectives and results among the interested industry sectors, demonstrating the 
added value, innovation and new technologies developed within the project. Due to the relevance of this target 
audience, the position of the project consortium within the industry is very important. 
The goal of our communication activities will be to disseminate technical information both to the industry and the 
scientific community. Project results will be disseminated through participation in international conferences and 
trade fairs, and through publications in peer reviewed scientific journals and trade publications in the area of 
biochemistry, polymer processing, bioplastics, etc. Publication in Scientific Conferences  related to the 
NEMOSINE R&D areas will be also issued. Table 2.2.c details the number of publications and the journals where 
the consortium plans to contribute. The project will disseminate the results to business stakeholders to make them 
aware of the expected impact of the project and promote the exploitation  of its results. Presentations shall be made 
by the partners at business seminars and trade fairs. Additionally, each of the partners will disseminate 
NEMOSINE results in the fairs and exhibition they participate. 
Table 2.2.c Activities related to participation in international events and publications in technical journals. 
NEMOSINE’s 
partner Conferences & seminars* Publications in high impact journals 
CNRS/IST/Prop
Particles/  
AIMPLAS/ 
MODISPREM/
BIOSENSOR 
Five  contributions as speaker or poster in confere nces 
related to new materials development (nanotechnology, 
smarts, functional, etc..) such IFLA conference (yearly); 
ICA conference (yearly); AIC conference (yearly); IIC 
conference (2 other years); ICOM -CC conference  (3 
other years); https://photographs.sciencesconf.org/ 
Three publications in the field of CH conservation - 
scientific open access (such as  Studies in 
Conservation, Journal of Cultural Heritage, 
Restaurator, Polymer degradation and stability) 
 
IPC/AIMPLAS/
AKUMPLAST 
Five  contributions as spe aker or poster in conferences 
related to plastic design, polymers, such 
-Smart Plastic Congress (France, September 2018) 
-European Polymer Congress (2019) 
Journal of Polymer Applied Science, eXPRESS 
Polymer Letters, Composites Science and 
Technology. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 34 of 110 
NOVA/BIOSEN
SOR/ IRIS 
Two contributions as speaker or poster in conferences  
related to sensors field such Eurosensors, EMRS, IMCS, 
IEEE meetings, air pollution meetings. 
Trade fairs and exhibitions (e.g. Trade Fair for 
Conservation and Restoration of Cultur al Heritage, 
Exponatec Cologne: International t rade Fair for 
Museum, Conservation and Heritage)  
Conferences, seminars and workshops (e.g. MATCONS, 
STREMAH, EuroMed, Culture matters TECHNART; 
International Congress on Chemistry for Cultural 
Heritage; Cultu ral Heritage and New Technologies; 
International Conference CSTI:  Conservation Science, 
technology and Industry; General Conference of the 
International Council of Museums ) 
Magazines (e.g. Conservation magazine,  Museum 
(guidance, information and study re view for 
museum and art gallery workers) ) 
Open Access Journal articles (e.g. “e -Preservation 
Science” Journal; Heritage Science, etc.) 
 
Note that most likely those would be joint efforts 
with partners already more integrated in CH world 
NPH/CNRS 
Two cont ributions as speaker or poster in conferences 
related to nanotechnology, encapsulation  
EuroNanoForum and Sustainable Nanotechnology 
Conference, National Meeting & Exposition.  
At least one publication in nanotechnology, 
encapsulation  related journals (Jo urnal of 
Controlled Release, European Polymer Journal,…) 
CxD, OEAW, 
CulturArts, 
DFI 
Participation in trade fairs/exhibitions and conferences 
such as IASA International Association of audiovisual 
Archives www.iasa-web.org; AMIA, Association of 
Moving Image Archivists http://www.amianet.org/, 
FIAT/IFTA http://fiatifta.org/; FIAF International 
Federation of Film Archives http://www.fiafnet.org/; 
Audio Engineering Society (AES) www.aes.org, Annual 
conference of the association for historical and fine art 
photographers;  workshops and events hosted by e.g. 
Centre for Photog raphic Conservation or  Center for 
Creative Photography, all address to promote the project 
findings and engage in outreach activities. 
Reserach sources: 
SMPTE Journal, JAES, Publications of the Image 
Permanence Institute, IASA Journal, etc,  
Publication platforms: 
JAES (Journal of the Audio Engineering Society), 
IASA Journal, others to be defined. 
 
 
* Please note that date and place change constantly for all events detailed. 
Data Management Plan. NEMOSINE project is fully aware of the open access to scientific publications as stated 
in art. 29.3. of the H2020 Grant Agreement. Open Access will be provided to peer -reviewed papers published by 
NEMOSINE’s Partners as table 2.2.c indicates, either in an open access journal repository (“green” model) or for 
instance using the OpenAire orphan repository. Depending on the results published, the selection of the best suited 
and higher impact repositories will be made on a case by case basis in cooperation with OpenAIR provided that 
the IPREB does not identify issues  conflicting with the industrial exploitation of project developments. Technical 
press platforms, generic or specific, will be continuously used, as well as the own partners communication 
channels. According to the H2020 guidelines, a Data Management Plan (DMP) will be created by using the FAIR 
EC system. A deliverable (first version) will be provided in month 6, and updated subsequently. Following the call 
recommendations, part of the modelling data (software data) will be shared in this DMP, based on the criteria of 
providing access only to those developed models developed at lab level, in intermediate packaging versions not 
100% finished).  
Networking: In addition to the direct commercial contacts of NEMOSINE industrial partners, wider dissemination 
would be achieved through using the partner memberships of trade associations related to the aims of the project. 
Working with trade associations the Consortium would increase the potential for exploitation of project results and 
additionally create a mutual op portunity with the associations to promote the conservators, within the relevant 
industrial sectors. Moreover, the know -how transfer of NEMOSINE to the European industry could be also 
provided by all NEMOSINE partners via existing contacts to other Europea n research institutes and networks. For 
examples, IPC is member of several associations which are partially related to NEMOSINE topic or could benefit 
from the results of the project, including OE -A (http://www.oe-a.org/home), AFELIM (http://www.afelim.fr/), 3D-
MID Association ( www.3d-mid.de/), and 4M ( www.4m-association.org/). Other partners´ ne tworks mentioned 
previously are:  
German Association of Cinémathèques (Kinematheksverbund), Association des Cinémathèques Européennes 
(ACE), Fédération Internationale des Archives du Film (FIAF), AIC (American Institute of Conservation), CEPIC 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 35 of 110 
Photo Agency Association, Tauvisual (Italian based professional imaging association), etc. Other organizations to 
be contacted to: ECCO, European Confederation of Conservator -Restorers' Organisations, ICOM -CC Triennial 
Conferences, etc. 
Training and knowledge transfer : NEMOSINE will work to enhance the training of conservators, plastics 
application technicians and education of engineers.  In particular, the Guide included in D.6.6  delivered by the 
project will be a very useful tool to achieve this goal. As the guide wil l be published at the end of NEMOSINE, 
technical and economical evaluations for the developed prototypes will be included. This guideline will be a crucial 
tool for the potential end -users of NEMOSINE materials and technologies. NEMOSINE aims to organise 2  
workshops (anticipated at month 36 and month 48). The topic will be selected a year ahead of the workshop, 
depending on the results obtained in NEMOSINE across technical, economic and environmental areas. 
NEMOSINE will showcase the demonstrators developed  during the project and to this end the Consortium will 
analyse the feasibility to organise a workshop in the context of a major fair/exhibition in order to maximise the 
impact. 
2.2.3 Exploitation of results. 
The exploitation routes and corresponding busin ess models will be investigated in WP8. The route for 
commercialization of the results can be logically identified from the NEMOSINE WP structure and work plan, 
from the logical flow of the project activities and their clear role, as represented schematically in figure 2.1.a. 
Exploitation partner, ALINARI as expert and referent in the field conservation of photography, the image and 
communication will act as coordinator of the exploitation activities and ensure that all IP -owning partners as well 
as potential and confirmed exploitation partners will work towards a successful technology and knowledge transfer 
to ensure efficient market uptake. The role of the exploitation manager will be to assess the commercial potential of 
the results and liaise with indust rial companies to maximize their commercial use. The exploitation manager, with 
support of the members of the IPREB, composed of representatives of the appointed partners (AIMPLAS, CNRS, 
IRIS, CXD and ALINARI) , will also be responsible for establishing targeted exploitation and dissemination 
strategies, when the project outcomes reach sufficient maturity. The entire project Consortium will discuss this 
strategy and the corresponding document (PEDR) will be delivered for the preliminary and mid -term assessment 
(D8.3 & D8.4 -M12 and 30). An updated and more detailed exploitation plan will be submitted thereafter (D8.5 -
M48). 
All technologies developed by the partners will be considered for exploitation (methods, processes or materials). A 
summary of anticipated Key Exploitable Results (KER) is reported in table 2.2.d.  
Table 2.2.d Summary of the key exploitable results. 
WP Key Exploitable Results (KER) Partner Interested In 
Exploitation 
1 New MOFs for the capture of AA and other carbonyl based VOCs in the presence of humidity 
with a high AA/Water selectivity CNRS/ IST/PROM 
2 Nanofiber packaging containing encapsulated peptides and other antifungals. NPH/CNRS/AIMPLAS 
3 Nanofiber containing up to 15% w/w of MOFs for AA adsorption NPH/CNRS 
4 Foams cells containing up to 15% w/w of MOFs for AA adsorption. MODISPREM/IST/ 
AIMPLAS 
5 Integrated sensor for AA, NO & O2 detection in a miniaturized multi-array. BIOSENSOR 
6 Multi-scale chemometric models to correlate sensors’ signals integrated in the package  IST/ NOVA/ 
IRIS 7 Tailored receiver with the function for the remote tracking of the integrated sensors and cloud 
platform 
8 Modular design of the smart package to be adapted to the three defined levels of customers 
(Basic preventive, Premium preventive and Premium curative). 
AIMPLAS/IPC/ 
AKUMPLAST 
9 Tailor-made, modular and innovative Smart package which offers energy savings and extents 
conservation time of cultural objects based on cellulose derivative. CXD 
The first phase of exploitation activities (Mont h 6) w ill aim to raise awareness among the project partners on 
exploitation issue. The Exploitation Plan will be updated annually for the rest of the project duration, in every EB 
meeting linked to the GA meeting.  
The methodology to reach consensus on exp loitation issues and to draw up a final exploitation plan is through 
Exploitation Workshops, described in detail in WP8. The exploitation strategy will answer crucial questions as 
detailed in Annex II.  
Exploitation tracking: The use of Key Performance Ind icators ( KPI) will allow the consortium to monitor 
progress towards achieving the projects exploitation objectives for the target products. Table 2.2.e summarizes how 
the project will contribute to the KPI defined by the EC for Societal Challenges under H2 020. More information 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 36 of 110 
about the contribution of each partner to the KPI (publications and conferences) see table 2.2.c. 
Table 2.2.e NEMOSINE expected key Performance indicators (KPI) related to Societal Challenges -H2020. 
NEMOSINE’s 
partner Patents and  IPR protection Products/technologies to develop. 
CNRS/ IST/ 
PROM 1 patent to protect the MOF applications. MOFs capable of removing effectively acetic acid and other 
carbonyl based VOCs. 
AIMPLAS/ IST/ 
MODISPREM Trade secret: formulations of input materials 
and pr otocols concerning their processing 
into nanofiber structures or foams 
MOF/foam composites maintaining the adsorbent 
properties of MOFs. 
NPH/ CNRS 
Encapsulation process of the selected adsorbers & 
antifungals and their incorporation to nanofibre 
packaging component  
BIOSENSOR/ 
NPH 
A patent/s to protect the innovative design 
and nanoparticles production of the 
sensors developed 
Multi-array integrated sensor for AA, NOx & O 2 
detection. 
IST/NOVA/IRIS Using market available electronic 
components. Licensing and direct sales. 
RFID based solution for CH package including the 
system and control platform. 
AKUMPLAST/ 
AIMPLAS/IPC 
Industrial design protection. Licensing and 
direct sales. 
Design and manufacturing packages by injection 
moulding, including ea sy mount ing and dismounting of 
sensors and RFID system, foams/nanofibers integration, 
barrier properties, vacuum. 
IST/NOVA/IRIS Predictive maintenance tool (software 
patent). 
Multi-scale chemometric models to correlate sensors’ 
signals integrated in the package.  
End-users-SHH 
CXD, OEAW, 
CulturArts, DFI & 
ALINARI 
Industrial design protection. Licensing and 
direct sales. Future designs adapted to the 
customers need. 
The entire knowledge generated under the NEMOSINE 
project to which they have contributed  as expert  end-
users and that is not covered by any of the above -listed 
patents. 
Intellectual Property Rights protection  activities are managed under WP8. The overall IPR strategy of the 
project is to ensure that partners are able to fully exploit their market position, involving patent protection.  
The Partners will sign a Consortium Agreement (CA) prior to the signature of the Grant Agreement with the EC 
in which all the rules for ensuring confidentiality (procedure for granting publication of the result s), owners hip 
regime and IPR issues (background included and excluded, ownership, licensing terms, etc) are detailed. Some 
previous knowledge and background are detailed in the description of each partner in section 4. The CA will be 
based on the DESCA mod el and the  Annotated Model Grant Agreement general rules. The CA will include the 
initial ‘Key Exploitable Results’ (Table 2.2.d) of the partners and patents interest list (Table 2.2.b), which will be 
the starting point for IPR protection and Exploitation Plans. 
The following three areas of activity have been identified in order to ensure proper IP management and maximize 
the impact and market relevance of the knowledge generated in the project: 
• Proper assessment of the pre -existing knowledge of the various  project partners, their potential contribution to 
the project results IP, and potential overlap of IP. In shaping the IP strategy of the consortium these will be 
assessed based on the Consortium Agreement.  
• The assessment report may be used to draft an IP  and exploitation agreement, if needed, as an integral part of 
the final exploitation plan, in line with the consortium agreement, and used as an input for the exploitation 
plans. The document will be upgraded during the project to include new results unfo reseen at the beginning of 
the developments as it is needed.  
• The overall IPR strategy annually focuses on the knowledge generated by the project, the IP rights, the 
patentability and optimal IPR protection options. Any disputes over IPRs should be settled  according to the 
consortium agreement. Legal requirements for commercialization are also explored, in particular through 
“freedom to operate” analysis as well as individual patent filing strategies and drafting of patent applications 
for the most promising project results, as it is needed. 
As described in section 3.2, the SMEs partners will have a higher percentage of participation in the results 
exploitation, so the IPR management will respect at any time the objectives established in this type of Collaborative 
Project and thus watching over SMEs interests. 
Exploitation through Standards development: Successful exploitation will only occur if the market is receptive 
to the products and processes developed in the project. After identification of the results  with stan dardisation 
potential (initially focused on enclosure and environmental quality preservation for CH, to promote the usage of 
this new storage solution in the visual imaging sector ), contacts will be made with relevant standardisation 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 37 of 110 
bodies in order to initiate, for instance a CEN workshop or contribute to existing standardisation activities in ISO. 
Some NEMOSINE partners have a strong link with standardisation bodies such as AIMPLAS, CNRS, NOVA, 
CXD and ALINARI. 
Post project execution of exploitation plan: As discussed a central aim of the NEMOSINE dissemination plan is  
to ‘prepare’ the market in order to reduce the incubation time for NEMOSINE new products and 
technologies to a maximum of 5 years after the project end,  and to provide knowledge, m ethodologies an d 
training materials that can contribute to increase competitiveness of the EU industry and workers skills in the field , 
facilitating the widespread adoption and market penetration of the developed materials and technologies.  
At the end of the project NEMOSINE technology will be at TRL6 and it is expected that a further 5 years will be 
required to achieve TRL8. Significant investment will be needed, i.e., additional budget outside of the project must 
be attracted using the patents and the tr ade secrets generated during the project and detailed in table 2.2.e.  The 
partners have resources to cover the costs needed to implement the necessary co-funding for further developing and 
marketing the results of NEMOSINE. Besides internal resources in order to support the commercial exploitation of 
the project’s results; EUREKA, national programs, investment funds (EU Investment Bank. EU Investment Fund), 
private investors and venture capital, SME instrument will be considered, as well as opportunities br ought through 
Regional Funds (ESIF), which should be possible as NEMOSINE aligns perfectly to the priorities identified under 
the RIS3 strategy for most of the Partner’s countries. To ensure that the maximum potential EU market is reached, 
the IPREB on beh alf of the  Consortium, will contact and involve Industrial Associations or SMEs in the new 
supply chain of NEMOSINE across EU thus achieving a multiplying effect and spreading the project results. 
In summary, the protection of the interest of Industry, esp ecially the SMEs, will be guaranteed as they are the 
majority represented in the various boards, and consequently an industry -driven vote will be guaranteed in all 
levels of the management structure. The existing consortium represents the complete research , development, 
manufacturing and material supply chain, thereby ensuring that the IPR protection procedure to be outlined 
within the Consortium Agreement  will be effectively managed and that the project results will be protected at 
each stage. NEMOSINE wil l result i n a n umber of innovative processes, materials, products and IPR with a high 
potential for commercialization. Therefore this consortium considers the issues of IPR management and protection 
as particularly important and the PEDR will be prepared i n order to reduce the time to market  to the minimum 
possible; although further developments will be needed after the project end to achieve TRL8. There are no known 
business agreements or commitments which may impose limitations on the exploitation. 
3. IMPLEMENTATION 
3.1. WORK PLAN - WORK PACKAGES, DELIVERABLES  
3.1.1. Overall structure of the work plan. 
NEMOSINE is a 4 -year project. It is structured into 9 workpackages, as the PERT diagram shows in the 3.1.2 
section, which are linked to promote the cooperation of par tners and to reach the target objective of NEMOSINE 
in the topic NMBP-35-2017. Each WP addresses a specific set of tasks needed to achieve sequentially the different 
goals and milestones set in the workplan. Really the workplan runs with a progressive structure from the individual 
elements (AA adsorbers and antifungals), and the modular integration of different elements: foams, nanofibers, 
sensors and wireless electronics, and barrier polymeric package. Every single has the objective to reach in the WP7 
3 real prototypes or demonstrators to validate the protective and curative performance.  
More detailed, WP1 will aims to define the packaging requirements of CH artefacts made by cell ulose derivatives. 
WP2 & WP3 are focused in the combination of different mat erials and polymeric structures to improve protection 
of CH artefacts, looking for synergetic effects. WP4 and WP5 develop the multisensors and the integration in the 
wireless RFID system and the simulation tools for predictive maintenance. WP6 will integr ate initially all the 
systems in a whole smart package  and will develop the defined prototypes and real demonstrators, as well as full 
validation in different protective applications (relevant environments). WP 7 will involves the environmental and 
economic studies, while WP8 (communication, dissemination and exploitation) and WP9 (management) will act as 
transversal workpackages, supporting the other ones. 
WP1: Definition of requirements of each selected CH artefact. WP Leader: ALINARI 
Definition of all requirements for active packaging based on specific form to be fulfilled by SSH and end -users. 
Initial 3D package concept design about the defined specifications.  
WP2: Development of protective system using MOF based on Acetic Acid absorbers and curative s ystem based 
on antifungals. WP Leader: CNRS 
Synthesis of a few existing robust hydrophobic MOFs with different structures and particle sizes for AA 
adsorption in preventive package model. Study of the fungicide effect and the efficiency of a 
disinfection/curative packages  
WP3: Acetic Acid Adsorbers and antifungals carriers integration. WP Leader: NPH 
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 38 of 110 
MOFs will be integrated in open cell and low density foams and/or high specific surface area electrospinning 
nanofibers. The preparation of MOFs -polymer co mposites a nd se lected antifungals following different routes 
will be carried out. Efficiency of carriers will be evaluated. 
WP4: Nanostructured sensors. WP Leader: BIOSENSOR 
Development of multiscale nano -sensors to monitor the main parameters of interes t (gases) in CH deterioration 
sensing using the technologies and materials detailed in section 1.4.3. 
WP5: Wireless sensor control and development of a CH deterioration model and software. WP Leader: IRIS 
Development of a RFID system for CH packaging,  remote analysis of data received through RF and modelling 
for CH deterioration monitoring. Development of a software platform to display results from the RFID data. 
WP6: Design & fabrication of the modular packages & validation. WP Leader: AKUMPLAST 
Development of the modular multi-functional polymer package solution for CH protection, in order to validate 
the different building blocks or modules integration for the final demonstration stage. The manufacturing of the 
final prototype packages including al l the added functionalities developed in the previous WPs to protect a film 
reel of 40 cm diameter and a rectangular box 10 x 15 x 5 cm to contain photographic negatives or old 
photographs. Both will be designed to include protective functionalities (AA ad sorber, gase s barr ier, and 
sensoring) or curative functionalities (antifungal). 
WP7: Environmental, regulatory & economic analyses. WP Leader: CXD 
Evaluation of the Environmental impact of (a) the packaging and (b) its production process & supply chain. We 
will take a product life cycle approach). Techno -economic analysis, to optimise (minimise) costs; and optimise 
revenue opportunities. 
WP8: IPR protection, Technology Transfer, Business Model, Communication and Dissemination. WP Leader: 
ALINARI 
Complete IPR protec tion, dissemination and technology transfer activities to ensure the full exploitation of the 
innovations and scientific results will be carried out in this work -package. A Plan for the Exploitation and 
Dissemination of Results (PEDR) will be elaborated, including the Dissemination Plan and the Business Plan. 
WP9: Project Management, WP Leader AIMPLAS 
Project’s activity coordination, efficient Grant management (resources optimization), communication with the 
EC, Risk Management. 
3.1.2. Graphical presentation of the components showing how they inter-relate (Pert chart). 
 
Figure 3.1a. NEMOSINE’s Pert diagram. 
 
NEMOSINE part B H2020- NMBP-35-2017 
Page 39 of 110 
3.1.3. Timing of the different WPs and their components (Gant Diagram). 
Work Packages and Related Tasks  Partners Num.  Delivera-
bles 
MONTHS 
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 
WP1 Definition of requirements of each audiovisual CH artefact. All, (16) D1.1-D1.2      H   H H     H          
T1.1 Identification of user requirements and evaluation criteria 1,2,5,12-(16) D1.1                         
T1.2 Functional Specification and package concept designs 1,4,5,(12),16 D1.2                         
T1.3 Previous data for initial development of models. 2,(4),13- 15  D1.2                         
WP2 Development of protec tive/active system using MOF based on AA 
absorbers and curative system based on antifungals. 1,(2)3,6,10  D2.1-D2.4         H          H      
T2.1. Synthesis and characterization of 1st generation MOF samples. (2),3,6 D2.1                         
T2.2 Synthesis & characterization of second generation MOF samples. (2),3,6 D2.2                         
T2.3 Synthesis optimization, scale-up and shaping of MOF samples. (2),3,6 D2.3                         
T2.4 Study of the fungicide effect for CURATIVE treatment. 1,(2),10  D2.4                         
WP3 Acetic Acid Adsorbers and antifungals carriers integration. 1-3,6,(10)-12 D3.1-D3.5                H   H      
T3.1 Development of nanofibre based carriers with incorporated MOFs or 
antifungals. 1,2,3,(10),12 D3.1                         
T3.2 Nanofibre based carriers with incorporated MOFs or antifungals scale -
up. 1,2,3,(10),12  D3.2                         
T3.3 Development of open cell and low density foams with incorporated MOFs or 
antifungals. 1,2,(3),11 D3.3                         
T3.4 Foams scale-up with incorporated MOFs or antifungals.  1,2,3,(11) D3.4                         
T3.5 Evaluation of MOF embedded in cellulose  1,(2) D3.5                         
WP4 Nanostructured sensors 4,(8),9,17 D4.1-D4.3           H H   H          
T4.1 Synthesis of nanoparticles for fabrication of sensitive layers for 
detection of low concentrations of O2, NO and AA. 4,(8) D4.1                         
T4.2 Selection of the most performant multiarray and definition of sensitivity, 
selectivity, cross sensitivity and optimization. 4,(8) D4.2                         
T4.3 Development of an integrated compact multisensor system with portable 
excitation light sources and optical detector systems. 4,(8) D4.3                         
T4.4 Development of algorithms for sensitivity analysis and integration with 
wireless communication system. 4,(8),9,17 -                         
WP5 Wireless sensor control & CH deterioration software. 3,4,5,7,8,9(17) D5.1-D5.5            H   H      H    
T5.1 Hardware and software system specifications and design. 5,7,9,(17) D5.1                         
T5.2 Sensor conditioning and integration. 8,9,(17) -                         
T5.3 Wireless sensor network (WSN) development. 8,9,(17) D5.2                         
T5.4 Model development and data analysis. (3),4,8,9,17 D5.3                         
T5.5 Control platform development. 3,9,(17) D5.4                         
T5.6 Validation trials of developed sensor, models and platform. 3,4,5,8,9,(17) D5.5                         
WP6 Design & fabrication of the modular packages & validation.  All, (7) D6.1-D6.6            H    H    H    H 
T6.1 Package design validation and definition of integration route for the 
building blocks. 
1,(5),7,9-
13,17 D6.1                         
NEMOSINE part B H2020-NMBP-35-2017 
Page 40 of 110 
Work Packages and Related Tasks  Partners Num.  Delivera-
bles 
MONTHS 
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 
T6.2 Polymers selection for the package structure and barrier films. (1),5,7 D6.2                         
T6.3 Design and conception of tools and moulds for manufacturing.  1,5,(7) D6.3                         
T6.4 Functional components integration. 1,(5),6,9-
12,17 -                         
T6.5 Manufacturing trials and production of packages 1,5,(7),9,17 D6.4                         
T6.6 Validation of the final packages. (2),12-16 D6.5                         
T6.7 Guide of recommendations to storage cellulose derivatives CH artefacts 
in preventive (basic, premium) and curative packages. All,(3) D6.6                         
WP7 Environmental, regulatory & economic analyses.  All(12) D7.1-D7.4                        H 
T7.1 Environmental impact Asses sment. All(12) D7.1                         
T7.2 Techno-Economic Analysis of Innovation. All(12) D7.2                         
T73 Social Life cycle analysis.  All(1) D7.3                         
T7.4 Regulatory and safety analysis. All(1) D7.4                         
T7.5 Social and Ethical issues.  All (1) -                         
WP8 IPR protection, Technology Transfer, Business Model, 
Communication and Dissemination. All(16) D8.1-8.6  H             H         H 
T8.1 Communication Plan  / Data Mana gement Plan  All(16) D8.1                         
T8.2 Dissemination.  All(16) D8.2                         
T8.3 Exploitation Plan & Business Models.  All(1) D8.3-8.5                         
T8.4 Intellectual Property Management.  All(1) D8.5                         
T8.5 Technology Transfer, Clustering with R&D projects & Standardization.  All(1) D8.6                         
WP9 Project Management  All(1) -  H                       
T9.1 Management of the Resources.  All(1) - ╬  ▲   ▲   ╬   ▲   ▲   ╬   ▲   ╬ 
T9.2 Risk management.  All(1) -                         
T9.3 Communication with EC.  All(1) -                         
*EB: Executive Board, TMC: Technical management Committee 
(1):(Responsible), (X) Leader Legend:  Deliverable M Milestone ▲ Meeting ╬ Kick-Off, Mid Term, Final Meeting 
NEMOSINE part B H2020- NMBP-35-2017 
Page 41 of 110 
3.1.4. Technical Risks and contingency plans.  
The project team has carefully considered the technical risks associated with this project, summarizing the potential 
risks, their likelihood and imp act, and the actions which will be taken to mitigate them. Significant risks have 
therefore been addressed through the work programme and partnership to ensure that the outcomes of the project 
are achievable ( Table 3.3a: Main technical risks and contingency plans ). The experience of all partners in their 
respective fields and a continuous co -ordination and risk assessment (T 9.2) will make possible to overcome or 
minimize potential problems if they arise. In the current status, the following risks could be identified. 
Table 3.3a: Main technical risks and contingency plans 
Description of risk.  Impact on the 
project objectives Risk Level*, and 
Likelihood (%) 
WP  
involved Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
Packages creat ed do not  meet user’s  
requirements (H, 10%)  
WP1, 
WP6,  
Project will verify, during the analysis of the proposed material to be 
utilized in the enclosures/boxes/preservation storage systems, the 
acceptance of the items by the involved content providers and  
selected end users. Criteria to finalize the production of the items will 
be cross checked and validated by the content providers and end 
users. 
Too high materials and production costs 
per each individual packages (M,40%) 
WP1, 
WP6 
By comparing production s costs t o available enclosures, and 
by analysing the cost/efficiency ratio, consortium will identify 
if the overall production chain and most cost effective 
solutions to keep production costs at bare b ottom level. Due to 
their modularity design some functionalities could be removed 
to adjust to the market cost demand. 
Impossible to obtain MOFs with different 
particle sizes (L,20%). WP2 
Find alternative synthesis conditions or eventually a more suitable  
MOF easier to modulate the particle size while being still efficient to 
capture acetic acid. 
Strong differences in sorption properties 
between the powdered or shaped particles 
(M,30%). 
WP2 Try other types of binders and/or use porogens  to enhance the 
diffusivity of acetic acid into the pores 
The adsorption  capacity of the fina l 
composites (in foams & nanofibers)  is 
not sufficient to assure long term 
adsorption, i.e. quick saturation of 
materials (H, 25%) 
WP3 
The amounts of MOFs that can be supported in the polyurethane foam 
can be increased at least to the same amou nts as with activated 
carbons (30% in mass) by IST. Since we are not aiming to use the 
final composite as filtering media, this amount can be further push -up 
(above 30 % w/w) at the expense of obtaining a less ordered foam 
matrix. These combined approaches significantly reduce the risk. 
The adsorption kinetics of the final 
composites is significantly reduced 
comparing with the original MOFs ( H, 
30%) 
WP3 
After being supported in the foam or fibers, the MOF particles will be 
covered by a thin film o f polymer. This may a ct as a diffusion barrier 
which vapours need to permeate to access the MOFs, slowing the 
overall adsorption process. An alternative approach is to squeeze the 
final composite  (foam or fibers)  to slightly crush the MOF pellets 
and/or to rupture of the thin layer covering the particles or to cut the 
composites in thin slices (1 to 5 cm) to rupture of the thin layer 
covering the pellets. These These alternatives were already successful 
tested for activated carbon pellets supported in PUR f oams, and thus 
the risk is significantly reduced if these alternative approaches need to 
be used. Increasing the concentration bath for dip coating process or 
activating the surface by plasma to increase MOF adsorption. 
Sensitivity or cross sensitivity problems 
of the develop sensors (M, 20%). WP4 
To change the receptors and use an array of various receptors 
according with neural networks to distinguish the signal to previous 
experience 
Problems with dependence of the signals 
by the temperature (H,20%) WP4 
Algorithms for sens itivity analysis will be developed for 
electronic signal calibration, avoiding potential drifts of the 
measured signal at high time periods  influenced by 
temperature and humidity. 
Problems with integration and signal by WP4 Study o f signal intensity depending on RFID placement and 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 42 of 109 
 
wireless system (L,35%) adjustment of electronic elements in smart package. 
Incompatibility between commercial 
RFID chips and the new sensors (M , 
50%) 
WP5 Design and development of specific RFID.  
Large distances or network load to be 
covered by the WSN (M, 30%) WP5 Inclusion of repeater nodes and diverted traffic routes.  
Delay in the fine -tuning of the WSN and 
data providing for model's development 
(M,40%) 
WP5 Use historical data  or accelerate the degrada tion of cellulose products 
to obtain a great number of data from the sensors. 
Barrier structure is damaged during the 
over-moulding/IML process, leading to 
reduced barrier effect efficiency (M) 
WP6 
Complex barrier structures architectures (multi -layered) will be 
investigated in order to improve the initial barrier effect efficiency. 
Over moulding material will be tailored in order to increase the 
overall barrier effect. 
The different added functionalit ies don’t 
achieve an appropriate bonding during 
integration and assembling process. (M) 
WP6 
Adaptation of geometric features in the different components of the 
prototype package will be done to help on the bonding and assembly 
stage. 
The final prototypes don’t reach the 
final requirements after initial 
evaluation (M) 
WP6 
Adjusting and adaptation of the different components 
(functional layers and added devices) to reach these final 
requirements. 
Difficulties on assembling in the best 
modular way all the co mponents 
after their  optimization in the 
previous WPs.  
WP6 Task of redesi gn and dimensioning all the components to improve 
modularity and assembling tasks. 
Failure to deliver economic value . 
The environmental and economic 
viability of the fully integrat ed 
developed packages in compromise  
(M). 
WP6-
WP7 
Alternative ma terials and processes will be explored based on 
partnership expertise. Safety and health processes and methodologies 
will be applied, according to best practices and protocols´ partners. 
LCA a nd LCC does not show 
positive results (M. 10%) WP7 Alternative materials an d processes will be explored based on 
partner’s expertise. 
Low Social acceptance of the new 
curative and protective solutions for 
CH audio-visual artefacts (L, 20%). 
WP7 Educational and training activities, as well as informative 
sessions.  
*L=low risk, M=medium risk, H=high risk 
3.1.5. Work package list.
3.2 MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE, MILESTONES AND PROCEDURES  
The Consortium of NEMOSINE 
will be coord inated by Partner 
AIMPLAS. The project 
management structure has been 
conceived to ensure the 
competent industrial, scientific 
and business management of 
NEMOSINE project and to 
enable efficient and effe ctive 
integration and communication 
throughout the man agement 
chain. NEMOSINE project 
success will be strongly based on 
the close interaction and 
equilibrated partnership of SMEs 
 
Figure 3.2.a Project Management Structure. 

NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 43 of 109 
 
(̴50%), research centers, and SSH 
institutions50.  
This ma nagement structure has been implemented successfu lly in similar EU Projects coordinated by Partner  
AIMPLAS (e.g. FP7 BRIGIT, BUGWORKERS and BISIGODOS, and H2020 JOSPEL, URBANREC and DAFIA), 
and as such,  has been adopted by the NEMOSINE Consortium with the latest improvements suggested by 
H2020. A schemat ic representation of the management structure of NEMOSINE is shown in Figure 3.2.a.  The 
project management structure is clearly industry and SSH driven a s an RTD directly involved in the proposal core 
topic, OEAW, chairs the General Assembly (GA). Furtherm ore, another Social Scienci e and Humanity (SSH) 
organization, a large company, CXD chairs the Executive Board (EB) and the SSH Public body -OTHER ALINARI 
chairs the IPR, Dissemination & Exploitation Board (IP REB). Moreover, there are 6 SMEs with R&D capacit ies. 
All boards have a majority representation of In dustrial Partners as described below. An overview of the governance 
structure and decision -making pro cess is also detailed below. The composition of the bo ards a nd the decision 
making mechanisms have been  designed in order to ensure that all decisions are taken in accordance with the 
Industrial commercial interests, and SME’s interests in particular, and also providing a relevant role to the SSH 
partners, as a direct way to reach the potential future clients of the NEMOSINE products.  
The structure adopted is particularly business like and highly end -user/clients oriented (as opposed to 
bureaucratic) to en sure that NEMOSINE is run as a “commercially” orientat ed pro ject with a very clear 
business focus on th e SSH stakeholders and citizens, in general. Neverth eless, there is the opportunity for all 
partners to express their opinion and canvas support through the General Assembly (GA) which will meet at least 
twice a y ear to ratify progress and decisions made b y the management bodies. The GA has the ultimate dec ision 
making power in the Consortium.  
Decision –Making mechanisms: All Boards and Committees will typically meet at least twice per year. Any group 
will deliberate and decide validly provided a majority of its members are present or represented and each m ember 
will have one vote with the Chairperson having a casting vote if required. Decisions will be ta ken by a majority of 
two-thirds of the votes of the me mbers present and the members that have delegated  their vote. General Assembly 
meetings, meetings inv olving industrial demonstration or key technical meetings will be face -to-face, conference 
calls will be also encouraged. All the partners have the responsibilities described below as a result of taking p art in 
a specific decision making body. In all of them, the SME and Industrial participants will have the highest level 
of decision-making competency (majority voting). 
The General Assembly (GA) consists of 16 representatives (one per partner), and is chaired by OEAW. The GA is 
the ultimate decision-making and arbitration body of the Consortium (the final and highest authority in the project). 
However, it delegates short -term decisions -making actions to the Executive Board (EB). Such decisions do 
however re quire subsequent acceptance by the GA. The GA will d ecide on matters relating to: a) The political 
strategic and economic orientation of the Project, its  objectives, definition and subsequent modifications, including 
the shift of budget of the Project. b) Actions towards defaulting parties, including their substitution. c) The 
nomination and election of EB members. d) The acceptance & exclusion of new part ies or affiliates in the ECGA 
and in the Consortium Ag reement. e) The Consortium Agreement and its Anne xes. f) Description of Work, 
subsequent Project Impl ementation Plan and ECGA, including proposals and modifications. g) Ultimate approval 
of IPR Policies & Exploitation Plans proposed by the IPREB. 
The Executive Board (EB) is responsible for the strategic and political guidance of the Project. It is composed of 
one representative of each one of the 16 partners . CXD will chair the EB. The responsibilities of the  EB 
include: Overall guidance & supervision over strategic, political, economic & operational day -to-day issues 
regarding the Project. Definition, app roval and fulfilment of Project objectives. Scientific and Technological 
Quality Assessment. Definiti on and implementation of risk management methodology a t all levels (financial, 
technical and administrative). Evaluation of results and definition of level s for dissemination relating to all kind of 
information and reports. Conflict Resolution. Constitutio n and administration of the funding. Presentation of t he 
taken decisions to the GA periodically. 
The EB will decide on matters relating to: The shift of ta sks and responsibilities and budget of the Project. The 
regulations governing the decision -making and  operational procedures of the EB and other Project bo dies. The 
method of payment and management proced ures of the Community’s financial contribution. Requ ests for 
subcontracting, within the context of the Project. The actions to be taken in accordance wit h the evaluation of 
 
 
50 Note that CNRS & OEAW partners have double role, both as RO and SSH, due to their huge influence in the CH -audiovisual field. For the calcutaions of their weight in the 
total consortium per type of partner, please note that only OEAW is considered full SSH, and CNRS full RTO, so that their double role is in some way considered.  
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 44 of 109 
 
results obtained. The reporting, c ontrolling and auditing procedures concerning the  Project. The validation of 
reports and Project Deli verables to be submitted to the EC within the EC reporting activity together with annual 
validation of the realised expenditure in accordance with the budget of the Project. 
The Technical Management Commi ttee (TMC) is the body responsible for ensuring the overall technical co -
ordination of the Project work, in accordance with the Work Programme, subsequen t Implementation Plan, and EB 
decisions, at Scientific , Tech nical, Financial and Administrative level. The TMC’s main responsibilities also 
include: ensuri ng co -ordination between WPs, facilitating the take -up of research results, supervision of the 
implementation of the EB decisions, and the assessment of Pr oject results. The TMC, Chaired by CNRS  will be 
composed by the WP Leaders: ALINARI (WP1), CNRS (WP2) , NPH (WP3), BIOSENSOR (WP4), IRIS (WP5),, 
AKUMPLAST (WP6), CXD (WP7), ALINARI (WP8) and AIMPLAS (WP9). 
The TMC will be responsible for: Ensuring the i mplementation of the decisions taken by the EB at W P level; 
Making proposals to the EB for the re -allocation of material, financial and human resources, tasks and 
responsibilities. Preparing deliverable s & other information requested by the EB, based on re ports by the WP 
Leaders. Validating and seeking EB approval for subcontracting. Ensuring co -ordination between WPs facilitating 
the take-up of research results in the demonstration activities. Assisting  WP leaders on day to day management. 
Monitoring the projects technical progress against the identified technical risks, as described in T9.2. 
The TMC will convene meetings with the Work Package Leaders at least quarterly (typically 2 face -to-face 
meetings and 2 conference call meetings) and if applicable wit h the EB, for purposes of co -ordination and 
management. Where the TMC cannot settle decision making disputes, the decision shall be taken in the EB.  
The Work Package Leaders (WPL) , as identified above will report and be accountable to the TMC. The specifi c 
WPL will be responsible for their own WP organizational arrangements, work procedures, day-to-day management 
and time schedule, providing that such arrangements, work procedures and time schedule do n ot conflict with the 
ECGA, the Consortium Agreement, t he Description of Work, subsequent Implementation P lans, or requests and 
other provisions made by the app ropriate bodies within the Consortium or the EC. Meetings of a specific WP will 
be convened at le ast quarterly, either face -to-face or by conference/vi deo call. Extraordinary Meetings shall be: a) 
Called in and convened by the corresponding WP Leader; or b) by the TMC Chairperson. 
The Project Coordinator (AIMPLAS) is the intermediate for communication between the Consortium and the EC 
and shall report an d be a ccountable to the EB and the GA. The Coordina tor is in charge of the financial and 
administrative management (WP9) of the Project. The Coordinator will submit for EB validation, the reports which 
shall be submitted to EC within the EC reporting activ ity. The reports covering project deliverables, sup porting 
documents and audit certificates will be provi ded to the Coordinator by the TMC. For the avoidance of any doubt, 
the Co-ordinator has the capac ity of representation of the consortium before the Com mission. The Co -ordinator 
undertakes to keep the Jo int Funds allocated by the EU Grant Agreement or by bu dget in accordance with the 
provisions which will be defined in the Consortium Agreement and in t he Grant Agreement and decisions from the 
appropriate bodies. The main coordinators responsibilities will include:  
a) Periodic Reporting: the project coordinator will be responsible for ensuring the collation and timely submission 
of the contractual repor ts required by the EC, always according to the EC repo rting requirements for the H2020 
Programme. With regards to the project periodic reports, the project man ager’s activities shall include: the creation 
of report /information gathering templates, providi ng support to the project consortium and enabling each  project 
partner to undertake their responsibilities for the provision of information to complete such reports and making sure 
that each partner is made aware of the deadlines for the timely delivery of any required information. Project reports 
will be sub mitted to the EC on due time, including copies of t he minutes, presentations given by partners and 
additional information. b) Periodic Commission Questionnaires: if the Commission requires a number of 
periodic questionnaires, the Project Co-ordinator will be in charge of coordinating the completion and rep orting of 
these questionnaires. c) To ensure the verif ication and submission of the project deliverable reports: all 
deliverable reports have to be ver ified initially by the EB before submission to the pro ject coordinator, who will 
ensure that they are according to the EC requirements and submitted timely. d) Coordination of the Periodic and 
Review Project Meetings: the project coordinator will assume re sponsibility for the organization of those 
meetings, taking into account the attendance of the EC representative(s) and the independent reviewer(s) appointed 
by the EC. The project coordinator will coordinate: the meeting venue, agenda, minutes and other l ogistical 
arrangements, in cooperation with the hosting Partner. e) Collection of Certificates on Financial Statements: the 
project coordinator will ensure tha t all Partners who are required to provide a CFS, provide them in a timely 
manner at the end of t he Project. f) Reporting and Payment of Project Financ ing: assuming the role of project 
banker and taking responsibility for holding and payment of the project  funds in accordance with the agreement of 
the General Assembly and the Consortium Agreement. g) Additional responsibilities of the project coordinator  
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 45 of 109 
 
will include: coordination for the updating and si gnature of the project Consortium Agreement and Contra ct 
amendments (when required); to provide a platform for communication between the EC and the pro ject 
consortium/ management structure; to provide supp ort and information to the project consortium in fu lfilment of 
the project contract and EC requirements. 
The representation of the Social Science Humanities bodies (i.e. organisms devoted to the Cultura l Heritage 
linked to NEMOSINE) is essential to ensure the proper uptake of the new products in the market. Then, not 
only the SMEs and Industrial Partners, but  also those SSH bodies will own the ultimate decision making in 
accordance with the organizationa l structure. As detailed above, all Consortium bodies have a  majority of 
Industrial and SSH Partners (12 out of 16), thus, in the end, the decisions are taken by majority voting, 
guaranteeing that the participating Industries needs and requirements, and SS H demands (as representatives of the 
end-users/customers) ar e fulfilled and consequently, that the result s of the project will be for the benefit of the 
sectors involved in the NEMOSINE value chain.  
From the Technical point of view, the Project Co -ordinator, delegating day to day work to the defined 
Management Bod ies, will monitor the overall progress of the  Project in all its aspects, with specific 
responsibilities in this regard for d evelopment of the Technical Report Procedures and the Technical Progres s 
Monitoring and templates for technical activities.  
The IPR, Dissemination & Exploitation Board  (IPREB) will be chaired by partner ALINARI, and the rest of 
Members chosen to represent the consortium ( AIMPLAS, CNRS, IRIS, CXD). They  are key partners who  are 
involved in the innovation and IPR generation and  protection of key technologies for their companies  as well as 
commercialization. IPREB will propose the IPR Policy and the Action Plan for the Exploitation of project results to 
the EB and GA. The IPRE B will be responsible for the preparation, monitoring and up dating of the list of 
exploitable results and innovations that will be used to monitor the progress and achievements of the project and to 
assess the Plan for the Exploitation and Dissemination of  Results (PEDR, including both the Dissemination and 
Business Plan). The IPREB will look to increase the IP  protection and ownership awareness and implementation,  
supported by training activities given by the IPR helpdesk and other EC support services needed. 
Finally, a stakeholders´ committee (made up of representatives of SHH partners) has been appointed as a  way to 
have a closer contact with the potential end -users/key external partners that can contribute to spread the products´ 
uptake once ready to be commercialized. The SSH NEMOSINE partners have a n outstanding list of useful 
contacts, apart from the Letters of Support attached.  
In summary, the protection of the interest of the End-users and Industry will be guaranteed as they are the majority 
represented in the various boards, and consequently a commerc ial industry-driven vote will be guaranteed in all 
levels of the management structure, allowing a day-to-day management as in a processing chain at industrial level, 
with protection of the interests of SMEs and SSH entities and innovations. 
Appropriateness of the organisational structure and decision-making mechanisms. 
As mentioned above, the project management structure has been replicated from that used in FP7 and H2020 
projects coordinated by AIMPLAS. This structure has been proven to be agile and has be en successful in properly 
managing projects of a similar nature to NEMOSINE, solving conflicts and overcoming hurdles for their successful 
completion. In addition, strong cooperation already exists among the majority of NEMOSINE Partners within FP6, 
FP7 or  H2020 projects, with an open management and cooperat ive approach which benefits from the relevant 
experience of all Partners. Moreover, the project partnership is highly complementary and industry driv en; each 
Partner with sound experience in their respec tive fields of work, have clear objectives and respon sibility of tasks, 
and each of them fully understands a nd is highly committed to exploit the project outcomes, ensuring that the high 
degree of cooperation achieved already during proposal preparation will continue during project execution. 
Innovation Mana gement: the IPREB will implement the Innovation Management strategy  developed within 
NEMOSINE. All NEMOSINE’s technologies can be exploited by a relevant number of additional applications by 
modification/adaptation of MOFs, sensors, or nanofibers. The Partners complementarities along the value chain and 
their highly innovative nature will foster cross -fertilisation and boost innovation within the proje ct, simply by the 
collaborative execution of the work plan. In addition, the project will constantly look f or internal and external 
opportunities in order to furt her promote innovation. The project will use the dissemination and business plan in 
order to d etect needs of potential customers and future end -users of t he results and will proactively look for 
feedback from all stakeholders, entities and organisations (i ndustrial platforms, public authorities, standard setters) 
that can be useful to improve NEMOSINE results, modifying accordingly the work plan if de emed u seful. 
Similarly, the project partners will communicate internally the project development, fostering constructive criticism 
and feedback from staff, engineers, and designers and in particular man agers. All this feedback will be gathered by 
the IPREB and discussed during the GA meetings to agree possible modifications of the workplan if improvements 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 46 of 109 
 
in the results can occur resulting from this innovation management strategy
3.3 CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE  
3.3.1 Overall description: adequacy, complementarities, representativity of the value chain and synergies.  
NEMOSINE consortium has a well -balanced composition. The NEMOSINE consortium brings together a wealth 
of expertise and resources within the areas, in cluding p artners that propose  the best solutions to ma ximize the 
environmentally friendly conservation of O RIGINAL works, i.e. films, audios, slides, and photogra phs. The 
presence of main actors in the whole value chain demonstrates the critical mass of co mplimentary resources that 
will enable the NEMOSINE pr oject to achieve its targeted societal, industrial, a nd scientific breakthroughs and 
commercial success. Each partner has a clearly defined role within the project and will contribute specific expertise 
that will enable the project success. RTD Partners (AIMPLAS, CNRS, IST, NOVA, IPC and OEAW) have the 
necessary research expertise and will provide support to the  partners to achieve their objectives . They will adapt 
and validate the active substances to p rotect or cure the CH artefacts, as well as, desig n the whole smart package. 
SME partners  (PROM, AKUMPLAST,  BIOSENSOR, VISUM, NPH, MODISPREM) and the IND partner  
(CXD), whose main aim is the integration of all the active elements prepared by research cente rs in the initial 
workpackages and the development of final 3 prototypes able to work in real environments.  
The 5 SSH institutions (CNRS, OEAW, 
CulturArts, DFI, ALINARI) will act a s 
final validators that can provide the 
suitable environment and CH artefac ts 
to validate and track the final 
prototypes. Moreove r, the y will also 
participate in the definition of 
requirements for smart package design, 
the most interesti ng CH artefacts, as 
well as dissemination and 
communication of project 
achievements. 
 Each con sortium member has 
demonstrated a long -term commitment  
to th e development of their own 
research, policy and commercial  
 
Figure 3.3.a. Sectors and expertise brought by the NEMOSINE consortium. 
activities within the industry  targeted by the project. Al l of them therefore offer excellent potential for a la sting 
integration of activities and the creation of a pa n-EU culture for the technologies, materials and proc esses 
developed. Figure 3.3.a shows the role/ expertise of each partner in the project and th eir distribution around 
Europe. All partners are committed to contribute to a gender balance of their resource s to be involved, in line with 
the Directive 2002/73/ EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 September 2002 on the 
implementation o f the principle of equal treatment for men and women a s rega rds access to employment, 
vocational training and promotion, and working conditions. 
The mobility of resources and personnel will be encouraged throughout the project, not only helping to form strong 
bonds between the consortium members. Those actions are going to be implemented to lead towards an integra tion 
of complimentary activities, services and future  research projects to improve the commercialization of an 
environmentally friendly cost -competitive conservation for CH audio -visual original works  at EU  level, and 
guarantying the long-term sustainability of the project results after the project end.  This is a complete set of actors 
complemented by a Stakeholders´ Advisory Board to extend industr ial, technical and specially end -users´ 
insight, which  will help to spread the market uptake beyond the projec t end and will also ensure the 
continuity of this nov el package production, not only under EU, but worldwide. Note that among the already 
involved stakeholders (through LoS), NEMOSINE counts on the IPI-Image Permanence Institute support.  
The table below ( Table 3.3.a) gives a brief overview of each partner s pecific business and their expertise, and the 
main tasks in the project allocated to them based on that expertise. 
 
 
 
 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 47 of 109 
 
Table 3.3a  NEMOSINE Participant Expertise and Tasks Distribution. 
Part. 
num 
Participant 
short name Participant business / expertise- Main role in the project 
1 AIMPLAS Research Technology Institute expert in polymer 
materials, nanotechnologies and processing. 
Development of materials modification, 
package design and functionalities testing. 
2 CNRS 
Scientific Research Center, contribution  of 3 
research units expert in Porous Materials, 
molecular materials and conservation and 
preservation of heritage goods artefacts 
Chemical adsorbers (MOFs) development. 
Preparation and characterization of MOFs-
polymers composites. Evaluation of the 
compatibility of the new products with 
photographic materials during long t erm 
storage and assessment of fu ngistatic or 
fungicide activity. 
3 IST RD&I and technology transfer institution, with 
expertise in Engineering, Science and Technology 
Assessment of adsorbers regarding their 
capacity & kinetics of removal of organic 
compounds. Hybrid models to unveil and 
predict chemical degradation stages of CH. 
4 NOVA  
Expertise in cutting edge R&D, in several areas, 
ranging from materials, environment and 
biotechnologies to conservation and restoration. 
CH degradation models based on real data 
from the sensors signals. 
5 IPC Plastic Materials and Processes Research Institute 
Development of materials functionalities 
testing, system integration and assembly 
automation development. 
6 PROM Design and development of inorganic 
nanomaterials in liquid dispersions MOFs manufacturer at pilot plant. 
7 AKUMPLAST Injection moulding SME with expertise in similar 
EU projects 
Development of plastic components of the 
smart package. 
8 BIOSENSOR Production and commercialization of sensors and 
biosensors 
Sensors based on nanotechnology to 
evaluate the presence of selected vapours. 
9 IRIS Optical engineering company  specialized in the 
Near Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS)- 
Sensors integration and wireless control. 
Final sensor prototype assembly. 
10 NPH 
Nanomaterials engineering, by using 
electrospinning technologies for preparation of 
biocompatible nanofiber-based materials 
Electrospinning sheets with encapsulated 
chemical adsorbers & antifungals additives 
to be integrated in the package. 
Electrospinning based sensors. 
11 MODISPREM 
Specialized in the processing of open cell  foams, 
mainly polyurethanes and melamines. 
Thermoset open cell foams at pilot plant 
(polyurethanes and melamines). 
12 CXD 
Industrial provider of high quality conservation 
products including furniture, showcase s, acid -free 
boxes, museum boards and specialist paper s to 
Museums, Galleries, Libraries and Archives 
worldwide 
Package definition, smart package 
validation. Product commercialization 
13 OEAW Institute for Audiovisual Research and 
Documentation 
End-user r ole in the CH EU field. 
Definition of requirements, va lidation 
studies. 
14 CulturArts Audio-visual Public Institution. 
15 DFI Film Museum. 
16 ALINARI Photography Museum. 
 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 48 of 109 
 
The budget proposed for NEMOSINE project is 7.3 M€, equal to the Maximum EC con tribution requested 
(RIA action). There are 10 countri es, being the higher % per country around 18.2%. The participation and 
leadership of SMEs/ IND and SSH organizations (end-users)51 in NEMOSINE is clear as they represent the 68.8 
% of the Partnership and  around 62% of the budget and Maximum EC contribution . In section 3.2 (management 
structure and procedures), it can be seen that the relevant Project Governance B odies (General Assembly, 
Executive Board, Technical Management Committee, and IPR -Exploitation Board) have a majority of those 
partners, having the decision-making power in all of them. Also 7 of 9 WPs are led by companies or SSH 
organizations. All of them demonstrate a strong commitment to the project and understand the responsibilities that 
this brings with it and have assumed a fundamental role within the project work programme, as clearly summarized 
in Table 3.3.b.  
Table 3.3b NEMOSINE Partnership Distribution. 
Partner type7 Nº Percentage of 
partnership (%) 
Total effort 
(p/m) 
Percentage of 
effort (%) 
Percentage of 
budget (%) 
Percentage of EC 
Contribution (%) 
SME 6 37,5% 398,00 36,8% 37,5% 37,5% 
IND 1 6,3% 47,00 4,3% 6,4% 6,4% 
RO 5 31,3% 454,50 42% 38,0% 38,0% 
SSH 4 25,0% 183,20 16,9% 18,1% 18,1% 
To obtain the complementary range of expertise  and the critical mass needed (both in human and finan cial terms), 
it is necessary to bring together, companies and ROs representing the entire supply chain and R &D areas, working 
in close cooperation to solve a common problem, which cannot be found within  a single EU Region, requiring the 
integration of resources from across EU.  
NEMOSINE partnership is composed by  16 organizations from 10 EU countries, having the  required pan EU 
approach essential for achieving the objectives of the project since it is re quired to address the EU social and 
Industry needs in the fi eld with a wide EU perspective. Furthermore, to ensu re that the long -term commercial 
success of the NEMOSINE results, it is important that the project innovation and research activities are undert aken 
with a strong knowledge of the different industri al sectors addressed as well as through all the types of e nd-users 
focused on (based on the 3 levels of pack age and the different clients linked to each of them). The Consortium 
therefore ensures the pa rticipation of different EU regions, whose roles withi n the project are clearly defined and 
represent strategica lly important regional objectives, which will addr ess t he overall objectives of enhancing 
European industrial competitiveness, for instance with  RIS3 smart specialisation strategies, providing a clear EU 
added value. 
3.3.2 Industrial/Commercial involvement to ensure exploitation of the results.  
NEMOSINE project clearly has a number of benefits for the involved SME as explained in detail along the  
proposal. It enables the transfer and market replication of the new materials/components for manufacturing the new 
smart conservation package, with improved perf ormance, cost/quality ratio, and sustainability and that contributes 
to the developed the well-defined and high market three types of smart package;  supporting the take-up of the new 
advanced manufacturing materials and technologies and becoming a source o f information, training and technical / 
regulatory support. Besides, NEMOSINE will create a ne w and more open market/supply chain for the materials,  
technologies and sales as previous figures shows under Section 2. 
The involvement of all the participants d uring and after the end of the project, in order to strengthen the industrial 
and commercial e xploitation, is a key aspect of the consortium relatio nship, implemented through the innovation 
and IPR manageme nt strategies resulting in the Business Plan inclu ded i n the Final PEDR (Plan for the 
Exploitation and Dissemination of the Results). 
During the project. Throughout the life of the project, all proj ect partners will be responsible for updating the 
project ‘Plan for the Exploitation and Dissemination of Re sults’. Dissemination will target ‘take-up’ actions within 
EU Local Authorities -Public Bodies, Stakeholders, SMEs and End -Users to promote the growt h of t he materials 
and technologies developed into new and  existing market sectors; and to encourage SME par ticipation within the 
NEMOSINE supply chain. Publication and dissemination of project knowledg e and results will be conducted on 
agreement between the consortium partners, led by the IPREB chaired by ALINARI ensuring that the SMEs and 
industry interests are not only taken into account but are the real drivers for the exploitation strategy. Managed by 
 
 
51 Note that CNRS & OEAW partners have double role, both as RO and SSH, due to their huge influence in the CH-audiovisual field. For the calculations of their weight in the 
total consortium per type of partner, please note that only OEAW is considered full SSH, and CNRS full RTO, so that their double role is in some way considered.  
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 49 of 109 
 
the IPREB, each project partner will be required to  develop their own ‘Exploitation Plan’ that will demonstra te 
how the project results will be integrated into  their own forward business plan and research actions. Exploitation 
activities are integral part of WP9. 
After the end of the project . As explained on section 2.1, all the partners will obtain economic prof its from the 
commercialization of the innovative NEMOSINE new materials and whole smart packaging 3 -type production and 
implementation of the sa le logistic will be able to introduce to the market co st competitive, sustainable and high -
added value products,  increasing/opening markets and besides, to obtain  profits by licensing the project results 
related to their knowledge field, especially the sales of the different types of package out of EU. However, as it will 
be detailed in the Business Plan and PEDR, t he percentages of these profits will be different among the Partners 
depending on the exploitation agreement reached among co -owners which will reflect the percentage of 
contribution of each Partner during Project execution, the Background brought by them to achieve such result, and 
so on. Furthermore, th ese economic profits will encourage all the partners to contribute in the initial investment 
necessary to set up the exploitation process, once the project is finished. The SMEs participants are economicall y 
and managerially capable of performing the explo itation of the results, based on their turnover, their own 
investment in R&D and the level of economic contribution to the project. The other partne rs have also the right 
competences to guarantee the NEMOSI NE exploitation of results in their areas. All par tners are highly convinced 
of the potential impact of the project results in their businesses,  and neither the SMEs, nor the other partners have 
conflict of interests regarding the areas of commercializatio n/exploitation, from a geographical, technological  or 
market sector point of view. More details are provided in section 2.1., where the steps to  achieve the foreseen 
impact are described.   
Industrial participation is very strong in this project. The conso rtium includes six + one industry partners (6 SMEs  
+ 1 large company, almost half of the consortium), with multiple and complementary technologi cal, research and 
business expertise, covering the ful l spec trum of the activities proposed in NEMOSINE. They ar e dynamic 
enterprises with an active intention and  outlook to expand their product/service portfolio into new markets. All 
project industrial pa rtners planning to directly capitalize on the NEMOSINE  results as we explain in detail in 
impact section. The geographical dispersion of the industrial partners e nsures that we cover an high proportion of 
European markets. 
3.3.3 Other countries. 
In the NEMOSINE consortium there is not any participant from the Associated Countries.  
3.3.4 Resources to be committed  
Each WP has been analysed to determine the personne l, equipment and financial resources required to undertake 
each task. The coordinator will lead the mobilization of these resources, ensuring or correcting any deviations from 
the plan through constant moni toring. The budget distribution has been arranged in order to allocate the necessary 
resources to each partner taking into account their expecte d workload and involvement in the different WPs and 
their needs for materials and consumables, travel, equipment , other goods and services and subcontracting. The  
summary of the staff effort (person-months) is shown in part A, with each work-package leader shown in bold.  
The description of those costs for partners w hose ‘Other direct costs’ budget exceeds the 15% of the personnel 
costs is included this section (ta ble 3.4.b), altogether an overview of the main equipment’s to be used during the 
project available at partners’ facilities, which will be integrated through the WPs, has been included in section 4. 
Moreover, note that there are some partners with 3 rd parties (linked parties and in -kind, i.e CNRS, NOVA, IRIS, 
OEAW) and that the subcontracting h as been identified by the partners according to the H2020 Financia l rules on 
the Annotated Modified  Gran Agreement.  There are also minor subcontracting costs  (representing 0.72%), which 
no represent any major impact to the project at all.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 50 of 109 
 
Table 3.4b: ‘Other direct cost’ items (travel, equipment, other goods and services). 
*Note that for equipment costs, the depreciation costs will be calculated according to t he usual accou nting practices of the organiz ation. 
Cost (€) Justification AIMPLAS Cost (€) Justification CNRS 
Other goods and services 
60,000 
Cost of IPR protection, 
dissemination-communication 
material and events, hostting meetings 
(10k€), audit certificate (3k€); 
prototype moulds and tooling (35.000 
€); polymer materials and additives 
(4k€), auxilia r devices fo r sensoring 
and monitoring the testing processes 
(5k€), lab consumables for lab testing 
(3k€) 
70,000 
IMAP subpartner -Chemicals (metal salts, ligands, 
acid-bases, solvents) and small labora tory equip ment: 
38k€. ILV- subpartner- Chemicals (metal salts, 
ligands, polymers...) and small laboratory equipment; 
8k€. CRC subpartner : SEC columns, acetic acid 
permeation tubes, chemicals reagents, cultural media, 
ATPmetry reagents and solvents (for SEC of cellul ose 
derivative analysis); 18k€. Global audit c ertificate and 
cost of IPR protection, dissemination -communication 
material, patenting: 6k€. 
 
Travel 
17,000 
In addition to the average travelling 
costs per partner (see below*), 1,800€ 
more are estimated, as P roject 
Coordinator. 
35,000 
See below* + 2 trips  per year (2 persons) are estimated 
for attendance to conferences, fairs, technical 
demonstrations, etc., with an average of 4 days per trip 
(cost of 1,500€/trip/person) this meaning 19.8 k€ more. 
 
Total 77,000  105,000  
Cost (€) Justification IST Cost (€) Justification IPC 
Other goods and services 
51,500 
Laboratory consumables (reagents 
and gases) for characterization 
(28k€), consumables and maintenance 
for the equipment and vacuum lines 
used in the charact erization of the 
materials (18k€) and audit cost s (500 
€). I PR protection, dissemination -
communication material, paten ting: 
4k€. 
85,000 
Raw polymer material (prototyping, barrier film 
development, injection moulding): 13k€, 
Consummables for labora tory: 3k€ , Mould for test 
vehicles: 28k€, Dedicated handling tool for barrier film 
management in the mould: 20k€, Devices/materials for 
the vacuum sealing equipment: 13k€. Micro scopy 
analysis ( TEM): 2k€, , Audit costs: 2k€; Cost of IPR 
protection, dissemination -communication material, 
patenting: 4k€. 
 
Equip
ment 18,000 
Vacuum balance to AA adsorption 
experiments  (: 20k €) and AA sensor 
for low concentration measures  
(10k€).  
 
3,150 Selective Laser Melting for mould cavities: 
3,150€ 
Travel 15,200 See below* 15,200 See below* 
 
Total 84,700  103,350  
Cost (€) Justification AKUMPLAST Cost (€) Justification BIOSENSOR 
Other goods and services 
50,000 
Steel standard parts and components 
for injection molds (2 moulds) - 10k€- 
per mold. Costs for tooling 8k€ -per 
mold, prod uction costs for injection 
molding 4k€, periphery e quipment for 
injection molding 8k€. Cost of IPR 
protection, disseminat ion-
communication material, patenting: 
2k€. 
68,131 
 
IPR protection, dissemination material and events, and 
open access journal (8k€) + audit certificate (2k€) + 
materials for 3 RFID read ers (5k€)  +  mehanical 
structure for locating them and related consuma bles 
(RFID chips, insert materials, electronics, semifinished 
products, etc.) ( 8.5k€)  + Electronic boards and optical  
components LED) , Opt ical fibers 600 mkm core, 
Collimating lenses, photodiodes, various electronic 
boards (9,5 k€) + Labs materials & Mechanical 
components, supports (5.5 k€) + Software and relative 
materials for ICT, matlab, arduino (8,83K€) 
 
 
Travel 15,200 See below* 15,200 See below* 
 
Total 65,200  83,331  
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 51 of 109 
 
Cost (€) Justification IRIS Cost (€) Justification NPH 
Other goods and 
services 
50,671.63 
IPR protection, dissemination 
material and events, and open access 
(8k€), audit certificate (3k€) - cost of 
materials for 3 RFID re aders (1 2k€), 
mehanical structure for locating  them 
(14,671€) and related consumables 
(RFID chips, insert  , etc.) (8k€), 
software licenses (3k€)  
42,500 Polymer materials and solvents (30k€), laboratory 
consumables and small laboratory supplies for 
characterization techniques (7k€). Audit costs (2,5k€). 
Cost of IPR protection, dissemination -communication 
material, patenting: 3k€. 
Travel 17,000 See below* + IRIS other partners 
visits for installing the RFID devices. 15,200 See below* 
Total 67,671.63  57,700  
Cost (€) Justification MODISPREM Cost (€) Justification CulturArts 
Other 
goods 
and 
service
s 
38,000 
Different materials testing materials 
(12k€), fungibles (12k€), cleaning and 
adecuation of the machinery (6k€), 
delivery samples and materials (5 k€) 
and auxiliary devices/IPR costs (3k€) 
24,000 
Dissemination works hop; dissemination & 
communciation materials, evaluation of patentability 
(video included, several options consdiered -maybe 
short videos for the different final packages developed) 
Travel 15,200 See below* 15,200 See below* 
Total 53,200  39,200  
Cost (€) Justification ALINARI 
Other goods and 
services 
17,100 Conservation material for investigation and forensic study analysis along with traditional silver 
halide photographic paper and pho tographic chemicals (developer, fixer, toning, cleaning 
solution). Material for dissemination, IPR costs and patentability evaluation.  
Equipment 32,025 Hardware equipment depreciation costs. 
Travel 22,000 See below* + ALINARI's other trips as Exploitati on Manager, f or IPR/exploitation and 
commercialiatization purposes. 
Total 71,125    
During the NEMOSINE four -year project, 8 consortium meetings have been planned: one GA meeting each 6 
months; all meetings will be held in EU countries. The Consortium ha s e stimated a round 950 €/trip/person in 
Europe (400€ flight, 350€ two nights hotel, 200€ meals, taxi, others). In consequence, the average cost per partner 
for NEMOSINE meetings assistance is 7,600 €, assuming that one person per partner attends. Please no te that, 
based on partners´previous experiences, these costs also include a buffer for other possible type of meetings , if 
applicable, when nececcary along the project (e.g. technical meetings, visits among specific partners,etc). 
Additionally, 2 trips per  partner p er year are estimated for attendance to conferences, fairs, technical 
demonstrations, etc., this meaning 7,600€ more. General full cost budget for partners is 15,200 €.  
The only exceptions, as detailed above are for one research centre, CNRS (a relevant RO in the consortium); the  
Coordinator´s case (AIMPLAS), IRIS (for specific installations) and WP9 leader, ALINARI. 
In the WP9, for all partners a minimum quantity of  at least  2,000€ in concept of IPR protection, Open access 
publication, Registration fees, attendances to conferences, dissemination materials  and evaluation of patentability 
has been considered. This amount has been increased depending on the foreseen involvement of each partner. 
These costs are included in other goods and services cost. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 52 of 109 
 
 
4. MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM 
4.1. PARTICIPANTS (APPLICANTS). 
PARTNER 1 
Full name : AIMPLAS -Asociación de Investigación de 
Materiales Plásticos y Conexas (AIMPLAS) 
Web page: www.aimplas.es 
Country: Spain  
Type: RO 
  
Brief description of the organization: AIMPLAS, Technological Institute of Plastics located in Valencia, is a 
private, non -profit Association with more than 500 associated companies created in 1990. AIMPLAS is 
formed by +120 highly skilled professional , m ore than 65% with a Masters, Engineering or equivalent 
degree in Chemistry, polymer engineering, materials engineering or equivalent, including 15 PhD.  
AIMPLAS’ fields of work are related to technological research and development on thermoplastic and 
thermosetting plastic materials & products, its transformation processes and their recyclability and 
sustainability. AIMPLAS generates new knowledge and technologies that can be transferred to companies 
in order to help them to increase their effectiveness and competitiveness. 
AIMPLAS has a broad expertise in the fields of recycling, compatibilization, reactive extrusion, biopolymers 
and renewable source materials, special assisted processing technologies and nanocomposites, gained 
during the last years in t he frame of EU and national projects. Nowadays, AIMPLAS is involved in more 
than 25 European projects and has participated in 77 projects in FP5, FP6, FP7, LIFE+, CIP -EcoInnovation 
EU Programmes, among others, coordinating 27 of them. At National and Regio nal levels A IMPLAS 
participates in around 100 projects yearly.  
AIMPLAS, as RO is focused to help companies in the plastic sector to develop new products and increase 
their competitiveness through innovation, has more than 20 pilot plants representing the most relevant 
polymer/plastics/composites production technologies present in the industry nowadays and has state -of-
the art test facilities for chemical, optical, morphological, mechanical and physical characterisation. These 
pilot lines and laboratories a re used by many customer’s every year allowing them to test new materials, 
optimize production processes and launch new products to the market, supported by AIMPLAS technical 
staff, resulting in more than 5000 assays, 170 technical assessments and 120 skills training actions to more 
than 1500 clients per year. AIMPLAS has state -of-the-art 8500 m 2 facilities, including thermoplastics and 
thermoset pilot plants, analysis and testing laboratories (physical -mechanical, chemical, packaging, 
automotive and construction) and training areas.  
Role in the Project:  
Project coordinator (WP9). Support industrial partners to adapt the materials development to obtain the 
demo packages at pilot plant Level.  Development of nanofibers carriers, antifungal composites, 
incorporation of MOFs into open cell foams at lab scale. Contribution to communication, dissemination, 
exploitation, business plan, LCA, LCC, and other related activities. Regulatory analysis. 
Scientific team:  
Dr. Adolfo Benedito (M) , PhD degree in Chemistry by the University of Valencia, focusing on ABS 
copolymer degradation and recycling capabilities. Since Mars 2001, he has been working at AIMPLAS as 
head of Compounding department until 2009 and currently as Head of the Materials Research 
Department. He has been the main technical responsible of several EU -research and national projects, as 
well as author and co -author of several papers, patents and book chapters focused on nanotechnology 
applied to polymeric materials. 
Mr. Serafín Garcia , Engineer, responsi ble for t he Design and Injection department since 2004.  
He has wide experience in a multidisciplinary approach to find integrated and comprehensive  
solutions for the plastic sector on processing optimization. He is expert in plastic materials with or without 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 53 of 109 
 
reinforcements. He is also responsible on research activities focused in Additive Manufacturing and 
Industry 4.0 at AIMPLAS. 
Dr. Alba María Ortiz Álvarez (female) , European PhD in chemistry by the Universidad de Alcalá, Madrid 
(December 2012), working i n AIMPLAS as PhD researcher in the chemical laboratory since 2013. Sh e has 
been involved in several national and international research projects  focused in different areas such as 
synthesis of new polymers, nanotechnology, materials from renewable resource s a nd coatings with 
enhanced properties, and so on. Moreover, she has being involved in the technical work of on Food 
contact plastics as well as Pharmacopoeia. Before joining AIMPLAS, she worked at the Universidad de 
Alcalá, where she was involved in rese arch projects. Her research focused on the design and synthesis of 
new enlarged-palladium complexes as recoverable catalysts by nanofiltration techniques, contributing in 
international peer-reviewed journals and in national and international conference pap ers in the field of 
catalysis, dendrimers and organometallic chemistry. 
Mrs. Raquel Giner (F), Degree in Chemical Sciences by the University of Valencia (Spain) in 2000. Working 
in AIMPLAS for more than 14 years after studying a master in “Plastic material s and their transformation 
processes”. Currently as Senior International Projects Manager. She has participated in more than 20 EU 
projects, being the official coordinator in 7 of them (including a recent one begun in Jun2016, under 
H2020). Speaker at several seminars/workshops to promote the coordinated projects, author of technical 
articles for sectorial magazines, and professor in different EU project management -related 
courses/webinars. Project coordination and management activities in projects within F P5, FP6, FP7-
R4SMEs, FP7 - FoF-NMP, LIFE+ and Eco -Innovation. Most of them focused on biomaterials/bioplastics, 
renewable resources and sustainability. Other EU programs where she has worked are: EIE, Cornet, 
Interreg IVC, etc. 
Publications:  
• Bayerl T., Be nedito A., Gallego A., Galindo B., Mitschang P. Synthetic Polymer -Polymer Composites 
(Melting of polymer -polymer composites by particulate heating promoters and electromagnetic 
radiation). HANSER. 2012 (39-64). ISBN: 978-1-56990-510-4. 
• Menes O., Cano M., Benedito A., Gimenez E., Castell P., Maser W.K., Benito A.M. The Effect of Ultra -
Thin Graphite on the Morphology and Physical Properties of Thermoplastic Polyurethane Elastomer 
Composites.  Composites Science and Technology. 2012, 72. (1595-1601). 
• Wegrzyn M., Galindo B., Benedito A., Giménez E. Morphology, thermal, and electrical properties of 
polypropylene hybrid composites co -filled with multi -walled carbon nanotubes and graphene 
nanoplatelets. J. APPL. POLYM. SCI. 2015, DOI: 10.1002/APP.42793. 
• Sathyanarayana S., W egrzyn M., Olowojoba G., Benedito A., Gimenez E., Huebner C., Henning F. 
Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes Incorporated Into a Miscible Blend of Poly(Phenylenether)/Polystyrene 
- Processing and Characterization.  Express Polymer Letters 2013, 7. (621-635). 
• Wegrzyn M., Juan S., Benedito A., Gimenez E.: The Influence of Injection Molding Parameters on 
Electrical Properties of PC/ABS-MWCNT Nanocomposites.  Journal of Applied Polymer Science. 2013, 
130. (2152-2158). 
Projects: 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
BIO4MAP: Transparent and high barrier biodegradable film 
and sheet for Modified Atmosphere food packaging FP7-SME 2017 www.bio4map.eu/ 
 
GRAMOFON: New process for efficient CO2 capture by 
innovative adsorbents based on modified graphene 
aerogels and MOF materials 
LCE 
H2020 
2020 //cordis.europa.eu/proj
ect/rcn/205816_en.html 
NANOONSPECT: Reliable Integrated On -Line 
Characterization Tool for Thermoplastic Compounds.   
FP7-NMP 2016 www.nanoonspect.eu/   
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 54 of 109 
 
 
COBAPACK: Development of a new recyclable long life co -
injected high barrier packaging for food applications, with 
broad design possibilities and reduced manufacturing 
costs. 
FP7 2011 cordis.europa.eu/result/
rcn/58264_es.html 
Technical equipment: 
- Equipment for mechanical, thermal, electrical, rheological and physical tests. 
- Optical/Confocal Microscope. 
- RAMAN Spectrometer with two laser sources. 
- Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer (FTIR). 
- Scanning Electronic Microscope (SEM) with EDX analysis. 
- High Vacuum Plasma Chamber with gas selector. 
- Dinamic Mechanical Analyzer (DMA). 
- Termogravimetric Analyzer (TGA). 
- Freeze Dryer. 
- Dispermat Disperser equipment and laboratory reactors for nanoparticles modifications. 
- Injection moulding processing pilot plant 
 
  
Belongs to Standardization Committees.  AIMPLAS is participating in the follow committees of 
standardization: 
Nationals: AEN / CTN 53 / CTC032 Certification Committee for bituminous sheets AENOR; AEN / CTN 53 / 
GT 2 "Agricultural Film"; AEN / CTN 53 / GT1 "PVC profiles for doors, windows, blinds and fittings"; AEN / 
CTN 53 / SC7 "Tanks"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC 4 "Containers and Packaging"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC 4 / GT "Tote 
Bags"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC 4 / GT "EPS Boxes"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC 8 "Recycled Materials "; AEN / CTN 53 / 
SC1 "Elastomers"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC2 "Plastic pipes and fittings"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC2 GT "GLP Tubes"; AEN 
/ CTN 53 / SC3 "Cellular materials"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC5 "Reinforced materials"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC6 "Raw 
material specifications and test m ethods": AEN / CTN 53 / SC6 / GT "Biodegradability and biobased 
products"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC9 "Tires out of use"; and International: CEN/TC 249/WG 7/TG 1 “Plastics - 
Biodegradable mulch films for use in agriculture and horticulture”¸ ISO TC61 (Plasti cs)/SC2: Mechanical 
Properties  and ISO/TC 138/SC 05/WG 05 "Polyolefin pipes". 
In which magazines/Journals do you publish? 
J. Applied polymer science, Express Letters,  
Consumable needs. Please could you describe and quantify. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 55 of 109 
 
Prototype moulds and toolin g (35.000 €); polymer materials and additives for testing (4.000 €), auxiliary 
devices for sensoring and monitoring the testing processes (5.000€), lab consumables for lab testing 
(3.000€) 
 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 56 of 109 
 
 
 
PARTNER  2-CNRS 
Full name:  CNRS, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 
Partner 2a : IMAP, Institut des Matériaux de Paris 
Partner 2b : ILV, Institut Lavoisier de Versailles 
Partner 2c : CRC, Centre de Recherche sur la Conservation 
Web pages:  
CNRS : http://www.cnrs.fr 
IMAP : http://www.chimie.ens.fr/?q=fre-imap-
2000/profil/christian.serre 
CRC : http://crc.mnhn.fr 
ILV: www.ilv.uvsq.fr 
Country: France 
Type:  RO 
 
 
 
Brief description of the organization: 
Partner 2: CNRS 
The National Center for Scientific Research, or CNRS, is a public organization under the responsibility of the 
French Ministry of Education and Research. It aims to: 
• Evaluate and carry out all research  capable of advancing knowledge and bringing social, cultural, 
and economic benefits for society. 
• Contribute to the promotion and application of research results. 
• Develop scientific information. 
• Support research training. 
• Participate in the analysis of the  national and international scientific climate and its potential for 
evolution in order to develop a national policy. 
CNRS laboratories (or research units) are located throughout France, and employ a large body of tenured 
researchers, engineers, and support staff. 
Partner 2a : Institute of Porous Materials from Paris (IMAP) 
CNRS-Versailles. The CNRS-IMAP group led by C. Serre (DR-CNRS), created end of 2016 and initially located 
at the Institut Lavoisier de Versailles (France), is a world leader in the synth esis, structural characterization 
and applications of porous MOF solids with more than two hundreds reported new porous solids within 
the last decade. It has developed a well -established expertise in the hydro/solvothermal synthesis and 
structure determination using when required computer modelling, of new porous MOFs. This know -how 
has been developed in conjunction with the understanding of their formation mechanism through the 
development of in or ex -situ studies (solid state NMR, X -ray diffraction...) an d t he identification of the 
inorganic or hybrid building units present in solution. The group also developed a large network of french 
or foreign collaborations to deeply characterize these hybrid solids (in -situ IR, Raman and Mössbauer 
spectroscopies, mol ecular simulation...) as well as study their properties in several strategic and/or 
societal domains of application (green-house gas sorption liquids phase separation, magnetism, lithium ion 
insertion, drug delivery, thin films...). This group has also acqu ired skills in the functionalization of MOFs 
nanoparticles by polymers, the synthesis of MOFs -polymer membranes or MOFs -graphene-oxide 
composites for different applications including biomedicine or gas separation. IMAP possesses many 
equipments related to the synthesis of MOFs, from their miniutarized (g scale, high -throughput) to large 
scale synthesis (Kg), to their structural (powder diffractometers (combinatorial, high resolution, 
temperature)) or physico-chemical characterization (thermogravimetric analysis, sorption porosimeters, IR 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 57 of 109 
 
spectrometer…). This also includes an access to a wide range of characterization platforms at ENS or ESPCI 
(SEM-FEG equipped with EDX, TEM, liquid phase NMR…). Shaping instruments will be soon available 
(2017) at IMAP to produce granules or extrudates of MOFs up to the 100 g scale. 
Role in the Project: 
In this project the Institute of Porous Materials, based on the above-mentioned expertise, will be in charge 
of : 
• Synthesis and characterization of MOFs able to adsorb selectively VOCs 
The IMAP will select or design the most appropriate MOFs systems that are able to absorb selectively 
VOCs (e.g. acetic acid) in the presence of moisture. IMAP will produce these MOFs at different scales or 
bearing various particle shapes, depending on the requirements from the project. The group will also carry 
out the physico-chemical characterization of MOFs micro or nano-particles (powder, shaped particles). 
• Preparation of MOFs-polymers packages or fibers 
The IMAP will assist partners for the preparation of the MOFs-polymers packages (electrospinning, foams). 
To enhance the compatibility between the MOFs particles and the polymers, surface functionalised MOFs 
particles might be prepared based on the strong know-how of the team in this field. 
Scientific team: 
Dr.  Christian Serre 
C. SERRE (DR CNRS, 46 years old, h index=74, >260 articles) (M) is a research director at ESPCI and got his 
PhD in Inorganic chemistry in 1999 (Versailles, France). Christian is one of the world leader in the 
synthesis, structural determination and application of porous MOF solids. He has an extensive experience 
in EU and national project coordination including an ERC Starting Grant (BioMOFs, 2008 -2013) and two 
FP6 or FP7 projects. He is currently workpackage leader of four  other ongoing FP7 EU projects ( M4CO2, 
FP7-608490, Sotherco, FP7 -295775)), HeteroMOFs (IF -H2020, 2015 -2017) and Gramofon (H2020, 2016 -
2019). He is head of the IMAP group at Paris Versailles. CS has received the bronze medal of CNRS in 2006, 
the French chemical society solid state chemistry award in 2010 and in 2016 the Berthelot medal and the 
Prix Fondé par l’Etat from the French academy of sciences. His role in this project will be related to the 
synthesis and characterization of MOFs and MOFs-polymers composites. 
Dr. Farid Nouar 
F. NOUAR (CNRS Research Engineer, 41 years old) (M) is a research engineer at IMAP and got is PhD in 
Inorganic chemistry/material science in 2010 (Tampa, USA). F. Nouar has been involved in several national 
(ANR, industrial collaborations) or EU projects from the team (Macademia, M4CO 2 and Gramofon) dealing 
with the synthesis and scale -up of MOFs for the capture of gases or vapors. He will be in charge in the 
Nemosine project of the synthesis optimisation, scale-up and shaping of MOFs. 
Publications: 
• V. Benoit ,  R. S. Pillai ,   A. Orsi ,   P. Normand ,  H. Jobic , F. Nouar ,  P. Billemont , E. Bloch , S. 
Bourrelly,  T. Devic, P. A. Wright , G. de Weireld , C. Serre, G. Maurin, P.L. Llewellyn, MIL -91(Ti), a 
small pore metal –organic framework whi ch fulfils several criteria: an upscaled green synthesis, 
excellent water stability, high CO 2 selectivity and fast CO 2 transport, J. Mater. Chem. A, 4, 1383, 
2016. 
• M. Prakash, H. Jobic, N.A. Ramsahye, F. Nouar, D. Damasceno Borges, C. Serre, G. Maurin  
Diffusion of H2, CO2, and Their Mixtures in the Porous Zirconium Based Metal –Organic Framework 
MIL-140A(Zr): Combination of Quasi -Elastic Neutron Scattering Measurements and Molecular 
Dynamics Simulations, J. Phys. Chem. C, 119, 23978, 2015. 
• Q. Yang, S. Vaese n, F. Ragon, A. Wiersum, D. Wu, A. Lago, T. Devic, C. Martineau, F. Taulelle, P.L. 
Llewellyn, H. Jobic, C. Zhong, C. Serre, G. De Weireld, G. Maurin, A water stable Metal Organic 
Framework with Optimal features for CO2 capture, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 52, 10316, 2013. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 58 of 109 
 
• S. Vaesen, V. Guillerm, Q Y. Yang, A. Wiersum, B. Marszalek, B. Gil, A. Vimont, M. Daturi, T. Devic, P 
L. Llewellyn, C. Serre, G. Maurin, G. de Weireld A robust amino -functionalized titanium (IV) based 
MOF for improved separation of acid gases, Chem. Commun. 49, 10082, 2013. 
• Guillerm V., Ragon F., Dan-Hardi M., Devic T., Vishnuvarthan M., Campo B., Vimont A., Clet G., 
Yang Q., Maurin G., Férey G., Vittadini A., Gross S., Serre C.  A Series  of Isoreticular, Highly 
Stable, Porous Zirconium Oxide Based Metal -Organic Frameworks , Angew Chem Int Ed Engl . 
2012 51(37), 9267–9271. 
• G. Férey, C. Serre, T. Devic, G. Maurin, H. Jobic, P L. Llewellyn, G. De Weireld, A. Vimont, Why 
hybrid porous solids capture greenhouse gases? Chemical Society Reviews, 40(2), 550, 2011. 
Equipment. 
Teflon-lined reactors for hydro or solvothermal synthesis (from 0.25 ml to 125 ml), 
High throughput solvothermal system (25*1.5 ml or 48 * 0.25 ml), 
Glass or alloy based reactors at different scales (0.4 to 30 l), 
Pressurised large scale filtration system, 
Microwave assisted hydrothermal reactors, 
Grinder and granulators for shaping of MOFs. Spin -dip coater. Centrifugators including a large scale high 
speed system, 
Powder X-ray diffractometers (high-throughput, high resolution, temperature), 
Scanning Electron microscope equipped with EDX analysis, TEM, 
Nitrogen porosimetry, thermal analysis, IR spectrometer. 
Five Relevant Projects: 
Partner 2b Institut Lavoisier of Versailles (ILV) 
ILV is internationa lly recognized for the synthesis in solution of hybrid and molecular materials based on 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website 
“DESANNS, Advanced separation and storage of carbon 
dioxide: Design, Synthesis and Applications of Novel 
Nanoporous Sorbents” 
 
FP6 2008 http://cordis.europa.eu/p
roject/rcn/78588_en.html 
M4CO2 : Energy efficient MOF -based Mixed Matrix 
Membranes for CO2 Capture; FP7 2017 www.m4co2.eu 
SOTHERCO - Solar Thermochemical Compact Storage 
System FP7 2017 http://sotherco.eu/midter
m.php?lang=en 
QUAM: Conception de matériaux hybrides 
multifonctionnels pour la capture et la détection de 
composés organiques volatiles : application à la 
conservation des objets du patrimoine 
National 2018 
http://www.sciences-
patrimoine.org/index.php
/conception-de-
materiaux-hybrides-
multifonctionnels.html 
Gramofon : New process for efficient CO 2 capture by 
innovative aerogels based on modified graphene and 
MOF materials 
H2020 2019 www.gramofon.eu 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 59 of 109 
 
MOFs, oxides, and discrete complexes such as polyoxometalates (POM). It has also acquired a strong 
expertise in the supramolecular assembly of a wide range of inorganic  entities (MOFs, POM, metal 
nanoparticles…) with (bio)molecules and (bio)polymers. These materials are characterized at ILV by 
coupling multiple techniques: single crystal or powder diffractometer, TGA, solid state NMR, SEM -FEG, 
EDX, XPS…A large network of french or foreign collaborations is also involved to deeply characterize these 
materials as well as study their physico -chemical properties for different applications (gas separation, 
biomedicine, electrocatalysis…). This group has also acquired skills in  the functionalization of MOFs 
nanoparticles by polymers as well as the synthesis of MOF-polymer composites and membranes. 
Role in the Project: 
In this project the Institut Lavoisier de Versailles, b ased on the above -mentioned expertise, will be in 
charge of : 
• Characterization of MOFs-polymers packages or fibers 
The ILV will assist partners for the synthesis and understanding of the formation of the MOFs/polymer 
composites (interfaces, pore blocking…), the role of surface functionalization and how it impact s t he 
sorption/release of VOCs. To achieve such a task, model polymer -MOFs composites will be prepared first 
and in a second step, the methodology will be extended to more realistic composites from the Nemosine 
project. 
Scientific team: 
N. STEUNOU  (PR, 45  years old, 66 articles, 1 book chapter, 2 european patents, H index =22, 30 oral 
communications), was assistant professor at LCMCP (Collège de France - UPMC) from 1999 to 2010  and 
moved in 2010 as a Professor to  ILV. She has acquired a strong expertise in the design of inorganic and 
hybrid materials based on oxides, MOFs and (bio)ligands, (bio)polymers, …. At the present time, she is 
currently developing hybrid materials based on MOFs including nano -objects for biosensing, and 
bioimaging as well as membrane s for CO2 capture and energy storage applications. She has supervised so 
far 7 PhDs and 8 Postdocs. Her role in the project will be mainly related to the synthesis of model 
polymers-MOFs composites as well as their microstructural characterization (dispers ion state of MOF 
fillers in polymer, MOFs/polymer interfaces…). 
E. DUMAS  (Lecturer, 44 years old, 33 articles, 1 book chapter, H index = 16) is currently developing 
nanosystems based on metal nanoparticles and/or MOFs for various applications (bioimaging, detection of 
trace elements, ...). His role in the project will be related to the electron microscopic and chemical analysis 
(TEM, SEM, EDX…) of the polymers-MOFs composites. 
Publications: 
1- “Toward an Understanding of the Microstructure and Interfacial Pr operties of PIMs/ZIF‑8 Mixed Matrix 
Membranes.” M. Benzaqui, R. Semino, N. Menguy, F. Carn, T. Kundu, J-M. Guigner, N. B. McKeown,  K. J. 
Msayib, M. Carta,  R. Malpass -Evans, C. Le Guillouzer,  G. Clet,  N. A. Ramsahye, C. Serre,  G. Maurin, N. 
Steunou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8, (2016), 27311-27321 
2- “Design of Laccase Metal Organic Framework -Based Bioelectrodes for Biocatalytic Oxygen Reduction 
Reaction” S. Patra, S. Sene, C. Mousty,  C. Serre, A. Chaussé, L. Legrand, N.Steunou, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 8, (2016), 20012-20022. 
3-“ Synthesis of the biocompatible and highly stable MIL -127(Fe): from large scale synthesis to particle size 
control.” H. Chevreau, A. Permyakova, F. Nouar, P. Fabry, C. Livage, F. Ragon, A. Garcia -Marquez, T. Devic, 
N. Steunou, C. Serre*, P. Horcajada*, CrystEngComm, 18, (2016), 4094-4101. 
4-“Supramolecular Assembly of Gelatin and Inorganic Polyanions: Fine-Tuning the Mechanical 
Properties of Nanocomposites by Varying Their Composition and Microstructure” 
I. Baroudi, C. Simonnet -Jégat, C. Roch-Marchal, N. Leclerc-Laronze, C. Livage,  C. Martineau, C. Gervais,  E. 
Cadot, F. Carn, B. Fayolle, N. Steunou. Chemistry of Materials, 27, (2015), 1452−1464. 
 
Equipment. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 60 of 109 
 
Teflon-lined reactors for hydro or solvothermal synthesis (from 0.25 ml to 125 ml) 
Glass or alloy based reactors at different scales (0.4 to 5 l), 
Microwave assisted hydrothermal reactors, 
Spin-dip coater. Centrifugators, 
Single crystal and Powder X-ray diffractometers (Routine, high resolution, temperature), 
Scanning Electron microscope equipped with EDX analysis, 
Nitrogen porosimetry, thermal analysis, IR and UV-vis spectrometers. 
Solid state NMR 
XPS spectroscopy 
Relevant Projects: 
 
Partner 2c : CRC, Centre de Recherche sur la Conservation 
The CRC is a CNRS research unit, founded in 1963, under the umbrella of the National council of scientific 
research (CNRS : USR 3224), the French Ministry of Culture and the National museum of Natural history. 
CRC is involved in research to improve the conservation and preservation of heritage goods artifacts from 
museums and archival collections to monuments. CRC is playing a role in the training and the education of 
scientists, conservators and curators. A staff of 40 heritage scientists and technicians with a background in 
chemistry, physics or microbiology, endeavor to develop the techniques of preserving museum artefacts in 
their original state for as long as possible. In order to fulfill these goals, the CRC is equipped with analytical 
tools such as high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, SEC-MALS, LC-MS), 2D gas chromatography/ 
Mass spectrometry (2D -GC/MS), UV-visible spectrometry, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), 
RAMAN micro spectroscopy, FORS, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), VNIR Hyperspectral Imaging, 
MEB and access to analytical platforms and  synchrotron facilities  (such as Soleil). CRC perfo rms 
accelerated ageing in climate chambers to evaluate the influence of temperature, light and pollutants on 
the deterioration process of these materials (thermal ageing, light ageing, pollution ageing). These 
apparatus permitted the CRC to take part to Eu ropean research projects on the effect of pollution on 
paper, leather and parchment or videotapes (STEP, MAP, IDAP, PRESTOSPACE). Within the LiDo project, 
CRC has introduced the Lightcheck light dosimeter or coordination the POPART for the preservation of 
Synthetic polymers in cultural heritage? 
The Center has an educational position, which not only includes the teaching of university students but 
also permanent training for curators and conservators. The CRC is in contact with similar foreign 
organizations through its participation in different international organizations such as the ICCROM and the 
Committee of Conservation of the ICOM (International Council of Museums). 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website 
SOTHERCO - Solar T hermochemical Compact Storage 
System FP7 2017 http://sotherco.eu/midter
m.php?lang=en 
QUAM: Conception de matériaux hybrides 
multifonctionnels pour la capture et la détection de 
composés organiques vol atiles : application à la 
conservation des objets du patrimoine 
National 2018 
http://www.sciences-
patrimoine.org/index.php
/conception-de-
materiaux-hybrides-
multifonctionnels.html 
Gramofon : New process for efficient CO 2 capture by 
innovative aerogels base d on modified graphene and 
MOF materials 
H2020 2019 www.gramofon.eu 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 61 of 109 
 
 
 
Role in the Project: 
In this project the CRC will focus on the efficiency of those sm art packaging in real condition of use in 
archives and museums. 
• Assessment of efficiency for acidic traps 
Once the different smart packages/enclosures are manufactured, the CRC will assess their ability and 
effectiveness to adsorb acidic gases produced by cellulose ester derivatives in different conditions of 
temperature and humidity. While the smart package made on synthetic polymer packages are produced, 
the CRC will prepare sheet of cellulosic substrate embedded with different adsorbants such as zeolithe s, 
active charcoal and MOFs. The VOC adsorption of the different packages will be compared in term of 
efficiency, as soon as the smart packaging are made available by the industrial partners, the same 
assessment will be perform. 
• Assessment of fungistatic properties 
Once packagings with encapsulated of peptides antifungals and other volatile substances are successfully 
produced by industrial partners, the CRC will test their fungistatic effect on contaminated photographs 
(with from the 19th and 20 centuries) in regular condition of used. 
• Assessment of risks 
The standardized photographic activity test will be applied to ensure that those smart packaging materials 
will not induce any damages on photographs. Long term behaviour of those packages will be tested 
through thermal and light ageing. 
Scientific team:  
Dr. Bertrand LAVEDRINE  (M)   got a Master degree in organic chemistry at Pierre and Marie Curie 
University and received the doctoral degree from the University of Paris I Panthéon -Sorbonne. He his 
professor at the National Museum of Natural History and since 1998 head of the “Centre de recherche sur 
la conservation” (CRC) - From 2004 to 2007, he was appointed as the director of the conservation training 
programme at University of Paris I. He has authored n umerous papers and books on preventive 
conservation of audio -visual collections and preservation of modern and contemporary art materials. 
Some of those books are now available in French, English, Spanish, Russian and Vietnamese. Bertrand 
Lavédrine has rec eived the european prize for innovation for conservation innovation (for a passive light 
dosimeter), the Kraszna -Krauz Photography Book award for his book “ A Guide to the Preventive 
Conservation of Photographs Collections. (Los-Angeles publish by J. Paul Getty Trust. 2003). He his teaching 
collection preservation and conservation science at the university of Paris I, the Ecoel du Louvre, the 
National Institute for Heritage (INP) where he is coordinating science programme.  He is involved in some 
international initiatives funded by the Mellon and/or the Getty foundation such as MEPPI project in 
Middle East, the Hermitage initiative or the ICCROM training programmes such as COLLASIA or SOIMA. 
 Dr. Anne -Laurence DUPONT (F)  is researcher at CNRS. She completed a  MSc in Biochemistry at the 
University of Montpellier in 1988, graduated from the Art Conservation Master’s program from the 
University Paris-Sorbonne in 1994, and received a PhD in Chemistry from the University of Amsterdam in 
2003. She obtained the Habil itation in 2014. Since 2001 she is Research Scientist at Centre de Recherche 
sur la Conservation des Collections (CRC, Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle, Sorbonne Universités) 
where she in charge of the Paper and Cellulose section. Her current research focuses on the 
characterization and diagnostic methods of the degradation of cellulose and paper, on the impact of the 
indoor environment on cellulosic artefacts and its modelisation, and on developing new treatment 
methodologies for the long -term stabiliz ation of paper. She has authored and co -authored over 75 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 62 of 109 
 
publications.  
Dr. Malanirina RAKOTONIRAINY (F) is a microbiologist, head of the microbiology section at the CRC. She 
has a postgraduate degree in Phytopathology and a PhD in Life sciences. Her inter est is on Microbiology, 
Mould metabolism of mould fungi, Biodeterioration and Fungal contamination of Cultural heritage and its 
disinfection. She studied the use of  essential oil for the prevention against mould growths in archives an 
library and has a special interest in foxing phenomenon. 
Publications:  
• PELLIZZI E., LATTUATI -DERIEUX A., DE LACAILLERIE JBD., LAVÉDRINE B., CHÉRADAME H., 2016. « 
Consolidation of artificially degraded polyurethane ester foam with aminoalkylalkoxysilanes», 
Polymer Degradation and Stability. Polymer degradation and stability 129(09): 106-113.  
• RAKOTONIRAINY M., VILMONT L., LAVÉDRINE B., 2016. « A methodology for detecting the level of 
fungal contamination in the French Film Archives vaults», Journal of Cultural Heritage, vol.1 9, p. 
454-462.  
• DUPONT A. -L., SEEMANN A., LAVÉDRINE B., 2012. « Capillary electrophoresis with electrospray 
ionisation-mass spectrometry for the characterisation of degradation products in aged papers », 
Talanta 89: 301-309.  
• LATTUATI-DERIEUX A., ÉGASSE E., THAO-HEU S., BALCAR N., BARABANT G., LAVÉDRINE B., 2012, « 
What do plastic emit? HS -SPME-GC/MS analyses of new standard plastics and plastic objects in 
museum collections », Journal of cultural heritage, doi.org/10.1016/j.culher.2012.06.005.  
• RYCHLY J., LATTUATI-DERIEUX A., MATISOVA-RYCHLA L. CSOMOROVA K., JANIGOVA I., LAVÉDRINE 
B., 2012, « Degradation of aged nitrocellulose investigated by thermal analysis and 
chemiluminescence », Journal of thermal and analytical calorimetry 107(3) : 1267-1276.  
• RAKOTONIRAYNI M, LAVÉDRINE B., 2005, “Screening for antifungal activity of essential oils and 
related compounds to control the biocontamination in libraries and archives storage areas”, 
International Biocontamination and biodeterioration, 55, p 141-147  
Five Relevant Projects: 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
IPERION-CH :  Integrated Platform for the 
European Research Infrastructure ON Cultural 
Heritage 
H2020 2020 http://www.iperionch.eu 
GDRI "Photographs perception and changes" Internatio
nal 2020  
QUAM: Conception de matériaux hybrides 
multifonctionnels pour la capture et la 
détection de composés organiques volatiles : 
application à la conservation des objets du 
patrimoine 
National 2018 
http://www.sciences-
patrimoine.org/index.php/conceptio
n-de-materiaux-hybrides-
multifonctionnels.html 
POPART Strategy for the preservation of 
plastic artefacts in museum collections  
 
European
- FP7 2012 
http://popart-
highlights.mnhn.fr/introduction/the-
popart-project/index.html 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 63 of 109 
 
 
LiDO A light dosimeter for monit oring cultural 
heritage: development, testing and transfer to 
market  
 
European
- FP5 
 
2004 http://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/
57249_en.html 
Technical equipment:  
- FTIR and Raman microscopy  
- HPLC- SEC, CE-MS, GC-MS, 2D-GC-MS 
- DVS, DSC, Light and Thermal ageing ovens  
- FORS, VNIR HS imaging 
 
 
 
 
PARTNER: 3 - IST 
Full name : Instituto Superior T écnico, 
Universidade de Lisboa 
Web page: tecnico.IST.pt 
Country: Portugal 
Type: RO 
 
Brief description of the organization : Instituto Superior Técnico (IST) is t he largest and most reputed 
school of Engineering, Science and Technology in Portugal. Since its creation in 1911, IST’s mission is to 
contribute to the development of society by providing top quality higher education, at undergraduate and 
postgraduate levels, as well as developing Research, Development and Innovation (RD&I) activities to allow 
it to provide teaching in line with the highest international standards. 
IST is involved with some of the most prestigious RD&I and technology transfer institutions in Portugal, 
with remarkable impact internationally in many scientific and technological domains. Internationalization 
has been defined as a key strategic goal over the past few years with increasing number of international 
students and staff as well as an  increasing participation in international academic networks and 
establishment of several double degree programs in both MSc and PhD levels. This way, IST contributes to 
the development of the students’ educational level, offering them several opportunitie s to participate in 
international research networks, approaching scientific cooperation and multicultural experience, and 
motivating innovation and entrepreneurship. 
Role in the Project: Assessment of adsorbers regarding their capacity & kinetics of remova l organic compounds. 
Hybrid models to unveil and predict chemical degradation stages. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 64 of 109 
 
Scientific team:  
Prof. Moisés L. Pinto (M)  got his Ph.D. in Chemistry (Physical Chemistry), at the end of 2005, at the 
University of Lisbon, with the thesis “Developmen t of Composite Materials for Removing Volatile Organic 
Compounds by Gas-Solid Adsorption”. After obtaining the Ph.D., he also worked for the chemical industry 
as an external consultant and as manager of R&D laboratories. He has been involved in several R&D  
projects for the development and application of adsorbent materials in purification of gas mixtures, gas 
storage and capture of volatile organic compounds and gases. He is an expert in the characterization of 
nanoporous materials for adsorption applications. From the 2014, he is Assistant Professor at the Chemical 
Engineering Department of Instituto Superior Técnico (IST) - IST. 
Prof. João C. Bordado (M) Full Professor at the Chemical Engineering Department of Lisbon University, 
with a long track -record and expertise in polyurethane chemistry at the academic and industrial fields. He 
started its R&D career on the Synthesis of Organic asymmetric products. Holds a PhD in Chemical 
Engineering, and he has Industrial Experience on the Design and Start -up of Chem ical Plants (20 Years). 
Former Director of R&D in Hoechst Portugal, and CEO of Hoechst Ambiente. President of Portuguese 
Materials Society (2 Mandates). Coordinator of 6 European Projects, recently FOUL -X-SPEL Main Research 
Topic: Synthesis of Reactive Pol ymers and Depolymerization of Natural Polymers. Author of more than 40 
Patents, most of them industrially implemented.  
Prof. Ana C. Marques (F) graduated in Materials Engineering (IST, 2000) and holds a Ph.D. in Materials Sci. 
& Eng. (IST, 2005) with a st rong focus on sol-gel processing and photoluminescent materials. She was then 
a Post -Doc at IST and Lehigh University (USA), before joining the chemical company Dow Corning in 
Belgium, where she worked as an R&D Chemist from 2007 to 2011. At Dow Corning, she was project leader 
of R&D projects, aiming at product development (e.g. halogen -free flame retardant additives) and large -
scale production. In 2011 she joined Ynvisible S.A. as R&D Director, for the development of electrochromic 
and electrolyte formulations, which are nowadays used in commercial displays. She then joined Greenseal 
Research Ltd. (2013) as R&D Coordinator for the development of greener components for polyurethane 
foams, followed by a FCT Post -Doc grant, which allowed her to start a Microen capsulation and 
Immobilization Technology Platform. She is co -author of 34 papers in peer -reviewed journals, 3 book 
chapters and 8 international patents. She is Assistant Professor at the Chemical Engineering Department of 
IST - IST. 
 
Prof. João Almeida Lo pes (M)  is Ph.D in Chemical Engineering from the Instituto Superior Técnico. 
Research areas include vibrational spectroscopy and chemometrics to monitor in -situ in real -time 
products, industrial processes, historical objects, etc. He founded in 2008 the Ch emometrics&Process 
Analytical Technology research unit at the Faculty of Pharmacy of University of Porto (Portugal). He 
published over 100 peer -reviewed scientific articles and coordinated/participated in multiple research 
projects most involving companies  from the pharmaceutical, agrofood, biotechnology and 
art&conservation fields. In the art&conservation fields he developed technology based on chemometrics 
assisted with different technologies for the in-situ and non -destructive analysis of artistic object s (e.g., 
photographs, films, metals, manuscripts, medieval illuminations, textiles etc.). He supervised and co -
supervised several students at the MSc and PhD level in conservation studies area following a long -term 
research partnership with the Conservatio n&Restoration Department of the Universidade Nova de Lisboa. 
Unveiling chemical composition, origin and authenticity are among the principal targets of the 
chemometric-based approach in the Conservation studies area. Joao Lopes is currently Assistant Profe ssor 
of Pharmaceutical Technology at the Faculty of Pharmacy of the IST. 
Dr. Ana Pires (female):  has a Ph.D. in Environmental Engineering at Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia - 
Universidade Nova de Lisboa (FCT NOVA) (year 2011). She is a researcher at FCT  NOVA in the fields of 
methodologies on assessment and development of sustainable SWM systems and its consequences for the 
environment and society. She is dedicated to life cycle assessment, carbon footprint, cost -benefit analysis, 
multi-criteria decision making, and consumer behaviour about recycling, reuse, and waste prevention. 
Besides her research activity at FCT NOVA, she supervised masters’ students and collaborates in teaching 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 65 of 109 
 
activities at Integrated Master in Environmental Engineering at FCT NOVA. Her teaching and research 
activities are related to the waste@NOVA, a research group at FCT NOVA devoted to solid waste 
management studies. Dr. Ana Pires participated in 16 projects from national funding agencies and 2 
international funding agencies, with and without an evaluation panel. In 2016 she won the PORDATA Prize, 
a Portuguese prize devoted to statistics. In 2012 she and her team won an honorable mention during ERP 
Eco Sustainability Award'12, from ERP Recycling organization. She won a Ph.D. fellows hip conceded by 
Foundation for Science and Technology in 2006. Dispar, a Portuguese association on distribution sector, 
gave her an honorable mention for a research work during 2006. 
So far, Dr. Ana Pires published 14 papers in international peer review jo urnals in the waste management 
field, as well two books and three book chapters in sustainable solid waste management. Her articles were 
published in the Top 11 Scimago ranking and Top 8 ISI Web of Science ranking in Environmental 
Engineering journals. Dr.  Ana Pires have presented 14 papers at peer reviewed international conferences 
and five at national conferences. 
 
Relevant publications, patents or products:  
• Pinto, M. L.; Dias, S.; Pires, J. Composite MOF foams: the example of UiO -66/polyurethane. ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 2013, 5 (7), 2360–2363 DOI: 10.1021/am303089g. 
• Pinto, M. L.; Pires, J. Porous and hybrid clay based materials for separation of hydrocarbons. 
Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 2012, 151, 403–410 DOI: 10.1016/j.micromeso.2011.10.002. 
• Pinto, M. L.; Pires, J.; Carvalho, A. P.; Bordado, J. C. M.; De Carvalho, M. B. Synthesis and 
characterization of polyurethane foam matrices for the support of granular adsorbent materials. J. 
Appl. Polym. Sci. 2004, 92 (3), 2045–2053 DOI: 10.1002/app.20156. 
• Mateus, M. M., Acero, N. F., Matos, S., Carvalho, R., do Vale, M., Marques, A. C., Bordado, J. C., dos 
Santos, R. G., One -component spray polyurethane foam from liquefied pine wood polyols: Pursuing 
Eco-Friendly Materials, Journal of Polymers and the Environment. DOI:10.1007/s10924-016-0931-z. 
• Marques, A. C., Dias, H., Matos, S., Sargaço, B., Simões, R., De Schrijver, A., Bordado, J. C. Polyurethane 
OCF Formulation Optimization for Low Free Isocianate Monomer Content. Journal of Cellular Plastics  
0021955X16639230, 2016. DOI: 10.1177/0021955X16639230. 
• Loureiro, M. V., Ciriminna, R.,  Lourenço, M. J., Santos, L. F., De Schrijver, A., Bordado, J. C., Pagliaro, 
M., Marques, A. C. Organically -modified silica based microspheres for self -curing polyurethane one 
component foams, In Press, Accepted Manuscript, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, 2016. DOI: 
10.1016/j.micromeso.2016.10.039. 
• Ana Serrano, Micaela Sousa, Jessica Hallett, Monique S. J. Simmonds, Mark Nesbitt, and João A. Lopes. 
Identification of Dactylopius cochineal species with high -performance liquid chromatography and 
multivariate data analysis, Analyst, 2013, 138 (20), 6081 - 6090 [doi:10.1039/C3AN00052D]  
• Miguel CP, Lopes JA, Clarke M, Melo MJ Combining infrared spectroscopy with chemomeric analysis for 
the characterization of proteinaceous binders in medieval paints, Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst., 2012, 119, 
32-38 [doi:10.1016/j.chemolab.2012.09.003] 
 
Five Relevant Projects: 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
FOUL-X-SPEL: Environmental Friendly Antifouling 
Technology to Optimize the Energy Efficiency of 
EU – FP7 2014 http://www.foulxspel-
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 66 of 109 
 
 
Ships antifouling.com/about.php 
Project QREN 2010 /13267 - GreenFoam 
“Ecological non isocyanate and non -moisture 
curing one component foam” 
National 2014 http://www.qren.pt/np4/projet
os 
VOCFilter - development of composite adsorbent 
filters for applications in air -conditioning systems 
and their business implementation 
National 2008 
http://www.adi.pt/novasempres
as/areas/materiais/Materiais.pd
f 
PTDC/EAT-EAT/104930/2008 - Beauty and 
meaning of color in the Portuguese medieval 
illumination  
National 2008 http://www.fct.pt 
PTDC/QUI-QUI/099388/2008 - Unveiling the 
secrets of Molecules with Colour and History: 
from Ancient to Modern times. A 
(Photo)chemical Approach 
National 2010 http://www.fct.pt 
Technical equipment: 
- Adsorption balances 
- Volumetric adsorption lines. 
- Automatic adsorption equipment for surface area and porosity assessment 
 
- Near infrared spectrometer (with reflectance f.o. probe) 
- Confocal fluorescence microscope. 
- Several equipment for the characterization of polymeric foams. 
 
PARTNER  
Full name : Associação para a Inovação e 
Desenvolvimento da FCT 
Web page: http://www.fct.unl.pt/ 
Country: PT 
Type: RO 
 
Brief description of the organization:  
Founded in 1977, the Faculty of Sciences and Technology of NOVA University of Lisbon (FCT NOVA) is one 
of the most prestigious Portuguese and Europ ean engineering and science public schools. It is engaged in 
extensive research activity involving around 600 PhD students of the total enrolment of more than 8900 
students.  
FCT NOVA partners with foreign universities such as the Massachusetts Institute o f Technology (MIT), the 
Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) and the University of Texas at Austin (UTAustin) to offer some of its 
advanced study programs, pioneers nationwide. FCT NOVA has a broad expertise in cutting edge R&D+I 
due to its multidisciplinary n ature and strong experience in fundamental and applied research projects in 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 67 of 109 
 
several areas, ranging from materials, environment and biotechnologies to conservation and restoration. 
The entrepreneurial drive of the students and graduates of FCT NOVA, greatly  potentiated by the 
curricular profile of school, has led to many successful spin-offs that transfer knowledge to the market and 
help create value and social impact. 
With a total of 630 academic staff (almost all holding a PhD) and 200 non -academic staff, FCT NOVA's has 
internationally recognized professionals due to their high potential in R&D+I activities, with researchers 
awarded ERC grants (five in total) and merit prizes. From 2010 to 2013, FCT NOVA published more than 
2525 papers indexed in ISI Web of  Science, in top journals and 1761 conferences with high impact, where 
has earned recognition by its peers. 
FCT NOVA is organized in 14 Departments and 14 Research Support Services, with suitable structures, 
infrastructures, facilities and qualified 16 R&D  Units (evaluated by the Portuguese Science Foundation, 3 
of them as Exceptional and 4 as Excellent), spin -off incubator (Madan Parque), interface institute 
(UNINOVA) and devoted managing structure to managing R&D+I projects (NOVA.id.FCT). Madan Parque is 
an enterprise incubator whose major associate is NOVA, with a high track record in facilitating spin -off 
incorporation. NOVA.ID.FCT, a private non -profit institution, was incorporated following the successful 
participation of FCT NOVA’s in several national  and international projects. UNINOVA’s objective is to 
pursue scientific research, technical development, high level training and creation of new technological 
innovation centers and small industries. Currently, all the institutions have experience in mana ging circa 
67 EU FP7 projects (around 21€ million) and have already been awarded with 32 projects in H2020 adding 
up to 19,5€ million. This shows the visibility and competitiveness of the school at European and 
International level and strong experience in collaborative projects, working with partners from all over the 
world. 
Role in the Project: Physical and molecular characterization of cellulose esters film based negatives and 
artefacts (selected reference materials naturally aged and new ones submitted t o accelerated ageing) and 
correlation with degradation stages to provide initial data for testing hybrid degradation models being 
developed (in collaboration with Prof. João Lopes integrated in the UL team), prior the real data obtained 
from the novel sensors signals. LCA of final products developed. 
Scientific team:  
Prof. Ana Ramos (female): holds a PhD in Chemical Engineering (field - Polymerizarion Reaction 
Engineering) at Universidade NOVA de Lisboa where she is Associate Professor at Chemistry Depart ment, 
Chemical and Biochemical Engineering Sector  since 1993, being responsible by the course Polymer 
Science, teaching the courses Chemical Reactor Design I, II and III, as well. Her scientific work and interests 
have been always related with aspects of natural, semisynthetic and synthetic polymers and the 
relationship between: 1) structure and molecular characterization and physical and chemical behaviour 2) 
polymerization conditions, kinetics and polymer properties. Developed work in pyrolysis of plasti c wastes, 
depolymerisation of PMMA, extraction of natural polymers from natural resources and biomass wastes, 
and characterisation of biopolymers and polymeric catalytic membrane reactors applied to the fine 
chemical reactions and production of biodiesel. Since the launch of Conservation and Restoration 
Department in 2000 has a strong pedagogical and scientific cooperation with this department teaching 
half of the course Polymers in Conservation, Project, in the last three years Diagnosis and Conservation i n 
Photography and the supervision of MSc and PhD students in C&R in subjects related with the ageing and 
degradation of plastics and polymeric materials applied to cultural heritage. Supervises two PhD in the 
field of photography (degradation of cellulose nitrate and cellulose acetate black and white film based 
negatives; fading of colour in cellulose acetate chromogenic slides).  orcid.org/0000-0002-9411-4150 
Prof. Maria João Melo (female): holds a PhD i n Physical Chemistry (1995), and is Associate Professor in 
the Conservation Department, Faculty of Sciences and Technology of the New University of Lisbon. She 
was PI of 6 research projects (539k €). In the last 5 years she has published 27 articles, 5 boo k chapters 
and 13 papers in proceedings (Total number of publications in international peer reviewed journals: 73; of 
published book chapters: 9; of published books: 1; h-index=24). Her scientific area of research is Chemistry 
applied to the conservation o f Cultural Heritage. Her research interests include the conservation of 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 68 of 109 
 
medieval illuminations and of Contemporary Art. Other fields of expertise are Colour in Art and Nature. 
orcid.org/0000-0001-7393-6801 
Prof. Graça Martinho (female):  has a Ph.D. in Envi ronmental Engineering at Faculdade de Ciências e 
Tecnologia - Universidade NOVA de Lisboa (FCT/UNL) titled: Recycling behaviour factors, and a Master 
degree in Sanitary Engineering by FCT/UNL. She is a Professor at Departamento de Ciências e Engenharia 
do Ambiente at FCT/UNL, being responsible for the disciplines of Waste Management, and Social -
Environmental Methods and Analysis at Integrated Master of Science at Environmental Engineering, and 
for disciplines Integrated Waste Management, Waste Collection and Transport, Waste Streams, and Waste 
Project at Advanced Studies on Sanitary Engineering and Integrated Waste Management. Her research 
fields are separate waste collection and recycling, waste streams management, urban waste management 
models, waste manag ement planning, waste policies, environmental education, and social psychology 
applied to waste management. She is member of Consultive Committee at ERSAR - The Water and Waste 
Services Regulation Authority, Waste Management Monitoring Committee, Monitorin g Committee at 
National Urban Waste Plan II, and EDP Environment and Sustainability Committee. 
Publications:  
• Silva, J., Roldão, E., Parola, A.J., Ramos, A.M. , Lavédrine, B. (2014). Conservation of cellulose 
acetate photographic negatives: searching for n ew approaches, in CoMa 2013: Safeguarding 
Image Collection, Hilke Arijs (Ed.), Cambridge Scholars Publishing, New Castle, United  Kingdom, 
pp 149-162, 2014. ISBN -13: 978-1-4438-6818-1. 
• Ferreira, J.L., Melo, M.J ., Ramos, A.M.  (2010). PVAc paints in works o f art: a photochemical 
approach - Part 1. Polymer Degradation and Stability, 95, 453-461. 
• Pires, A., Chang, N. -B., Martinho, G. (2011). Reliability-based life cycle assessment for future solid 
waste management alternatives in Portugal. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 16, 
316-337. 
• Pires, A., Martinho, G. (2013). Life cycle assessment of a waste lubricant oil management system. 
International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 18, 102-112. 
• Pires, A., Martinho, G., Ribeiro, R., Mota, M., Teixeira, L. (2015). Extended producer responsibility: 
a differential fee model for promoting sustainable packaging. Journal of Cleaner Production, 108, 
343-353. 
Relevant Projects: 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
MARLISCO – Marine Litter in European Seas: Social 
Awareness and Co-responsibility.  FP7-SIS 2015 http://www.marlisco.eu/ 
URBAN_WINS -  H2020-
WASTE 2019 http://www.urbanwins.eu/ 
SusFoFlex - Smart and Sustainable Food Packaging 
Utilizing Flexible Printed Intelligence and Materials 
Technologies 
     
FP7-KBBE 2014 
http://www.susfoflex.com/ 
(integrated in ICETA) 
Crossing borders. History, Materials and Techniques 
from Portuguese Painters 1850 -1918 (Romantism, 
Portugal 
Project 
2014 http://citi.di.fct.unl.pt/projec
t/project.php?id=116  
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 69 of 109 
 
 
Naturalism and Modernism)    
Technical equipment:  
- Micro FTIR spectrometer and portable ATR FTIR spectrometer 
- Micro Raman spectrometer 
- UV-VIS-NIR spectrometer 
- Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (EDXRF) 
- Optical microscope 
- Portable in situ Shore A hardness meter 
- Portable micro electrode pH potentiometer  
 
 
             
 
        Micro FTIR spectrometer                Portable ATR-FTIR spectrometer           UV-VIS-NIR spectrometer 
 
PARTNER: 5- IPC 
Full name: IPC – Centre Technique Industriel 
de la Plasturgie et des Composites 
Web page: www.ct-ipc.com 
Country: France  
Type: RO 
 
Brief description of the organization:  
IPC is the Technical Industrial Centre of the French plastics and composites industry  cluster, with more 
than 3000 SMEs directly connected to IPC. As such, IPC is in charge of providing the plastics and 
composites industry cluster with innovative and high added value facilities and manufacturing pilot lines, 
cutting edge expertise and services. IPC covers the full industry value chain with its key fields of expertise 
including design and simulation of parts and processes; advanced injection moulding and tooling; 
thermoplastics materials; composites materials; plastronics (also known as 3D -MID, for Molded 
Interconnect Devices). Main markets addressed today encompass automotive, aeronautics, health, 
packaging, connectors, house appliances, horology. Developing new value chains is a key strategic issue 
with focus e. g. on micro / nanostructured  plastic parts, microsystems on plastics; smart composites; 
multi-materials additive manufacturing. 
Role in the Project:  
Within the NEMOSINE project, IPC will be in charge of developing the injection moulding -based process 
for the manufacturing of the mod ular multi -functional package for CH protection. This will more 
specifically include: 
- modular multi-functional package design  
- development of O2 barrier films (material development, extrusion/calendaring, characterization) 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 70 of 109 
 
- overmoulding / In -Mould Labelling  -based process development for barrier package 
manufacturing 
Scientific team:  
Dr. Lionel TENCHINE  (male) received his master’s degree in micro and nanoelectronics from the Aix -
Marseille University (France) in 2007, and graduated from Centrale Marseille (France) the same year. He 
obtained his PhD degree in 2011 from Grenoble INP and CEA -LETI for his work on the vacuum packaging 
of MEMS using thin films getters. Since 2011, he is working at IPC, first as R&D project manager in the 
Plastronics Business Unit , and then as “Microsystems on Plastic” program line manager since 2013. His 
research activities are mainly focus on adding new functionalities to polymer parts, either by electronic 
functions integration, or by surface micro / nanostructuration. 
 
Dr. Valérie FREREJEAN (female) received the diploma on engineering in materials science from INSA of 
Lyon in 1990 and the PhD degree in Macromolecular and Composite materials, in 1994 from University 
Claude Bernard in Lyon. Her PhD thesis was focused on mix of pla stics, PE, PS, PVC for packaging 
recycling. Following her PhD, she worked for 10 years for Tear 1 Automotive subcontractors (Manducher 
and Plastic Omnium) in R&D and purchase departments. In 2007 she joined IPC – firstly as R&D project 
manager in Process a nd Tool Business Unit, and then since 2013 as “Plastics Recycling” program line 
manager. 
Dr. Ing. Dominique MEILLASSOUX  (male) is Head of IPC’s Process Engineering Research Program. 
Dominique has an engineer’s degree in plastics engineering from ITECH, Fra nce. He specialized in 
materials sciences through a PhD carried out in relation with Renault SA and Arkema. Dominique has a 
10 years experience in the automotive sector as head of engineering manufacturing services and a 15 
years experience as R&D VP of Gr osfillex, Smoby and Qualipac. Since 2014, he is in charge of IPC’s 
research program on advanced Process Engineering for polymers and composites. Dominique has 
extensive experience in managing collaborative projects with a strong experience from the industr y 
where he was in charge of managing relations with research centres and universities within research 
collaborations. 
Dr. Thierry FALHER (male) received his master’s degree in chemistry and physico -chemistry of polymers 
from the University Pierre and Marie  Curie (Paris VI). He obtained his PhD degree in 1996 from the 
University of Le Mans for his work on the post -grafting of N-Vinyl-2-pyrrolidone onto a plasma modified 
polypropylene surface. Since 1996, he is working at ISPA, first as Lecturer, and since 20 15 as head of the 
technology transfer center. Thierry will join IPC during the year 2017 as “Advanced functional materials” 
program line manager. 
Relevant publications, patents or products:  
• S. Dessors, L. Tenchine, S. Gout, et al., “Injection moulding an d selective metallisation technologies 
for polymer Microsystems”, Proc. Of 4M2016 conference, Lyngby, 2016, pp. 19-22. 
• L. Tenchine, O. Dassonville, “Randomly shaped 3D electronics using innovative combination of 
standard Surface Mount Technologies and poly mer processing”, Proc. 12th Int. Congress Molded 
Interconnect Devices, 2016, pp. 106-111. 
• L. Tenchine, S. Dessors, R. Pugin, et al., “Injection moulding of microstructured 3D plastic parts using 
standard stainless steel inserts“, Proc. 4M/IWMF2016, Lyngby, 2016, pp. 47-50. 
• M. Jamshidian, E. Arab Tehrany, F. Cleymand, S. Leconte, T. Falher, S. Desobry, Carbohydr. Polym., 
87(2), 1763 (2011). 
Five Relevant Projects: 
Project acronym/description. Scope End Website  
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 71 of 109 
 
 
Year 
SPICY - Silicon and polyanionic chemistr ies and 
architectures of Li -ion cell for high energy battery. IPC 
role: development of a 3D -MID-based modular 
packaging for Li-ion battery cells 
H2020 2018 http://www.spicy-
project.eu/ 
ARMATURE – Miniaturized 3D -MID-based active 
antenna. IPC role: overmou lding of printed electronics 
for 3D antenna integration in a pager 
FUI (French 
national 
project) 
2018  
ELLIPSE – Printed electronics overmoulding for Smart 
Plastic Devices. IPC role: overmoulding of printed 
electronics with high aspect ratio 
FUI (French 
national 
project) 
2019  
HINMICO - High throughput integrated technologies for 
multimaterial functional micro components. IPC role: 
development of injection moulding and 3D -MID –based 
technologies for multi-functional devices 
FP7 2016 http://www.hinmico.eu/ 
TERASEL - Thermoplastically deformable circuits for 
embedded randomly shaped electronics. IPC role: 
overmoulding process of stretchable electronics. 
FP7 2016 http://www.terasel.eu/ 
Technical equipment: 
Within the project, IPC will use several equipmen ts in order to perform its technical tasks. IPC is 
equipped with technological means at pilot and industrial levels, including:  
- 12 injection moulding machines, from 15 Tons to 2200 Tons 
- 2 Selective Laser Melting equipments, for the manufacturing of inject ion mould elements with 
optimized 3D cooling channels 
- peripheral equipment for the optimization of the injection moulding process: heat & cool 
technologies, vacuum, etc. 
- process control and data acquisition tools for the monitoring of the injection moulding process 
 
IPC has also a full -equipped laboratory for mechanical, chemical, thermal, aging characterization of 
plastic parts. Microscopy equipment is also available, including confocal microscopy and FTIR 
microscopy. 
For the development of the O2 barrier film, IPC is equipped with a complete pilot line with dosing, mixing, 
compounding and extrusion / calendaring machines. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 72 of 109 
 
    
    
  
 
 
PARTNER: 6 - PROM 
Full name: Promethean Particles Ltd. 
Web page : 
www.prometheanparticles.co.uk 
Country: UK 
Type: SME 
 
Brief description of the organization:  
Promethean Particles (PROM) is a UK -based SME that designs and develops inorganic nanomaterials in 
liquid dispersions.  The company technology is based on a patented reactor system that allows truly 
continuous hydrothermal synthesis of inorganic nanoparticles for the first time (patent WO2005077505).  
PROM design and develop inorganic nanoparticle dispersions for industrial customers and then 
manufacture commercial quantities at our pilot plant.  Our unique productio n process allows us to tailor 
the nanoparticles to get the best functionality for an end use application. 
Role in the Project:  
PROM will be responsible for the upscaling of MOF synthesis during the project. PROM has the ability to 
synthesise a range of MO Fs in different compositions and this has been demonstrated at multi -kg scale 
using their one -step continuous manufacturing route. PROM will have significant input into the selection 
of MOF materials that will be upscaled using the continuous flow approach . PROM will advise and co -
ordinate with consortium partners in WP1 to develop the most appropriate MOF syntheses at lab-scale.  
Scientific team:  
Dr Pete Gooden (M)  is the Technical Manager at PROM.  He has an MSci degree and PhD in Chemistry 
from the Uni versity of Nottingham.  He specialised in high pressure and temperature synthesis for this 
research work.  Pete joined PROM in 2009 and as Technical Manager now oversees all technical work 
undertaken at PROM.  This includes the design and synthesis of new inorganic nanoparticle dispersions 
and industrial scale manufacture of these materials. Pete will co -ordinate the scientific activities within 
this project on behalf of PROM. 
Dr Selina Tang (F) is a Senior Scientist at PROM following completion of her PhD in Chemical Engineering 
at the University of Nottingham.  Selina has extensive experience in materials research, as well as 
synthesis and analysis of nanomaterials; she will be a valuable member of the scientific team working on 
this project. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 73 of 109 
 
Five relevant publications, patents or products:  
• E. Lester, P. Blood, J. Denyer, D. Giddings, B. Azzopardi and M. Poliakoff, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2006, 37, 
209-214. 
• E. Lester and B. Azzopardi, International Patent, WO/2005/077505, 2005. 
• E. Lester, S. V. Y. Tang, A. Khlobystov, V. Loczenski Rose, L. Buttery, C. J. Roberts. CrystEngComm, 2013, 
15, 3256-3260. 
• Q. Wang, S. V. Y. Tang, E. Lester, D. O’Hare. Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 114-117.  
• M. Gimeno-Fabra, A. S. Munn, L. A. Stevens, T. C. Drage, D. M. Grant, R. J. Kashtiban, J. Sloan, E. Lester, 
R. I. Walton. Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10642-10644 
Relevant Projects: 
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
SHYMAN (Sustainable Hydrothermal Manufacture of 
Nanomaterials) – PROM involved in material 
development case-studies and scale up of materials from 
lab-scale to pilot-scale to full-scale production. 
FP7 NMP 2016 www.shyman.eu 
NanoMILE(EU FP7 - Engineered nanomaterial 
mechanisms of interactions with living systems and the 
environment) – PROM involved as material su pplier 
initially but will also implement recommendations from 
other consortium partners to engineer ‘safer by design’ 
nanomaterials. 
FP7 NMP 2017 www.nanomile.eu-vri.eu/ 
NanoFASE (EU H2020) - PROM involved as material 
supplier initially for investigation environmental fate of 
engineered nanomaterials. 
H2020 2019 www.nanofase.eu 
Technical equipment:  
PROM possesses lab-scale reactors capable of screening and producing small batches (g/hr throughput of 
dry weight equivalent) of nanomaterials. PROM also ow ns a pilot-scale reactor system (mentioned above) 
which is capable of producing kg scale quantities per day. This reactor system is housed at PROM’s 
facilities in Nottingham. 
PROM operates a full-scale continuous reactor system capable of producing up to 1000 tonnes per year of 
nanomaterials. 
 
 
PARTNER: 7 - AKUMPLAST 
Full name: AKUMPLAST JSC 
Web page: www.akumplast.com 
Country: Bulgaria 
Type: SME 
  
Brief description of the organization : Akumplast is an SME, established in 1985 in Dobrich,  Bulgaria. The 
main activities of Akumplast are: Injection molding of plastics /ABS, PS, PC, PP  copolymer and 
homopolymer, PE-LD, PE-HD, PA/; Production of injection moulds; Compounding and Recycling.  Injection 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 74 of 109 
 
molding machines are with molding capacities ranging between 0.001to4 kg. The products of the company 
are: Plastics sets for starter batteries; Plastics crates for drink and food;  Technical parts. Akumplast JSC 
have its own design department and tool room wi th standard metal processing equipment, also and  CNC 
milling machines; We supply solutions starting from 3D design of the product and ending with the final 
injected part. 
Role in the Project:  
Fabrication of the packages for movies, photographs/slides & posters and full Validation. 
Scientific team: 
Hristin Nikolov – Executive director, University Degree in Economic, working in the company more than 17 
years. He was involved in several national and international projects as DOLFIN  /FP – 6/, NANOSCRACTH / 
European-FP7/ and PHOENIX / FP7 NMP/ providing information for Economic, regulatory, health, safety, 
toxicology and environmental studies; 
Desislava Stojanova /female/  have University Degree in Chemistry, working in Akumplast more than 10 
years as RD and Quality manager and is responsible for improving raw materials, processes and final 
products. She has experience in several international research projects as NANOSCRACTH / European-FP7/ 
and PHOENIX / FP7 NMP/. 
Georgi Georgiev is a part of Akumplast more t han 25 years as a Production manager, responsible for the 
hole production process from mould design, the raw material, processing and final quality control. He was 
a part from the following international projects in the area of production  process DOLFIN /F P– 6/, 
NANOSCRATCH / European-FP7/ and PHOENIX / FP7 NMP/. 
Five relevant publications, patents or products: 
• N/A 
Relevant Projects: 
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
PHOENIX: Synergic combination of high performance 
flame retardant nan o-layered hybrid particles as real 
alternative to halogen based flame retardant 
additives.  
FP7 NMP 
 2016 www.phoenix-eu-
project.eu/ 
NANOSCRACTH: To develop a scratch resistance 
coating using a molecular s elf-assembly nano -
technology for plastic products 
European-
FP7 2013 
www.aimplas.es/proyectos
/nanoscratch/summary.ht
ml 
DOLFIN - Development of Innovative Plastic 
Structures for Aquicu lture Using a New Composite 
with Crop Waste as Reinforcing Filler 
FP 6 2005 www.aimplas.es/proyectos
/dolfinc 
Technical equipment:  
- Injection moulding machines range from 160t to 700t; 
- 3 – axis CNC milling machines; 
- Compounding equipment; 
 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 75 of 109 
 
 
 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 76 of 109 
 
 
PARTNER: 8 - 
BIOSENSOR 
Full name : BIOSENSOR 
SRL 
Web page : 
http://www.biosensor-
srl.eu/ 
Country: ITALY 
Type: SME 
 
Brief description of the organization:  Biosensor is a SME at limited responsibility  founded in 2003. 
Biosensor works in the field of production and commercialization of sensors and biosensors. Most of 
Biosensor’s production is focus on the design, fabrication and product engineering of miniaturized modular 
portable instruments suitable for a variety of applications, especially for environmental applications.  
The devices use optical, amperometric, impedimetric  transduction modules to detect the signal generated 
by  organic porphyrins, polymers,  proteins, enzymes, bacteria, cells, RNA, D NA marked with fluorescent 
probes and/ or inorganic nanostructured materials (ZnO). The receptor material is immobilized on various 
inorganic-organic materials microelectrodes, microelectrodes array, screen printed electrodes, glasses 
coated with indium -tin oxide, graphene microelectrodes etc.  In the last years to enhance the ability to 
sense, detect, analyze, monitor and act on phenomena on nano scale (as for the presence of biomedical 
markers at lower fM levels), nanoparticles were used for the immobiliz ation of the biomaterials, for 
example, quantum dots integrated with magnetic beads. 
It has produced sensors for Space research for various research institutions, tested in ESA flights and at 
International Space Station from 2000 -2007; another flight to IS S is expected in 2018 
http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/experiments/804.html 
It has developed detection techniques based on lasers, LEDs, photodiodes a nd different types of filters 
with disposable screen -printed electrodes, nanowires, planar microelectrode arrays, ITO coated -glasses 
etc. The base concept of all Biosensor’s devices is the production of portable low size and weight, 
multifunction systems capable of integrating the unique detection characteristics of the biomediators (high 
sensitivity, specificity, reproducibility of analysis, rapidity, simple use and low cost) with the necessary 
mechanical, electronic and microfluidic parts for automatic me asurements. The sensors are also provided 
of ICT applications for large data analyses in specific applications such as environmental monitoring and 
control. The on -board processing also includes analysis of sensor data to determine if certain thresholds 
are reached, generating an appropriate action, such as raising an alarm or increasing measuring frequency, 
and interfaces with the storage subcomponent to write/read sensor data from a database. It makes 
biosensor services accessible remotely, such as system  update, system configuration (e.g., sensor 
measuring frequency), sensor data queries. 
Role in the Project: Biosensor Srl will be involved in the following activities: 
-fabrication of sensitive layers for detection of low concentrations of O2, NO and aceti c acids, based on 
ZnO nanorods, porphyrine, conductive polymer and hybrid ZnO Nanorods/organic compound 
nanostructures. 
-Sensitivity tests to the target gas/vapours under different analyte concentrations, relative humidity and 
ambient temperatures, using p hotoluminescence/fluorescence, photocurrent and absorption 
spectroscopy. 
-Sensitivity and selectivity analysis, cross sensitivity measurements and optimization of sensor elements. 
-Development of an integrated compact multisensor system with portable excit ation light sources (LEDs) 
and optical detector systems (photodiodes, CCD matrixes). 
-Development of algorithms of sensitivity analysis for integration with wireless communication system. 
-Preliminary pilot plan analysis for production, Market analyses, exploitation and dissemination. 
Scientific team:  

NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 77 of 109 
 
Dr. Giovanni Basile (Male).   He is the CEO and co -founder of Biosensor S.r.l. With a solid multi -year 
experience in industrial and research project management Dr. Basile has experience in managing human 
resources, financial principles and strategic market analysis. He has been responsible in managing 
Networks and Alliances and Strategic Market Analysis in private and public companies (Alitalia and SIMA). 
He is co-inventor in three patents and he has successfully coordinated two European Projects in the Frame 
Program 7 (call for SMEs 2009).  
Dr. Gianni Pezzotti PhD. Male  He has been employed by the company since 10 years. PhD in “Sensor and 
Learning Systems Engineering” and  Engineer of Automatic Control; 10 ye ars of experience in the R&D of 
new prototypes in industrial projects involving industries, research Institutes, universities and the Space 
agency as ASI, ESA and NASA. 
Mr. Mehmet Turemis PhD. Male He has been employed by the company since three years; just completed 
a PhD in Biotechnology at the University of La Tuscia; degree in chemistry in 2010. His work interests focus 
on the development and characterization of sensors and their applications. Expert in production of 
receptors and in new immobilization strategies for maintaining high biological activity. 
Dr. Laura Moro. Female. PhDs in Biotechnology, employed by the company since one year; she is expert in 
molecular biology, directed mutagenesis, protein expression in cell -free systems; biochemistry, 
electrophoresis, western -blot, HPLC, mass spectrometry; proteomics, protein microarrays, peptide 
synthesis; statistical analyses; biosensors, biomediators hybrids with nanoparticles in immunosensors.  
Dr. Maria Teresa Giardi.  Female. She is a co -founder of the company, presently working in Biosensor; till 
2015 research manager at the National Council of Research (CNR) in Rome. She trained 20 PhDs. Her 
background is in industrial chemistry and she has extensive experience in receptors utilization in biosensor 
design.  
Dr Roman ViteR. Male.  PhD  He has background in physics of semico nductors and surface science. The 
main focus of Dr. Viter’s knoledge is development of metal oxide, organic and hybrid nanostructures, their 
structure and optical characterization for  further applications in optical/optoelectronic sensors and 
biosensors.  
Relevant publications, patents or products:  
-R.Viter, K.Jekabsons, Z.Kalnina, N. Poletaev, H. Shan-hui, U.Riekstina. Bioanalytical system for detection 
of cancer cells with photoluminescent ZnO nanorods (2016) Nanotechnology, V ol. 27 465101 (11pp) 
-Daria Majchrowicz , Marzena Hirsch, Paweł Wierzba, Michael Bechelany , Roman Viter  and Małgorzata 
Jędrzejewska-Szczerska. Application of Thin ZnO ALD Layers in Fiber -Optic Fabry -Pérot S ensing 
Interferometers (2016) Sensors, V ol.16 (3) 416 (11 pages) 
-Alla Tereshchenko, Mikhael Bechelany, Roman Viter , V olodymyr Khranovskyy, Valentyn Smyntyna, 
Nikolay Starodub, Rositza Yakimova. Optical Biosensors Based on ZnO Nanostructures: Advantages and 
Perspectives. A Review (2016) Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical  V ol. 229, 664-677  
-L Moro, M Turemis, B Marini, R Ippodrino,  MT Giardi . Better together: strategies based  on magnetic 
particles and quantum dots for improved biosensing. Biotechnology Advances  (2016) 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0734975016301537 
-M Turemis, G Rodio, G Pezzotti, E Touloupakis,  U Johanningmeier, I Bertalan, S Litescu, G Rea, MT 
Giardi. A Novel optical/electrochemical biosensor for real time measurement of physiological effect of 
astaxanthin on photoprotection (2016) Sensors and Actuators B: Ch emical 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2016.10.115 
-Silletti, Rodio, Pezzotti, Turemis,  Dragone, Frazzoli, Giardi. (2015) An optical biosensor based on a 
multiarray of enzymes for monitoring a lar ge set of chemical classes. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical  
V ol 215, 607–617 
Patents  
✓ Direct laser immobilization of biomolecules on rough substrates  C. Boutopoulos, E. Touloupakis, G. 
Rodio, and I. Zergioti, GR patent pending (Application number: 20120100368, Application date: 11-07-
2012). 
✓ Multitransducer for fluorescence/amperometric sensors applied to biological systems . MT Giardi 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 78 of 109 
 
and G Pezzotti. Multiflamp ITRM20060398 (A1). 2008-01-26 National patent Registered 30 July 2006 
✓ Biosensor and method for t he monitoring M.T. Giardi, D. Esposito, C. Leonardi, A. Mattoo, A. 
Margonelli, G. Angelini. (EU patent 2006, 01830148.1-2204) 
✓ Portable optical multidevice for fluorescent measurement of DNA biomarkers. G Rea, MT Giardi, 
G Pezzotti.  National patent  ITRM20060683 (A1) 2008-06-2Application date 20 Dec 2006 
 
PARTNER: 9 -VISUM 
Full name: VISUM ltd. 
Web page: seeingnewdata.com 
Country: Ireland 
Type: SME 
  
VISUM Ltd. is an optical engineering company from Dublin that specializes in the development and 
commercialization of Near Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS) -based portable and inline analyzers and 
measurement systems for process monitoring and quality control a pplications in the food, pharmaceutical 
and chemical applications. The company was established in 2014 and  currently employs 9 staff from its 
facilities in Nexus UCD (technology park at the University College Dublin campus). In 2016, the company 
launched t he VISUMPalm (a handheld NIR measurement instrument) and has secured first sales. An 
integration platform (VisumNIR) for the inline version is currently under development in cooperation with 
early adopter clients from the food processing industry (dairy, m eat and olive oil) and pharmaceutical 
industries. VISUM Ltd. is an SME Champion -awarded a Phase 1 and a su bsequent Phase 2 Grant under 
H2020’s SME Instrument. On 08/02/2016, VISUM was awarded the Seal of Excellence form the European 
Commission. 
 
Role in the project: 
VISUM will lead the WP5 in terms of developing the right RFID technology for the smart packag ing and the 
platform to visualise the results.  
 
Scientific team: 
DR. SEVERINE PHILIPPE (female) graduated with a 1st class Hon s. B.Sc. in Applied Sciences (Physics and 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 79 of 109 
 
Physics Technology) from Dublin Institute of Technology, Ireland, in 2002 and received her PhD in Physics  
from Trinity College Dublin in 2007, for the study of polarisation effects in semiconductor optical amplifie rs 
(SOA). She went on to work on the development and characterization of low noise SOAs, as well as THz 
generation by multimode l asers and their de tection using four wave mixing in SOA, both in the 
Semiconductor Photonics Group, Trinity College Dublin, and  the School of Electronic Engineering, Dublin 
City University. She previously worked as a R&D technician for the plastics industry and in quality control for 
electronic appliances. She joined VISUM in 2014 as an optical engineer and is currently involved i n projects 
including various microscopy techniques, planar waveguide technologies and MIR spectroscopy . Serevine 
will be the Proj ect Manager for this project. Severine is currently the Project Manager for the Phase 2 SME 
Instrument in VISUM, and prior to t his she has managed internal development teams and she has 
participated in the Steering Committee of 4 EU FP7 projects. She is tr ained in ISO 9001: 2008 certified 
project management procedures. 
DR. TIMOTHY KEHOE (male) PhD in Engineering, University College  Cork, Ireland - developed an IR 
photometric measurement system for thermal diffusivity in anisotropic materials.  Masters in 
Optoelectronics, Queens  University Belfast. Designed an Echelle spectrometer while based at Andor 
Technology Ltd.  Worked at Tyndall National Institute, Cork, and Catalan Institute of Nanotechnology, 
Barcelona, developing diffractive optical and acousto -optical metrology techniqu es for nanotechnology 
applications, in particular for characterision of nanoscale structures fabricated by na noimprint lithography 
and directed self-assembly. Other research activities: quantification of ordering in self-assembled structures 
by image analy sis techniques and optical sensors  using hydrogel materials. Tim is the VISUMPalm Product 
Manager, as well as  the Technical Lead at VISUM Ltd. and he brings vast optical integration and device 
instrumentation expertise.  
NIKOLINA MIKULCIC (Female) User Interface Designer. Nikolina comes from web design and development 
background with more than 15 years of experie nce in this field and she is an expert on UI/UX design 
strategy and front -end development (CSS/HTML). She studied graphic design and she started to  learn web 
design due to her deeply interested for digital world. Since joining VISUM in September 2016, she has been 
creating a new User Interface for the VISUM product lines. Prior to VISUM, she has an extensive experience 
in the online  world, having wor ked in companies such as EuroArt93 – digital agency, BlueBOX IT, Biroval. 
She also was a founder of design st udio In Love With Blue and she worked as Project Manager, UI/UX 
designer and front -end developer. She was leader numerous digital  projects for diff erent clients as Erste 
Bank, Unicredit Bank, Telenor Bank, Komb Bank, ZAMP etc. 
CHRIS DERMODY (Male) Software Developer. Bachelor’s degree in Product Design from Dublin Institute of 
Technology. Chris excels in creative problem -solving, using the latest tec hnologies to transform ideas into 
real opportunities that provide exponential value to business operations. W ith a keen eye for user 
experience, Chris builds robust, responsive applications that stand the test of time. Since joining VISUM , 
Chris has been hard at work developing both front and backend features that push the VISUM product lines 
forward. Prior to VISUM, Chris enjoyed working across the full spectrum of business, founding startups and 
overseeing product development throughout the lifecycle of many successful businesses. 
EKAITZ HERNANDEZ TROYAS (Male) Fullstack Developer at Visum. Bachelor Degree in Computing Science in 
the Public University of Navarra (5 years). Ekaitz comes from startup background focusing in web 
developing. H e has 4 years of e xperience in the web industry. He started to work in Dublin for a small 
startup related with geolocation industry. He had the opportunity to create his own startup related with the 
cosmetic industry. This experience has given him the oppo rtunity to learn cutting edge technologies as well 
to learn other facets of a company like business development or marketing. A lso he worked as a freelancer 
implementing solutions with the Squarespace CMS. Ekaitz is always keen to face new challenges and l earn 
new things ou t his core competency. He is currently developing several software development projects, 
including data management. 
MÉABH GARRICK (Female) Optical Engineer. M.Sc Photonics, Friedrich Schiller Universität, Jena, Germany, 
B.Sc Physics with Medical Physics, National University of Ireland, Galway. She worked as a research scientist 
at the Fraunhofer IOF in Jena, Germ any after completing her Master Thesis at the institute. .She specialised 
in the area of spectrally resolved laser -induced damage  testing using a h igh-power tunable OPO laser 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 80 of 109 
 
system as well as angle resolved scattering (ARS) from surfaces and the unique co mbination of both 
techniques. Her work was presented at the OSA Interference Coatings conference (June 2016). She speaks 
Irish, G erman (and English ). Motivated, team -orientated person with a flair for problem solving. She was 
awarded a scholarship to study  at the Abbe School of Photonics, Friedrich Schiller Universität, Jena, where 
she spent almost four years. She is currently worki ng as an Optical E ngineer at VISUM, performing various 
R&D Projects in the area of optical monitoring. 
Relevant publications, patents or products:  
-E. Bugnicourt, T. Kehoe , M. Latorre, C. Serrano, S. Philippe and M. Schmid, Recent Prospects in the Inline 
Monitoring of Nanocomposites a nd Nanocoatings by Optical Technologies, Nanomaterials  2016, Review, 
6(8), 150; doi:10.3390/nano6080150 
-VISUM devices: In-line Monitoring for real-time quality control, based on NIR technology.  
-VisumPALM: For incoming material quality control and detection of adulteration.   
-VisumNIR: In-Line monitoring for product standardization and increase of production efficiency.  
Five Relevant Projects: 
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
Phase 1 SME Instrument: An IR -spectroscopy-based 
platform for the rapid integration and customisation of 
affordable, real -time mo nitoring solutions for the food 
and pharmaceutical industry (Grant Agreement number: 
684767). 
Platform 
for 
monitorin
g 
purposes 
2015 NA 
Phase 2 SME Instrument: Cloud-enabled IR spectroscopy 
platform for the rapid integration and customisation of 
affordable, real -time chemical monitoring solutions for 
food and pharmaceutical industries (Grant Agreement 
number: 731043) 
2018 www.seeingnewdata.com  
PREVIEW, PREdictiVe system to recommend Injection 
mold sEtup in Wir eless sensor networks, Grant 
Agreement no: 3569176, H2020- FoF 
Electronic
s for 
Wireless 
sensor 
networks 
2018 http://www.preview-
project.eu/  
OptiNanoPro, Processing and control of novel 
nanomaterials in packa ging, automotive and solar 
panel processing lines, Grant Agreement no: 686116, 
H2020- NMP-PILOTS (as 3rd party) 
Monitorin
g and 
software 
2018 www.optinanopro.eu  
B2B developments of detection and quality control 
devices of different kinds  NA NA 
Technical equipment: 
- Spectroscopic Laboratory: equipped with several instruments, namely, an FTIR-ATR (Interspectrum), two 
UV-VIS (PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), one Extended -SWIR (StellarNet) and one NIR (Mightex) 
spectrophotometers as well as a SWIR Hyperspectral imager (Spe cim-Xenics). The associated staff are 
trained and skilled in chemometrics  modelling by using a commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from 
Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non-commercial chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes).  
 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 81 of 109 
 
 
PARTNER 10 - NPH 
Full name: Nanopharma, a.s. 
Web page: www.nanopharma.cz 
Country: Czech Republic 
Type: SME 
 
Brief description of the organization:  
Nanopharma, a.s. is a Czech -based technology SME operating in the area of nanomaterials engineering. 
Founded in 2008, the company started developing reproducible and scalable electrospinning technologies 
for preparation of biocompatible nanofiber -based materials. Later on, the company started developing 
nanofiber-based applicati ons f or biomedicine, but also other industrial areas such as agriculture, textile, 
cosmetics, food, packaging, and many others. Apart from developing and commercializing its own material 
portfolio, Nanopharma carries out R&D contracts for industrial and re search partners interested in using 
nanofibers for their innovation projects.  
The company is very active in conducting more material research through the Nanoprogres nanotechnology 
cluster and international research projects, e.g. FP7. 
Role in the Project:  
Nanopharma will be responsible for the preparation of nanofibrous carriers with controlled release kinetics 
of incorporated MOFs an d antifungals. Different techniques will be used to achieve these goals, namely 
classic electrospinning, coaxial electrosp inning and nano -encapsulation. Nanopharma will be also 
responsible for evaluation of the nanostructured materials produced throughout the project activity by 
using several standard analytical methods, e.g. EDS, SEM. 
Nanopharma will also participate in the scale-up process of laboratory products created for various 
applications and in dissemination and exploitation of results. 
Scientific team:  
Dr. Kateřina Vodseďálková (female)  is the Technical Director of Nanopharma. Katerina  graduated from 
Technical University of Liberec at the Department of nonwovens, where she defended her doctoral thesis on 
Coaxial Electrospinning. Katerina is involved in th e management of the company in terms of managing 
research and development programs and she is also responsible for  coordination of national and 
international research projects.  Katerina will co -ordinate the scientific activities, lead full time and timely 
execution of the proposed work plan and on -going controlling and risk analysis within this project on behalf 
of Nanopharma as Principal Investigator. 
Jakub Erben (male) has several years of experience in research and development of innovative processes for 
the preparation of nanofibrous structures by combining different production technologies. Jakub is also 
specialist in the development of new methods of functionalization of these structures. He will be 
responsible for the management and execution of techn ical tasks within the feasibility study as Product 
Development Manager. 
Dr. Martin Šlais (male)  is the Project man ager for innovative medicine projects at Nanopharma. Martin 
graduated from Veterinary and Pharmaceutical University of Brno and defended his d octoral thesis on 
Veterinary Toxicology. He will be a valuable member of the scientific team working on this proje ct as a 
Scaffold Adjustment Specialist 
Dr. Lucie Vysloužilová (female)  has long experience in the optimization of production of commercial 
nanofibrous materials, particularly with respect to reproducibility, uniformity and scaling. She will be 
responsible for the optimization of production proc ess, preparation of standardized procedures and 
protocols as Production Manager. 
Berezkinová Liliana  (female) is the CEO of Nanopharma. Liliana is developing commercialization and 
business development strategies, as well as risk management schemes for scientific activities within multiple 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 82 of 109 
 
international projects at Nanopharma. She will be a valuable member o f the scientific team working on this 
project, drafting of the business plan, conducting market surveys, collaboration with external specialists  as 
Business Development Manager for Nanopharma. 
Five relevant publications, patents or products:  
• Berezkinova L., Vodsedalkova K., Vyslouzilova L.: Electrospinning device for reproducible large volume 
production of coaxial nanofibers, Nanotech Italy, 21-23 November, Venice, Italy, 2012. 
• Barbe Ch. J. A., Berezkinova L., Khatri A., Somerville J. A., Vodsedalkova K.:   Nanofibrous mat containing 
ceramic particles with releasable dopant 
Registration date:  6.4.2016. Patent No: 2016901261 
• Amler, E., Mickova, A., Jakubov a, R., Plecner, M., Prosecka, E., Rampichova, M., Filova, E., Buzgo, M., 
Lukas, D., Pokorny, P., Kostak ova, E., Pokorny, P., Vodsedalkova, K.: The way of preparation of 
nanoparticles based on nanofibers.  
Registration date:  7.9.2011. Patent No: 302 699 
• Pokorny P., Lukas D., Mikes P., Martinova L., Vodsedalkova K., Zalesakova D., Sanetmik F., Amler, E.: 
Technique and device for nanofiber production by weir electrospinning. 
Registration date: 22.11.2011. Patent No: 302 876 
• NanoMatrix3D®, http://www.nanopharma.cz/en/eshop 
Relevant Projects: 
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
THYMISTEM: Controlling differentiation and proliferation 
in human stem cells intended for therapeutic use EU FP7 2017 http://www.thymistem.or
g/ 
Programme of Support of  International Technological 
Co-operation: Functionalized biocompatible composite 
carriers based on nan ofibers for targeted delivery and 
controlled release of bioactive molecules. 
National 2016  
NANOPROGRES II: Development of unique and patented 
coaxial electrospinning units and a number of electrodes 
enabling scale -up of the coaxial electrospinning proces s 
while retaining its homogeneity and reproducibility. 
National 2014 http://nanoprogres.cz 
NANOPROGRES III:  Research and development of 
functionalized nanofiber structures. National 2017 http://nanoprogres.cz 
Technical equipment:  
– Electrospinning device. 
– Optical Microscope. 
– Scanning Electronic Microscope (SEM) with EDX analysis.  
– Ultrasonic sonicator. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 83 of 109 
 
 
 
 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 84 of 109 
 
 
PARTNER MODISPREM 
Full name: MODISPREM 
Web page: www.modisprem.com 
Country: Spain  
Type: RO 
 
Brief desc ription of the organization:  Modisprem S.A., is  a company specializing in the processing of 
plastic foam: 
• We start from foam material. 
• We study solutions and customised applications. 
• We make the product according to customer needs. 
We have over 40 years of experience in the sector: 
• We have a highly-qualified team of professionals and the most modern technology at your 
disposal. 
• Our facilities cover total area of 25.000m2, of which17.500 has been built upon. 
• We produce an average of 100 million pieces annually for the most diverse sectors. 
• We export our products to more than 25 countries. 
Role in the Project:  
Foam converting and transformation. 
Scientific team:  
Jorge Puerta (male). Industrial Design Engineer, working in Modisprem as Development Manager. He has 
been working in MODISPREM since 2005.  
He has worke d in different areas of foam and lightweight plastics applications like automotive, industry, 
packaging and construction. He develop the part to get the solution to the application and control the 
production process and preseries to assure the value of the final part. 
Monica Ibañez (female), Industrial Engineer, working in Modisprem as Quality Manager . She has been 
working in MODISPREM since 2002. 
She assurance the standards and the procedure within Modisprem method. She has established a Quality 
Management System based on the UNE -EN-ISO 9001:2008 and  ISO/TS 16494:2009 standard. 
Certification according to ISO 9001:2008 and ISO/TS  16494:2009 involves the management of quality in 
the structure and organisation of the entire company for the development, quality  control, production, 
storage, maintenance, marketing, sales and post-sales service. 
Technical equipment: 
- Mechanical foam processes 
- Moulding foam processes 

NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 85 of 109 
 
 
 
 
PARTNER: 12 - CXD 
Full name: Conservation by Design 
Web page: www.cxdltd.com 
Country: UK 
Type: MNC 
  
Brief description of the organization:  
Conservation by Design (CXD) is part of an international group of likeminded companies. Proud holders of 
the Royal Warrant by appointment to Her Majesty the Queen, CXD’s reputation for quality and expertis e 
has been built on an enthusiasm to understand and satisfy the needs of a wide variety of clients.  
We believe in a holistic approach to conservation. W orking in partnership with conservators from 
museums, libraries and archives around the world enables u s to offer a wide range of high quality 
products. Our commitment to product development, design and innovation drives our manufacturing. So 
from multi mi llion pound installations to a simple album page, choose the partner who constantly raises 
the standard. 
Our head office, based in Bedford, UK, has in -house manufacturing capabilities for many conservation 
products, including; boxes, polyesters, storage fu rniture and showcases. We supply and are exclusive 
distributors for a number of other archival products  including; specialist papers and boards and 
conservation equipment. CXD owns many leading brands, including Planorama, Archival Aids, Armour 
Systems showcases and Museum Workshop.  
Since 1992 we have been privileged to work with high -profile organisations including; The British Library, 
British Museum, Victoria and Albert Museum, Bodleian Library, National French Archives, and Boston 
Library. 
 
Role in the Project:  
Selling product for conservation. Needs/ requirements definition, Package design and Packagi ng market study. 
Business plans. Lead for WP8 
 
Scientific team:  
Laurent Martin (M)  is the New Product Development Manager for Conservation by Design. L aurent is a 
conservator with 18 years of practice and was formerly Head of conservation for the Archives Nationales 
de France . Specialist in book and paper conservation Laurent also initiated the photographic material 
conservation for the national Archives. 
Maite Lopez Sosa (F)  is a MSc. in Logistics and Production Systems from the Ecole des Mines de Nantes . 
She joined Conservation by Design in 2015, having previous international experience in Production, 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 86 of 109 
 
Continuous Improvement, New product development and Software development.  
Dirk Hendrickx (M) is the Managing Director of Larson Juhl conservation. Conserv ation by Design is part of 
Larson Juhl. Dirk got his Master’s Degree in Business Administration from Nyenrode University in the 
Netherlands. Dirk has ext ensive product development knowledge working for various global organisation: 
Gillette; Coty Beauty; International Flavors & Fragrances; and Kao.  
Products:  
• Heritage Archival pHotokraft TM paper: the only archival paper range that provides strength and pu rity 
because of our specifications and control of the manufacturing process allow us to meet internatio nal 
standards and adding nothing else. Heritage Archival pHotokraftTM paper is the DNA or CXD’s signature 
range of boards, boxes, folders, and envelopes. 
• PlanoramaTM: aluminium, archival storage cabinets that can provide double the storage capacity at half 
the weight. Build to specification in our own factory in Milton Keynes, UK, Planorama TM is the favoured 
storage solution for leading conservation instit utes including Welcome; British Museum; and French 
National Archives 
• EcopHantTM: recycled range of archival grade boxboard. After three years of development, EcopHant TM 
is the leading recycled archival storage solution 
• Crystal Clear Polyester Type 2 polyes ter: A CXD innovation, crystal clear polyester Type 2 album pages 
are for those looking for optimal cla rity and strength for long -term conservation grade storage and 
display of photographs, documents and ephemera. 
• Armour Systems TM Showcases: since 1992, Co nservation by Design (CXD) has provided a 
comprehensive range of high quality showcases to Museums, Gal leries, Libraries and Archives 
worldwide 
• pHotonTM: 100% cotton, high purity, silver -image-safe papers and photographic storage folders. They 
have been developed exclusively for CXD in collaboration with leading photographic conservators and 
institutes of conservation.  
Relevant Projects: 
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
Jürgen Teller bespoke photo Cold Storage Purpose build 
cold room 2016 www.lehmannmaupin.co
m/artists/juergen-teller 
Museum KRNAP Cold chamber Purpose build 
cold room 2015 www.krnap.cz/krkonosska
-muzea/ 
Climatic frame for Daguerreotype tryptic, based 
on CXD NoOxTM Frame concept 
Bespoke display 
and conservation 
device 
2015 www.hermitagemuseum.
org/ 
 
Technical equipment:  
- Welding machines to make polyester folders and album pages to archive (among other things) photos. 
- Box and Folder producing equipment, bespoke cutting machinery (Kasemake TM) and platen.  
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 87 of 109 
 
 
PARTNER 13 - OEAW 
Full name : Oesterreichische Akademie der 
Wissenschaften - Phonogrammarchiv 
Web page: www.phonogrammarchiv.at, 
www.oeaw.ac.at 
Country: Austria 
Type:  
 
Brief description of the organization : The Austrian Academy of Sciences (OeAW)  is Austria’s central non-
university research and science institution. Founded in 1847 as a learned society, today the OeAW has over 
770 members and 1,450 employees dedicated to innovative basic research, interdisciplinary exchange of 
knowledge and the dissemination of new ins ights with the aim of contributing to progress in science and 
society as a whole.  The OeAW operates 28 research institutes in the field of innovative basic research in 
the arts and humanities and the social and natural sciences. The Academy stimulates pion eering research 
by taking up future-oriented topics and ensuring the preservation and interpretation of cultural heritage. 
The designated project partner Phonogrammarchiv, an institute of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, was 
founded in 1899 and is the old est audiovisual research archive in the world. From the very beginnings it 
has aimed to produce, collec t, preserve and make accessible sound recordings as acoustical sources for all 
disciplines concerned, without regional restrictions. Its holdings consist  almost exclusively of field 
recordings, made chiefly by Austrian scholars and comprising ethnomusicolo gy, (ethno -) linguistics and 
cultural anthropology.  
Today the Phonogrammarchiv holds ca. 75.000 items of recorded sound and video material, both analogue 
and digital. As a result of the great variety of different formats in its holdings, the Phonogrammarc hiv has 
developed internationally acclaimed expertise in long time storage, preservation, restoration, transfer and 
digitisation of audio.  
In 1999, UNES CO included the archive’s historical collections (1899 –1950) as documents of universal 
significance in the World Register of its “Memory of the World” Programme; and in 2007 the 
Phonogrammarchiv received the UNESCO/Jikji Memory of the World Prize, the highest international award 
for significant contributions to the preservation of documentary heritage. Addi tionally, the 
Phonogrammarchiv is part of the Austrian CLARIN consortium (digital humanities research infrastructure 
consortium), https://www.clarin.eu/node/4199.  
The Phonogrammarchiv has a wide experience in the storage, restoration, transfer and treatme nt of 
cellulose acetate based materials and has carried out substantial research in this field. The 
Phonogrammarchiv of the Austrian Academy of Sciences,  Vienna, has together with the Austrian Institute 
for Chemistry and Technology OFI, developed a method to permanently refresh acetate media, especially 
those affected by the chemical deterioration process referred to as “vinegar syndrome”. 
The method has been patented (Pub. No.: WO/2012/088553), and an exclusive licensing contract has been 
made with the com mercial company NOA GmbH. As part of a public -private-partnership, the restoration 
process is in further development for industrial applications, as well  as in verification, in cooperation with 
NOA GmbH Vienna and consultants of the University of Vienna, I nstitute for Organic Chemistry, Univ. Prof. 
Dr. Erich Schmid. 
Role in the Project:  
Contributor to WP1: Definition of requirements for CH artefacts withi n audiovisual archives and 
collections, related input on package design criteria. WP7: Materials evalua tion: validation of package 
design and efficacy (acidity testing, accelerated ageing, functionality, applicability, audiovisual signal 
quality evaluation). WP9: Contribution to business model, communication and dissemination (participation 
in industry-lead events related to cultural heritage artefacts, networking within audiovisual communities & 
heritage institutions as well as their umbrella organisations, e.g. IASA, AES, UNESCO). 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 88 of 109 
 
Scientific team:  
Nadja Wallaszkovits (female). Graduate audio engineer,  ethnomusicologist (MA),  specialist in audio 
preservation, restoration, re -recording and digital archiving. She manages the audio department of the 
Vienna P honogrammarchiv (senior researcher, evaluated scientific employment) and is consultant for 
archival technology for various National and International Institutions. Manager of the working group for 
technical development. Responsible for collection -management, preservation, digitization and long time 
storage strategy, field recording technology and methods. S cientific publications, lecturing, project 
planning, national/international relations, budget planning, reporting, administration. She is guest lecturer 
at the University of Vienna and at the Universities of Applied Sciences in Berlin and Berne. Nadja 
Wallaszkovits is internationally well connected within the archival community and is member of several 
professional committees (IASA, AES). She also manages the new research department of NOA GmbH, an 
industry collaboration project dedicated to the restoration of acetate media. 
Johannes Spitzbart (male). Graduate electronics engineer working as A/V and IT specialist at the 
Phonogrammarchiv, including analogue and digital audio restoration and mastering, data acquisition, 
integrity checking and extraction of ana logue and digital audio media, database maintenance and 
webdesign. Paper presentations and training within the framework of  the “Vienna Summer School on  
Audio Preservation” (2005), the “TAPE” project (2006, 2007) and the “4th UNESCO Regional Training 
Workshop on the Preservation of and Access to Documentary Heritage in Asia and the Pacific” (Korea, 
2009). Member of the Audio Engineering Society (AES).  
Bernhard Graf (male). Audio and Video engineer, technical assistant. Specialist in audio -visual media 
storage and archiving, as well as for transfer, digitisation, restoration and parameter testing. Wide 
experience with handling, restoration and performance of audiovisual media based on cellulose derivates 
(cellulose acetate). Specifically responsible for cli mate control and software based monitoring, archival 
storage security and optimisation.  
Associated to OEAW participation, NOA GmbH will act as third par ties according to art. AMGA 11,'IN -KIND 
contribution-against payment'. The personnel that will be involved by NOA side are: 
- Jean-Christophe Kummer (male): Managing partner of NOA GmbH. 
- Peter Kuhnle (male): CTO of NOA GmbH 
- Silvester Stöger, Mag art (male): Film Archivist 
- Manuel Corn, Dipl. Ing., MBA (male): Strategic Sales  
Patents: 
Oesterreichische Akademi e der Wissenschaften: Method for Reconditioning Data Carriers. Inventors: P. 
Liepert, L. Spoljaric -Lukacic, N. Wallaszkovits. Appl. filed 23.12.2011, pub lished 05.07.2012. IPC: G11B 
23/50 (2006.01), G03D 15/00 (2006.01). Pub. No.: WO/2012/088553 
Publications:  
• Wallaszkovits, Nadja: Fighting the Decay: Permanent Refreshment of Acetate Media. In: Sustainable 
Audiovisual Collections Through Collaboration. Pro ceedings of the Joint Technical Symposium 2016, 
Singapore. Indiana University Press. In print. 
• Wallaszkovits, Nadja: Digitalisierung gealterter Magnetbänder auf Cellulose -Acetatbasis. In: Gabriele 
Fröschl, Rainer Hubert, Elke Murlasits & Siegfried Steinlec hner (Hg.), Reale Probleme und virtuelle 
Lösungen. Eine Bestandsaufnahme 50 Jahre Österreichische Media thek/UNESCO-World-Day AV 
Heritage. Münster/Wien: LIT-Verlag, 2012, p. 43–50. 
• Wallaszkovits, Nadja; Fennesz -Juhasz, Christiane 2015. “Transferring archiva l research collections into 
the digital domain: a special challenge”. International Forum on Audio -Visual Research – Jahrbuch des 
Phonogrammarchivs 6. Wien: VÖAW, p. 126-143. 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 89 of 109 
 
• Wallaszkovits, Nadja: Digitisation of Small Sound Collections: Problems and Solut ions. In: Duranti, L.; 
Shaffer, E. (edts.): Proc. “The Memory of the World in the Digital Age: Digitization and Preservation. An 
international conference on permanent access to digital documentary heritage” 26 -28.9. 2012, 
Vancouver/CANADA, p.1440-1451. 2013 
Projects: 
 
Standards/ Best Practices: 
 
The Phonogrammarchiv is participating in the following standards/ best practices working groups: 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
TAPE - Training for Audiovisual Preservation in Europe 
The carriers for audiovisual documents are fragile and 
subject to rapid decay: the lifespan of most tapes, even 
when stored under good  conditions, is measured in 
decades. Continued access is further complicated because 
evolving technolog y forces equipment out of use. 
Digitization of audiovisual materials would enhance the 
chances of their survival and facilitate access, but is as yet 
expensive and little applied outside the large institutions. 
TAPE, funded under the Culture 2000 programme  of the 
EU, was a project for raising awareness and training by 
expert meetings, research, publications and workshops. 
TAPE focused on audiovisual collec tions held outside the 
major national institutions with specific responsibilities for 
audiovisual heritage. 
EU-
Culture 
2000 
2008 http://www.tape-
online.net/ 
DELOS - Network of Excellence on Digital Libraries. 
The DELOS network is conducting a joint progra m of 
activities aimed at integrating and coordinating the 
ongoing research activities of the major Euro pean teams 
working in Digital Library - related areas with the goal of 
developing the next generation Digital Library 
technologies. DELOS intends to conduct a joint programme 
of activities aimed at coordinating current European 
research in DL -related areas, with the goal of developing 
the next generation of DL technologies. 
The Phonogrammarchiv brought in its expertise to bear on 
work within the Preservation Cluster. 
National  2006 http://delosw.isti.cnr.it/ 
EAH - European Acoustic Heritage - Studies in ur ban 
soundscape 
Co-financed by EACEA-P5-Culture Unit, Culture Programme 
2007-2013 - Strand 1.2.1 
A restudy of urban soundscapes as part of the EU -funded 
project “European Acoustic Heritage”. Comparison of 
urban sounds then and now, and its recording, long t ime 
preservation, integration into the work of the partners in 
Spain, Finland and France, the applicability of surround 
sound recording for possible futu re use in field work is 
explored. 
EACEA-
P5-
Culture 
Unit 
2013 http://eacea.ec.europa.
eu/index_en.php 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 90 of 109 
 
 
Committee Scope End 
Year Website  
IASA Technical Committee (International Association of 
Sound and Audiovisual Archives) 
The Techni cal Committee is concerned with the 
preservation of sound and audiovisual media and 
technically sustainable approaches to future access. 
Internatio
nal 
ongoin
g 
http://www.iasa-
web.org/technical-
committee 
AES SC -03 Audio Engineering Society (AES), Standards  
Committee, Subcommittee 03 on Audio Preservation and 
Restoration (AES SC-03) 
AES Standards Subcommittee 03 engages in the 
preparation of Standards and R ecommended Practices 
related to preservation and restoration of audio 
recordings. Working Group members  participate in their 
personal capacity. 
 
Internatio
nal 2012 http://www.aes.org/sta
ndards/ 
AES SC -07-01 Audio Engineering Society (AES), 
Subcommittee on  Metadata, Working group 01 on Audio 
Metadata 
 
Internatio
nal 
ongoin
g 
http://www.aes.org/sta
ndards/ 
Technical equipment: 
- Fully climatised storage vault (access storage),incl. state of the art fire protection system 
- Audiovisual testing and measuring laboratory 
- 3 fully equipped highest quality digitisation transfer studios 
- Digital restoration suite  
- Scientific library 
- Access rooms 
 
 
  
 
 
Fully climatised storage vault Audio-visual testing and measuring 
lab 
Transfer facilities 
 
 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 91 of 109 
 
 
PARTNER: 14 - CulturArts 
Full name : CULTURARTS -
GENERALITAT 
Web page: www.culturartsgeneralitat.es 
Country: SPAIN 
Type:  
 
Brief description of the organization:  
CulturArts is a public entity integrated in the Conselleria d’Educació, Cultura i Esport whose aim is the 
development and execution of the cultural policies of the Generalitat Valenciana as for concerns to the 
knowledge, protection, promotion, preservation, restoration, estudy, research and dissemination of the 
scenic, musical and plastic arts in all their varieties an d the museums in particular, and of the audiovisual 
heritage and cinematography and, in general, of all the cultural goods of the valencian cultural heritage.  
To achieve a higher administrative coordination and a closer work relationship between the diffe rent 
cultural areas, CulturArts consists of and assume the responsibilities in subjects of Music, Audio visual and 
Cinematography (IVAC), Theatre and Dance, Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Goods (IVC+R) and 
Castelló Cultural, which inform the sub-directorates of CulturArts.  
CulturArts-IVAC is the sub -directorate that developes the responsibilities for the audiovisual and 
cinematographical subjects and in particular all regarded to the safeguarding of the audiovisual heritage, 
including its recopilation, preservation, restoration, cataloguing and dissemination.  
Role in the Project:  
Definition of package specifications and validation. 
Scientific team:  
D. JUAN IGNACIO LAHOZ RODRIGO  (M) is senior curator of the IVAC, responsible for the 
restaurations, preservation, storage and cataloguing of the filmic materials and also is in charge of the 
equipment and software in the film archive of the IVAC. We has been the IVAC’s responsible for the EU 
funded EFG1914 project. He has been coordinator in the IVAC and F.E. project for the consolidation of the 
preservation of filmography of the Spanish filmmaker Luis  García Berlanga. He was also the coordinator of 
the Spanish editions of the dissemination workshops of the EU funded projects EDCine in Valencia in 2009, 
and in 2011 of the “Promoting the use of the European Metadata Standars for the Interoperability of  
filmographic databases (CEN/TC372) . He has a degree in Geography and History by the Universitat de 
València (1986) and he is also a cinematographical his torian specialized in the valencian film History.  He 
directed the congress “With regard to Cuesta. Ist . Congress on the beginnings of the Spanish cinema (1896 -
1920), organized by IVAC in Valencia in 2005 as part of the project of safeguarding of the valen cian 
producer company Films H.B. Cuesta and has managed the digital restauration of the remaining fragm ents 
of its film “La barrera num. 13”.  
Dª. ALICIA HERRAIZ SAEZ (F) Degree in documentation by the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, specialities 
of Electronical Information and Information and Document Systems; also Diploma in Biblioteconomy and 
Documentation by the Universitat de València. Since 2011 she is Documentation Technician for the 
cataloguing and preservation of the graphic archive in CulturArts -IVAC. She has passed courses on 
“Photographical colections,  documentation and management” and  “Introduction to the work of the 
cinematographical documentalist”. 
Dª MARIA JESUS PIQUERAS GOMEZ (F)  Degree in History of Art by the  Universitat de Vàlencia, has  been 
documentalist in RTVV and other audiovisual media. She has been responsible for exhibitions like La 
imagen rescatada (1991) organized by IVAC. She has published in several art history and cinematographical 
journals (Archivos de la Filmoteca, Nosferatu, Ars Longa) and in collective works. Since 2002 she is member 

NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 92 of 109 
 
of the film archive of CulturArts-IVAC, with special commitment on photochemical materials.  
Relevant publications, patents or products:  
• Lahoz Rodrigo, J. I. (coord.). (2010). A propósito de  cuesta: Escritos sobre los comienzos del cine 
español 1896-1920 (1st ed.). Valencia : Ediciones de la Filmoteca. 
• Piqueras Gómez, M. J.; Lahoz Rodrigo, J.I. (2009).  Las películas amateurs y de paso estrecho en el 
archivo del Instituto Valenciano del Audiov isual y la Cinematografía (IVAC). En Ruiz Rojo, J. A. 
(coord.):  
V Encuentro de historiadores En torno al cine aficionado (pp. 319-327). Guadalajara. Diputación de 
Guadalajara 
• Lahoz Rodrigo, J.I. (2012): De ayer a hoy. ¿Qué es España? y la salvaguarda del patrimonio 
cinematográfico español , Archivos de la Filmoteca, nº 70 (165 -178) Valencia. Ediciones de la  
Filmoteca 
• Cano, Carmen; Herráiz Sáez, Alicia (2013) Los archivos gráficos en las filmotecas, Archivos de la 
filmoteca, nº71 (pp. 171-178) Valencia. Ediciones de la Filmoteca 
 
Relevant Projects:  
 
Technical equipment:  
 
  
Special strips for acidity 
detection 
Breezy cans for long term 
preservation in controlled 
atmosphere with air renovation 
- Devices for film handling 
 
 
 
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
EFG1914. DIGITALIZACIÓN DEL CINE DE LA I GUERRA 
MUNDIAL 
CIP-ICT-
PSP-
2011-5 
2014 http://project.efg1914.eu/ 
 

NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 93 of 109 
 
PARTNER 15 - DFI 
Full name: Deutsches Filminstitut  
Frankfurt am Main 
Web page: www.deutsches-filminstitut.de 
Country: Spain  
Type: RO 
 
Brief description of the organization:  
The Deutsches Filminstitut – DIF e.V. was founded in 1949 and is the oldest and one of the most important  
institutions in the Federal Republic for the collection, archiving and academic utilisation of films a nd film-
historical documentation, as well as for the transmission of film culture and film literacy. It is a recognised 
non-profit institution and is supported by both public funds and private benefactors. Since 2006 it has been 
the organising institute fo r the formerly municipal Deutsches Filmmuseum, with its exhibition and cinema 
facilities and activities.  
 
The film archive department of DIF preserves a  collection of more than 20.000 films, which are stored 
according to modern conservation standards in c limate controlled vaults. The collection is comprised of 
feature films, fiction and documentaries, as well as short films among these promotional and inf ormational 
films as well as amateur footage. 
 
DIF is a full member of the Fédération Internationale des  Archives du Film (FIAF), the Association des 
Cinémathèques Européenes (ACE) and the Deutscher Kinemateksverbund (Association of German 
Cinématheques). 
Aside from its functions as research institute, museum and archive, DIF is actively engaged in promoting  
film culture in the scope of several national and international online projects. With filmportal.de, DIF runs 
the national filmography providing users w ith information, photos, texts, etc. on German film and 
filmmakers from the beginnings to the present. On European level, since 2006, DIF has been co-ordinating a 
series of EU -funded projects, such as MIDAS, which built the online union catalogue for Europ ean film 
archives filmarchives-online.eu (2006-2009), EFG - The European Film Gateway, a portal for dig ital content 
from European filmarchives (2009 -2011) and EFG1914, a film digitisation project on World War I (2012 -
2014).  
Role in the Project:  
Definition of packaging specifications and validation process. 
Scientific team:  
Thomas Worschech  (male) is hea d of film archive at Deutsches Filminstitut – DIF since 2006 and also  
responsible for the Digital Department of the Archive. After his studies he realiz ed serveral projects for  
Museums in Germany and starts working 1995 for the Deutsches Filmmuseum in th e non-film Archive. He 
curated film exhibitions (e. g. Curd Juergens), cinema programs and has done film restorations, e. g. “Die 
Abenteuer des Prinzen A chmed”. He is the author of scientific publications in the field of film history.  
Since 2005 he is res ponsible for publishing DVD -editions (Lotte Reininger, Ella Bergmann -Michel) in  
collaboration with commercial labels. 
Hans-Peter Reichmann (male) studied German Language and Literature, Theater, Film & Television Studies, 
and Sociology at Frankfurt am Mai n University. Since 1982 staff member of Deutsches Filmmuseum, 
currently its head of collections and senior curator. Curator and project manager of numer ous exhibitions, 
for example, on West German post -War films, film architecture, Marlene Dietrich, Klaus  Kinski, Stanley 
Kubrick and Rainer Werner Fassbinder.  
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 94 of 109 
 
Kerstin Herlt (female) is managing the ACE office, situated at Deutsches Filminstitut, Frankfurt since 2004.  
She has been coordinating ACE's work in several EU funded projects such as the European Fi lm Gateway, and 
the WWI film digitisation project "European Film Gate-way 1914". In the FORWARD project (2013-2016) she  
was responsible for dissemination & awareness. Actually she is coordinating ACE’s project work for  
Europeana DSI 2 responsible for com munication and sustainability. Kerstin Herlt studied at the University of 
Kassel, Germany, and the Universities of Nice and Dijon, France. She holds a Master Degree in Romance  
Philology and Sociology, and a European Master Degree in Film and Media Literacy.  
  
Publications: N/A 
Five Relevant Projects: 
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
EFG1914: Digitizing films and film-related collections from 
and about World War 1 
CIP ICT -
PSP 2014 http://project.efg191
4.eu/ 
EFG – The European Film Gateway:  The single access 
point to films and film-related collections in European film 
archives 
eContent
Plus  2011 www.europeanfilmga
teway.eu 
FORWARD: Framework for a EU -wide audiovisual orphan 
works registry  
CIP ICT -
PSP 
 
2017 http://project-
forward.eu/ 
iMediaCities: Innovative E -Environments for research on 
Cities and the Media  
Horizon2
020 2019 https://imediacities.e
u  
MIDAS: Moving Image Database for Access and Re-use of 
European Film Collections FP7 2017 
www.filmarchives-
online.eu 
 
 
PARTNER 16 - ALINARI 
Full name : Fratelli Alinari Istituto d Edizioni 
Artistiche SpA 
Web page: www.alinari.com 
Country: Italy 
Type: SME 
 
Brief description of the organization:  
Founded in Florence in 1852, Fratelli Alinari is the oldest firm in the world working in the field o f 
photography, the image and communication.  The birth of photography and the story of the Firm go hand in 
hand in their development and growth, as attested to by the immense Alinari owned fund of 5.000.000 
photographs. 
This fund is continuously growing and, thanks to a rational policy of new acquisitions and new photographic 
campaigns, it ranges from daguerreotypes to modern color photos. 
In 1852 Leopoldo Alinari, with his brothers Giuseppe and Romualdo, founded the photographic workshop, 
heart of the firm that still bears his name. It was the beginning of a unique endeavor that specialized in 
photographic portraiture, views of works of art and historical monuments, and achieved immediate national 
and international renown. 
Today the name of Alinari guarantees a century of experience and state of the art professional technology. 
In 2001 the Digital Archive was inaugurated. It continues to grow and progress constantly with images that 
can be consulted on line.  
Alinari is a leader in Photographic Publishing, and its Art Printworks or Art Printworks is the only one in the 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 95 of 109 
 
world still using the artisan technique of collotype on paper and on silver plate from photographic images.  
The Alinari laboratory engages in conservation treatment of the many types  of materials that comprise the 
photographic heritage: from the oldest daguerreotypes to calotypes, to various types of photographic prints, 
rare negativ es on paper and Conservation and restoration also includes covering the other aspects of the 
photographic heritage comprised of frames, albums, particularly valuable and fragile containers in leather, 
wood, mother of pearl, semi -precious stones, bronze. The restoration laboratory has also activated a section 
specialized in digital restoration, working with electronic supports in constructing images that are illegible as 
a result of damage due to atmospheric or mechanical agents.  These new methodologies make  it possible to 
virtually reconstruct images that would otherwise be irretrievably lost, where the leve l of deterioration 
excludes the possibility of a traditional type of restoration. This greatly increases the chances for the 
recovery of visual documents and the entire wealth of information they carry. 
collodion and silver glass-plate negatives, up to the most recent color proofs and negatives.  
The restoration laboratory pursues a fundamental activity of conservation treatment and restoration of its 
own photographic fund but also that of third parties, from the great public archives deposited in museums, 
libraries, institutes and academies to materials belonging to the archives of industries and firms as well as 
private individuals. 
Since 1995 Alinari has  participated in many European projects connected to culture and technology, in 
particular in the field of the image.  
The principal projects successfully carried out are:, Migrator 2000, 2Kan, Orpheus, TNT, SCHEMA, 
ECMADE, eRMIONE, EURIDICE, CITER, EuropeanaPhotography and Food and Drink. Currently the firm 
is involved on the newest Calls for Horizon2020, Interreg, Cult-Coop and National projects. 
 
Role in the Project: Content provider, user testing, proof of concept, dissemination, exploitation, 
requirements, validation, real world scenario implementation. WP1 leader. 
Scientific team:  
Mr. Andrea De Polo (M). Manage and direct a staff of 4 including a Multimedia Development Manager and 
2 support personnel responsible for electronic photographic indexing. Delegate assignments and evaluate 
performance. Assess hardware/software requirements. Long term preserv ation and save our memory 
coordination internal project. Museum studies certificate from Eastman House. Internship at Image 
Permanence Institute in photo activity tests. Experience in user testing, user requirements, test beds. Over 
20 years activities in projects involving specific activities such as systems demonstrations, participation as 
invited speakers in leading events, conferences and workshops suc h us EVA Conferences in Russia, Italy, 
UK, Germany and US, Museum and the Web conferences in Europe and  US, Photo Marketing Association, 
Computer Electronics (Las Vegas), IS&T on preservation, storage and memory conservation best practices. 
 
Dr. Rita Scartoni (F) took her degree in 1989 at the Università degli Studi in Firenze,Faculty of Letters and 
Philosophy, discussing a thesis in Medieval History of Art. She has collaborated with several Cultural 
Institutions, especially in Tuscany and Liguria, in diffe rent fields of competence, from the writing of 
exhibitions texts to the realization of multimedia didac tic material, archeological excavations in sites of 
historical medieval interest as the Brugnato’s Cathedral (La Spezia). Since 1998 she is in charge of the 
coordination of the cataloguing project of the Archivi Alinari’s images including experience in pre servation 
and storage projects. Experience in content management, content selection, marketing and commercial 
exploitation, dissemination and validation user requirement activities. 
Mr. Giorgio De Polo (M).   Publishing house, Photographic Archives, Exhibit ion organizing, responsible for 
the dissemination and promotion of Alinari material through marketing campaign. Giorgio has a long 
experience in sales an d currently is the product manager for the online editorial and imaging products of 
the company. Giorgi o has taken also responsibility in  the company related to the building security 
management, cleaning and privacy Italian legal requirements for an SME company.  
Dr. Anna Luccarini (F). Currently:  Photographic research for new editorial and corporate projects based on 
archive images as well as on new productions with a staff of new photographers working with the 
company. Contact with national and internat ional companies with the purpose of cooperating in different 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 96 of 109 
 
areas of the photographic business and mar keting communication. Before Position: photo editors, design, 
contact management and realization of photographic reportages in Italy and abroad. relation ships with 
international agencies and freelance photographers.  Production of P'Zero magazine, monthly d igital 
entirely produced within the agency and usable on Ipad and / or smartphone. Organization of 
photojournalistic workshop regarding reportages production and image editing.  
Dr. Alba Hernández (F).  Picture researcher, copyright sales and management of reproduction rights.  
E-Marketing and international support. Design, development and implementation of activities and 
documents for the project VISITO TUSCANY (investigate and realize technologies able to offer an interactive 
and customized advanced tour gu ide service to visit the cities of art in Tuscany). Allocated within the 
Cataloguing & Classification Department, performed various daily tasks and dutie s (cataloguing and 
updating catalogue records) using the Innovative Millennium library software application. 
Assisted with workflow in other EUI library departments: customer service and traditional library tasks 
(circulation, interlibrary loan, acquisitio ns) and participated in various library projects, including one with 
the European Documentation Center (EU official publications). Support to the Service of Documentation 
and General Archive, especially in the maintenance of databases and attention to inte rnal consultations. 
Entering data into a specialized database (OPAS). Treatment of documentation file i mages and scanning.  
Management and cataloguing of the Institution’s information collection, documentation management in 
the historical archive and in the central administrative archive. 
Relevant publications, patents or products:  
• Photographic Perfection – Pushing the Boundaries - EVA Berlin, November 2015, Staatliche 
Museen zu Berlin - EVA conference series. November 4, 2015. Taking photography to its ex treme. 
Analysis of current market trends in digital photography.  
• Printing is not dead. University Press. May 1, 2015 
Relevant Project: 
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
Save our memory Long term preservation 2020 www.alinari.com 
Technical equipment:  
-  1 x MacPro computer for image analysis and preservation validation activities  
-  1 x PhaseOne XF 100 megapixels digital camera back system with standard lens for reproductions scopes  
-  1 x storage NAS to store digital analysis files  
- 1 x high resolution EIZO calibrated monitor for image quality analysis  
- 4 x SSD high speed storage discs, server edition, high durability, 400GB each for long term preservation:  
- Conservation material for investigation and forensic study analysis along  with traditional silver halide 
photographic paper and photographic chemicals (developer, fixer, toning, cleaning solution):   
 
     
  
MacPro              PhaseOne XF             Storage NAS            Eizo monitor      SSD for storage          photo restoration 
tools 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 97 of 109 
 
 
PARTNER: 17 -IRIS 
Full name :  IRIS (Innovació i Recerca 
Industrial i Sostenible, S.L., SME). 
Webpage: 
http://www.iristechnologygroup.com/ 
Country: Spain 
Type: SME 
 
The involvement of IRIS (Innovació i Recerca Industrial i Sostenible, S.L., SME) as a Linked Th ird Party of 
VISUM will allow to increase the level of excellence of the technica l work planned in the project  both in 
terms of industrial integration. VISUM is 100% owned by IRIS which is its founder. 
IRIS is an advanced engineering company that specialis es in process monitoring and contro l, and process 
optimisation. Its commercial division offers advanced monitoring and control solutions based on NIR and  
hyperspectral imaging solutions for foreign body detection and chemical composition analysis; data 
management solutions for data processi ng, decision support, automation and data analysis (big production 
data).  
Besides, IRIS’ innovation division has 4 core lines: 
1. Optical and spectroscopy technologies (e.g. MEMs spectrophotometers, fluorescence and Rama n) 
for process monitoring for on-line and PAT applications in food, pharmaceuticals and the process industries 
2. SMAC technologies: information technologies and data management 
3. Novel processing technologies (ultrasound, plasma, microwave…) for process intensification and 
non-thermal decontamination   
4. Sustainable processing technologies: waste valorisation strategies, biocompounds and biopackaging 
for the circular economy 
The company was established in 2007 and currently employs 56 staff with a turnov er of €3.8 M. It is 
equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an 
electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified and also is certified under UNE -EN-ISO 
166002: Management Systems R&D&i.  
With its team includi ng telecom and electronics engineers, system engineering, application programming 
and web development etc. IRIS can carry out full system des ign and engineering, including electronic design 
(PCB) and assembly, firmware an d software development, electrical harnesses and interconnections. 
Moreover IRIS has mechanical and mechatronics engineers, specialised in process upscaling, integration 
work, as well as installation, validation and industrialisation of prototypes and equi pment in different 
industries. In a ddition to this broad cross -disciplinary engineering team, IRIS’ research team consisting 
among other of food and material scientists, biolog ists and physicists, have all the expertise to validate the 
technologies develop ed. Finally, IRIS has significant e xpertise in the use of QFD (quality function 
deployement) and uses a systems development management approach based on KANBAN agile 
methodologies 
 
Role in the project: 
IRIS will lead the WP5 in terms of developing the rig ht RFID technology for the smart p ackaging and the 
platform to visualise the results.  
 
Scientific team: 
Dr. Ing. ELODIE BUGNICOURT. (female) Masters in Material Science & Engineering (2002), PhD in Polymers 
and Composite Materials (2005), both from Nation al Institute of Applied Science (INSA), Lyon, F rance. 
Leader of the Eco -Materials business unit in IRIS since 2009. Coordinated  several European projects in the 
fields of bio -based packaging materials develop ment, process monitoring, surface treatment. Pre vious 
industry experience: R&D in chemical indu stry especially related to reactive polymer formulations: i) 
Arkema (ex. Cray Valley, 2002, Spain) in the field of polyester powder coating; Wacker Chemie (2002 -2005, 

NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 98 of 109 
 
Germany and France), Silicone division tha t funded her PhD thesis: development of nanocom posites based 
on an epoxy matrix and silica; iii) Ashland (2006 -2009, located se quentially in US, Spain and France) in the 
Composite Polymers division, focussing  on bio-sourced resins, flame retardant resins, SMC resins, PU and 
epoxy structural adhesives. Led and participated in many R&D projects aimed at developing new 
formulations, understanding mechanisms and structure-properties relationships, developing new a nalytical 
methods and modelling (for improved qu ality management); as well as collaborations wi th academic labs 
and other players in the supply and value chain. Author of seve ral papers in peer -reviewed and technical 
journals, and has presented her work in numerous international conferences.  
PAU PUIGDO LLERS DE BALLE, PMO Officer. (Male). BSc in Env ironmental Science (Research Project: 
"Estimating patterns of leaf herbivory in NE Queensland Rainforests, Australia. Might global warming 
increase leaf herbivory in tropical rainforests?", 2009) from the Univ ersitat Autònoma de Barcelona. MSc in 
Terrestrial Ecology (Research Thesis: "Effects of biochar from fast pyrolysis on soil wat er availability and 
basal respiration", 2010) from the same university and MSc in  Renewable Energy Engineering and 
Management from the Universitat de Barcelona. Prior to joinin g IRIS he held positions as technical sales 
person on Servicios Normativos consu ltancy group, working with environmental and quality projects, and 
quality field inspector on waste treatment plants for Ingenier ía IDOM International, performing quality 
audits and reports. He has also held different research positions at the CSIRO (Commonwealth Scientific and 
Industrial Research Organization), in Australia and in the  CREAF (Centre de recerca ecològica i aplicacion s 
forestals) in Barcelona. He has also experien ce as environmental consultant at Eco Intelligent Growth, 
working with renewable energies, life cycle assessment, C2C certifications and green building. In IRIS he is 
working as a project manager in the Energy  & Environment Group and he has successfully ma naged 
numerous projects in FP7 and H2020 among which are the coordination of the  SPIRE-1 PROPAT and the 
SPIRE-6 SHAREBOX projects. He has led several projects related to wireless sensors network. 
IVAN PAQUICO RODRIGUEZ. Male. Scrum Master. Telecommunications Degree from University Polytechnic 
of Catalonia and a Joint Degree in Multime dia Development from LUAS (Finland). Final thesis, 'Augmented 
Reality Chess and Application to Detect Chess Moves', implemented b y using Computer Vision, Augmented 
Reality and Artificial Intelligence techniques, has won several awards: Best Final Thesis of  the UPC and Best 
Final Thesis of Spain (received from Vodafone Spain and Univers ia foundation). Professional Scrum Master 
certified by Scrum.org,  and an official iOS and Andro id Developer since 2010. Since then  he has 
created numerous social network  Apps for Mobile Platforms with experience programming with  iOS SDK 
from Apple, Couchba se database technology,  and using different prog ramming languages such as C, C++, 
Objective C or Java, 8 bits embedded and real time systems. He has expertise in multimedia me thodologies 
ranging from Virtual Reality programming techniques to 3D/2D modellin g software such as OpenGL, 
Quest3D, Autodesk May a, Autodesk 3DS Max or Adobe Photoshop.  He is c urrently working as a Scrum 
Master in IRIS, and is leading a number of software scrum teams working in internal, commercial and 
collaborative R&D projects in the  development of the software for advanced monito ring systems, sensor 
integration, wireless sensor networks, among others. 
 IVAN BALBOTEO  holds a Bachelor’s Degree in Telecommu nications (2012) at  University Polytechnic of 
Catalonia. For his thesis he implem ented a MAC protocol for wireless ad hoc network s called Distributed 
Point Coordination Functio n (DPCF). The results demonstrated improved performance of this type of 
networks in terms of throughput, energy efficiency and delay. Based on the thesis, he pub lished a paper 
that was accepted for presentatio n at the 2013 IEEE 14th Workshop on Signal Proc essing Advances in 
Wireless Communications (SPAWC). He began his career at “ESADE Business & Law Schools” giving technical 
support and managing incidents related to Information and Communication Technology sec tor. He also has 
experience in different progra mming languages such as C, C++, nesC, C#, Java, and embedded software 
development. His  specialised knowledge involves MAC protocols, Wireless Sensor Networks, Mo bile 
Communications, OPC, MySQL and Serial Commu nication Standards (RS232, RS485, SPI, CAN, I2C  and 
Modbus). He is currently working as a Software Developer at IRIS, and is co llaborating on internal, 
commercial and R&D projects with the development of soft ware for advanced monitoring systems, sensor 
integration, wireless sensor networks, among others. 
LLUÍS GELABERT. Holds a Bachelor’s Degree in Electronics and Automation (2013 ) at University Polytechnic 
of Catalonia.  He is also a Higher Technician in Elect ronics Products Development with experience on 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 99 of 109 
 
microcontrollers, embedded systems, and PCB and hardware designing. His software expertise includes 
Altium Designer, PSPice and C language programming among others. He is technical responsible for some 
FP7 eur opean projects, coordinating the technical work as well as contributing with his expertise in 
electronics. He is also part of a software team currently working on C++ language  based on desktop 
applications.  
JOAN A. MARTÍNEZ BORRÀS . Telecommunications Engineer from the Universitat Politècnica de Catalun ya 
specialising in Electronic Systems. Broad experience in the development of embedded systems working with 
microcontrollers from Intel, Nec, Motorola, National Semiconductor, Zilog, Renesas (Hitachi) and Atm el and 
its related software written in C and ass embler. Expertise in R&D and industrial develop ment- Indomatic 
Elite, Dam Alignment By Means Of Laser for Endesa and test devic es (control of the electropneumatic test 
device for the SEAT Toledo dashboard man ufactured by VDO). His communications libraries following the 
V.21, V22, V.22bis and X.25 stand ards for Electronic Funds Transfer terminals were deployed on a few 
million paym ent terminals around the world and his teleloading system allowed some hundreds o f 
thousands of terminals to collect the transact ions and update their software online. He also has led the 
development of some security EFT terminals following the EMV, ZKA, V ISA PED and PCI PED standards. His 
programming skills include assembler, C, C++, Java, Visual Studio, .NET, Linux, Qt, Gtk, HTML,  CSS, 
Javascript, PHP. He is currently leading the electronics development group working in several commertial 
and collaborative R&D projects in the development of the hardware and embedded software for advan ced 
NIR measurement systems, sensor integration, wireless sensor networks, pests control, among others 
MIROSLAV SPAJIC. B.Sc. in Programming, Uni. Belgrade. M.Sc. Programming,  Megatrend University, School 
for Computer Sciences. Senior Programmer in IRIS si nce March 2009. Main fields of interest are 
Programming, DB administration, SAP, Networking and  multimedia. Industry expertise: 1996 to 2008 - 
Senior Programmer at “TE Nikola T esla” Power Plant: programming; DB admin, creation, scripting, 
automatic backups and maintaining of database security; Networking . SAP (System installation and 
configuration, Data migration, QHQ Client, Customizing etc.) and SAP Training for System Adminis trators in 
EPS/ICAS. 1994-1996- design and video editing in Studio MAG, MSC Studi o, TV Mix Bourgas – Bulgaria and 
Studio Film Bel grade: non-linear audio-video editing, radio an d TV advertisements and movie production. 
2008-2009- Snr. Prog. At Sol90Labs, Ba rcelona, developing the program “Xalok” (editorial software for 
newspapers) in C++, XML, XSLT, ASP and JS; Network and DB admin o f MS SQL databases. He works at IRIS 
since 2009 in IT department, fixing issues with servers, network, software, user support, bugs/attacks fixing 
and tracking, accounting software maintenance, backups and ad ministration of more than 20 project web 
sites. In parallel, he has made the web for Flick the Switch (2009), php/MySQL/js/jQuery programming of 
WaterBee (2010), CompoBall (2011), Dissemination Web (2011), Administration DB (2012) using MS Access, 
StarTEC (2013) using Django framework, python, MySQL and  GraphDB, worked on AgriBox with 
PostgreSql/php, programming SmartRipe user interface (2014), he was also technical responsible  for that 
project. He has made user interface and database for CrystalVis (2015) using C# and MySQL, currently is 
working as a programmer on ProPat, CTC+, ShareBox and other software projects. 
DAVID NETTLETON. (male) Data Mining Analyst.  Has a Ph.D in Arti ficial Intelligence from the Universitat 
Politécnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spa in, M.Sc. In Computer Software and Systems Desig n from the 
University of Newcastle upon Tyne, U .K., and B.Sc. (Hons) Computer Science from the University of 
Wolverhampton, U.K . Has over 20 years experience of applying data mining algorithms (including neur al 
networks, rule induction) and statistical tec hniques (including ANOVA, regression, principal components) in 
a diversity of data analysis and modeling projects, such as medi cal diagnosis/prognosis, fraud detection, 
customer loyalty and segmentation, onli ne user web search behaviour and data privacy. A s well as 
commercial projects, he has conducted  research and lectured at two universities. He has published a 
diversity of articles in specialized data analysis journals/congresses and three books. He has par ticipated in 
several competitive multi -partner r esearch projects and has a European patent appl ication for a graph 
matching algorithm. His IT Industrial experience includes pr oject management, consultancy, programming 
and analysis, database development and  business startups. He has developed software wi th a diversity of 
programming languages, (inclu ding Java, C++ and COBOL/CICS/DB2), database systems (such as Oracle, 
Ingres, MySQL) and data mining systems (IBM Intelligent Miner, Clementine, Weka). In IRIS h e is currently 
involved in two major European projects (OpenMind and Sharebox), as a data mining specialist. The work in 
OpenMind involves modeling a complex industrial produc tion process for producing high precision medical 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 100 of 109 
 
instruments. The work in Shareb ox involves building a symbiosis system for indu strial collaborations 
between companies for the recycling of waste products using case based reasoning and agent modeling. 
Relevant publications, patents or products:  
1. Conference ICIEMPM 2016: Towards Automatic Calibration of In -Line Machine Processes, 18 th 
International Conference on Industrial Engin eering and Manufacturing Process Modeling, D.F. 
Nettleton, E.Bugnicourt, C. Wasiak, A. Rosales, London, UK, July 28-29, 2016.  
2. Commercial Data Mining, Processing, Analysis and Modeli ng for Predictive Analytics  Projects, David 
Nettleton, Elsiever book ,ISBN9780124166028, 304p 
3. Technical article “Injection moulding process optimization by online material monitoring”. E. Bugnicourt 
et al., October 2012. Packaging connections.  
4. "Wireless Sensor Network for Smart Composting Monitoring and Control". Oscar Casas, Marga López,  
Marcos Quílez, Xavier Martinez -Farre, Gemma Hornero, Carlos Rovira, Mirta R Pinilla, Pedro M Ramos, 
Beatriz Borges, Hugo Marques, Pedro Silva Girão. Measurement 01/2014; 47:483 - 495. 
5. Marga López, Xavier Martinez -Farre, Oscar Casas, Marcos Quileza, Jose P olo, Oscar Lopez, Gemma 
Hornero, Mirta R. Pinilla, Carlos Rovira, Pedro M. Ramos, Beatriz Borges, Hugo  Marques, Pedro Silva 
Girão, Intelligent Composting Assisted by a Wireless Sensing Network, Waste Management 34, pgs 738-
746, April 2014 
Five Relevant Projects: 
1. OpenMind, On-demand production of entirely customised minimally invasive medical devices, 
Grant Agreement no:  680820, H2020- FoF 
2. ProPAT, Robust and affordable process control technologies for improving standards and 
optimising industrial operations, Grant Agreement no: 637232, H2020- SPIRE* 
3. OPTIJECT; A novel spectroscopic instrument for in -line monitor ing during injection m oulding; 
Grant agreement no.: 262623; FP7* 
4. SHAREBOX,  Secure Management Platform for Shared Process Resources, Grant Agreement no: 
680843, H2020-SPIRE-08-2015* 
5. Hypera, Affordable hyperspectral Imaging System for on -line foreign body d etection and 
chemical composition analysis, H2020- SMEInst, Grant Agreement no: 726572, 2016-2017* 
*: coordinated by IRIS 
Technical equipment: 
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops: e quipped with up -to-date hardware and tools: signal 
generators, wide band oscilloscopes , PCB design [Altium] and building tools, devel opment kits for 
programming microcontrollers, CNC -milling machines for electroni c and mechanical prototyping, and CAD 
software [SolidWorks], among others. ZEEMAX software for the design of optical systems and design setup 
by means of advanced optical compo nents and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light 
sources and related “opticalware”). 
 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 101 of 109 
 
 
4.1.1THIRD PARTIES PROFILES. 
4.1.1.1  CNRS THIRD PARTIES  
 2.a UVSQ 
 2.b MNHN 
 2.c MCC 
 
The University of Versailles Saint -Quentin-en-Yvelines (UVSQ), the National Museum of Natural History (MNHN) 
and the French Ministry of Culture (MCC) are linked third parties to the project. 
 
In addition, the role of the resources involved, Ms. Steunou , Mr. Dumas, Mr. Lavédrine and Ms. Rakotonirainy is 
already described in CNRS presentation (section 4.1.).  
 
4.1.1.2 NOVA THIRD PARTIES 
FCT/NOVA will be a third party in kind contribution free of charge. See details in Section 4.1 & 4.2 
 
4.2. THIRD PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE PROJECT (INCLUDING USE OF THIRD PARTY RESOURCES) 
Taking into account the whole pro ject budget, the subcontracting part herein described has been limited to the 
minimum percentage 
 
1. AIMPLAS  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks 
(please note that core of tasks should not be 
subcontracted) 
YES 
WP9. Subcontracting is as follows: 
Specific services for Innovation Management support, complementary to the two main partners  involved in 
WP8-Exploitation & IPR issues (ALINARI & CXD) 
TOTAL cost: 13.500€ 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is 
performed by linked third parties  
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the 
foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions 
in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
 
 
2.CNRS 
Does the p articipant plan to subcontract certain tasks 
(please note that core of tasks should not be 
subcontracted) 
NO 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is 
performed by linked third parties  
YES 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the 
foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 102 of 109 
 
 
The University of Versailles Saint -Quentin-en-Yvelines (UVSQ), the National Museum of Natural History 
(MNHN) and the French Ministry of Culture (MCC) are linked third parties to the project. 
  
- ILV is a joint research unit under the umbrella of UVSQ and CNRS, and Ms. Steunou and Mr. Dumas are 
employed by UVSQ;  
  
- CRC is a joint research unit under the umbrella of CNRS, MCC and MNHN. Mr. Lavédrine is employed by 
MNHN and Ms. Rakotonirainy is employed by MCC. 
  
The costs of Ms. Steunou, Mr. Dumas, Mr. Lavédrine and Ms. Rakotonirainy have been charged on the project 
and therefore, UVSQ, MNHN and MCC are considered as linked third parties. 
TOTAL cost: 51,327.5 € 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions 
in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
 
 
3. IST 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks 
(please note that core of tasks should not be 
subcontracted) 
NO 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is 
performed by linked third parties  
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participa nt to the third party, and describe and justify the 
foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions 
in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
 
4.NOVA  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks 
(please note that core of tasks should not be 
subcontracted) 
NO 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is 
performed by linked third parties  
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the 
foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
Does the participant envisage the use of contribution s 
in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General model Grant Agreement) 
YES 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
The cooperation between Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia da Universidade Nova de Lisboa (F CT/NOVA) 
and NOVA.id.FCT - Associação para a Inovação e Desenvolvimento at FCT is based on an agreement, in the 
scope of the Article 12 of the Multi-beneficiary Annotated General Grant Agreement.  
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 103 of 109 
 
In such context the FCT/NOVA has been making available to N OVA.id.FCT a certain number of human 
resources (HR) - professors, researchers, managerial and technical staff - which will be allocated to the project 
by NOVA.id. FCT on the basis of the prior agreement. FCT/NOVA allows its staff to participate in the R&D& I 
projects carried out by NOVA.id.FCT, according to the nature and needs of each particular project and contract. 
This means the costs of PI’s salary are incurred only by the Third party (not recorded in beneficiary accounts), 
but charged by the beneficiary. So FCT/NOVA will be a third party in kind contribution free of charge. 
 
 
5.ICP  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks 
(please note that core of tasks should not be 
subcontracted) 
NO 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its wo rk is 
performed by linked third parties  
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the 
foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
Does the participant envisage the use of c ontributions 
in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
 
6.PROM 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks 
(please note tha t core of tasks should not be 
subcontracted) 
NO 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is 
performed by linked third parties  
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justi fy 
the foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
Does the participant envisage the use of 
contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General model Grant 
Agreement) 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
 
7.AKUMPLAST  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks 
(please note that core of tasks should not be 
subcontracted) 
NO 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is 
performed by linked third parties  
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify 
the foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
Does the participant envisage the use of 
contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General model Grant 
NO 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 104 of 109 
 
Agreement) 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
8.BIOSENSOR  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks 
(please note that core of tasks should not be 
subcontracted) 
 
WP4. Subcontracting is as follows: 
Biosensor is going to subcontract a research centre, which will primarily assess the quality, in terms of 
physicochemical properties of the sensors based on the new support nanomaterials. In the receptor 
production, the f irst stage is immobilization of the receptor into the new materials; thus,  electrospinning 
and Laser Printing, have been studied extensively by research centres and the relative facility will be 
available to Biosensor’s  testings.  
The new receptor will be tested by the subcontractor with specific calorimetric analysis and by fluorimetric 
analyses. 
 
Total Cost:  24,000 €  ( renting 90 days – 8 hours – using specific machinery: Electrospinning, 
Fluorimeters, Calorimetric analysis). 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is 
performed by linked third parties  
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify 
the foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
Does the particip ant envisage the use of 
contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General model Grant 
Agreement) 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
 
9.VISUM  
Does the participant plan to subcontract cert ain tasks 
(please note that core of tasks should not be 
subcontracted) 
NO 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is 
performed by linked third parties  
YES 
IRIS (Innovació i Recerca Industrial i Sostenible, S.L, SME). While VISUM is more sp ecialised in sensors and 
intial platform set up, IRIS will support the  industrial integration, apart of the definition of requi rements and 
project managenent (WP1, WP5, WP9). 
28,170.56 € 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions 
in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
 
10.NPH 
Does the participan t plan to subcontract certain tasks 
(please note that core of tasks should not be 
subcontracted) 
 
WP3 Subcontracting is as follows: 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 105 of 109 
 
Task 3.1. Development of nanofibre based carriers with incorporated MOFs and antifungals  
One part of this task will address the scalability and manufacturing of the novel delivery platforms incorporating 
MOFs and antifungals to address challenges associated with production of large -scale carriers. In particular, this 
will involve technologically impr oved equipment, using enha nced powerful electrodes and by varying the 
geometries and shapes of the counter electrodes. Man ufacturing reproducibility of nanofibrous carriers in 
particular with regard to their internal structure will also be validated in thi s task. The scaled-up engineered and 
validated carrier prototypes will be prepared for serial production. Standardisation,  reproducibility and scale-up 
protocols will also be developed and verified in an operational environment. For this purpose, we have to lease 
the operating line using Nanospider technology. 
Total costs: Operating line renting: costs 10.000 € (renting 8 days/8 hours - special Nanospider technology) 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is 
performed by linked third parties  
NO 
If yes, please descri be the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe  and justify the 
foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions 
in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
 
11.MODISPREM  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks 
(please note that core of tasks should not be 
subcontracted) 
NO 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is 
performed by linked third parties  
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the 
foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions 
in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
 
12.CXD 
Does the participant plan to sub contract certain tasks 
(please note that core of tasks should not be 
subcontracted) 
NO 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is 
performed by linked third parties  
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the  link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the 
foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions 
in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
 
 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 106 of 109 
 
13. OEAW 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks 
(please note that core of tasks should not be 
subcontracted) 
YES 
Does the participant envisage that pa rt of its work is 
performed by linked third parties  
NO 
Does the participant envisage  the use of c ontributions 
in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
NOA GmbH NOA GmbH will act as subcontractor in work packages 1, 6 and 8. 
NOA is the leading global pro vider of flexible turnkey solutions for quality -controlled digitizing, management, 
and archiving of audio and other media content. Scalable to suit collections of al l sizes, NOA's product families, 
ingestLINE™, mediARC™, act LINE ™ and jobDB™, not only help  ensure long-term preservation of media, 
but also support enterprise -wide collaboration, efficiency, a nd productivity by enabling fast and accurate 
identification and retrieval of clips from the full range of an enterprise's arch ive. NOA's easy-to-use proprietary 
technologies are today installed in some 20 high -profile enterprises worldwide, including Sver iges Radio 
Förvaltnings (SRF), Yleisradio Finland (YLE), Radiotelevizija  Slovenija (RTV), Fonoteca Nacional de Mexico, 
the Vlaamse Radio- en Televisieomroep (VRT), and Voice of Vietnam. With headquarters in Vienna, Austria, 
NOA is committed to the ongoing development of innovative technologies to ensure the maintenance of 
invaluable cultural heritage for future generations. 
NOA will contribute its existing considerable chemical  and mechanical testing laboratory facilities, as well as 
extended special cond ition storage and testing facilities. Additionally, NO A will contribute as consu lting 
company in the sales strategy of such an application into the market.  
Specifically, NOA will participate in  WP1: defintion of the requirements of CH artefacts  and supporting in the 
preparation and analysis of Deliver able 1 .1. Previous data for initial development of models, by providing 
chemical and mechani cal testing laboratory facilities, laboratory assistant to run the tests (e.g. SPME/GC -MS), 
WP6: Materials evaluation: validation of package  design and efficacy (acidity t esting, accelerated ageing, 
functionality, applicabil ity, audiovisual s ignal quality evaluation). WP 8: Contribution to business mode l, 
communication and dissemination ( Marketing and management / Business Model Development, ma rketing 
strategy, networking wi thin audiovisual communities & heritage institutions as well as their u mbrella 
organisations, e.g. IASA, FIAT). 
 
Total Cost: 140.400 € 
 
14. CulturalArts 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks 
(please note that core of tasks should not be  
subcontracted) 
NO 
 
Does the participant envisage t hat part of its wo rk is 
performed by linked third parties  
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the 
foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
Does the participant env isage the use of c ontributions 
in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 107 of 109 
 
 
15. DIF 
Does the parti cipant plan to subcontract certain tas ks 
(please note th at core of tasks should not be 
subcontracted) 
NO 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is 
performed by linked third parties  
NO 
If yes, please describe the third part y, the link of t he participant to the third party, and  describe and just ify the 
foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions 
in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
 
16. ALINARI 
Does the  participant plan to subcontract certain tasks 
(please note that core of tasks should not be  
subcontracted) 
YES 
WP6 Subcontracting is as follows: 
The Image P ermanence Institute will be subcontrac ted to perform a k ind of external validation on the fin al 
products (considered safe enough to perform up to 3 tests on 3 different boards), as a top wor ldwide reference 
for the type of tests to be performed. 
Their collaboration will show the interest of th e consortium in wi den the markets and exploitation acti vities in 
the future, by ensuring that our products comply with the International standards (i.e.  photo-safe standard” ISO 
18902), and are supported by such a relevant top Institute, the best one in their field. 
 Total costs: 5,000€ 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is 
performed by linked third parties  
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the 
foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
Does the parti cipant envisage the use of contributions 
in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
 
17.IRIS 
Does the p articipant plan to subcontract ce rtain tasks 
(please note that core of tasks should not be 
subcontracted) 
NO 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is 
performed by linked third parties  
NO 
Does the participant envisage the use of contribut ions 
in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General model Grant Agreement) 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 108 of 109 
 
5. ETHICS AND SECURITY
5.1 ETHICS 
The project does not face ethical issues except for the possible ones raised in relat ion w ith the human beings 
involvement, but any of those data are not sensitive ones. These issues will be linked to the correct fulfilment of 
the inf ormation consent forms and proper use of the information sheets due to the  participation of humans 
beings a nd th e related procedures and criteria to identify/recruit research participants that will be followed 
within the NEMOSINE project (i.e. participatio n of  humans beings for the interviews on the prototypes 
performance, under WP6 and WP8).  
 
The selection process for participants, using data bases must comply with the European and national legislations.  
All partners involved in the mentioned WPs will pa rticipate in the work with human beings (for collection of data, 
interviews). 
 
This could reflect privacy -sensitive occupancy information that may emerge when multiple sources of data are 
combined. Such personal information will be stored in an encrypted form and the identifiers will be in a password 
protected file, therefore no  personal information will be ava ilable to the general public outside few members of 
the NEMOSINE team. Specifically, the partners will take all necessary steps to ensure that the In formation is "de-
identified", i.e. that all Personal Data is removed from the provided information, made il legible, or otherwise 
made inaccessible to the receiving parties prior to provision (in accordance with Article 2 section (a) of the 
European Data Protection Directive). 
 
Each party shall be responsible for ensuring its own  compliance with all laws and reg ulations applicable to its 
activities, including without limitation the acquisition of data, the processing of data by it through any tool used in 
connection with the Project and the use of such data within the project framework. Such laws include, but are not 
limited to, those in respect of rights of privacy, publicity, reputation and intellectual property rights, including 
patent and copyright rights. 
 
We will make sure that we keep with H2020 guidelines in terms of recrui tment, informed consent, data sto rage, 
protection and destruction procedures (no personal information will be collected during surveys, which will be 
anonymous, not involve minors nor any audio or video recording).
5.2 SECURITY. 
Please indicate if your project will involve: 
• activities or results raising security issues: NO 
• 'EU-classified information' as background or results: NO  
 
NEMOSINE part B H2020 NMBP-35-2017 
 
Page 109 of 109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX I :  
LETTERS OF SUPPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Asociatia             Ştiinţa şi patrimoniul cultural în conexiune  
                            Blv. Tineretului nr. 51, bloc 64, sc.1, apt 34, Bucureşti, sector 4, 040352, Romania 
                                  Cod inregistrare fiscală (C.I.F.): 30934252/22.11.2012 
 
To whom it may concern 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
 
Innovative packaging solutions for storage and conservation of 20th century cultural 
heritage of artefacts based on cellulose derivate  
(NMBP35-2017: Innovative solutions for the conservation of 20th century cultural 
heritage)  
 
I, the undersigned Elena Badea, identified with national identity document series PA, 
number 094447, as President of the Asociatia Stiinta si patrimoniul cultural in 
conexiune1 (i-CON) based in Bulevardul Tineretului no. 51 , bloc 64, sc.1, apt 34, 
Bucharest, postal code  040352, Romania, hereby declare  that Asociatia Stiinta si 
patrimoniul cultural in conexiune is interested in the results that will be obtained from 
the project “Innovative packaging solutions for storage and conservation of 20th 
century cultural heritage of artefacts based on cellulose derivate ”, to be submitted to 
the NMBP35-2017 call:  Innovative solutions for the conservation of 20th century 
cultural heritage. 
In my capacity as President  consider that the outcomes of the “Innovative packaging 
solutions for storage and conservation of 20th century cultural heritage of artefacts 
based on cellulose der ivate” according to the proposed workplan could be very 
interesting as alternative to the solutions currently used. Therefore, i-CON Association 
wishes to support the Project and hereby commits to follow the Project developments. 
 
 
 
 
Signature:         Date:22nd March 2017 
 
 
 
 
Name: Elena Badea 
Position: President 
 
                                                      
1 Romanian n on-profit association “Science and Cultural heritage in connection”(i-CON). PIC No. 
952580450