3.3 CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE ................................................................................................................................................. 61 
3.3.1 Consortium description............................................................................................................................................... 61 
Figure 8. Scheme showing the partners relations in different projects........................................................................................... 61 
3.3.2 Industrial/commercial involvement ............................................................................................................................... 62 
3.3.3 Other countries .......................................................................................................................................................... 62
3.4 RESOURCES TO BE COMMITTED .......................................................................................................................................... 63 
Table 3.4a: Summary of staff effort ........................................................................................................................................... 63 
Table 3.4b: ‘Other direct cost’ items (travel, equipment, other goods and services, large research infrastructure) ............................. 64 
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................................................................... 68 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  3 
1. Excellence
1.1 Objectives  
The main objective of the project is to d evelop strategies for rice productivity, stability and quality by developing New 
commercial EUropean RICE (Oryza sativa) harbouring salt tolerance alleles to protect the rice sector against climate change and 
apple snail (Pomacea insularum) invasion (NEURICE). 
European rice consumption was ca. 2.68 million tonnes of milled rice (Mt) in 2014, while the rice production in Europe (EU-28) 
for the same year was ca. 1.64 Mt [1], being mainly temperate japonica rice. The rice production from 2013 to 2014 decreased 
from 1.77 Mt to 1.64 Mt, consequently, the rice imports have increased from 0.9 Mt in 2013 to 1.1 Mt in 2014, being mainly long-
grain indica rice. The rice exports (mainly japonica rice) were maintained at 0.2 Mt [1]. Thus, only 61% of the rice consumed by 
European citizens in 2014 was produced in EU [1]. European rice productivity is affected by abiotic and biotic stresses and by 
the local farming practices.  
Current European rice Genotypes are not able to withstand salinity increases  that the Environment is posing on the rice 
producing regions due to climate change , moreover poor Management has been employed to afford this in a proper way. Of 
particular concern, global temperature has increased over the last century, especially during the last 50 years (0.13° C / decade). 
This warming has been more intense in the Mediterranean region [2], and has been specially evident in spring and summer. 
Temperature increases around the Mediterranean coasts are greater than that observed in other regions of the same latitude. In 
addition, due to scarcer water availability and the rise in sea levels, there is a clear tendency toward salinization in the river 
deltas where rice is grown in Europe, notably in the plots close to the sea level [2]. Salinization certainly affects rice as it is the 
most salt sensitive crop among cereals [3, 4].  
Associated with changes in temperature, the biotic stress of the Apple snail species from genus Pomacea now threatens to 
destroy Europe’s rice paddy fields eating the sown seed and the rice plantlets, representing one of the worst introduced gastropod 
crop pest of the recent time [5-10]. It is calculated that nowadays this pest causes damages in rice fields worldwide that result 
into losses of tens of billions of Euros a year [11]. Recently, apple snails have been detected in the Ebro river delta, and now 
it represents an important thread to Europe’s wetlands biodiversity and rice production. To date the measures adopted to 
combat apple snail have failed, but in the autumn of 2013 a new strategy with permission of the EU was explored, which consisted 
in flooding 2500 ha of infested fields with seawater  to eradicate the  apple snails . This treatment proved 100% effective in 
destroying apple snail infestations [12], nevertheless residual salt concentrations affected negatively rice productivity. There is a 
way to bypass this problem, which is to introgress salt tolerance into elite European varieties using the most salt resistance alleles 
from tolerant rice lines such as Pokkali, FL478 and IR64-Saltol. It has been reported that Pokkali and FL478 can grow at 150 mM 
NaCl concentrations [13], while the most salt tolerant European cultivars just can tolerate  salinity ranges between 30 and 60 mM. 
The European deltaic areas have been historically and naturally salinized before rice cultivation, when artificial inundation during 
the dry season (summer) reduced salinity levels to per mit rice cultivation, thus the natural flora and fauna are not negatively 
affected by the seawater treatment.  
The NEURICE project proposes a coordinated multi-actor approach  that includes public research and technological 
development universities and the active participation of end-users such as technological companies, a specialized technological 
centre for breeding and innovation support and farmers cooperatives . The NEURICE project aims t o address rice abiotic (i.e. 
salinity in fields caused by rise in seawater level and scarce of water availability due to climatic change effects) and biotic (i.e. 
apple snail pest) stresses. T he project ensures the generation and growth of ideas between all the partners to develop the co -
creation and the co-ownership of new knowledge, technologies and techniques that will facilitate their adoption for the benefit of 
the rice production sector as well as the generation of more jobs in Europe.  
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  4 
Thus, the general objective of the NEURICE project is to identify and introduc e genetic variation in European rice 
varieties for obtaining commercial varieties tolerant to salinity in order to:  
(i) mitigate the imminent effects of salinization and deterioration of water quality in the Mediterranean basins due to 
climate change; and  
(ii) avoid the decline in production observed after seawater treatments performed in rice paddies that successfully 
controlled the apple snail pest (which has recently appeared in a major producing region of Europe, the Ebro delta) 
but it is likely to spread to other rice growing areas in Europe producing great loses [14].  
For the seed industry partners from participated countries, the final objective of the NEURICE project  is to register and 
commercialize new s alt tolerant elite European lines . These new salt tolerant European commercial l ines will become 
available all over Europe to use them as prevention to abiotic stress derived from climate change as well as for avoiding 
the dispersion of this devastating pest ( biotic stress ) apple snail  all over Europe  while maintaining or increasing rice 
production. These new rice lines will allow rice cultivation in abandoned salinized paddies, while low productive salinized 
fields will obtain higher yields resulting in creation of new jobs and a reduction of the rice import in Europe 
The specific objectives of the NEURICE project are:  
1. To identify new salt tolerant varieties and new salt tolerance alleles  using phenotypical, physiological and genetic 
screening of germplasm collection and complementary approaches of Genome Wide Association Study (GWAS) in a panel 
of japonica accessions and linkage mapping in a population of  biparental Recombinant Inbred Lines (RILs) (UMIL, CRA, 
UGLA, INDEAR and CAAS). The partners selected for this proposal include European teams with outstanding expertise in 
rice geno typing/phenotyping and top worldwide teams in biotechnology from third -country partners (i.e. Argentina and 
People’s Republic of China).  By the 24th month of the NEURICE project , salt tolerant japonica accessions and biparental 
RILs will be identified, moreover at the month 48 the genomic studies will be complete. 
2. To obtain advanced lines with improved salt tolerance  by introgressing Saltol, a chromosome segment carrying a salt 
tolerance gene from the highly salt tolerant Asian variety FL478 into European elite varieties from Spain, Italy and France 
using marker assisted backcross (MABC) selection (UB, UMIL, CRAG, CIRAD, CRA, UGLA and CFR). This objective also 
includes an embryo rescue adaptation to fasten the (MABC) process. The best rice centres from the m ain rice production 
areas have been carefully selected as partners. At the 22th month of the project, BC3F3 seeds (the 3rd generation of the 3rd 
backcross) will be ready to be assayed in controlled conditions using hydroponic systems to validate their salinity tolerance. 
3. To evaluate salinity tolerance in controlled conditions using hydroponic systems  to validate salt tolerant lines 
produced within this project after introgressing salt tolerance genes from FL478 into the European elite varieties (UB, CRAG, 
CIRAD, UMIL and UGLA),  including the most salt tolerant japonica accessions and RILs . This evaluation will be 
complemented with the  quantification of  salinity-related transport and accumulation traits (UGLA)  and oxidative stress 
markers (UB). The seeds from the validated lines will be obtained in the month 27 to be used in the field trials under non-
salinized and salinized conditions. 
4. To perform field trials to evaluate in salinized and non-salinized conditions the traditional European rice lines 
harbouring the Saltol salt tolerance chromosomal region introgressed from salt tolerant FL478, as well as the most salt 
tolerant japonica accessions and RILs, in order to select those  salt tolerant lines with commercial potential. Each country 
will assess their lines in their low salinity environmental conditions to ensure quality, productivity and commerciality of lines 
(CAMARA in Spain, CRA in Italy and CFR in France). In parallel, the same lines will be assessed in high salinity conditions 
field trials (IRTA in Spain, SIS in Italy and CFR in France). Samples from lines assessed in both salinity levels will be studied 
in order to select those salt tolerant lines with best commercial potentiality with the objective of registering  the best for 
commercialization. Selection will take into account productivity and quality for both industrial (head rice recovery, grain length 
and width, amylose content, etc.) and nutritional  traits such as storage of microelements essential for human diet such as 
Fe and Zn, exclusion of toxic heavy metal such as Cd and As (UB, IRTA, CAMARA, IRIS and UMIL). The competent partners 
from each country will commercialize these lines. Thus,  the NEURICE consortium will ensure that the obtained lines 
maintain, or even increase, the actual productivity of parental lines. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  5 
5. To implement a s alinity motorization system in rice plots treated with seawater  using a novel autonomous salinity 
wireless sensor network based on low cost sensors developed by IRIS, which is a company specialised in monitoring 
technologies with several years of experience in the agricultural sector. Sensors will be placed in all plots dedicated to low 
and high salinity field trials in order to monitor continuously their salinity levels. This remote data transmission system will 
have a software package including a data-mining layer in which all the data collected in the fields will be used for improving 
the management of irrigation through a decision support system. This information will serve to evaluate in real time the 
impact of the proposed adaptability interventions in response salinity levels while ensuring the productivity and stability of 
the agricultural sector. 
6. To transfer the knowledge of the new elite European salt tolerant varieties and the salinity monitorization system to the 
end users through extensive open field days as well as seminars and other instances intended to disseminate and 
communicate the results and goods obtained in the NEURICE project . Knowledge transfer will allow the end-users of the 
rice sector, which are primarily rice farmers, rice farmers associations, rice farmer’s cooperatives and the rice seed industry, 
to properly implement the new salt tolerant varieties as well as the salinity monitorization system.
1.2 Relation to the work programme  
The NEURICE project, presented within the call Sustainable Food Security and the sub-call of: H2020-SFS-2014-2015 
and Topic: Strategies for crop productivity, stability and quality SFS-05-2015, explicitly considers improving identification, 
prediction and introduction of useful genetic variation in crops while seeking for novel breeding targets to improve yield, yield stability, 
quality, biotic/abiotic stress resistance/tolerance and environmental benefits. 
The proposal falls into the concept of multi-actor approach that includes rice farmer’s cooperatives, rice institutions and SMEs 
(CAMARA, CFR, SIS ), RTD public organizations (U B, CRAG, CIRAD, CRA, UMIL, UGLA, IRTA  and CAAS), an SME of the 
agrobiotechnology sector (INDEAR). They all have the equipment and human capital to approach crop improvement with advanced 
molecular breeding procedures to face climate change and apple snail problems. In addition, a private company (IRIS) specialized 
in developing low cost and high effective remote detection devices will develop a remote wireless sensor network to monitor salinity. 
Moreover, the NEURICE proposal is based on an international cooperation in research and innovation that includes countries 
like Argentina and People’s Republic of China  of which cent res involved in the NEURICE project are experts in the fields of 
genomics and bioinformatics, respectively. Furthermore, these two countries are great rice producers so they will be of uttermost 
importance to the project to disseminate the new salinity elite European tolerant lines produced in this project and to commercialize 
them outside of the Europe region. 
The project proposes smart approaches and tools to improve identification, prediction and introduction of salt tolerance variation 
into European rice cultivars, while monitoring salt concentrations. The salt tolerance improvement of rice varieties is tackled in a 
holistic manner, seeking for new salt tolerance alleles, and developing new material introgressed with the most salt tolerant gene 
alleles that have been recently identified in rice [15]. The novel breeding targets, other than yield stability, include the 
maintenance/improvement under mild salt stress tolerance of nutritional and industrial rice grain qualitative traits. 
The NEURICE project is a trans-disciplinary approach that integrate:  
1. Non-academic knowledge from f armer and Rice breeding knowledge  through SME farmer’s cooperative 
(CAMARA), SME rice institution (CFR), SME rice private company (SIS) and RTD public organizations (CIRAD, CRA, 
IRTA) that work with direct contact with farmer’s reality. This farmers-institutions close interaction will contribute to solve 
complex problems while fostering multi-actor engagement in the research and innovation process 
2. Plant physiology expertise from Universities with expertise in salt stress at physiological and subcellular level (U B, 
UMIL, UGLA). 
3. Plant biotechnology knowledge and expertise from RTD public organizations (CIRAD, CRA) and SMEs (CFR, SIS , 
INDEAR). 
4. Expertise in genomic, transcriptomic and data analysis from RTD public organizations (CRAG, CRA, CAAS), SME 
of agrobiotechnology sector (INDEAR). 
5. Knowledge in sensor reading, process logic and control, modelling from the SME private company (IRIS). 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  6 
6. Market knowledge and positioning to protect IP and successfully commercialize the derived products from the project 
(CRA, CAMARA, IRIS, CFR, SIS). 
Our project has been developed based in the farmer needs through addressing breeding programmes and farm management to 
help minimizing yield losses due to salinity through introducing salt tolerance to the European rice varieties. Abiotic stresses 
such as salinity are highly damaging to rice due to its salt sensitivity. In this context, climate change is expected to salinize fields 
due to the temperature  increase, sea levels rise, and reduced precipitation [2]. Hence, it is crucial to introduce salt tolerance 
alleles to European rice varieties to be prepared for this forthcoming scenario. In addition, global warming clearly set to enhance 
invasions by tropical species (biotic stresses), such as the apple snail ( Pomacea insularum) as they expand into new habitats 
[16]. Accidentally, the apple snail was recently been introduced in Europe (as in other Asian countries) , producing severe 
rice yield losses  [9-11, 17-19], This species is considered one of the worse introduced gastropod crop pest of the recent time 
and has been identified as a new pest by the European Food Safety Authority [14]. Seawater flooding has proved an efficient 
means to eradicate apple snails from infested fields. However, European rice genotypes are highly salt sensitive and application 
of such eradicating procedure in fields have led to a 30% loss of productivity [20]. Fighting the apple snail in rice fields with 
seawater has proved to be more effective than any other treatments (i.e. chemical), while preserving environment and biodiversity 
in wetlands (bird species, invertebrates, fisheries and aquiculture industry).
1.3 Concept and approach 
 1.3.1 Main ideas of the project (state-of-art) 
European rice cultivation importance. Rice (Oryza sativa) is one of the most important cereal crops in the world, and makes up 
an important calorie proportion of the human diet. Europe produces  1.64 Mt of rice which represents a 61% of the 2.68 Mt of 
milled rice consumed in Europe [1]. Rice production thus has major socio -cultural, economic and ecological impacts in several 
European Mediterranean countries. These countries have adapted their gastronomy to locally produced varieties, in general of 
short and pearl -shaped grain, which are the best suited for paella or risotto recipes. In Europe, Spain a nd Italy are by far the 
biggest European producers (80% production). However, several other countries are also rice producers, including France among 
others, which along with Spain and Italy have several Research Centres, Universities, rice farmer associations and cooperatives 
and rice seed industries working on increasing quality and productivity among their elite cultivated lines 
(http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/markets/rice/index_en.htm). Increasing and promoting rice cul tivation in Europe is of the ut most 
importance to increase production and thereby decrease imports as well as for maintaining the derived commerce from the rice 
sector such as tourism and gastronomy. 
Rice salt sensitiveness. Rice is one of the most salt sensitive crops [4, 21]. Salinity affects both its early growth and reproductive 
stages, delaying the blooming time and reducing the pollen viability which negatively affects the productivity. Yield is affe cted 
even under mild salinity : an electroconductivity of about 2.6 dS/m reduced the yield to 90 % with respect to 2.0 dS /m, and 
electroconductivity about 4.8 dS/m reduced yield by an additional 50 % [22]. Additionally, there are nutritional as well as industrial 
qualitative traits that are threatened  because of salinity [23]. High salt concentrations impose ionic stress, osmotic stress and 
other secondary stresses such as nutritional disorders and oxidative stress that causes cell injury and photosynthesis reduction. 
Food security is being compromised by the climate change, the salinization of the aquifers and the increasing food demand for a 
growing population. It has been estimated that the global demand for rice in 2025 will increase from the 480 million tons 2013 rice 
production [24] to 715 million tons of milled rice. Many efforts have been made by international rice institutes to obtain salt tolerant 
lines. Recently, molecular markers were identified in rice that are strongly linked with a specific chromosomal region named 
“Saltol” which confer salt tolerance by correcting K +/Na+ levels and excluding sodium from plants  in the Pokkali variety and the 
Saltol introgressed lines (i.e. FL478 and IR64-Saltol). This Saltol region along with other major QTLs of salt tolerance has a known 
position in the rice genome and can be followed through molecular markers. So, using classical breeding and molecular markers, 
the salt tolerance regions can be effectively introgressed into the elite European rice cultivars along with maintaining classical 
European rice traits to obtain new salt tolerant commercial lines with interest to the European rice-farming sector and rice-industry 
sector. This new lines will be successfully commercialized in the European Community. 
Climate change. Global temperature has increased over the last century, especially during the last 50 years (0.13 ° C / decade).  
This warming has been more intense in the European Mediterranean region [2], being the effects most evident in spring and 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  7 
summer, contrasting to what happens in northern Europe where most notable increases are detected in winter. Temperature 
increases on the Mediterranean coastline is greater than those observed in other regions of the same latitude. In addition, due to 
scarcer water availability and the rise in sea levels, there is a clear tendency toward salinization in the river deltas wher e rice is 
grown in Europe, notably in the plots close to the sea level [2]. Simulations of regional climate models (RCM), performed during 
the EC project PRUDENCE, indicate that in the Mediterranean area temperatures will likely continue increasing at a faster rate 
than the global and European average during this century, so that in a few decades this in crease may be very obvious [2]. The 
increase of temperatures together with the rise of the sea level and the freshwater availability reduction are very likely to increase 
salinity levels especially in Mediterranean deltaic areas where rice is grown. Consequently, if measures are not taken before, the 
European rice production will greatly decrease. Having salt tolerant rice lines adapted to the environment that climate change is 
producing in the main European deltaic areas is an urgent objective for the European Community, and one of the main objective 
of the NEURICE project. 
The apple snail plague. The Apple snail species from genus Pomacea, including Pomacea insularum (described by d’Orbigny 
in 1835), are native of the South America wetlands. They have been widely introduced in Asia and Central and North America to 
be used as aquarium pets or human food [9, 10, 17-19]. The apple snail creates ecologic imbalances and destroys rice paddy 
fields, eating the sown seed and the rice plantlets, although they also feed on other plants [25]. These snails represent one of 
the worst gastropod crop pests of the recent times [5-10]. The Apple snail species are considered important exotic invasive 
species due to several characteristics they possess [18, 26]. In favourable conditions, they have a lifespan of 4 years [27], reach 
maturity in 2-4 months [28] and each female can lay about 8500-9000 eggs per season [29]. They are highly adaptable to harsh 
environmental conditions such as low dissolved O2 concentration, low food availability and low temperatures [9]. It is calculated 
that this plague has currently caused a damage equivalent to the loss of tens of billions of Euros in rice fields worldwide each 
year [11]. Recently, this harmful species, apple snails, entered accidentally the Ebro river delta. The Ebro delta in North East 
Spain is one of the finest wetlands in the western Mediterranean and plays a vital role in the local community while also serving 
as a stopover site for many migrant birds. This invasion represents a serious t hreat to Europe’s wetlands as it is spreading 
quickly. If the apple snail establishes itself across Europe, the consequences will be devastating for both Europe’s wetlands  
biodiversity and for rice European production. An evaluation of European Food Securi ty Authority (EFSA) at the end of 2013 
included Italy (the Po valley, which is the main rice production area in Europe) as an important hub for apple snail dispersal and 
epidemics. To date, the measures adopted to combat the apple snail and stop its spread have failed but, in the autumn of 2013, 
a new strategy was explored with permission of the European Union. This strategy was to flood 2500 ha of infested fields with 
seawater in advance of the 2014 growing season. The sea water treatment proved 100% effec tive in destroying apple snail 
infestations [12], however, the residual salinity caused a loss of productivity of about 30% in some fields [20]. If Europe had salt 
tolerant lines, with genes introgressed from FL478 or IR64-Saltol, problems arising from such management interventions could 
be avoided, and in this way, the natural environment of European rice producing regions could be maintained along with local 
rice genotypes. 
Remote Salinity Monitoring. As seawater treatment of rice fields is one of the most effective methods for apple snail control, it 
is very important to control and know accurately the level of salt, measured through electric conductivity, in the fields. Moreover, 
the climate change effects will increase the abiotic pressure on coastal and estuary areas in Europe and thus will raise the 
importance of knowing the levels of salinity in those areas in real time. This will increase, in return, the use of salty water for field 
rinsing and the effect of climate change and pest control on water scarcity. Agriculture is by far the biggest consumer of water 
and rice is more water consuming than many other crops: in continuous flooding cultivation, it takes about six times the water 
required by wheat. In fact, rice production consumes about 30 % of all freshwater used worldwide and production is challenged 
by the increasing shortage of water resource in the world and by the limitation of wat er resource in the seasonal drought areas 
[30]. For this reason, the project is proposing the development of a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) for monitoring salinity in rice 
paddies in real time, prov iding the farmer a most valuable tool for improving the agricultural practices and the management of 
their fields while reducing environmental impact. Within this WSN, a decision support system will be developed to tailor the 
system to the needs of the agricultural community aiming at introducing smart-agriculture tools in the everyday management of 
fields. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  8 
Taking into consideration these concepts, the objectives of the NEURICE project are: (i) to identify and introgress salt tolerant genes from salt-tolerant varieties to European elite rice cultivars 
and (ii) to develop a wireless salinity sensor monitoring in order to be prepared for the forthcoming climate change and to combat the apple snail plague, which could decrease the production 
of the main producing Mediterranean rice regions (Fig. 1). 
 
Figure 1. Scheme explaining what will be accomplished in this project, including the goods derived from this project. *: goods. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
 
NEURICE 
 1.3.2 Positioning of the project (from “idea to application”) 
Since the main pillar of the call is related to Sustainable Food Security, we have designed the proposal in order to prepare 
the European rice sector to respond to the growing threats: abiotic and biotic stresses (i.e. salinity and apple snail infest ation). 
The proposal is focused to achieve within 4 years: i) salt tolerant European rice varieties ready for registration, commercialization 
and distribution; ii) advanced salinity monitoring systems and iii) study of new rice salt tolerance alleles for mid -term further 
improvement of the obtained varieties. 
The European salt tolerant lines produced in this project will be registered and commercialized by NEURICE partners (CAMARA, 
CFR, CRA  and SIS) to ensure lab to market positioning . We plan to develop a collaborative, interdiscipl inary area for 
stakeholder engagement and knowledge sharing of common issues and drivers that present challenges to adaptive management.  
 
This project will bring together experts in diverse fields such as plant breeding (CIRAD, CFR, CRA, CAMARA), biotechnology 
(UB, CRAG, CIRAD, CRA, UMIL, UGLA, INDEAR and CAAS), plant physiology (UB, UGLA, IRTA and UMIL), farming and 
agriculture development (IRTA, CAMARA, CFR, CRA and SIS ), electrophysiology and cell signalling (UGLA) and sal inity 
monitoring systems (IRIS). This joint will foster new opportunities for training and additional collaborative research. Furthermore, 
the project is an ‘early development’ project that has the capacity to move quickly to ‘premarket’ development and therefore offers 
substantial promise for agroindustrial stakeholders. 
Furthermore, the results co-produced in the NEURICE project will be broadly transmitted and disseminated to the rice farmers 
sector in the form of seminars and field demonstrations by research centers, IRTA (Spain), CIR AD (France) and CRA (Italy). 
These work sessions will allow farmers to better know how to use the new salt-tolerant varieties, as well as how salinity control 
will be monitorized by the systems created by IRIS that will ensure a better adoption of NEURICE project results.  
.  
TRL (Technology Readiness Levels) of the NEURICE project 
Considering the provisions of HORIZON 2020 – WORK PROGRAMME 2014-2015 Annexes G. Technology Readiness Levels 
(TRL), the innovation potential that NEURICE Project is delivering are (Table 1.3.2.a): 
i) At least two new salt tolerant rice varieties in each of three rice growing areas in Europe (Ebro delta in Spain, La 
Camargue in France and Po Delta in Italy). 
 
ii) A wireless sensors for salinity monitoring  
 
Table 1.3.2.a: Key elements of the NEURICE project and the TRLs before and after the work.  
Development or 
technology 
Initial 
TRL 
Final 
TRL Comment 
Two salt tolerant 
rice varieties in 
Spain 
TRL3 TRL7 
Two Spanish salt tolerant varieties obtained from the backcrosses in WP2, which uses 
2 already proven productive varieties (2 Elite Spanish varieties) and a salt tolerant 
variety (FL478), will be  registered after the large-scale trials performed on WP4. 
Two salt tolerant 
rice varieties in 
France 
TRL3 TRL7 
Two French salt tolerant varieties obtained from the backcrosses in WP2, which uses 2 
already proven productive varieties (2 Elite French varieties) and a salt tolerant variety 
(FL478), will be registered after the large-scale trials performed on WP4. 
Two salt tolerant 
rice varieties in 
Italy 
TRL3 TRL7 
Two Italian salt tolerant varieties obtained from the backcrosses in WP2, which uses 2 
already proven productive varieties (2 Elite Italian varieties) and a salt tolerant variety 
(FL478), will be registered after the large-scale trials performed on WP4. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  10 
Wireless sensor 
network and 
decision support 
system 
TRL4 TRL6 
The WSN has been proven at laboratory scale (TRL4) but in WP5 it will be validated in 
rice fields and the user interface will be tested with real farmers in WP4 and end-users 
final considerations will be assessed during open field days and seminars in WP6. 
 
 1.3.3 National and international research and innovation activities of partners 
Partners in volved in th is pro posal ha ve pa rticipated and/ or led national and/or i nternational research pr ojects, a nd 
therefore have the expertise and collected data that will be used to successfully achieve the aims of this proposal (Fig. 
2). 
 UB (PI Salvador Nogués) has participated in the COST project SIBAE ‘Stable isotopes in biosphere-atmosphere-earth 
system research (ES0806, 2009 -2012, 22 partners). UB, INDEAR are participating in the FP7 -KBBE-2011-5 project 
OPTIMA ‘Optimization of perennial grasses for biomass production in the Mediterranean environment (2011 -2015, 21 
partners), which is an inte rnational interdisciplinary project involving physiology, biotechnology, agronomy, socio -
economical and environmental analysis focused on important species of perennial grasses. 
 CRAG (PI Blanca San Segundo) is a public consortium that comprises research gr oups from the Spanish Research 
Council (CSIC), the Institute for Food and Agricultural Research and Technology (IRTA), the Autonomous University of 
Barcelona (UAB) and the University of Barcelona (UB). Areas of research at CRAG focus on the study of charac ters of 
interest in plants and farm animal species.  CRAG coordinated the ERA-Plant Genomics Project “Trilateral Initiative for 
Enhancing Salt Tolerance in Rice” (TRIESTER, ref. ERAPGFP/06.018B, 2007 -2010) in which 9 partners from Spain, 
France and Germany participated. Currently, CRAG and CRA are partners in the FACCE-JPI project on Climate Smart 
Agriculture ERA Net+ “Sustainable and Environmental friendly rice cultivation systems in Europe” -GreenRice that is 
coordinated by CIRAD (2014 -2017; 7 partners). C RAG was also Partner in the EURICE project (European Rice: 
transgenes for crop protection against fungal diseases (QLK5-1999-01484; 2000-2003), and together with IRTA, in the 
ERRI project (Engineering Rice for Insect Resistance; FAIR CT 97 -3761. BSS has been responsible for 13 Research 
Projects funded by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation focusing on the molecular/cellular mechanisms and 
signalling networks governing the plant response to biotic and abiotic stress in plants (mainly, rice). 
 CIRAD (PI Brigitte Courtois) and CRA were partners in the EU funded projects RESGEN (1999-2002) and EURIGEN 
(2007-2010) that contributed to a better characterization of the European rice genetic resources, notably in terms of 
salinity tolerance and the developm ent of an associated database 
(http://eurigendb.cirad.fr/eurigen_home/JSP/index.jsp).  
 CRA (PI Giampiero Valè) coordinated two national research projects, RESPAT and RISINNOVA. RESPAT is a project 
dedicated to genomics of plant pathogens interactions funded by the Italian Agriculture Research Council and the Italian 
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry ( MiPAF) (2009 -2011; 10 partners), while RISINNOVA is  a project dedicated to 
genetic and genomics research of rice adaptation to abiotic and biotic stresses, funded by AGER foundation (2011-2014; 
12 partners). CRA recently participated in several nati onal and international projects such as  POLORISO, GS-RUSE 
and FACCE-JPI. POLORISO is a scientific research on genetics and technology of rice, funded by MiPAAF (2011-2013; 
10 partners), GS -RUSE, Genomic selection for resources use efficiency in rice,  is funded by Cariplo and Agripolis 
Foundations (2012-2016; 7 partners), and FACCE-JPI project on Climate Smart Agriculture ERA Net+ “Sustainable and 
Environmental friendly rice cultivation systems in Europe” GreenRice (2014-2017; 7 partners). 
 UMIL (PI Gian Attilio Sacchi) has coordinated national and international research projects: 2011-2014 UE - FP7 - MC-
ITN “BIONUT: Biochemical and genetic dissection of control of plant nutrition”; 2011 -2014 Lombardy Region research 
program “BIOGESTECA: Platform of green biotechnologies and management techniques for an agricultural system with 
high environmental sustainability". UMIL has participated in projects about rice breeding strategies: 2011 -2014 AGER 
foundation research program “RISINNOVA: Integrated genetic and genomic approaches for new Italian rice breeding 
strategies”; 2012-2013 MiPAAF research program POLORISO scientific research on genetics and technology of Italian 
rice. UMIL is leader in performing single ionomic and metabolomic maps (produced adopting ICP-MS, GC-MS, LC-ESI-
MS/MS, and NMR techniques) and their informatics-based overlap. 
 UGLA (PI Michael Blatt) has contributed to EU (FPV) and HFSP programs since the 1990’s. It leads a bi -national 
(UK/USA) program (US $4.5M), initiated in 2011, that aims to develop synthetic approaches to improving photosynthetic 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  11 
capacity in crop species (MAGIC). UGLA also leads a multi -institutional program between Glasgow, Cambridge and 
Essex universities (£0.8M) to develop the next -generation OnGuard platform for modelling photosynthesis, gas 
exchange and water use by plants, and it holds some £1.5M in additional funding centred on stomatal physiology, 
synthetic membrane biology and alkali cation transport. 
 IRTA (PI María del Mar Català) is a research institution owned by the Autonomous Government of Catalonia and has 
managed the rice genetic resources in the Eu ropean projects UE - PL95 - RG3 and participated in Biology integrated 
control of Red Rice UE – FAIR 3 PL96 -1450, Quality a competitiveness of European rice UE – AIR 3 PL93 -2518, 
Engineering rice for resistance to insects UE – PL97-3761, European rice UE-QLRT – CT99-1484 and Deciphering the 
genetic basis of field resistance to blast in European rice varieties GEN 2006 -27764-C4-3-E, Sustainable and 
environmental friendly rice cultivation systems in Europe. GreenRice; 2014-2017.  IRTA has been designated as expert 
of the rice varieties national evaluation committee (Spain). IRTA has a wide experience on rice field trials. IRTA also has 
a close relationship with rice farmers in Spain, which is the key to transfer the innovation to the rice sector by open field 
days, seminars and technical papers. 
 INDEAR (PI Mercedes Rivero)  participates in different national and international Consortiums that include projects 
related to complex plant genomes sequencing, metagenomic environmental samples processing, the addressing of 
transcriptomic studies and health-related projects and the development of new technologies and traits in different crop 
species including rice. INDEAR participates in the OPTIMA consortium as Biotechnology leader; SOILGeNe, following 
a metagenomic strategy using  second generation sequencing technology. PasArg,  Pasturas Argentinas (Argentinean 
pastures) which is a support network of the National Agency for the Scientific and Technology Promotion (ANPCyT) – 
Argentine Sector Fund (FONARSEC) leading the development of molecular markers genotyping and characterization. 
 CAAS (PI Jiankang Wang)  has participated in dif ferent CGIAR projects, including the Integrated Breeding Platform 
(involving Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation), in the FP7 project OPTICHINA and in diverse Chinese national projects 
about genetic populations and information for increase breeding effectiveness.  He is the leader of the Quantitative 
Genetics Research Group at CAAS, which has developed an integrated linkage map construction and QTL mapping 
software. 
 CAMARA (PI Xavier Serrat)  is a rice farmer cooperative that has developed two LIFE European projects (LIFE 97 
ENV/E/000259 and LIFE02 ENV/E/000255) and two Research Executive Agency (REA) projects (Smart Paddy and 
RiceGuard) among others. CAMARA has als o developed national projects in cooperation with UB and has recently 
published high quality scientific articles [31, 32]. 
 IRIS (PI Pau Puigdollers) participated in the FP7 project Water-Bee DA (283638) “Water-Bee Smart Irrigation Systems 
Demonstration Action”; where they developed the Wireless Sensor Network and Decision Support System for irrigation 
management. IRIS coordinated the FP7 project Smart-Paddy (285861) “Smart on-line salinity measurement network to 
manage and protect rice fields”; where they developed a Wireless Sensor Network for real time salinity measurements 
in rice paddies. IRIS is coordinating the FP7 project Rice-Guard (606583) “In-field wireless sensor network to predict rice 
blast” where they are developing a wireless sensor network for weather monitoring inside rice -paddies and a user 
interface and decision support system based on a disease appearance model. 
 CFR (PI Arnaud Boisnard) has participated in many national and international projects aiming to improve rice growing 
practices and has registered more than 20 new rice varieties through its joint rice breeding program with CIRAD. CFR is 
also a partner in the GreenRice project. 
 SIS (PI Stefano Ravaglia ) has participated in many national and international projects (CEREALAB, SITEIA, 
GranaioItaliano, SIGRAD, WHEALBI) in collaboration with public institutions (e.g. CRA, MiiPAAF) and private  
companies(e.g. De Cecco, JFC, MARS) aiming to improve wheat and rice growing practices and new variety release. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  12 
 
Figure 2. Geographical distribution of the NEURICE partners. RTD and SMEs are shown in green and blue boxes, 
respectively. 
 
 1.3.4 The overall approach and methodology 
An evaluation of germplasm to identify new salt tolerant accessions and a lleles will be carried out. For this evaluation, 
phenotypical selection, physiological analysis, Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS) and allele mining wi ll be conducted 
on a germplasm collection of 300  japonica rice varieties and an available bi -parental population of 200 F6 RILs segregating for 
salt tolerance. This information will serve as a base for the results obtained in all the work packages. In parallel, a recently obtained 
high salinity tolerant variety called FL478 (IR29-Pokkali) will be used to introgress its salt tolerance chromosomal region into elite 
European cultivars (Fig. 3). FL478 is an advanced high-yielding and short cycle indica variety from the International Rice Research 
Institute (IRRI) introgressed with the Saltol salt tolerance chromosom al region from the well -known salt tolerant Pokkali Indian 
variety, so the crosses between FL478 and the European lines will produce high -yielding and salt tolerant varieties adapted to 
the European climate and market. Moreover, to fasten the crosses and breeding process, a molecular marker assisted 
backcrossing (MABC) selection technique will be coupled to an embryo rescue technique adaptation, which will allow us to obtain 
European varieties introgressed with Saltol region in just two years. To ensure that the FL478 salt tolerance alleles are 
introgressed, from F1 onward, along with a high amount of European parental genetic background, 60 to 70 KASPar markers will 
be used for the selection of the heterozygous plants and for background selection of the recurrent parent genome . The BC3F1 
plants will be self-pollinated in order to obtain homozygous Saltol BC3F2 plants and select those lines with the best return toward 
the recurrent parent(s). A set of approximately 20 BC3F3 homozygous Saltol lines from each country will be evaluated through 
hydroponic assays in greenhouse conditions under experimentally controlled salinity (0mM NaCl and 100 mM NaCl) inclu ding 
salt tolerant and salt sensitive (European) parental lines as controls. Non-destructive phenotyping protocols (thermal imaging and 
chlorophyll fluorescence) will be used to validate salt tolerant lines.  
Moreover, the Saltol donor ( FL478) and the most promising salt tolerant line from each country will be assessed again in 
hydroponic assays under 4 different salinity levels (0mM, 50 mM, 100mM and 150 mM). Deeper analysis for different physiological 
traits will be used to quantify traits in relation to Na+ and K+ transport and redistribution to further characterize one of the most  
promising salt tolerant lines of each country to compare with FL478 data. These analysis are: Na+ compartimentation analysis by 
fluorescent laser scanning confocal microscopy of root tissue vacuoles (CoroNa+ staining), leaf chlorophyll content, assessment 
of membrane integrity through evaluation of electrolyte leakage, determination of major membrane sterols by GC/MS ICPOES 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  13 
and direct electrophysiological methods. In addition, biochemical markers of oxidative stress (glutathione and malondialdehyde 
levels) will be evaluated on selected salt tolerant lines to characterize salt stress response of the rice accessions. Finall y, the 
expression level of genes involved in the sulphur metabolism (i.e. SULTR genes) will be analysed along with the expression level 
of other genes known to be involved in the response to salt stress using RNAseq in one line selected from each country lines.  
Six advanced breeding lines from each country will be assayed in salinized and non-salinized fields in the years 2018 and 2019 
in Ebro, Po and Rhône river deltas. For both years, the procedure will be as following: BC3F4 rice lines selected from BC3F3, as 
well as two salt tolerant japonica rice cultivars/RILs accessions, validated in hydroponic assays, will be evaluated for salt tolerance 
and commercial potential in terms of quality, productivity and cultivability to ensure that the original recipient traits are maintained. 
Lines will be tested in the natural growing area of their European parents, in this way, Italian accessions will be tested in the Po 
river delta, Spanish lines in the Ebro river delta and French accessions in the Rhône river delta. Parental lines used to obtain the 
new backcrossed lines will be included in the field trials as controls. For each line, salt tolerance, quality, yield and industrial traits 
will be assessed. Moreover, salinity will be monitored using a Wireless Sensor Network, based on low cost electrical conductivity 
sensors and an autonomous power supply based on energy harvesting which will provide real time data of the salinity conditions 
of the rice paddies, developed within this project in both, Spanish and Italian fields. Productivity, quality and industrial traits will 
be evaluated in rice grains of the selected tolerant lines. A work plan to disseminate and transfers the results to the society,  
research centers and universities and the rice -farming sector will be implemented. Its objective will be guaranteeing the proper 
transfer of the results obtained in this project using a website, publications, posters, journal articles and seminars. Open field days 
will be performed in 2018 and 2019 to explain to rice farmers how the new varieties should be used, how the wireless sen sor 
network works, and how to deal with salinity in rice paddies whether it is due to the climate change effects or to the saltwa ter 
treatments to stop the apple snail pest. Moreover, at the end of the project, the end -users will benefit from the new salt tolerant 
lines registered by the competent partners in each country for its commercialization in the European community as well as other 
countries all over the world. 
 
 
Figure 3. Scheme and schedule of the Marker Assisted Back-Cross (MABC) breeding. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  14 
 1.3.5 Sex/gender issue 
Partners’ institutions have equal opportunity policies.  No sex or gender discrimination was u sed in the p articipants' 
selection. All personnel were enrolled only on the basis of their professional expertise and motivated personal interest to participate 
in the common European research. We are also unusually well balanced in terms of gender (ca. 45% are female participants), 
with women taking many of the leading roles. Among female participants, there are high quality experts:  
 Marta López-Carbonell and Teresa Sauras from University of Barcelona (P1, UB). 
 Blanca San Segundo leader (PI) from Center for Research in Agricultural Genomics (P2, CRAG). 
 Brigitte Courtois (PI) leader of the Agricultural Research for Development (P3, CIRAD). 
 Elena Baldoni from Università degli Studi di Milano (P5, UMIL)  
 Maria del Mar Català (PI) and Fanny Alvaro from Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentària (P7, IRTA). 
 Mercedes Rivero (PI) leader the Instituto de Agrobiotecnología Rosario (P8, INDEAR). 
 Roser Llaó Garcia and Mònica Reverté Calvet from la Cámara Arrocera del Montsià (P10, CAMARA).  
 
To promote gender-equality in terms of decision -making, three women are WP leaders. Thus, Brigitte Courtois is the leader of 
WP2 due to her expertise in rice breeding, Blanca San Segundo is the leader of WP3 due to her expertise in rice physiology and 
genomics, and finally Maria del Mar Català is the leader of WP6 due to her expertise in conducting field seminars to communicate 
and transfer knowledge and results to farmers. All partners will encourage application of female researchers when recruiting 
additional project personnel or students. The project itself is considered as gender neutral in terms of its research priorities and 
impact. 
 
 
 1.4. Ambition 
 1.4.1 Ambitions of NEURICE 
The main ambition of NEURICE is to develop  two new salt tolerant European elite varieties per each Mediterranean 
country involved in the project (Spain, France and Italy) to be commercialized in Europe. This will be done through a multi-actor 
approach for the protection of European rice production from emerging abiotic (salt stress due to climate change) and biotic 
(apple snail, which is controlled with seawater treatments ). These problems could pose serious losses in the European rice 
production (that has already decreased between 2013 and 2014).  
The project addresses the challenges of both abiotic and biotic stress threats, and does so taking advantage of the 
consequences of one to control the other. Climate change impacts on European rice threat to reduce yields as a consequence of 
paddy salinization. Introducing salt-tolerant alleles, including the major QTL region called Saltol recently discovered that confers 
a strong salt tolerance, into commercial elite European rice varieties will relieve the negative effects of salinization in rice cultivation 
and will greatly improve rice seed commerce and rice genotypes in Europe through the registration of these new salt tolerant elite 
European rice varieties. Consequently, these new varieties will help to grow rice where the salinity levels, due to climate change 
or natural salinization, have increased to high levels.  Moreover, these varieties will also permit to use the only effective method, 
seawater flooding of rice paddies, for eradicating apple snail infestations that are currently spreading through several major rice-
producing areas around the Mediterranean zone and that have proven to be a severe plague in Asia, Central and North America. 
Different projects are being developed to face the climate change effects on rice. Some of them face greenhouse gases emissions 
such as Ebro Admiclim (http://www.lifeebroadmiclim.eu/es/) LIFE project in Europe and GLOBAL RESEARCH ALLIANCE (Asia-
LatinAmerica consortium) projects ( http://www.globalresearchalliance.org/research/paddy-rice-research-group/). Other projects 
try to face  flooding problems caused by the climate  change, such as CLUES (http://irri.org/networks/climate-change-affecting-
land-use-in-the-mekong-delta) in Mekong delta. Others try to modify the management prac tices to reduce water consumption 
such as CLIMARICE ( http://www.climarice.org/) in India. Other projects are focused in avoiding salinity through interspecific 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  15 
hybridizations between Oryza sativa and O. glaberrima, such as STRASA in Africa ( http://strasa.irri.org/), while others try to 
discover new salt tolerant alleles in American rice varieties  
(http://www.ars.usda.gov/research/projects/projects.htm?accn_no=426485). 
Recently, a major QTL for salt tolerance has been found in Pokkali, an ancient rice variety from Kerala (India), which confers salt 
tolerance up to 150 mM NaCl. This revolutionary salt tolerance QTL called Saltol has been introgressed into IR29 line by IRRI to 
obtain FL478 (IR 66946-3R-178-1-1), that has been promoted as an improved donor for breeding programs, as it has a high level 
salinity tolerance and is photoperiod insensitive, shorter and flowers earlier than the original Pokkali landrace [33-35]. 
Introgression of the Saltol region from FL478 into other indica rice varieties has successfully produced new salt tolerant varieties 
in Vietnam [36, 37] and India [38], but no studies have been developed about Saltol introgressions in European temperate rice 
accessions or even in temperate japonica rice accessions in general. 
In this project, new salt tolerant temperate japonica rice accessions will be identified, and a GWAS analysis will be performed to 
determine loci involved in salt tolerance as well as an evaluation of allelic diversity in candidate salt tolerance genes through allele 
mining. Moreover, the methodologies proposed to obtain new varieties combine classical breeding assisted with molecular 
markers with a nd in vitro  embryo rescue technique  that permits germinating embryos 10 days after fertilization . Thus, 
performing these methodologies with different rice varieties from thr ee rice -producing countries in Europe will advance rice 
breeding programs and will lead rice research . In addition, it will broaden the knowledge needed to develop salt tolerance in  
temperate japonica rice varieties (the most produced and consumed rice  cultivars in Europe) since the current information is 
available only for indica and tropical japonica rice varieties.  In addition, phenotypical selection along with physiological, 
biochemical, genomic and transcriptomic assays and studies will be carried out through the project . This approach will expand 
knowledge on salt tolerance mechanis ms of rice at the physiological and molecular level , which are at this time still not fully 
understood, even though rice has been cultivated in Europe since the 8th century [39]. Some of these techniques are detailed 
Na+/K+ studies (transport, distribution and translocation), ROS measure ments and RNA sequencing. The knowledge obtained 
will serve to establish where new salt tolerant varieties should be used and which ones are best applied in new breeding programs. 
Finally, candidate salt tolerant lines will be tested in rice paddy fields to assess their commerciality within the European rice 
farming and industry sector. The field trials will be accompanied by a remote salinity monitoring system using a wireless sensor 
network. These remote salinity monitoring systems will be developed to alert rice farmers and the rice industry about the use of 
the salt tolerant varieties and will help avoid losses due to the salinity increase in the fields or to reduce the environmental impact 
of seawater flooding for pest control . To achieve these ambitious objectives, the NEURICE project relies on innovative 
breakthroughs in plant and pathogen biology fostered from (i) one side by the knowledge of the rice crop genome sequence for 
the identification and introduction of useful genetic variation and (ii) from other approaches for land management that will be 
applied. This project is also designed in order to develop ambitious and ground-breaking objectives such as the joint approach to 
salinity problems using new salt tolerant varieties with remote salinity monitoring systems in order to evaluate, control and respond 
to the complex interactions of specific management interventions. Moreover, the NEURICE consortium will ensure that the end-
users involved in this project (CFR, SIS,  CRA, CAMARA) will send new tolerant lines to registry and to make them available to 
the rice-industry and rice-farming sector. 
 
1.4.2 Innovation potential of NEURICE 
The NEURICE project will use a combination of Molecular marker assisted breeding and embryo rescue techniques 
to rapidly and efficiently obtain and commercialize salt tolerant European rice varieties. An efficient and rapid salt tolera nce 
introgression protocol adapted to local constraints will be developed for European rice accessions. The innovation aspect comes 
from the background in which the chromosome segment carrying the Saltol region QTL will be introgressed. Such transfer has 
not yet been attem pted in temperate japonica rice. The material produced will enable to validate the effect of the QTL coming 
from an indica rice background in a temperate japonica rice background and assess the extent of the possible QTL x g enetic 
background interactions. 
Presence of new loci conferring tolerance to mild salinity stress will be investigated within a germplasm panel of japonica rice 
through a GWAS approach and within a biparental RIL population through a linkage mapping approach. Non -destructive high-
throughput phenotyping procedures, conducted on paddy soil in controlled environment, will assess the two mapping procedures 
and candidate genes will be characterized by allele mining. The study will provide both information about salt tolerance loci in a 
japonica genetic background and led to the identification of japonica accessions bearing mild tolerance to salt stress. These 
activities will take advantage from the GreenRice Project’s work in which salt tolerance evaluations of germplasm collections will 
be carried out in hydroponic conditions. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  16 
A challenge for the project will be to conduct the introgression program at the rate of three generations per year in order to have 
products usable in the framework of the project. To achieve this propose we will fasten M olecular marker assisted breeding by 
coupling it to embryo rescue technique that permits embryo germination 7 days after fertilization. This goal will allow to develop 
a  marker-aided backcross scheme enabling both to reduce the size of the introgressed se gment to the smallest possible size 
and ensuring an almost perfect return toward the recipient parent, and to accompany it by an excellent logistic. Once tested and 
validated by the three partners (CAMARA, CFR, SIS), this scheme could be used for similar introgression work using other genes.  
Furthermore, the methods to assess the salt tolerance of the material will use a combination of high throughput techniques (infra-
red imaging) at the plant level and advanced techniques looking at salt effect up to the cell level. Finally, innovative salt tolerance 
allele detection techniques will be used to identify new sources of salt tolerance alleles in japonica rice cultivars and monitor salt 
tolerance inheritance inbred lines.  
A high reliability remote salinity m onitoring systems, wireless sensor network,  will be developed for salt resistant field trials in 
order to control and improve the effects of salinity on the productivity of the rice fields. Through the development of a low -cost 
monitoring system it will be possible to control large rice areas while obtaining accurate local data of salinity, and thus of the effect 
of the proposed water management interventions. The innovation of this wireless sensor network will help give the rice sector key 
feedback for management practices by allowing to evaluate the environmental changes in regards to salinity, and thus use the 
new salt tolerant varieties to mitigate its damage. 
Currently, there are no European rice varieties available for European farmers with sufficient salt tolerance to face salinity 
problems. Thus, the project will produce advanced breeding lines with a high level of salinity tolerance in locally adapted genetic 
backgrounds and to test their adaptation in a range of environments. The best one(s) of thes e new lines will be selected to be 
later registered and commercialized as cultivar(s), increasing the basket of varieties available for farmers. Among the partn ers, 
there are institutions which are conducting conventional breeding programs for the target a rea (CAMARA, CFR,CRA and SIS) 
and who are the best at testing relevant traits of the cultivars, and ensuring a fast transmission of the advanced material t o the 
farmers.   
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  17 
2. Impact
2.1 Expected impacts  
  The NEURICE project is under the topic SFS-05-2015, so the project impacts are those connected with the work 
programme and the impacts defined in this topic description (Table 2.1.a.). 
 
Table 2.1.a: Specific call addressed. 
What the call says How NEURICE responds 
Increased knowledge on 
complex plant-environment 
interactions and suitable 
combinations of genotypes 
and management practices. 
Knowledge should be used 
in various ways, i.e. feed into 
different user communities 
(researchers, breeders, 
farming practitioners). 
An increased knowledge on the interactions of rice culture in highly salinized fields 
using elite European rice varieties introgressed with salt tolerance genes. These new 
varieties will protect the rice sector from productivity loses due to salinity levels derived from 
the climate change and from treating fields with seawater to stop the apple snail infestation. 
The know-how of growing these new varieties will be fed into the EU end -users (CAMARA, 
SIS, CRA and CFR), which include the rice-industry sector and the rice -farming sector. In 
addition, management practices will be improved through matching data form the field trials 
with different salt concentrations and different rice varieties, with data from the 
implementation of the developing remote salinity monitoring system. 
Development of novel 
breeding strategies and tools 
for continuous support to a 
dynamic breeding sector 
 
The new salt tolerant elite European rice varieties wi ll be obtained with a novel 
breeding strategy, that includes molecular marker assisted breeding coupled with embry o 
rescue on immature seeds. It will be entirely developed within the NEURICE project, i.e. the 
introgression of salt tolerance into elite European varieties using the most salt resistance 
alleles from resistant rice lines such as Pokkali, FL478 and IR64-Saltol. It has been reported 
that Pokkali and FL478 can grow up to 150mM NaCl concentrations, while the most salt 
tolerant European cultivars just can tolerate salinity ranges between 30 and 60 mM. This 
development will broaden the knowledge on salinity tole rance alleles and will therefore 
support productivity and stability of the agricultural sector in Europe and possibly beyond. 
Improved varieties and crop 
management strategies 
which allow for increased 
diversity and show higher 
adaptability to particular 
environments including 
under a changing climate. 
The new improved salt tolerant varieties will allow maintaining the natural 
environment of the rice growing regions as well as increasing rice diversity for a higher 
adaptability to particular environments, including abiotic and biotic stresses tolerance to face 
a changing climate scenario. In addition, the apple snail dispersion throughout Europe can 
be stopped or even eradicated thanks to the availability of these new salt tolerant European 
varieties, as se awater treatments of infested fields (that proved 100% efficacy) can be 
resumed, avoiding less effective and highly contaminant chemical strategies. 
Over a longer term, 
knowledge and tools created 
shall support productivity 
and stability of the 
agricultural sector in Europe 
and possible beyond. 
The consortium of the NEURICE project involves Spain, France and Italy, which are 
accounted for an 83% of the European rice production, thus this project will contribute to 
reinforce the position of the EU in the fi eld of plant health and cereal production, 
attractiveness of research European centres in plant sciences and innovation in the 
European rice sector. Moreover, this project addresses a common societal challenge of vital 
concern on food safety, by providing control strategies against the imminent climate change 
and a possible pest of rice that is known to cause huge yield losses. The WSN system 
developed within NEURICE intends to become part of the tools used in agricultural practises 
and field management in order to improve the productivity of agriculture in Europe, but also 
in all areas where salinity is a problem or a potential threat due to climate change. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  18 
Other impacts (not explicitly listed in the call):   
Along with developing new salt tolerant varieties, a wireless salinity monitoring sensor network will be developed by IRIS, which 
will alert the rice farmers and cooperatives of salinity increments so they can shift to grow the salt tolerant varieties developed in 
the project. 
Identification of mild s alt stress tolerant loci and accessions in japonica background through utilization of mapping approaches 
coupled with non-destructive phenotyping will permit advancing in rice salt tolerance knowledge and, as a consequence, will 
permit introgress other additive salt tolerant loci to the European advanced Saltol lines to further increase the rice salt tolerance 
in future rice breeding programs. 
The multi -actor approach of the NEURICE project will strengthen research and innovation collaboration between Europ e, 
Argentina and People’s Republic of China in line with priorities identified under existing policy dialogues and related projects and 
initiatives. In addition, it will improve the innovation capacity and growth of companies by developing new products such new salt 
tolerant varieties and salinity monitoring systems, which meet the needs of European markets. NEURICE involves end -users, 
CAMARA, CFR, CRA and SIS, which will commercialize these new varieties and will be prepared to face problems due to climate 
change perturbations and/or apple snail plague so that the EU rice sector maintains their productivity and stability. 
Moreover, the NEURICE project will support the development of an innovative ecosystem in the agrifood sector in the EU  and 
the development of the European Innovation Partnership on productive and sustainable agriculture (EIP -AGRI). The agrifood 
sector needs to answer the societal and consumer demand for safe, healthy and sustainable food, while continuing to export (i.e. 
the rice exports were maintained at 212,000 t in 2014) and compete in international markets providing jobs for more than 4 million 
people across Europe. The EU has about 14 million farmers with a further 4 million people working in the food sector. The farming 
and food sectors together provide 7% of all jobs and generate 6% of European gross domestic product. The agrifood sector in 
the EU plays a central role for its economic importance and also for its social and environmental implications. 
At the same time, there are wide v ariations within the agricultural sector in the EU that must be considered. The structure and 
characteristics of this sector can be very different, with different actors assuming distinct roles and having different w eights 
according to the country (i.e. farmers, farmer associations, SMEs, research centres).  The EU recognises the need to promote 
cooperation amongst the different actors of this sector, but especially between the “producers” of science a nd technology and 
end-users.  
There is therefore a need f or strategies that generate the necessary confidence among innovation actors and to link them 
effectively, as well as to integrate the needs from end users (farmers, coop eratives, SME´s) in the innovation chain. This will 
contribute to align the development of innovative products and services to the existing supply of knowledge and technology from 
research centres and universities.  The NEURICE project will provide good practices  and recommendations adapted to the 
different EU countries, to help them in the development of this innovative sector.
2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
 
2.2.1. Dissemination and exploitation of results  
When constructing NEURICE work -plan, particular attention has been paid to actions that can adequately support an 
integrated knowledge, a dissemination strategy and an effective exploitation of the project results. For this, the NEURICE project 
has prepared several activities oriented towards results dissemination to general and scientific public. Moreover, we need to  
ensure salt tolerant rice lines registration and commercialization at the industrial level as well as of the wireless sensor network, 
while complementing with activities specifically orientated to the seed industry, European rice sector companies and European  
rice cooperatives and farmers in order to show the new lines growing in paddies and ensure the knowledge transfer (WP6). 
NEURICE project will launch and maintain a website to ensure proper dissemination and transfer of the ongoing development of 
the different work packages and to serve as a platform for researchers and rice seed industries interested in the project to contact 
any of the partners involved. Project leaflets, posters, presentations as well as publications in periodic press releases in local, 
regional, national, and international newspapers will be done. Partners also have a commitment to publish the breakthrough 
results obtained in this project to ensure its transfer and availability to researchers in Europe and all over the world. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  19 
In order to support the elite European salt tolerant rice lines (final product) commercialization, and to support availability for the 
seed industry and rice farmers, rice farmer associations and cooperatives are involved in open field days demonstrations to rice 
farmers. These open field days will be performed in Rhône delta (CFR), Po delta (CRA) and Ebro delta (IRTA), which will include 
seminars and field demonstrations to show the new lines. Furthermore, in order to support wireless sensor network to monitor 
salinity (final product), IRIS will be accompanied by CFR, CRA and IRTA in the previously mentioned open field days in Rhône 
delta (CFR), Po delta (CRA) and Ebro delta (IRTA). IRIS will conduct seminars to  explain the application of the wireless sensor 
network to monitor salinity to know when there will be need to use these new elite European salt tolerant lines.  
These activities will ensure knowledge transfer and exploitation of the results obtained in the NEURICE project. 
The Communication and Dissemination plan will also define a model and the mechanisms for engaging the agricultural European 
Innovation Partnership (EIP -AGRI) Service Point and the different EIP national/regional networks in the project, including the 
connection with EIP databases. The main goal is to use the NEURICE outcomes, activities and material to feed the EIP website 
and update and maintain their database. This model will include: 
 The identification of different relevant players at EU and national /regional levels; 
 The definition of protocols and standards to ensure the embedment with the existing EIP networks (EU EIP network 
and the different national EIP networks that will be created in the EU Member States, following RDP 
recommendations); 
 Development of the framework for the participation of interested institutions and co-ownership of the system. 
 
Initial business and exploitation plans  
Over the course of the project we will develop new rice varieties with salt resistance and a wireless sensor network with a decision 
support system for improved agricultural practises. The project outputs are highly relevant for future market exploitation. Critically, 
all the expected impacts from this project that have been discussed in Section 2.1 can only be realised through a robust post -
project exploitation strategy. Our intention is to realise all the exploitation pathways for the results:  
a) Commercial exploitation- the industrial use of the project knowledge and outputs for increased competitiveness and 
growth will deliver high innovation and growth impacts;  
b) Education and training- the use of the new knowledge generated for upskilling and for enriching curricula in European 
education will have a high impact for raise the European rice and agriculture knowledge base;  
c) Further research- planning future spin-out research and development projects especially in areas that will contribute to 
the transferability of the project results to new applications;  
d) Contribution to standards- the project results can contribute to rice variety breeding standards for example.  
 
Each partner has communicated clear exploitation expectations (table 2.2.1.a), which will be planned in greater detail during Task
6.3 Knowledge transfer and exploitation of results. Importantly, a first exploitation/business plan has been drawn up considering 
the contribution of the results to patents, to new or existing products, services, infrastructures, knowledge bases and stand ards, 
to ensure the project innovations are delivered to the market.    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  20 
Table 2.2.1.a: Summary of exploitation intentions of the NEURICE partners. 
 
Participant No Acronym Intention for use of project results 
1 UB  Developed knowledge and further research on rice breeding, salt stress tolerance and 
embryo rescue in vitro technique. 
2 CRAG Use of gained knowledge in genetics and molecular tools in breeding programmes for 
tolerance to salt stress in rice. 
3 CIRAD Development and release of new rice varieties. Publications associated with this release. 
4 CRA Develop knowledge on genetics for salt tolerance and salt tolerant lines 
5 UMIL 
To identify new sources of salt tolerance alleles in japonica rice cultivars and to improve 
knowledge on rice responses to salt stress, including effects on grain nutritional quality 
(micronutrients accumulation and inorganic toxic element - mainly Cd and As - exclusion).  
6 UGLA Detailed knowledge and dissemination relating to ion transport and partitioning characteristics 
of rice tissues, their relationship to transpiration, photosynthetic capacity and yield factors. 
7 IRTA Transfer of the technologies developed (new salt-tolerant varieties and wireless sensor 
networks) to Ebro Delta river farmers. 
8 INDEAR 
To contribute to the identification of new salt tolerant varieties and salt tolerant alleles in rice, 
providing new opportunities for the future of salt tolerance improvement and development in 
this crop. 
9 CAAS Project outputs will be included in some graduate courses at the Graduate School of CAAS, 
and the regular international training course on Genetic Mapping and Breeding Design 
10 CAMARA Commercialization of salt-tolerant Spanish rice varieties in order to fight against the apple snail 
pest and face Ebro Delta progressive salinization  
11 IRIS 
Use of knowledge generated in relation to the wireless sensor networks and decision support 
systems for commercial purposes in products/services provided. Interest in commercialisation 
of the NEURICE technologies. 
12 CFR 
Commercialization of salt-tolerant French rice varieties to face the yield reduction due to  the 
progressive salinization of Rhône delta, while been prepared in order to address the apple 
snail pest through sea water treatments. 
13 SIS 
Commercialization of high quality and salt-tolerant Italian rice varieties suitable for cultivation 
in Po Delta and Sardinia rice areas subjected to progressive salinization and been prepared in 
order to address the apple snail pest. 
 
In terms of the measures that will be in place in order to effectively plan for the exploitation of the results of the project, first of all 
an Innovation Committee will be established, consisting of qualified representatives from each of the partners. This Committee 
will be responsible for effectively planning for the post -project use of the results through both the commercial and new research 
routes. In order to assist in this effort and to ensure that both exploitation routes are effectively addressed and prioritised over the 
course of the project, an Innovation Manager, Prof. Blanca Sansegundo from CRAG, will lead the planning of the industrial 
exploitation route in the industry. The Technical Manager, Prof Gian Attilio Sacchi from UMIL, will lead the consortium in planning 
for future research directions that could emerge in order to build on the knowledge generated during the project. These managers 
will be re sponsible for leading the Innovation Committee in implementing the measures for planning for the post -project 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  21 
exploitation of the results. They will both work closely with the IPR (Intellectual Property Rights) Manager, Mr Pau Puigdollers 
from IRIS, to ensure that the results are properly protected in a timely manner and that access rights are defined and agreed. 
They will also work closely with the Communication and Dissemination Manager, Ms Mar Català from IRTA, to ensure that the 
dissemination activities serve as powerful tools for stimulating future use of the NEURICE results. As an example: disseminating 
in relevant international exhibitions and trade shows in the case of facilitating future commercial exploitation; disseminating in EIP 
Agri, PRIMA, SFS and Horizon 2020 events, as well as at conferences for attracting and identifying further research opportunities 
to build on the results; etc.  
How the proposed measures will help to achieve the expected impact of the project 
Fundamental to achieving the expected impacts of this project, is to enable SMEs to enter the research-development-innovation 
cycle of crop productivity and farm management and to ensure the project effort takes industry closer to bringing new technologies, 
processes and products onto the market to benefit society and the environment and to lead to growth and value added jobs in 
Europe. To realise these goals, there is a strong innovation dimension/cycle in the project approach with a view to increasing 
the likelihood of continuity of the established ecosystem, as well as market uptake of project results for European 
agricultural sustainability, competitiveness, growth, and jobs.  
Strong industry and academia involvement in the consortium, backed by robust knowledge management, knowledge transfer 
and market exploitation plans, will contribute to ensuring that the NEURICE project is successful in transitioning knowledge 
towards the market. A key measure for contributing to industry adoption of research results lies in a R&D offering that is founded 
on the agricultural industry requirements. It is noteworthy that the NEURICE work plan is based on a rising problem for the r ice 
sector across Europe, which  has a potential for severely affecting agricultural productivity. To this end, the R&D w ork is 
implemented with industry, market, regulatory and end user considerations and constraints in mind.  
It is noteworthy that this consortium is led by UB, who has vast experience in leading European R&D projects, and counts with 4 
SMEs which have already been part of research projects and that are geared towards market-oriented exploitation. Linking 
industry with the right RTOs is vital for success. To this end, the involvement of RTOs of international renown in the fields  of 
breeding (CIRAD, CFR, CRA, CAMARA), biotechnology (UGLA, UB, CRAG, UMIL, CRA, INDEAR and CAAS), plant physiology 
(UB, UGLA, IRTA, UMIL and CRA), farming and agriculture development (IRTA, CAMARA, CFR and UMIL), electrophysiology 
and cell signalling (UGLA) and salinity monitoring systems (IRIS), thereby fostering new opportunities for training and additional 
collaborative research. This ‘early development’ project has the capacity to move quickly to ‘premarket’ development and therefore 
offers substantial promise for agroindustrial stakeholders.  These will help in transferring research results to industry, as well as 
providing training and educational programmes, added value assets, which when combined with industry drive will ensure we 
bridge the innovation gap that frequently prevents industry adoption the results and R&D outputs. 
While the involvement of industry in R&D consortia increases the success rate of market -oriented exploitation , vertical 
integration (i.e. including the whole value chain)  in R&D projects is a success factor  for market-oriented exploitation. The 
consortium counts a synergistic mix of technology SME companies (IRIS) and agricultural SMEs (CAMARA, CFR, SIS) which are 
committed to routing project outputs to market. Moreover, SIS as an international seed company will act as end user enlarging 
the direct market uptake of the project results. They all have the in-house R&D capacity to perform further advancements of the 
TRLs to achieve a minimum level of vali dation and commercial viability. They  will pave the way fo rward for a timely 
commercialisation phase to see the upgraded agricultural practises and productivity being swiftly used towards full products and 
market adoption of the NEURICE solutions within 2 years of project completion. They will also contribute to technology push as 
they are not only charged to contribute to the R&D effort, especially in the context of scale-up, integration and demonstration 
of the results during the project ,  but can absorb the knowledge generated, in order to quickly commercialise the project 
outputs. This way they can serve strong industry demand that will be stimulated because of the market pull generated by the 
participating end-users (SIS), as well as other in the agricultural industry, end -users of salt resistant plant varieti es, and smart 
agriculture companies. Importantly , the inclusion of partners that are experts in supporting farmers and ensuring stability and 
productivity of agriculture (IRTA, CRA) and in market uptake ( CAMARA, SIS) is an important added value for the con sortium. 
Furthermore, they will contribute to ensuring a systematic and methodological approach to planning for the important post-project 
exploitation stage is in place from the project outset to ensure success.   
Ensuring that measures are in place to id entify and study the impacts of relevant rice varieties aspects, regulations and the 
requirements of industry standards will contribute to ensuring that are no market obstacles could prevent the future commerci al 
adoption of the NEURICE  technologies post project. In addition, the validation (field trials WP 4) will include productivity 
assessments, as well as salt tolerance tests for ensuring a wide use across different salinity stress conditions, as well as 
confirming its cost competitiveness and its environmental benefits. Furthermore, the results will provide invaluable data for helping 
to push the results to the market, and at the same time stimulating market pull.  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  22 
As seed breeding, rice growing and remote field condition monitoring cover highly multidisciplinary fields, there is a high doorstep 
for smaller companies and farmers. To overcome this, different points are needed for raising technical skills and the knowledge 
base among the rice farming, seed breeding and agriculture technology industry: 
 Structured knowledge transfer and training effort towards the industry on the use of newly developed rice varieties with 
induced salt resistance. 
 The wireless sensor network use for agricultural management. 
 The competitive and wider socio-economic benefits of enhanced agricultural production through research, and standards 
and regulations.  
This way we can ensure they are prepared for management decisions in relation to the investments in novel breeding lines and 
new technology deployment. This will be shown through the training activities organised in Task 6.3 Knowledge transfer and 
exploitation of results, as well as through the exploitation route of using the project knowledge for future training and education 
programmes by IRTA.  
Other aspects will also increase the likelihood of market uptake of the project results: 
 Sound management of the knowledge generated during the project. 
 Active planning in relation to post-project exploitation activities for industrialisation of the most market ready results. 
 Further research work for escalating along the TRLs, or indeed for application of the platform knowledge generated 
during this project beyond the rice industry (other cereals, fruit and vegetables). 
 A solid communication strategy to disseminate the non-confidential aspects of the result to the European sectors related 
to the project EIP -AGRI, SFS, PRIMA community and beyond, as well as to market actors and multipliers,  and policy 
makers. 
As an example, the results obtained in the NEURICE project will be transmitted to the rice farmers sector in the form of seminars 
and field demonstrations by the research centers, IRTA (Spain), CIRAD (France) and CRA (Italy). These work sessions will 
explain to farmers how to use the new varieties, as well as how salinity levels can be monitorized by the systems created in the 
NEURICE project. 
The business plans that will be drawn up during Task 6.3 Knowledge transfer and exploitation of results, building on the preliminary 
exploitation plans outlined in this document, will provide the details on how the project’s results will be used in commercial 
exploitation activities, for training purposes, for further research activities as well as for standardisation activities.  
In short, all the ingredients are present to achieve the expected impact of the project-sound innovation measures and a relevant 
value chain of actors in the consortium who are in pursuit of a common goal. 
How the participants will manage the research data generated and/or collected during the project 
The NEURICE project will not participate in the Pilot Open Access Research Data scheme, and all the research data generated 
by the project will be used for the purposes of the development of the project results. 
Strategy for knowledge management and protection 
To pave the way forward for commercial exploitation and dissemination of the project results, the consortium will implement an 
integral strategy for the effective management of this knowledge  based on the IPR definition and dissemination of non -
confidential results.  
 
Background IPR and access rights 
Background- information and knowledge (including inventions, databases, etc.) held by the participants prior to their accession 
to the EC grant agreement, as well as any intellectual property rights which are needed for carrying out the project or for using 
foreground1 held by the consortium, or indeed by third parties  will be defined in Consortium Agreement to be signed in the first 
six months of the project. The current status of the Background being brought to the proje ct by the consortium is listed in Table 
2.2.1.b. Access to Background that is, or will be found to be, necessary for the implementation of the project will be granted 
                                                 
1 REGULATION (EU) No 1290/2013 Of The European Parliament And Of The Council  of 11 December 2013 laying down the rules for par ticipation and 
dissemination in "Horizon 2020 - the Framework  Programme for Research and Innovation (2014-2020)" and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1906/2006 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  23 
royalty free and background needed to use the results of the project will be provided either royalty free or under fair and 
reasonable conditions. 
 
Table 2.2.1.b: Preliminary background per beneficiary, to be detailed in the Consortium Agreement 
Participant No Acronym Preliminary background 
1 UB Knowledge in Rice breeding and embryo rescue applied in embryos 10 days after fertilization. 
Knowledge in oxidative stress evaluation.  
2 CRAG 
Knowledge of molecular and cellular responses to salinity stress in plants, including oxidative 
stress and membrane functions. Gene expression and signalling p athways in relation to salt 
stress. Rice genotyping. Knowledge and skills to assess tolerance to salinity in rice. 
3 CIRAD Knowledge in molecular and cellular responses to salinity stress in plants. 
4 CRA 
Knowledge in association and linkage mapping, ger mplasm resources exploitation, allele 
mining, marker -assisted selection, rice breeding for abiotic stresses, rice phenotypic 
evaluations in field trials. 
5 UMIL 
Knowledge in molecular, biochemical and physiological responses of plants to abiotic 
stresses. Knowledge in molecular and physiological aspects of solute transport in plants. 
Knowledge in high-throughput analysis of grain rice quality (ionome and metabolome). 
6 UGLA Knowledge of membrane physiology, membrane bioenergetics, stomatal physiology and 
water use efficiency. 
7 IRTA 
Knowledge in rice phenotyping under field conditions and rice management in saline soils. 
Experience in dissemination and technology transfer activities involving stakeholders (field 
open-days, technical seminars, etc). Experience in communication and dissemination through 
information technologies. 
8 INDEAR 
Fully equipped and robust high -throughput Platform for sequencing and genotyping. 
Knowledge and experience in Genotyping by Sequecing methodologies for the study of plant 
genomic diversity. Knowledge on  Bioinformatics, Plant Molecular Biology and plant breeding 
techniques. 
9 CAAS 
Knowledge in genetic data analysis methodology. Knowledge in plant breeding methodology; 
Knowledge in genetic analysis and breeding simulation to ols. Knowledge in organizing the 
international training courses. 
10 CAMARA 
Experience in Rice growing and breeding. Knowledge in rice seed market needs. Knowledge 
in commercial rice varieties evaluation in terms of quality and productivity. Experience in new 
rice varieties development, registration and successful commercialization. 
11 IRIS 
Knowledge in sensor readings, process logic and control, and modelling, Knowledge 
predictive and adaptive learning. Knowledge in Wireless Sensor Networks; Knowledge in risk 
management tools and protocols for industrial systems; Knowledge in product quality analysis. 
12 CFR Experience in rice growing and breeding and new rice varieties development and registration.  
13 SIS Experience in rice breeding , new rice varieties  development, registration and successful 
commercialization. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  24 
A comprehensive review of “prior art” and patents (Section 1.4) has revealed that to date there is no relevant Background held 
by third parties that is needed for implementing the research or u sing the project results. In order to ensure that the intended 
NEURICE R&D effort does not trespass into the owned knowledge space of a third party, and to mitigate against expensive 
infringement claims, during Task 6.3 Knowledge transfer and exploitation of results, subtask Protection of the IPR , up-to-date 
patent reviews will be performed periodically to confirm the novelty of the proposed research and the freedom to exploit the 
results.  
 
Results definition, protection, ownership and access rights  
 
The expected results from the project are listed in Table 2.2.1.c. below, and will be continually assessed in terms of novelty, 
patentability and protection as part of Task 6.3 Knowledge transfer and exploitation of results, sub-task 6.3.1. Protection of the 
IPR, as part of an effective knowledge management strategy.  Results shall be owned by the participant generating them. To 
avoid doubt or confusion over ownership, a protocol of procedures will be defined, which will be followed by each partner to clearly 
show the development of the generation of knowledge or results. In cases where the results are generated jointly (i.e. where the 
separate parts of some result cannot be attributed to different participants), it will be jointly owned. The allocation and the terms 
of exercising this joint ownership will be agreed in Joint Ownership Agreements that will be established during Task 6.3 Knowledge 
transfer and exploitation of results, sub-task 6.3.2. IPR Ownership and Sharing. Access rights to results if needed for implementing 
the project will be granted on a royalty -free basis. Access rights for use purposes will be granted either royalty-free, or on fair 
and reasonable conditions  to be agreed in the NEURICE Exploitation Agreement. Table 2.2.c provides an overview  of the 
expected scenarios of results ownership and access rights.  
 
Table 2.2.1.c : Expected results ownership and access rights  for goods, products and services  generated within the 
NEURICE project and NEURICE consortium. WP: Work Package. 
WP 
Description of the 
expected IPR generated in 
the project 
Envisaged IPR tool Partner 
owner 
Partners to which 
access rights will be 
granted and conditions 
1 
Identification of mild salt 
tolerant rice accessions and 
involved genetic loci 
Publications, patent. 
UMIL, CRA, 
INDEAR, 
CAAS 
Preferential use to project 
partners under fair and 
reasonable conditions. 
2 Two Spanish salt tolerant 
rice varieties 
Registration in the Spanish 
registration office (Registro de 
Variedades Comerciales 
MAGRAMA). 
CAMARA 
Preferential use to project 
partners under fair and 
reasonable conditions. 
2 Two French salt tolerant 
rice varieties 
Registration in the French 
registration office (Groupe d`Étude et 
de contrôle des Variétés et des 
Semences). 
CFR 
Preferential use to project 
partners under fair and 
reasonable conditions. 
2 Two Italian salt tolerant rice 
varieties 
Registration in the Italian registration 
office (RNV, Registro Nazionale delle 
Varietà). 
CRA, SIS 
Preferential use to project 
partners under fair and 
reasonable conditions. 
6 Salinity Wireless Sensor 
Network prototype Patent, utility model. IRIS 
Preferential use to CFR, 
CAMARA and SIS under 
fair and reasonable 
conditions. 
6 User Interface and Decision 
Support System Software Patent, utility model. IRIS 
Preferential use to CFR, 
CAMARA and SIS under 
fair and reasonable 
conditions. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  25 
 
 
In addition, in order to define and agree  the terms of exercising ownership and the conditions of access rights to the project 
Results (using Table 2.2.c as the starting point), the Exploitation Agreement will also define such issues as whether access will 
be granted to third parties for exploitation purposes  (variety registration, any exploitation restrictions,  etc.). A first draft of the 
Exploitation Agreement will be available by M24 and will be continually  revised and edited throughout the project, and a final 
version will be signed by all partners at M48. Over the course of the project, the consortium will tap into external assistance and 
support from such sources as the IPR-Helpdesk (http://www.ipr-helpdesk.org), Enterprise Europe Network  
(http://www.enterprise-europe-network.ec.europa.eu/index_en.htm), EIP-AGRI Subgroup on Innovation, among other sources in 
the partner countries. An experienced patent attorney will also be approached  and the activities of the Paddy Rice Research 
Group from the  Global Research Alliance on Agricultural Green House Gases  
(http://www.globalresearchalliance.org/research/paddy-rice-research-group/). 
 
 
Open access to peer-reviewed scientific publications  
 
The two ways authors can provide open access are: 
 By self-archiving their journal articles in an open access repository, also known as 'green' open access 
 By publishing in an open access journal, known as 'gold' open access[40].  
It is envisaged that green open access will be the preferred option in this project, whereby the partners will publish in peer -
reviewed scientific publications and then self-archive a version of the article for free public use in their institutional repository, in 
a central repository, or on some other open access website. The project website (or Internet Portal) will house a ‘NEURICE Green 
Channel’ for open access to the peer -reviewed publications of the project. In relation to expected publications from the project, 
these include and are not limited to: plant physiology, plant breeding, plant transcriptomics, oxidative stress, agricultural novelties, 
resource management,  etc. The University of Barcelona (UB), coordinator of NEURICE, has an institutional repository 
(http://diposit.ub.edu) publicly accessible to anyone, with several collections , among them one dedicated to research outputs 
(http://hdl.handle.net/2445/7181). Any researcher can upload a copy of any reviewed published paper through the Current 
Research Information System (CRIS) avail able at the institution. Researchers are informed of the self -archiving policies of the 
publication and they are asked to deliver a copy of the document in the suitable version: final publication, postprint or preprint. All 
rights metadata and possible emb argoes are automatically introduced in the system. If there is a requirement for an embargo 
period, all the metadata of the publication are publicly available at the repository but the document is locked until the specific date. 
The institutional repository of the UB meets all the requirements for OAI-PMH harvesting and therefore it is acknowledged as an 
OpenAIRE compliant repository. 
 
 
  2.2.2.  Communication activities 
 
 Communication activities, including the deployment of a Web 2.0 strategy, will be detailed in the WP6. Nevertheless, an 
important part of the communication activities have already been identified and detailed in the proposal (please see WP6 
description). These include: 
 Developing a NEURICE web site, to act as a repository of project news, activities, outputs and communication material; 
 Developing a Social media strategy: a Live blog and a You Tube channel will be opened for the dissemination and 
communication of the NEURICE activities; 
 Producing innovation videos, flash videos, streaming vi deos (in events) and other broadcast communication, to animate 
the NEURICE website and other social media platforms, in order to reach a larger audience. 
The Communication and Dissemination Plan will also define a model and the mechanisms for engaging the EIP-AGRI Service 
Point and the different EIP national/regional network in communication activities. This model will include the development of the 
framework for the participation of interested institutions and co -ownership of the system. This will allow ke y actors (farmer´s, 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  26 
Cooperatives, SME´s and other End-User´s) to get involved in the project, by connecting their needs with the project outcomes 
and integrating them in the different workshops and dissemination / communication activities to be developed. 
Formal agreements will be developed to ensure the regular communication and interaction with several institutions at the EU and 
national levels, including (but not only) with EU tech platforms operating in the agrifood sector (i.e. Food for life), H2020 National 
Contact Points, and on-going rice projects like GREENRICE. Building these kinds of partnerships will be very important to improve 
and increase the communication and dissemination activities. 
One of the aims of the NEURICE project is to communicate t he knowledge & project findings to European rice farmers, public 
authorities, mainly local and regional, professional, business and trade organizations, private investors and entrepreneurs, social 
and economic partners, beneficiaries of projects and progra m management bodies, media as disseminators of information, 
research centers, and public in general. Focusing on SMEs, the dissemination and exploitation strategy will include local 
authorities, local and international experts and relevant associations, in dividuals (public at large) and potential rice seed 
companies interested in acquiring rice seed exploitation licences. 
Bearing in mind the project objectives, activities and foreseen results, the preliminary plan for the use and dissemination o f 
NEURICE results comprises both specific and general dissemination instruments for different target groups, as well as different 
strategies for the exploitation of the project results while it is considering different measures to assure appropriate manag ement 
of intellectual property. The Consortium Agreement -to be signed by all participants- will include specific provisions covering the 
ownership, protection and dissemination of the project results as well as provisions explaining how access can be gained to them. 
Responsible for the monitoring and correct functioning of such provisions will be the coordinator (UB, Spain) which will ensur e 
that any future IPR provision officially notified by the EC is included in the Description of Work and/or in the consortium agreement.  
The main issues to be included in the “rules on dissemination and use, and access rights” of the Consortium Agreement are the 
following:  
 Access to the background (the existing knowledge) to be needed for the purposes of the project shall be royalty -free 
unless agreed otherwise before acceding to the grant agreement. The allocation and terms of exercising the joint 
ownership of the results of the project (foreground). 
 The time -limit for the prior notice to the rest of the partners, as well as the nec essary information concerning the 
envisaged new owner of the foreground to assure the other partners can exercise their access rights. 
 The time-limit for objecting to any transfer of ownership, when a partner demonstrates that their access rights would be 
adversely affected. 
 The rules for the adequate and effective protection of the foreground capable of industrial or commercial application, 
having due regard to the legitimate and commercial interests of all partners. 
 Access rights for implementation (background needed for the purposes of the project) and access right for use. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  27 
3. Implementation
3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables and milestones  
 To ensure a proper development of the NEURICE project and to meet all the objectives proposed, its w ork plan has 
been divided into seven work packages whose description and organization (Fig. 4) is shown below: 
 
 
 
WP1: Germplasm evaluation and genetic mapping for salt tolerance.  
 
  Analyses will be conducted on: i) FL478 and IR64-Saltol, the salt tolerance donors that will be used in WP2, ii) 
a germplasm collection of 300 japonica rice varieties and iii) an available bi -parental population of 200 F6 RILs 
segregating for salt tolerance. Phenotyping will be conducted in greenhouse for two years on pots filled with submerged 
soils with a mid-level (around 5dS/m) of salinity controlled by conductivity (UMIL). Different parameters will be evaluated: 
i) comparison of germination rate in saline and non -saline soil; ii) plants growth curve and leaf damages evalua tion 
monitored at different phenological stages by semi-automated photo cameras and dedicated software system; iii) thermal 
imaging at different phenological stages using long-wave infrared cameras; iv) spikelet sterility. Furthermore, a one-year 
phenotyping of a stronger salt treatment using a submerged soil with an electrical conductivity around 10 dS/m will be 
conducted, using a core collection expressly generated. For this purpose, after the first year of phenotyping, the 
germplasm will be divided in cl usters, depending on the tolerance level to salt treatment. The tolerance data will be 
compared with genotypic data (molecular markers) to extract a core collection of a few genotypes, representative of the 
entire variability for salt tolerance in the whole germplasm collection. 
The 200 RILs population will be genotyped using Genotyping By Sequencing (GBS) by INDEAR. The identification of 
loci involved in mid salt tolerance will be conducted in the 300 accessions germplasm collection, already genotyped 
using GBS, and the 200 RILs population by CRA and INDEAR respectively through a GWAS and a linkage mapping 
approaches. For both mapping approaches, bioinformatics analyses will be carried out for the identification of candidate 
genes underlying the phenotypic effect of mid salt tolerance and alleles re -sequencing in tolerant and susceptible 
accessions will be conducted for suitable candidates (CAAS, INDEAR, CRA, UMIL). In addition, an in-depth physiological 
study using 4 conditions of salinity on hydroponic cul ture (0, 50, 100 and 150 mM) will be carried out on the highly salt 
tolerant line FL478 (UB, UGLA). 
 
 
WP2: Salt tolerance introgression  from salt tolerant varieties into 6 elite European cultivars, 2 from each country 
involved: Spain, Italy and France.  
  A molecular marker assisted back -crossing (MABC) breeding coupled to an embryo rescue (ER) technique 
adaptation will be applied to an already available collection of F1 lines obtained by crossing Saltol rice varieties (IR64-
Saltol and FL478) with elite European rice accessions. This approach will yield Saltol salt tolerant accessions with elite 
European varieties background in just two years. The marker assisted back-cross (MABC) program will be conducted to 
transfer the Saltol and QTL regions into 2 elite lines from Spain, 2 from Italy and 2 from France (UB, CRAG, CIRAD, 
CRA and CFR). From F1 onward, a set of 60-70 KASPar markers will be used to asses that the Saltol region is present 
in the carrier chromosome as well as to determine which plants have the best return toward the recurrent parent. This 
strategy will allow for selecting the best beachhead plants as starting points of the program. The number of BC1F1 plants 
will be large but the number of plants genotyped at each BC generation will decrease with  the advance of the project. 
From the BC3 generation, part of the BC3F1 plants will be self -pollinated and the BC3F2 plants with the smallest 
introgressed segment at the homozygous state and good return toward the recipient parent will be selected and BC3F3 
seeds used for a first phenotypic evaluation under controlled hydroponic conditions. 
 
WP3: Salt tolerance validation and mechanisms study.  
  The European lines obtained in the WP2 will be validated using hydroponic assays at 0mM and 100 mM NaCl 
(CRAG, CIRAD, CRA). BC3F3 seeds from twenty BC3F2 homozygous Saltol lines from each Spanish, French and Italian 
elite varieties will be assessed in greenhouse conditions under no salinity (0 mM NCl) and experimentally controlled high 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  28 
salinity (100 mM NaCl) including salt tolerant (FL478 salt tolerance donor) and salt sensitive elite (European) parentals 
as crosschecks. The non-destructive phenotyping protocols used in WP1 (thermal imaging and chlorophyll fluorescence) 
will used in this WP for the validation of salt tolerant lines. The six most salt tolerant lines of each country will be selected 
for WP4 field trials. Moreover, the most promising salt tolerant lines, one from each country,  as well as six selected 
japonica rice cultivars/RILs accessions (two sensitive , two tolerant and two with an intermediate tolerant phenotype), 
derived from WP1 activities,  will be analysed in detail in hydroponic conditions performed by CRAG at 0, 50, 100 and 
150 mM NaCl. In addition, biochemical markers of oxidative stress will be evaluated to characterize salt stress response 
of the rice accessions, such as: differences in GSH levels (UMIL) and malondialdehyde (MDA) levels (UB). Finally, the 
expression level of genes involved in the sulphur metabolism as well as the expression level of other genes known to be 
involved in the response to salt stress will be evaluated by UMIL  and RNA sequencing will be carried out by CRAG to 
selected lines of all countries comparing lines cultivated at 0 and 50 mM NaCl.  
 
WP4: Field assays of the adv anced breeding lines in the summer of the years 2018 (mid -scale assay) and 2019 
(large-scale assay).  
  To ensure a proper evaluation of the lines a multi -actor approach will be used that consists in that each new 
produced line will be evaluated in the reg ions of their parental rice lines in the field of the e nd-users of the NEURICE 
project. For both years, the procedure will be as following: 6 BC3F4 lines from each Spanish, Italian and French elite 
lines (a total of 18 lines) , as well as two salt tolerant japonica rice cultivars/RILs accessions, selected in WP3 will be 
assayed in salinized and non-salinized fields. Lines will be tested in the natural growing area of their European parents, 
in this way, Italian accessions will be tested in the Po river delta, Spanish lines in Ebro river delta and French accessions 
Rhône river delta (CFR). The parental lines used to obtain those BC3F4 lines will be included in this assays in order to 
be able to compare and select those BC3F4 lines with commercial potential in terms of quality, productivity and 
cultivability to ensure that the original recipient traits are maintained, and the lines are effectively salt tolerant. Standard 
fertilization and field management principles of each growing area (country) will be applied. The experimental design will 
be the same in non -salinized and in fields destined to salinity tolerance assays  (split-plot with 4 replications); IRIS will 
monitor salinity using a Wireless Sensor Network for salinity in salinized and non -salinized trials in Spain, Italy and 
France. At least eight plants will be randomly selected from each line in order to record data measurements. General 
agronomic, production and quality of plants as well as grain quality traits will be assayed in all lines in all countri es. 
Moreover, nutritional traits such of storage of microelements and exclusion of toxic heavy metal will be measured in order 
to provide more robust seed characterization of the selected rice lines grown either in high salinity and no salinity 
conditions by UMIL. After large-scale trials, year 2019, at least 2 lines of each country (one from each variety)  will be 
sent to registry by the end-users of each Country so that they’ll be available to the rice-industry sector and rice-farming 
sector. 
 
WP5: Development of a wireless sensor network for remote salinity impact monitoring. 
  In order to monitor the salinity during the salt -stress field trials, a salinity remote detection system will be 
developed and implemented in selected pilot areas. The development of this sensor will be done in conjunction with the 
project end -users and rice farmers of the different rice producing European regions involved in this project.  The 
development of this  novel Wireless Sensor Network based on low cost electrical conductivity  sensors and an 
autonomous power supply based on energy harvesting will provide real time data of the salinity conditions of the rice 
paddies. This system will include a software package including a data-mining layer in which all the data collected in the 
fields will be used for improving the management of irrigation through a decision support system. It will serve to evaluate 
in real time the impact of the proposed adaptability interventions in response to salinity levels while ensuring the 
productivity and stability of the agricultural sector. This system will comprise a mesh of interconnected nodes acquiring 
salinity data, which will be remotely sent to a central server for data mining and the final output will be displayed through 
a user -friendly interfa ce for supporting irrigation decision making. The system will comprise energy harvesting 
technologies for being completely autonomous during the rice growing season and will allow the correct management 
and evaluation of the impacts on the proposed genetic and environmental interventions.  
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  29 
 
WP6: Communication, d issemination, knowledge transfer and exploitation of results to the society, research 
centres and universities and the rice-farming sector.  
  With the aim of guaranteeing the proper transfer of the results obtained in this project, first of all a website will 
be put in motion for updating the progress of the different WPs as well as publications, posters and journal articles. It is 
expected for all research centres and universities to publish break through results as open-access papers as well as 
attend congresses and seminars to show the work generated by NEURICE project. Moreover, CRA, IRTA and CFR  will 
perform seminars and open field days in the years 2018 and 2019 to explain rice farmers how the new varieties should 
be used, how the monitoring systems created by IRIS work, and how to deal with salinity in rice paddies whether it is 
due to the climate change effects or to the saltwater treatments to stop the apple snail pest.  
 
WP7: Project management.  
In order to ensure a proper management of the project so that every partner do es their different tasks in all the 7 WPs 
as well as ensuring that funds are properly allocated UB will be the leader of this work package. Moreo ver, for 
coordinating all the 13 partners UB, UMIL and CIRAD will function as geographic nodes (one of each rice -producing 
region) establish a communication network to ensure that every partner receives the information needed to continue 
performing their corresponding WPs (Fig. 4). Finally, this WP will be in charge of carrying out and hosting the different 
meetings of the NEURICE project: kick-off meeting in 2016, annual meetings in 2017, 2018 and 2019 and last the project 
final meeting at beginning of 2020. Thus, this WP will expedite the functioning of the NEURICE project objectives.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Organization of the project showing the main relations between partners in each work packages. Leading 
partners in bold letters. * = end-users.  
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  30 
 Figure 5. Gantt chart depicting work packages, tasks, participants and duration. Work packages are shown in green, Tasks in dark blue. WP: Work Package. 
 
  
j f m a m j j a s o n d j f m a m j j a s o n d j f m a m j j a s o n d j f m a m j j a s o n d j f
-1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48
WP 
1
Worldwide germplasm 
evaluation
UB, CRA, UMIL, UGLA, 
INDEAR, CAAS 1 34 34
T 1.1 Phenotyping of germplasm 
collection and RILs UMIL, CRA 1 24 24
T 1.2 Detailed physiological 
characterization of FL478 UB, UGLA 4 25 22
T 1.3 GWAS and linkage analyses CRA, INDEAR, CAAS 1 34 34
T 1.4 Bioinformatic analyses and allele 
mining. CRA INDEAR, CAAS, UMIL 24 34 11
WP 
2
Salt tolerance 
introgression
UB, CRAG, CIRAD, CRA, 
CAMARA, CFR -1 22 24
T 2.1 BC1F1 breeding (F1 crosses +  
embryo rescue + MAS)
UB,  CRAG, CIRAD, CRA, CAMARA, 
CFR -1 4 6
T 2.2 BC2F1 breeding (BC1F1 crosses +  
embryo rescue + MAS) UB, CIRAD, CRA, CAMARA, CFR 3 8 6
T 2.3 BC3F1 breeding (BC2F1 crosses +  
embryo rescue + MAS) UB, CIRAD, CRA, CAMARA, CFR 7 13 7
T 2.4 BC3F1  and  BC3F2 selfing UB, CRAG, CIRAD, CRA 11 22 12
WP 
3
Salt tolerance validation 
and mechanisms study
UB, CRAG, CIRAD, UMIL, 
UGLA 21 46 26
T 3.1 Phenotypic selection for salt 
tolerance UB, CRAG, CIRAD, UMIL UGLA 21 26 6
T 3.2 Physiological and biochemical 
characterization UB, CRAG, UMIL, UGLA 27 36 10
T 3.3 Membrane integrity, 
composition and function CRAG, UGLA 27 33 7
T 3.4 Transcript profiling of salt 
tolerant rice lines CRAG, UMIL 27 43 17
T 3.5 Integration of data. Markers of 
salinity tolerance CRAG, UMIL, UGLA 44 46 3
WP 
4
Field assays of the 
advanced breeding lines
UB, CRA, UMIL, IRTA, 
CAMARA, IRIS, CFR, SIS 25 48 24
T 4.1 2018 Field trials UB, CRA, UMIL, IRTA, CAMARA, 
IRIS, CFR, SIS 25 36 12
T 4.2 2019 Field trials UB, CRA, UMIL, IRTA, CAMARA, 
IRIS, CFR, SIS 37 47 11
WP tasks
Months
2018 20192016 2017
Work plan activities Activities participants
Start 
End 
Duration
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  31 
  
j f m a m j j a s o n d j f m a m j j a s o n d j f m a m j j a s o n d j f m a m j j a s o n d j f
-1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48
WP 
5
Development of a 
wireless sensor network
CRA, IRTA, CAMARA, 
IRIS, CFR, SIS 0 45 46
T 5.1 Review of technical 
requirements CRA, IRTA, CAMARA, IRIS, CFR, SIS 0 6 6
T 5.2 Design, manufacturing and 
integration IRIS 7 15 8
T 5.3 Preliminary prototype testing 
and fine-tuning CRA, IRTA, CAMARA, IRIS, CFR, SIS 16 23 7
T 5.4 Field assays implementation 
tests CRA, IRTA, CAMARA, IRIS, CFR, SIS 26 45 16
WP
6
Communication, 
dissemination, 
knowledge transfer and 
exploitation of results
UB, CRAG, CIRAD, CRA, 
UMIL, UGLA, IRTA, 
INDEAR, CAAS, 
CAMARA, IRIS, CFR
1 48 48
T 6.1 Communication of results All participants 1 48 48
T 6.2 Dissemination of results All participants 1 48 48
T 6.3 Knowledge transfer and 
exploitation of results
UB, CRA, IRTA, CAMARA, IRIS, CFR, 
SIS 27 47 15
WP
7 Project management
UB, CRAG, CIRAD, CRA, 
UMIL, UGLA, IRTA, 
INDEAR, CAAS, 
CAMARA, IRIS, CFR
0 47 48
T 7.1 Project coordination and 
management UB (Coordinator) 0 47 48
T 7.2 Steering Commitee UB 0 47 48
T 7.3 Advisory Board UB 0 47 48
T 7.4 Consortium agreement UB 0 0 1
T 7.5 Mid-term evaluation UB 24 24 1
T 7.6 NEURICE project meetings
UB, CRAG, CIRAD, CRA, UMIL, 
UGLA, IRTA, INDEAR, CAAS, 
CAMARA, IRIS, CFR, SIS.
1 47 6
WP tasks
Months
Work plan activities Activities participants
Start 
End 
Duration
2016 2017 2018 2019
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  32 
Table 3.1a: Work package description 
 
Work package number  1 Start Date or Starting Event 2016-03-01 
Work package title Germplasm evaluation and genetic mapping for salt tolerance 
Participant number 1 4 5 6 8 9 
Short name of participant UB CRA UMIL UGLA INDEAR CAAS 
Person/months per participant: 15 28 30  12 34 20 
 
Objectives 
 
- Identification of new salt tolerant accessions within a worldwide japonica rice germplasm through biometric and 
physiological measurements. 
- Identification of loci involved in salt tolerance through GWAS and linkage mapping approaches. 
- Evaluation of allelic diversity in candidate salt tolerance genes through allele mining. 
- Detailed physiological characterization of the salt tolerant line FL478. 
 
Description of work  
 
This WP consists on the evaluation of rice germplasm in order to identify new salt tolerant accessions among worldwide 
japonica rice cultivars. It will be achieved through i) identification of new salt tolerant accessions in worldwide japonica rice 
cultivars, ii) identification of loci in the rice genome involved in conferring salt tolerance and iii) identification of the allelic 
diversity in candidate genes through bioinformatic analyses and allele mining. The information obtained in this WP will be used 
for the development of WP3 and WP4. Furthermore, this information provide new opportunities for the future of salt tolerance 
improvement in rice breeding programs. 
The lead partner of this WP is UMIL, which is working since many years on plant physiology and biochemistry of plant mineral 
nutrition and responses to abiotic stress. In particular, UMIL is an expert of phenotyping of abiotic stress response in rice and 
disposes the expertise, equipment and space for performing high quality phenotyping requested by this WP. Moreover, the 
activity of this WP will be completed by the high expertise of CRA, INDEAR and CAAS  in genotyping and bioinformatic 
analyses. 
 
Task 1.1. Phenotyping of germplasm collection and RILs for genome-wide association (GWAS) and linkage mapping 
studies. Contributors: UMIL and CRA. Months 1-24. 
A phenotyping activity will be conducted by UMIL on a germplasm collection of 300 japonica rice accessions and a biparental 
population of 200 F6 RILs obtained from a cross between a mild salt stress tolerant and salt susceptible rice genotypes. These 
accessions, supplied by CRA, will be screened for salt tolerance, in order to produce data for the GWAS and linkage mapping 
to be performed in Task 1.3 for the identification of loci involved in salt tolerance. For comparison, also FL478 and IR64-Saltol, 
the salt tolerance donors that will be used in WP2, will be phenotyped. Phenotyping will be  conducted on plants grown in pot 
filled with submerged soil in controlled greenhouse environment, both under control (i.e. no salinity) and salinity conditions.  
Each rice accession/line will be analyzed in triplicate (three different pots, each pot conta ining 12 -15 plants) from seed 
germination to flowering. For salt treatment, the electrical conductivity of the submerged soil will be weekly monitored and 
maintained around 5 dS/m adding, if necessary, adequate amounts of NaCl solution. The phenotyping activity, conducted for 
two years, will consist in: i) comparison of seed germination rate in saline and non-saline soil; ii) plants growth curve and leaf 
damages evaluation monitored at different phenological stages (4 -6 leaf, tillering and panicle initiatio n) by semi -automated 
photo cameras and dedicated software system; iii) leaf thermal imaging at different phenological stages (4-6 leaf, tillering and 
panicle initiation) using a semi-automated long-wave infrared cameras system; it represents a non-destructive protocol for the 
study of stomatal responses and the presence of stress-related symptoms iv) spikelet sterility  
Furthermore, a one-year phenotyping of a stronger salt treatment using a submerged soil with an electrical conductivity around 
10 dS/m will be conducted to identify possible highly tolerant accession, using a core collection expressly generated. To this 
purpose, after the first year of phenotyping, the germplasm will be divided in clusters, depending on the tolerance level to salt 
treatment. The tolerance data will be compared with genotypic data (molecular markers) to extract a core collection of a few 
genotypes, representative of the entire variability for salt tolerance in the whole germplasm collection. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  33 
The most tolerant accessions, among the japonica accessions and the RILs, will be selected from the two -year phenotyping 
(salt treatment using the submerged soil with an electrical conductivity around 5 dS/m) and from the one -year phenotyping 
(salt treatment using the submerged soil with an electrical conductivity around 10 dS/m). These accessions will be 
characterized through physiological, biochemical and molecular analyses in WP3. 
 
Task 1.2. Detailed physiological characterization of the salt tolerant line FL478. Contributors: UB, UGLA. Mo nths 4-
25. 
An in-depth physiological study using 4 conditions of salinity on hydroponic culture (0, 50, 100 and 150 mM) will be carried out 
on the salt tolerant line FL478. Thus, mechanisms and processes that are known to operate in salt stress adaptation in plants 
will be examined in this line. In this respect, key mechanisms of salinity tolerance are the ability of a plant to control Na+ uptake 
and transport at both cellular and tissue levels and the exclusion and/or compartmentalization of Na+ (vacuoles). Accordingly, 
the following analyses will be carried out by UGLA on FL478: Na+ concentration measurements, shoot Na +/K+ ratio, Na + 
compartmentalization analysis by fluorescent laser scanning confocal microscopy of root tissue vacuoles (CoroNa+ staining), 
and direct electrophysiological methods to furthermore quantify Na + and K+ transport- and redistribution-related traits. UGLA 
will also perform a leaf chlorophyll content assay and membrane analysis consisting in assessment of membrane integrity 
through evaluation of electrolyte leakage and determination of major membrane sterols by GC/MS ICPOES. Moreover,  salt 
stress increases the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) which, in excess, might cause oxidative damage to 
biomolecules (e.g. membrane lipids, thus, resulting in perturbation of cell membrane functioning). Reduced glutathione (GSH) 
protects the plant cell from the oxidative damage based on its redox buffering action by reducing ROS levels. Oxidative stress 
states produces peroxidation of lipid  membranes at the cellular level, to evaluate this, the levels of a well -known oxidative 
stress marker, malondialdehyde (MDA), will be measured. Biochemical markers of oxidative stress (ROS production and GSH 
and MDA levels) will be evaluated by UB to characterize salt-induced oxidative stress responses of the highly salt-tolerant line 
FL478. 
 
Task 1.3. GWAS and linkage analyses for the identification of loci involved in salt tolerance. Contributors: CRA, 
INDEAR, CAAS. Months 1-34. 
Loci involved in salt tol erance in the germplasm collection, already genotyped using  GBS with a coverage of about 55 .000 
SNPs, will be identified through a GWAS approach for salt stress treatment indicated in Task 1.1. For GWAS analysis, only 
SNPs with call-rate > 90% and MAF > 5%  will be used. The association between SNP genotypes and salt tolerance -related 
traits will be tested fitting one SNP at a time in a mixed linear model in which correction for population structure and kins hip 
matrix will be evaluated (CRA). RILs will be subjected to GBS for the construction of a SNPs-based genetic map and a linkage 
mapping procedure will be applied for the identification of genes/QTLs for salt stress tolerance using the phenotypic data 
produced under salt stress conditions (INDEAR). Linkage  analysis will be performed using CarthaGene or other suitable 
software. QTL mapping will be conducted with the R/qtl module of the R statistical computing pack age (or other suitable 
software) and threshold of significance for declaring presence of QTLs wi ll be identified through permutation analysis (CRA, 
INDEAR). Redundant markers in the two populations described in Task 1.1 will be removed before genetic studies. Linkage 
maps and QTL mapping results will be independently validated by the integrated software QTL IciMapping Version 4.0 (CAAS). 
 
Task 1.4. Bioinformatic analyses and allele mining. Contributors: CRA, INDEAR, CAAS, UMIL Months 24-36. 
An allele mining approach will be carried out for genes identified as candidates for the salt tolerant loci. For this purpose, the 
latest release of the Nipponbare genome sequence will be scanned for the identification of genes with functions compatible in 
conferring salt tolerance located in the genomic regions identified through GWAS and linkage mapping and theref ore 
representing candidate genes for the phenotypic effect of mild salt tolerance. UMIL will support the decision about candidate  
genes for salt tolerance on the basis of their putative functions. Candidate genes will be subsequently sequenced in a discrete 
number of tolerant and susceptible accessions through Illumina-based sequencing of PCR amplified fragments or targeted re-
sequencing-based procedures, depending from the number of candidates identified (CAAS, INDEAR, CRA, UMIL). Optimum 
breeding strategies to efficiently introduce favourable alleles to other elite parents will be investigated by computer simulation 
(CAAS). 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  34 
 
Deliverables 
 
D1.1: Identification of salt tolerant rice cultivars/genotypes [By:  UMIL; Type: R; Delivery date: M24] A report depicting the 
tolerance of the 300 temperate japonica salt tolerant rice cultivars and the 200 RILs assayed under mid salt treatment, and a 
list with identified salt tolerant accessions.  
D1.2: In-depth physiological study of FL478 [By: UB, UGLA; Type: R; Delivery date: M25]. A report of the in-depth analysis 
that will serve as a basis for the physiological studies performed in promising lines in WP3. 
D1.3: Salt tolerant loci identified by GWAS and linkage mapping. [By: CRA, INDEAR; Type: R; Delivery date: M36]. A list of 
the loci of salt tolerance identified in the assayed temperate japonica rice cultivars and 200 RILs. 
D1.4 Allelic variation of candidate salt tolerance genes and their utilization in breeding [By: CAAS; Type: R; Delivery date: 
M48]. A report of the sequences with functions related to salt tolerance for updating the genetic knowledge of salt tolerant in 
rice. 
  
Milestones 
 
M1.1:  Phenotyping of both germplasm collection and RILs [By: UMIL; Type: R; Milestone date: M24]. 
M1.2: In-depth physiological study of FL478 [By: UB, UGLA; Type: R; Milestone date: M25]. 
M1.3: GBS of the RIL population and map construction [By: INDEAR, CRA; Type: R; Milestone date: M36]. 
M1.4: Bioinformatics results of salt candidate genes search [By:  CAAS, INDEAR, CRA, UMIL; Type: R; Milestone date: 
M41]. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  35 
Work package number  2 Start Date or Starting Event 2016-01-01 
Work package title Salt tolerance introgression 
Participant number 1 2 3 4 10 12 
Short name of participant UB CRAG CIRAD CRA CAMARA CFR 
Person/months per participant: 30 10 34.5 34 8 2 
 
Objectives 
 
- Obtain advanced lines with improved salt tolerance by introgressing salt tolerance alleles using marker assisted back-
crossing selection (MABCS). 
- Couple an embryo rescue technique adaptation with MABCS to fasten the introgression breeding process for obtaining 
the advanced salt tolerant lines. 
 
Description of work 
 
This WP consists in introgressing the salt tolerance alleles of FL476 indica rice into the selected elite European rice accessions. 
It will be ac hieved through a molecular marker assisted back -crossing selection (MABCS) breeding approach coupled to an 
embryo rescue (ER) technique adaptation that will be developed to fasten the back -crosses (BCs) introgression process to 
finally speed up the obtainm ent of advanced salt tolerant lines of the elite European rice lines. The MABCS program will be 
conducted to transfer the salt tolerance QTL region into 2 Spanish elite lines, (UB, CRAG and CAMARA), 2 Italian elite lines 
(CRA) and 2 French elite lines (CIRAD and CFR), in their respective greenhouses, paddy rice fields and laboratories. In order 
to avoid starting from donors with too low yield potential or photoperiod sensitivity, an advanced salt tolerant high -yielding 
indica line from the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) called FL478, has been selected. This high productive and salt 
tolerant (recently introgressed with Saltol region from Pokkali) will be used as donor rather than the well -known tolerant 
landraces (Pokkali, Nona Bokra) to obtain productive European varieties in a shorter time than it would normally take. 
The leader partner of this WP is CIRAD, which has already practical experience in undertaking MABCS for different traits in 
rice. For the French elite lines, CIRAD will be in charge of the MABCS, whereas CFR will be in charge of the breeding process. 
For the Spanish lines, UB and CAMARA will perform the breeding process and embryo rescue, whereas the MABCS part of 
the process will be undertaken by CRAG. In Italy, the whole process (breeding, MABCS and embryo rescue) will be undertaken 
by CRA. 
 
Task 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3. BC1F1, BC2F1 and BC3F1 breeding . Contributors: UB, CRAG, CIRAD, CRA, CAMARA, CFR. 
Months (-1)-13. 
In all the backcrosses tasks, KASPar markers associated with the Saltol region on chromosome 1 will be used to select 
heterozygous plants for the introgressed segment on the carrier chromosome, and will be done by CRAG, CIRAD and CRA. 
In addition, a set of 60 -70 KASPar markers (available from the IBD platform; https://www.int egratedbreeding.net/) will be 
genotyped on the 11 non-carrier chromosomes to accelerate the return towards the recipient type, which will be also carried 
out by CRAG, CIRAD and CRA. To enable selecting the best beachhead plants as starting points for the program, the number 
of BC1F1 plants genotyped will be very large but the number of genotyped plants will decrease in the following BC generations 
 
Task 2.4. BC3F1 and BC3F2 selfing. Contributors: UB, CRAG, CIRAD, CRA. Months 11-22. 
From the BC3 generation, part of its F1 plants will be self -pollinated and in addition the KASPar markers set (available from 
the IBD platform; https://www.integratedbreeding.net/) will be genotyped on the 11 non-carrier chromosomes to accelerate the 
return towards the recipient t ype, which will be carried out by CRAG, CIRAD and CRA (Task 4). The resulting BC3F2 lines, 
with the smallest introgressed segment at the homozygous state and good return toward the recipient parent, will be selected 
and self-pollinated to obtain sufficient BC3F3 seeds for further phenotypical, physiological and genomical evaluation in WP3. 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  36 
Deliverables 
 
D2.1: Spanish BC3F3 seeds from 20 BC3F2 introgressed lines [By: UB; Type: R; Delivery date: M22]. A report of 10 BC3F2 
lines per each variety that were successfully introgressed and a BC3F3 seed collection coming from these introgressed lines. 
D2.2: Italian BC3F3 seeds from 20 BC3F2 introgressed lines [By: CRA; Type: R; Delivery date: M22]. A report of 10 BC3F2 
lines per each variety that were successfully introgressed and a BC3F3 seed collection coming from these introgressed lines. 
D2.3: French BC3F3 seeds from 20 BC3F2 introgressed lines [By: CIRAD; Type: R; Delivery date: M22]. A report of 10 
BC3F2 lines per each variety that were successfully introgressed and a BC3F3 seed collection coming from these 
introgressed lines. 
 
Milestones 
 
M2.1: BC3F3 seeds of BC3F2 Saltol introgressed Spanish lines [By: UB, CRAG; Type: R; Milestone date: M22]. 
M2.2: BC3F3 seeds of BC3F2 Saltol introgressed Italian lines [By: CRA; Type: R; Milestone date: M22]. 
M2.3: BC3F3 seeds of BC3F2 Saltol introgressed French lines [By: CIRAD, CFR; Type: R; Milestone date: M22]. 
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  37 
 
Work package number  3 Start Date or Starting Event 2017-10-01 
Work package title Salt tolerance validation and mechanisms study 
Participant number 1 2 3 5 6 
Short name of participant UB CRAG CIRAD UMIL UGLA 
Person/months per participant: 12 47 10 22 40 
 
Objectives 
 
- Validation of BC3F3 salt tolerant lines and salt tolerant japonica rice cultivars/RILs accessions under none- and high-
controlled salinity conditions (hydroponic systems). 
- Physiological, biochemical and molecular characterization of the most promising salt tolerant introgressed rice lines and 
japonica rice cultivars/RILs accessions. 
- Identification of salt tolerance biomarkers in salt tolerant introgressed rice lines and japonica rice cultivars/RILs 
accessions. 
 
Description of work 
 
In this WP, we intend to establish a comprehensive view of determinants contributing to salt tolerance in BC3F3 introgressed 
rice lines produced in WP2, as well as in the japonica rice cultivars/RILs accessions selected in WP1. Salt tolerance will be 
evaluated in hydroponic systems under controlled greenhouse conditions (Task 3.1). Complementary approaches will be then 
used to investigate key mechanisms that control salinity tolerance in selected rice lines at the molecular, cellular and whol e 
plant levels (Tasks 3.2 to 3.4). To discover potential new salt tolerance determinants, expression profiling of the most promising 
introgressed lines will be used (Task 3.4). Finally, the information gained in these studies will be the basis for the identification 
of biomarkers for salt tolerance in rice (Task 3.5). 
The leader of this WP is CRAG, which is an expert in the study o f molecular and genetic characters of interest in plants, 
especially in plant response to environmental stress. CRAG disposes the expertise, equipment and space for performing high 
quality hydroponic systems to assay varieties, as well as the necessary exp ertise on transcript profiling and molecular 
mechanisms involved in salt stress tolerance in rice. UB, CIRAD, UMIL and UGLA will contribute to this WP. 
 
Task 3.1. Phenotypic selection for salt tolerance of selected introgressed rice lines. Contributors: CRAG, CIRAD, UMIL, 
UGLA. Month 21-26 
A forward screening of the BC3F3 lines generated in WP2 will be performed on hydroponically -grown plants at the seedling 
stage (15 day -old, no salinity and 100mM NaCl) under greenhouse conditions (CRAG, CIRAD, UMIL). For a comparison, 
FL478 and European parental lines will be included. Salt tolerance will be evaluated using the Standard Evaluation System 
(SES) established for rice by the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI).  
Then, the most promising salt tolerant lines, one from each variety and each country, will be analysed in detail in task 3.2, 3.3 
and 3.4 using 4 conditions of salinity on hydroponic culture (0, 50, 100 and 150 mM), through the evaluation of biochemical 
marker of oxidative stress, ion translocation, membrane integrity and transcript profiling. In addition, the six most salt-tolerant 
introgressed lines of each country, 3 lines from each variety, and the two most tolerant japonica rice cultivars/RILs accessions 
will be selected to be included in the Po delta field trials of 2018 (mid-scale) in WP4.  
 
Task 3.2. Physiological and biochemical characterization of salt-tolerant lines. Contributors: UB, CRAG, UMIL, UGLA. 
Month 27-36 
Selected introgressed lines identified in Task 3.1 will be examined to i dentify the physiological, biochemical and molecular 
mechanisms contributing to salt tolerance in these lines.  For this, the non-destructive phenotyping protocols (thermal imaging 
used for the phenotyping and chlorophyll fluorescence) will be used for the validation of salt tolerant lines (UMIL). Additionally, 
mechanisms and processes that are known to operate in salt stress adaptation in plants will be examined (UB, CRAG, UMIL, 
UGLA).  In this respect, a key mechanism of salinity tolerance is the ability of a plant to control Na + uptake and transport at 
both the cellular and tissue levels. The homeostasis of Na + and K +, and the exclusion and/or compartmentalization of Na + 
(vacuoles) are particularly important for salt tolerance. Salt stress also induces pr oduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
which, in excess, might cause oxidative damage to biomolecules (e.g. membrane lipids), thus, resulting in perturbation of cell 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  38 
membrane functioning. Accumulation of malondialdehyde (MDA) is a well-known marker of membrane lipid peroxidation widely 
used as an indicator of salt-stress induced membrane damage . Reduced glutathione (GSH) protects the plant cell from the 
oxidative damage based on its redox buffering action by reducing ROS levels. Finally, a diverse set of  genes and signalling 
pathways are known to be regulated by salt stress that can be categorized according to their function (i.e. genes involved in  
protection against oxidative stress, synthesis of osmolites or ion transport, regulatory genes, among others).  
Accordingly, in this Task the following analyses will be carried out on selected salt -tolerant rice lines:  i) Na+ and K+ 
measurements on root, shoot  and xylem sap of Na+ and K+ will be performed by UMIL through ICP-MS to evaluate differences 
in Na+ and K+ systemic allocation in the whole plants for the considered BC3F2 and BC4F2 advanced rice lines. UGLA will 
also perform a leaf chlorophyll content assay. Na+ compartmentalization in rice roots will be examined at CRAG by fluorescent 
laser scanning confocal microscopy of root tissues (CoroNa+ staining). Biochemical markers of oxidative stress (GSH/GSSG 
ratio) (UMIL) and membrane lipid peroxidation (UB, UMIL, CRAG) will be evaluated to characterize salt -induced oxidative 
stress responses of the selected advanced rice lines. 
All these analyses will be performed also on six selected japonica rice cultivars/RILs accessions (two sensitive, two tolerant 
and two with an intermediate tolerant phenotype), derived from WP1 activities.   
 
Task 3.3. Membrane integrity, composition and function. Contributors: CRAG, UGLA, Month 27-33 
The assessment of membrane integrity will be carried out on salt-treated and non-treated selected rice lines by CRAG through 
evaluation of the relative electrolyte leakage, and voltage cla mp. The same plant material as in Task 3.2 will be used. The 
analysis of major membrane sterols (campesterol, β-sitosterol and stigmasterol will be approached by GC/MS (CRAG). Results 
obtained in these studies, together with those obtained in Task3.2 on membra ne lipid peroxidation, will allow us to establish 
whether there is a correlation between salt-induced membrane damage and tolerance to salt stress for the different rice lines 
here evaluated. 
 
Task 3.4. Transcript profiling of salt tolerant rice lines. Contributors: CRAG, UMIL. Month 27- 43 
Global gene expression analysis of the most promising introgressed rice lines (2 -4 lines) as demonstrated by their gain in 
tolerance to salinity will be carried out by CRAG (RNASeq, Illumina  HiSeq2000).  Leaves and roots of plants grown in control 
and salt conditions will be analysed. Prior to RNASeq analysis, the collected plant material will be validated by examining the 
expression of known salt -associated rice genes (RT -qPCR). Data arising from microarray experiments will be interpreted in 
the context of alterations in gene expression contributing to a phenotype of tolerance to salinity in introgressed rice lines. This 
analysis will also serve to identify salt-associated components and signalling pathways in rice, and confirm results obtained in 
regulation of Na+/K+ uptake/transport and protection against oxidative stress. Finally, salt tolerant candidate genes will be  
further evaluated by UMIL on the most promising introgressed rice lines and on the six selected japonica rice cultivars/RILs 
accessions (two sensitive, two tolerant and two with an intermediate tolerant phenotype). Since sulphur plays a pivotal role in 
the plant responses to abiotic stress, UMIL will further examine the expression pattern of key genes invo lved in sulphate 
assimilation. Among these key genes, the members of the adenosine -5'-phosphosulfate reductase (APS) family, as well as 
the members of the SULTR (sulphate transporter) family involved in controlling root-to-shoot sulphate translocation (Group 2) 
and sulphate concentration into the vacuole (Group 4)  will be evaluated. Other genes involved in the salt stress responses 
(e.g. the SOS pathway) will also be evaluated; other candidate genes will be specifically chosen in relation to the main 
characteristics observed during the activities in which the salt tolerant lines will be physiologically characterised.  
 
Task 3.5. Integration of data of physiological, biochemical and molecular markers of salinity tolerance of the 
introgressed rice lines. Contributors: CRAG, UMIL, UGLA. Month 44-46 
Data generated in WP3 together with those obtained in WP1 (electrophysiological studies) will be combined for systems 
analysis in order to identify determinants of salt tolerance in introgressed . This information will serve for the identification of 
biomarkers of salt tolerance in rice. Discovery of physiological, biochemical and molecular markers of salinity tolerance 
represents a potential value for rice breeding. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  39 
 
Deliverables 
 
D3.1: Validation of salt tolerant lines. [By: CRAG; Type: R; Delivery date: M27]. A report of the results in the phenotypic 
validation of BC3F2 and BC4F2 salt tolerant lines in hydroponic systems of all the elite European introgressed rice lines, as 
well as of the japonica cultivars/RILs accession. 
D3.2: In-depth physiological and biochemical analysis. [By: UGLA; Type: R; Delivery date: M37]. A report of the results in all 
the physiological approaches, including ion translocation and compartmentalization, chlorophyll content, membrane analysis 
and markers of oxidative stress in the three selected lines. 
D3.3: Integrated genomic and transcriptomic information of salt tolerance validation. [By: CRAG; Type: R; Delivery date: 
M45]. A report of the information obtained from the transcriptomic RNAseq analysis. List of genes contributing to salt 
tolerance in introgressed rice lines and in japonica cultivars/RILs accession. 
D3.4: List of potential rice markers for salt tolerance. [By: UB; Type: R; Delivery date: M47] A report detailing potential 
physiological, biochemical and molecular markers for salt tolerance in rice. 
 
Milestones 
 
M3.1: List of validated salt tolerant lines for field assays [By: UB; Type: R; Delivery date: M27]. 
M3.2: In-depth physiological and biochemical analysis results [By: UGLA; Type: R; Delivery date: M37]. 
M3.3: Salt tolerance rice transcriptome [By: CRAG; Type: R; Delivery date: M45]. 
M3.4: Salinity tolerance markers of the assayed European rice lines [By: UB; Type: R; Delivery Date: M47]. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  40 
Work package number  4 Start Date or Starting Event 2018-03-01 
Work package title Field assays of the advanced breeding lines 
Participant number 1 4 5 7 10 11 12 13 
Short name of participant UB CRA UMIL IRTA CAMARA IRIS CFR SIS 
Person/months per participant: 11 16 17 39 40 9 25 20 
 
Objectives 
 
- Evaluation of WP3 selected rice lines in their respective fields of origin in mid-scale and large-assays scale in salinized 
and non-salinized fields (control). 
- Selection of the lines showing the best quality, best productivity and best commerciality to perform large scale field trials 
in WP5. 
 
Description of work  
 
Introgressed rice accessions validated in WP3 will be evaluated in the different European rice production regions in the summer 
of the years 2018 (mid-scale assay) and 2019 (large-scale assay) in salinized and non-salinized fields (control). Lines will be 
assayed in the rice producing regions of the partners involved including the end -users of the project to ensure a multi -actor 
approach that includes the research sector, the rice -industry sector and the rice -farming sector. At the end of the 2019 field 
trial, the NEURICE consortium will ensure that the end -users (CAMARA, CFR and SIS) will send to register at least 2 lines 
from each country (1 line from each variety used as parental line in the WP2).  Moreover, the most interesting japonica rice 
cultivars/RILs accessions identified in WP1 and WP3 will be analysed in the same way. 
The leader of this WP is CAMARA, which have large experience in rice breeding, new varieties development and certified rice 
seed production and commercialization. CRA and CFR will aid CAMARA to ensure that all the rice lines are evaluated in the 
rice paddy fields in which their parentals are normally sown. 
 
Task 4.1 and 4.2. 2018 and 2019 field trials. Contributors: UB, CRA, UMIL, IRTA, CAMARA, IRIS, CFR, SIS.  
The assays will be mid- and large-scale for years 2018 and 2019 respectively. Despite this, for both years, the procedure will 
be as following: 3 BC3F4 lines from each Spanish, Italian and French elite li nes (a total of 18 lines) coming from BC3F3 
selected accessions validated in the hydroponic assays of WP3 will be assayed in salinized and non-salinized fields. Lines will 
be tested in the natural growing area of their European parents, in this way, Italia n accessions will be tested in the Po river 
delta (SIS, CRA), Spanish lines in Ebro river delta (CAMARA, IRTA) and French accessions Rhône river delta (CFR). To be 
able to evaluate BC3F4 lines in terms of commercial potential (quality, productivity and cultivability) to ensure that the original 
recipient traits are maintained, the European elite parental lines will be included in both assays (salinized and non -salinized 
fields). Moreover, two salt tolerant japonica rice cultivars/RILs accessions, derived from WP1 will be assayed in salinized and 
non-salinized fields in all the locations. To ensure that the lines are salt tolerant, and at which extent, the FL478 salt tolerance 
donor will be also assayed in salinized field trials. Standard fertilization and field management principles of each growing area 
(country) will be applied. Parcels design will be the same in non -salinized and in fields destined to salinity tolerance assays, 
this will be done using a randomized design with 4 replications  in 4m 2 (2018 mid-scale trials) and 16 m 2 (2019 large-scale 
trials) plots/line distributed hazardously. Non-salinized field trials will be performed by CAMARA in Ebro delta (Amposta), CFR 
in Rhône delta (La Camargue North) and CRA in Po delta ( Vercelli) and SIS also in Po delta (Lagosanto-Ferrara), while 
salinized field trials will be conducted by IRTA in Ebro delta (Deltebre), CFR in Rhône delta (La Camargue South) and SIS in 
Po delta (Lagosanto FE). IRIS will monitor salinity using a Wireless Sensor Network for salinity in all salinized and non-salinized 
field trials in Ebro, Po and Rhône deltas. At least eight plants will be randomly selected from each line in order to record data 
measurements. General traits such as uniformity, plant shape and height, panicle number per plant, grain/panicle, phenological 
stage and pests/diseases appearances will be recorded weekly. More specific traits such as flag leaf width, length and angle, 
panicle position and exertion, days to heading, late flowering ratio and fun gal lesions on leav es and panicles  will be also 
recorded weekly. Plants will be harvested at  maturity to obtain proper yield results. Productivity, grain quality and industrial 
traits (head rice recovery, grain dimensions, amylose content, etc.) will be evaluated by CAMARA. Moreover, nutritional traits 
such of storage of microelements such as Fe and Zn, exclusion of toxic heavy metal such as Cd and As will be measured, in 
order to provide more robust seed characterization of the selected rice lines grown either in high salini ty and no salinity 
conditions by UMIL. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  41 
 
Deliverables 
 
D4.1: Mid-scale fields trials report. [By: CFR; Type: R; Delivery date: M37]. A report of the results in the 2018 assays in 
salinized and non-salinized fields of the salt tolerant introgressed lines will be issued, containing lines behaviour in both field 
conditions, traits data and salinity monitoring data. 
D4.2: Large-scale fields trials report. [By: CAMARA; Type: R; Delivery date: M48]. A report of the results in the 2018 assays 
in salinized and non-salinized fields of the salt tolerant introgressed lines, as well as japonica rice cultivars/RILs accessions, 
will be issued, containing lines behaviour in both field conditions, traits data and salinity monitoring data. 
 
Milestones 
 
M4.1: Selection of assayed lines in mid-scale reports [By: CFR; Type: R; Delivery date: M37] 
M4.2: Selection of assayed lines in large-scale reports [By: CAMARA; Type: R; Delivery date: M48] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  42 
Work package number  5 Start Date or Starting Event 2016-02-11 
Work package title Development of a wireless sensor network 
Participant number 4 7 10 11 12 13 
Short name of participant CRA IRTA CAMARA IRIS CFR SIS 
Person/months per participant: 1 5 5 32 1 3 
 
Objectives  
 
- To gather specifications for establishing the requirements of the NEURICE Wireless Sensor Network (WSN). 
- To design and build a low cost WSN according to the NEURICE end-users design specifications. 
- To integrate all elements that make up the system into a functioning NEURICE unit. 
- To set up the system in a laboratory environment in order to carry out preliminary testing and fine-tuning 
- To perform field assays implementation tests and final installations in Spain, France and Italy 
 
Description of work 
 
Task 5.1. Review of technical requirements and end user design specifications. Contributors: CRA, IRTA, CAMARA, IRIS, 
CFR, SIS. Months 0-6. 
In this task the aim will be to gather qualitative input from a selected sample of European rice growers in order to formulate a 
collective up-to-date insight into their needs in terms of real time salinity monitoring and precision farming in order to define 
the specifications of the NEURICE system. In order to do this, a series of questionnaires and interviews will be performed 
following the Quality Function Deployment (QFD) methodology that aims at obtaining the most accurate vision from the end -
user needs. The results and conclusions arising from these consultations will be included in Deliverable 5.1 Technical 
requirements and end user specifications wh ich will include the system specifications (quantities to be measured and 
approximate range, accuracy and resolution) along with the key industry, market and regulatory requirements that influence 
on the development of the NEURICE system. These will form t he basis for detailed design specifications and performance 
characteristics of the NEURICE system concerning measurement range, accuracy, resolution, and operating conditions, as 
well as acquisition, maintenance and replacement costs for the sensor nodes. These user needs and requirements together 
with the technical specification of the overall NEURICE architecture will be used as a blueprint for guiding the technical wo rk 
to be carried out during Task 5.2, where the system will be designed, built and integrated, and Task 5.3 where the system will 
be preliminarily tested and fine-tuned. 
In parallel, during this task a thorough analysis of the market, regulatory and standardisation framework within which the 
proposed RICE-GUARD system will need to operate will be performed. To this end, during this task a review of all European 
and national regulatory related issues will be carried out in order to ensure that the system adheres to them, as well as to 
identify additional drivers for the technology. The results of this task will feed into Deliverable 5.1. IRIS will lead this task with 
the assistance of IRTA and CRA, as well as the agricultural SMEs of the project, CAMARA, CFR and SIS. 
 
Task 5.2. Design, manufacturing and integration of the NEURICE system. Contributor: IRIS. Months 7-15. 
Results from task 5.1 will be used to propose designs for the sensor nodes and the instrumentation electronics, the network, 
software and User Interface in order to fulfil the user requirements. The proposed NEURICE system will rely first and foremost 
on sensory data from its environment. This sensory data will come from multiple sensors in distributed locations. Information  
about nodes surroundings will need to be known as well as their internal workings. To this end the system wil l be designed 
and built to ensure that it is capable of detecting, monitoring and collecting the data, as well as assessing and evaluating the 
information before finally transmitting it. The design and building of the NEURICE system will be reported on Del iverable 5.2: 
Design and manufacturing of the NEURICE prototype. IRIS will lead this task. For accomplishing this task, the electronic 
components (PCB boards, power supply units) for the sensor, control and communication parts of the sensing nodes will be 
designed based on the user requirements and the environmental characteristics of the area to be monitored . Since the 
selection of components may affect the individual work in other tasks, the timing programme has been carefully planned to 
ensure that this task starts in the early stages of system design in order to ensure a smooth development that avoids the high 
costs associated with subsequent re-designing. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  43 
The proposed RICE-GUARD system consists of a heterogeneous wireless sensor network with several basic nodes and a 
single master node  for a large area. In both cases, each node will conceptually comprise a sensor unit  (SU) and a 
communication unit (CCU), and a power supply system based on solar energy harvesting.  
The variety of available technologies ne cessitates a thorough review of potential components, to ensure that an optimal 
selection is made to ensure a consistent, reliable, robust overall system is designed. In addition, an evaluation of current sensor 
technologies will be carried out and suitable technology will be selected for further development and implementation. Then, a 
draft of the physical design of the prototype will be done and later improved as it incorporates the changes needed. The 
mechanical structure will comprehend the shape, size and materials used. 
The mechanical design of the prototypes must take into account not only material endurance to the harsh environment, 
corrosion by salty water and fauna, but also weight limitations and resistance to physical stress. In that sense, the casing will 
be selected or developed to comply with the appropriate Index Protection, which will be at least equal to IP 65. 
The battery system deserves special attention. Different batteries will be evaluated following the criteria of offered voltage, life-
time and rechargeable capacity by solar panels. The solar panels needed to recharge the batteries will also be selected. This 
task will address the placement of the battery, the solar panel and the regulator to interconnect them if needed. 
The information required by NEURICE will be provided by a Distributed Wireless Sensor Network, which will be responsible 
for sensing, as well as for first stages of the processing hierarchy. This purpose will be achieved optimizing the protocol to be 
used in NEURICE node s, focussing on low -power technologies to enhance the battery life of the system. A heterogeneous 
WSN (with water electrical conductivity sensors) will be designed for monitoring the salinity in the study areas. The final number 
of nodes will be defined fo llowing the requirements defined within Task 5.1 in order to ensure the proper environmental 
monitoring of the pilot areas of the NEURICE project. Based on the results of Task 5.1 and on the analysis on the dimensions 
and communication distance capabilitie s of the WSN the final configuration and network topology will be established. The 
selection of the wireless technology will also have to take into account the frequency bands available for free use. ISM bands 
are unlicensed and therefore they have no cost  associated in their use. However, not all technologies are available in every 
band and the available equipment may be limited in some of them. The study of the most suitable band with special 
consideration about the attenuation of the signal will influence the selection of the wireless technology. 
Moreover, the different technologies in order to select the best and most suitable telecommunication technology for the 
transmission of the packets filled with the sensory data from the gateway to the central server will be evaluated. The gateway 
is the device that will be used as the central on -field point in the NEURICE network. It will act as the highest hierarchy node 
within the network, and will have bigger computational capabilities than the rest of the nodes. A local database on the gateway 
will store the readings from the nodes, taking care of its identification and the timestamp from each of the measurements and 
safeguarding the sensor information in case of communication problems to the central server. The gateway will have different 
connection options to be able to transmit the information from inside the field to a remote central server database, so that the 
system will be able to adapt to the facility’s needs. The information will be sent to a central d atabase that will serve a dual 
purpose: (a) to control the NEURICE system and, (b) to act as a user interface with the system. The database software will act 
as the back-end of the system. This back-end system will be responsible for network control; it will receive the data sent form 
the NEURICE sensors over the WSN and this data will be processed by the database software. This task will design both 
databases (local and central) to meet the requirements from the partners considering the data that the syste m will need to 
handle and store.  
The building of the system software and the web-based user interface represents an important component of the NEURICE 
architecture and the central point to the innovation of the system. In order to process the data, along with the requests submitted 
via end users to the web portal, a specific web -based application that will build on existing “open -source” solutions will be 
developed. The User Interface will need to be designed and implemented to access the database and present the results from 
the data collection in an understandable and customisable form. The objective will be that the final user gets familiarised quickly 
with the interface and can adapt the presentation of the data in the most appropriate way for his or he r needs in order to 
improve their management practises and resources . The aim is to develop this easy to use, readily accessible user 
interface that also allows different kinds of representations of the data and improves the management practises in terms of 
apple snail eradication and validation of new salt resistant rice varieties. During this task, extensive user tests will be performed 
to ensure that the design meets the needs and expectations of the end-users of the NEURICE system.  
All the different co mponents that make up the NEURICE system will be integrated together to physically build the complete 
NEURICE prototype. Specific models of mechanical (material, holders, screws...) and electronic (PCB and processors 
involved) parts will be evaluated and selected. The overall objective will always be obtaining the most competitive cost for the 
system while retaining the required quality of functionality in line with the system specifications defined in Task 5.1. Off -the-
shelf materials and tools will be preferred over tailor-made ones whenever available. In addition, not only the costs for a small 
number of prototypes but also the costs of a later large-scale production will be evaluated.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  44 
Task 5.3. Preliminary prototype testing and fine-tuning. Contributors: CRA, IRTA, CAMARA, IRIS, CFR, SIS. Months 
16-23. 
Once all the elements have been fully integrated into the NEURICE unit, it is vital that preliminary laboratory and field tes ting 
is carried out in order to ensure that the integrated components work at peak performance and smoothly together. During these 
laboratory trials the NEURICE system will be fine-tuned and adjusted as necessary, before the NEURICE prototype system is 
deemed ready for field-testing. Then, the system will be tested under field conditions with the supervision and collaboration of 
partners of the NEURICE project: CRA, IRTA, CAMARA, CFR and SIS . This task will be led by IRIS and will involve the 
planning of the functional tests and their execution. The results will be analysed and a repo rt will be drawn up documenting 
the results (Deliverable 5.3). 
 
Task 5.4. Field assays implementation tests. Contributors: CRA, IRTA, CAMARA, IRIS, CFR, SIS. Months 26-45. 
Following the integration of the definite NEURICE prototype and its preliminary validation at laboratory and field level it will be 
necessary to plan field tests in different paddy field sites. To this end, the NEURICE system will be installed by IRIS, test ed 
and validated at the sites of the participating agricultural SMEs - CFR in France, CAMARA in Spain and SIS in Italy. The editing 
of a comprehensive installation and user manual will be required and annexed to D5.4. An analysis of the results of these tests 
will allow the specifications of accuracy and resolution of the salinity measur ements to be validated, along with the sampling 
frequency and the minimum duration of the batteries. They will also ensure that the system is robust enough to withstand the 
harsh environment. The obtained results will be documented in Deliverables 5.4 “2018 Field assays implementation tests” and 
5.5 “2019 Field assays implementation tests”. 
A careful plan for the in -field testing will be drawn in close collaboration with the rice growers in the consortium who will be 
testing the system in their rice paddies with the help of CRA, CFR, CAMARA, IRTA and SIS  who will perform a comparative 
analysis of the salinity measured in-field and the salinity tests performed with the newly developed rice varieties. 
 
Deliverables 
 
D5.1: Technical requirements and end user specifications [By: IRIS; Type: R; Delivery date: M11]. Report on the technical 
requirements and end user needs to generate a detailed specifications document to be used as an input for the design.  
D5.2: Design and manufacturing of the NEURICE prototype [By: IRIS; Type: R; Delivery date: M23]. Report describing the 
detailed designs of the system and manufacturing characteristics such as materials, procedure and user manual. 
D5.3: Preliminary testing and fine-tuning report [By: IRIS; Type: R; Delivery date: M24]. Report describing the outcomes of 
the first tests performed for validating the system and fine-tuning the overall functionality.   
D5.4: Field assays implementation tests [By: IRIS; Type: R; Delivery date: M32 and M44]. 2018 and 2019 assays. Report 
describing detailed results from the tests in the field to monitor salinity in different European areas. 
 
Milestones  
 
M5.1: Wireless sensor network working prototype [By: IRIS; Type: R; Delivery date: M24]. 
M5.2: Fully functioning wireless sensor network in rice paddies [By: IRIS; Type: R; Delivery date: M45]. 
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  45 
Work package number  6 Start Date or Starting Event 2016-03-01 
Work Package Title Communication, dissemination, knowledge transfer and exploitation of results 
Participant Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name of participant 
UB 
CRAG 
CIRAD 
CRA 
UMIL 
UGLA 
IRTA 
INDEAR 
CAAS 
CAMARA 
IRIS 
CFR 
SIS 
Person/months per 
participant: 18 3 1 4 3 3 31 3 3 4 10 4 3 
 
Objectives  
The aim of WP 6 is to ensure a wide dissemination of the new rice salt tolerant varieties and the salinity sensor developed in 
this project in order to facilitate their adoption amongst stakeholders.  
The main objectives of this WP are: 
- To widely disseminate and transfer to stakeholders the new technologies developed (salt-tolerant varieties and the 
wireless sensor networks works) and instruct them about their management and how to deal with salinity in rice 
paddies in order to mitigate the imminent effects of salinization and deterioration of water quality in the 
Mediterranean basin due to climate change and to avoid the decline in production observed when seawater 
treatments are applied to control the apple snail 
- To exchange with the scientific community the results of this project in an accessible and open manner 
- To communicate and disseminate the goals, progresses and all the information related to the project to the society 
and administrations so increase their awareness into the consequences of climate change in food production. 
The specific objectives are: 
- To identify the major stakeholders. 
- To disseminate the new rice salt tolerant varieties to rice farmers, rice millers and consumers. 
- To introduce the salinity wireless sensor as a tool to manage salinized rice field. 
- To disseminate the technology for apple snail control developed in the project. 
- To exchange with the scientific community the most relevant achievements of the project.  
 
 
Description of work 
This WP will focus on ensuring proper and adequate ways to disseminate and transfer the results and information generated 
by NEURICE project to the rice farming sector, technicians and rice seed industries which will benefit from the new varieties 
obtained and wireless sensor network developed in this project, as well as to the society, administrations, research centres 
and universities to raise public awareness of the issue on climate change and its effects on food production. 
The leader of this WP is IRTA, which has been designated as expert of the Spanish national committee for the evaluation of 
new rice varieties while also has a wide experience in rice experimentation. IRTA rice activities give prominence to technology 
transfer, being permanently in contact with stakeholders: farmers rice industry, technic ians and government officers. IRTA 
organizes twice a year crop events, open field days and technical conferences, which have been consolidated not only locally 
but also at national scale since it counts with the attendance of national stakeholders. Therefore, they are an excellent platform 
to disseminate results from the  NEURICE project to the rice farming sector and rice producing industries  IRTA has also a 
Communication Department with experience in agrifood European active projects ( www.itaca-project.com, 
www.cleanleach.eu) or recently initiated (i3Food, GreenRice) capable to produce all kind of materials and formats for the 
dissemination and communication of the NEURICE project. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  46 
Once the project is finished, a detailed report is prepared that will include all it has been done for communicating and spreading 
the project, as well as the impacts, the materials and/or actions generated. 
Task 6.1. Communication of results. Contributors: UB, CRAG, CIRAD, CRA, UMIL, UGLA, IRTA, INDEAR, CAAS, 
CAMARA, IRIS, CFR, SIS. Months 1-48 
In this task, first, we will design a NEURICE logo and image as well as a NEURICE website. Then, the NEURICE consortium 
will establish the periodic sending of a newsletter. Information about the progress of the project will be also updated on social 
networks and by generating press notes and videos.  
The NEURICE logo and image will ensure that the project will be visible to everybody and will be shown along with the 
WEBSITE launch. This website will be the centre of the d issemination in the NEURICE project and will contain different web 
sections for professionals as well as general visitors and medias  to describe the objectives, general information and other 
contents (press notes, videos, photos of the project, etc.) of the NEURICE project. Moreover, it will also serve as a platform for 
researchers and rice seed industries interested in the project to contact any of the partners involved. Finally, the website will 
be linked not only with other websites but also with NEURICE  newsletter and NEURICE social networks. The newsletter will 
be sent periodically by the project partners to subscribers and social networks, and will include the latest news, activities , 
videos, etc. Several social networks related with the project (agric ultural, agrigenomics, genetics…) and more general ones 
such as: Linked-in, Twitter and Facebook will be used, which will be linked with the social networks of different partners. All of 
the activities, news, general information, inquiry results, workshops , etc., will be diffused by one or more dissemination 
channels of the project (web, newsletter, social networks…) along with videos about NEURICE projects such as general 
interviews, workshops, and webinars. In addition, a series of leaflets and brochures will explain the project, the concepts and 
the results. These materials will be located in the website, newsletters, social networks, sent to the media, etc. 
Task 6.2. Dissemination of results. Contributors: UB, CRAG, CIRAD, CRA, UMIL, UGLA, IRTA, INDEAR, CAAS, 
CAMARA, IRIS, CFR, SIS. Months 1-48. 
Activities oriented towards results dissemination will consist mainly in open -access papers as well as conference 
communications. The partners of the NEURICE consortium will compromise to publish breakthrough rese arch findings in: i) 
relevant international scientific journals with high impact factor, which can be measured according to the times that each article 
can be cited; ii) open-access papers to allow the information to be available to all interested research es in Europe as well as 
other rice producing regions all over the world. Moreover, the results of the project will be shown in conferences as oral 
communications as well as posters to ensure that results are shown in events aimed to specific sectors such a s plant 
physiology, plant genomics, rice production, etc. 
Task 6.3. Knowledge transfer and exploitation of results. Contributors: UB, CRA, IRTA, CAMARA, IRIS, CFR, SIS.  
Months 27-47. 
Activities oriented towards knowledge transfer and exploitation of result s to the seed industry and rice farmers will be mainly 
by open field days and cooperatives. IRTA, CFR and CRA will instruct the seed industry and rice cooperatives rice farmers 
how the new varieties should be used and how they will benefit of them. To do t his they will conduct seminars and open field 
days directed to rice farmers with the objective of guaranteeing the proper transfer of the results obtained in this project. These 
working sessions will ensure that explainations are given to the rice farming sector on how the new varieties should be used 
to deal with salinity in rice paddies whether it is due to the climate change effects or to the saltwater treatments to stop the 
apple snail pest. In addition, a plan for transmitting the information and innov ations obtained in this project to the rice seed 
producing industries will be implemented to show how the wireless sensor network developed by IRIS to monitorize salinity in 
real-time works along with the new varieties. 
The expected results from the project will be continually assessed in terms of novelty, patentability and protection in Sub-
task 6.3.1. Protection of the IPR  as part of an effective  knowledge management strategy. Results shall be owned by the 
participant generating them in accordance to a pr otocol of procedures that will be defined, which will be followed by each 
partner to clearly show the development of the generation of knowledge or results. In cases where the results are generated 
jointly (i.e. where the separate parts of some result cannot be attributed to different participants), it will be jointly owned. The 
allocation and the terms of exercising this joint ownership will be agreed in Joint Ownership Agreements that will be established 
during Sub-task 6.3.2. IPR Ownership and sharing. Access rights to results for implementing the project will be granted on 
a royalty-free basis. Access rights for use purposes will be granted either royalty-free, or on fair and reasonable conditions 
to be agreed in the NEURICE Exploitation Agreement. 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  47 
Deliverables 
 
D6.1. Image and logo design of the NEURICE project [By: IRTA; Type: DEC; Delivery date: M1]. The image and the logo will 
be used in all of the materials generated by the NEURICE project (press releases, banners, e-mails signatures, posters, roll-
ups, videos, leaflets, etc., and will be the basis to design also the image of the website. 
D6.2. NEURICE website. [By: IRTA; Type: DEC; Delivery date: M2]. Creation of a website that provides all the information of 
the NEURICE project (partners, objectives, milestones, etc.) to everyone. It will also work as a mechanism for exchanging 
data and results of each WP and a will have a restricted section for the use of the partners. 
D6.3. Presentation (Power Point), poster, roll-up, leaflets [By: IRTA; Type: DEC; Delivery date: M2]. This templates will be 
used for all the partners in their presentations, dissemination or communications actions about the project. 
D6.4. Leaflet about the objectives and general information about NEURICE project [By: IRTA; Type: DEC; Delivery date: M2] 
This leaflet will be used to present the NEURICE project during the different activities (printed), sent each time that the 
project makes a contact with a media (pdf format) and will be included in the website in order to have a document on line 
ready to be sent by all of the partners to all of the contacts. 
D6.5 NEURICE roll-up with the general description and objectives [By: IRTA; Type: DEC; Delivery date: M3]. This roll-up will 
be present in all of the public activities during the project 
D6.6. Social Networks: Twitter, Linked-in and Facebook [By: IRTA; Type: DEC; Delivery date: M1-M48]. The social networks 
will be used to help the dissemination of the news, activities, results and the social image of the NEURICE project 
D6.7. Videos with different contents about the project (interviews, general, activities, webinars....) [By: IRTA; Type: DEC; 
Delivery date: M1-M48]. This videos will help to explain better and will increase the dissemination of the project. A series of 
interviews with every WP leader, with field activities and made during the public seminars and open days will be materials 
edited in youtube and in the website, sent to the media, spreaded by the social networks and periodical newsletters. 
D6.8. Newsletter [By: IRTA; Type: DEC; Delivery date: M6, M12, M18, M24, M30, M36, M42, M48]. A series of periodical 
Newsletters will be edited in order to offer an alternative way to disseminate news, articles, papers, videos, photos, meetings, 
conferences, open days, results and all kind of information about NEURICE project. 
D6.9. An evaluation report on the success of the open field days and seminars [By: IRTA; Type: DEM; Delivery date: M32, 
M42, M47]. During rice season, IRTA will organize open field days to present the new rice varieties tolerant to salinity 
conditions and the new salinity sensor to rice farmers and rice technicians. Out of rice season, in winter, seminars will be 
organized in order to present the results of the trials to rice stakeholder. Those open days are a referent for the rice sector in 
Spain, and many farmers from the different rice area in Spain attend them in order to keep abreast the innovation on rice 
crop. 
D6.10. Leaflet about results of NEURICE project [By: IRTA; Type: DEC; Delivery date: M48] This leaflet will be used to 
present the NEURICE project results to all of participants in the different activities, sent to all of the media (general and 
agricultural) and included in the website in order to have a document on line ready to be sent by all of partners to all of the 
contacts. 
D6.11. A collection of Press Releases about activities of NEURICE project and other themes [By: IRTA; Type: R; Delivery 
date: M1 to M48]. During all of the NEURICE project, each activity: meeting, dissemination material (leaflet, video), result, 
etc., will be used as material to generate a press release. This press release will feed the website in order to be sent using 
social networks, newsletter, etc., and will be sent to the general and professional media (agricultural). 
D6.12. Final report about communication and spreading, impacts, materials and actions. [By: IRTA; Type: DEC; Delivery date: 
M50]. Once the project is finished, a detailed report is prepared that will include all it has been done for communicating and 
spreading the project, as well as the impacts, the materials and/or actions generated. 
D6.13. Exploitation agreement [By: IRTA; Type: R; Delivery date: M24]. Exploitation agreement signed by all partners. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  48 
 
Milestones 
 
M6.1. NEURICE Image, logo and website [By: IRTA; Type:O ; Delivery date: M2]. 
M6.2. Public and scientific development and results divulgation report [By: UB; Type: R; Delivery date: M12, M24, M36, M48] 
M6.3. End-users knowledge transfer evaluation [By: IRTA; Type:O ; Delivery date: M32, M42, M47]. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  49 
Work package number  7 Start Date or Starting Event 2016-02-11 
Work Package Title Project management 
Participant Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name of participant 
UB 
CRAG 
CIRAD 
CRA 
UMIL 
UGLA 
IRTA 
INDEA
R 
CAAS 
CAMA
RA 
IRIS 
CFR 
SIS 
Person/months per 
participant: 
42 3 0,5 1 3 0,3 1 1 1 3 1 1 1 
 
Objectives  
 
- To coordinate the project between the partners and the European Commission To coordinate the steering 
committee as well as the group of the WP leaders in order to ensure that all NEURICE beneficiaries and in 
particular the WP leaders will carry out the work plan as it has been scheduled 
- To prepare protocols and to ensure that all the fields of the NEURICE will be carried out according to scheduled 
work plan  
- To consolidate the NEURICE results in to periodic reports  
- To deliver the financial periodic cost statements to EU 
- To create the Advisory Board that will consult the NEURICE project 
 
 
Description of work  
This WP will focus on the integration of data and results from all the others work packages in order to ensure proper information 
exchange between partners and to make NEURICE project visible. The leader of this WP is UB, since it is the coordinator of 
the NEURICE project, who has coordinated other agricultural projects such as OPTICHINA and TERPMED.  
UB manages an average of 150 European projects per year, for an average amount of about 8.6 million euro a year. 
 
Task 7.1. Project coordination and management. Contributors: UB. Months 0-47. 
The coordination of the project will be accomplished through the technical meetings held regularly, with respect to the project 
planning and timetable. Special attention will be given to the preparation of the kick -off, annual and final meetings. All WP 
leaders (in close collaboration with the Task leaders of their WPs) as appointed in the project outline, shall have protocols (or 
action plan) and updated time schedules, which will be though discussed, finalized and accepted by all partners during the 
kick-off meeting. They shall ensure that that the accepted protocol (or action plan) is realistic and will lead to the collection of 
high quality, up-to-date data. Possible adjustment to the predicted time schedule may be required, depending on the approved 
project starting date. This issue shall also be addressed and finalized in the kick-off meeting. 
At the kick -off meeting the WP leaders apart from the protocol (or the action plan) have to present in detail the resources 
(reports from completed projects, ongoing research actives and sites, international liter ature, etc.) that will use as a base in 
order to run their work packages. In order to achieve an efficient coordination and management of the project, a steering 
committee will be established soon after the beginning of the project, which will consist by the coordinator and the WP leaders. 
The steering committee will meet in every technical meeting of the project. 
 
Task 7.2. Steering Committee. Contributors: UB. Months 0-47. 
The Steering Committee is the decision-making body of the project. Chaired by the project Coordinator, it is composed of one 
representative per partner (including work package leaders), each having one vote for decision -making. The Steering 
Committee will be in charge of the operational management of all activities of the Project and re -orientation whenever 
necessary, budget revision, incorporation of new contractors, measures towards defaulting partners. It will integrate 
recommendations from the IPR strategy  and Dissemination Committee and survey ethical and gender issues. 
The Steering  Committee will also be in charge of financial management of work packages. The Steering Committee will 
supervise the work of the European Project Manager including quality control and preparing meetings with the EC, including 
preparation and transmission of deliverables. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  50 
Task 7.3. Advisory Board. Contributors: UB. Months 0-47. 
External international leading scientific experts, representatives of industry, breeders, agronomists, physiologists, etc. wi ll be 
integrated in an Advisory Board (AB). The AB will provide guidance to the Steering Committee on project orientations. It will 
be consulted by the Steering Committee on all relevant important scientific issues and can make any proposal or transmit any 
information it seems useful to the Steering Committee. The external expert panel will provide an opportunity for getting on 
board additional industrial partners, together with others stakeholders. 
The AB will share information with the steering committee through newsletters, e -mails, videoconference and forum on 
NEURICE website. With the aim of sharing knowledge during the project activities, a selected number of specialists in the field 
of plant and crop physiology, agronomy, biotechnology, environmental researchers, and from industries, belonging to the AB, 
will be invited at the annual NEURICE meetings in order to investigate specific issues based on the activity needing. Prior to  
the beginning of its activity, each AB members will enter into a non-disclosure agreement. 
 
Task 7.4. Consortium agreement. Contributors: UB. Month 0. 
The Consortium Agreement will be a single formal legal document, agreed and signed by all the parties which defines a set of 
standard conditions under which the project will be managed and IP will be shared.  
The Consortium Agreement will:  
 be coherently documented;  
 provide an appropriate project management framework;  
 clearly allocate responsibility for resource allocation and risk management;  
 reflect the understandings of the parties as to their role, rights and responsibilities; en sure that the work for which 
funding is allocated is completed in a timely fashion. 
The Consortium Agreement will be drawn and signed in the first three months of the project. 
 
Task 7.5. Mid-term evaluation. Contributors: UB. Month 24. 
After two years project a mid-term evaluation will be asked to the Commission in order to assess the on-going activities of the 
project for each of the planned WPs. 
 
Task 7.6. NEURICE projects meetings. Contributors: UB, CRAG, CIRAD, CRA, UMIL, UGLA, IRTA, INDEAR, CAAS, 
CAMARA, IRIS, CFR, SIS. Months 1-47. 
The following meetings are planned during the duration of the NEURICE project:  
Kick-off meeting: this meeting will be held in Barcelona at the beginning o f the NEURICE project (02/2016)  in order to: 
organize all the initial  work, make a fresh start of the different work packages, coordinate partners activities, as well as to 
implement and execute the work packages. It will also be established that all partners involved in each Work Package should 
communicate periodically.  
Project development discussion meeting year 1 and 2: At the beginning of the years 2017 and 2018, a project development 
discussion and coordination meeting is proposed, which will take place in the different rice regions at January of each year.  
These meetings will serve to monitor if any of the proposed risks is present and to monitor the work packages development: 
Have deliverables be met? Have milestones been achieved? Moreover, this are foreseen during January of each year to be 
able to report in time to the EC, which in term will allow to liaise between the project partners and the EC programme officers.  
Field monitoring and meeting year 2 and 3: This two meeting will be held during the summer of 2018 and 2019 so partners 
of the NEURICE project can discuss the develop pment of the project as well as monitor the field trials of 2018 and 2019. 
Final meeting: At the end of the project in January 2020 a results meeting to gather and discuss the results and achievements 
will be proposed at Brussels, Belgium. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  51 
 
Deliverables 
 
D7.1: NEURICE consortium Agreement [By: UB and all partners; Type: R; Delivery date: M1]. A consortium agreement 
signed by all partners in which they agree and commit with the NEURICE project. 
D7.2: Creation of updated timetable, work plan, protocols and action plan [By: UB and all partners; Type: R; Delivery date: 
M1]. This will be delivered after the kick-off meeting has been held. 
D7.3: Creation of consolidated annual technical and financial reports [By: UB and all partners; Type: R; Delivery date: M13, 
25, 37, 48]. These reports will be specified as in the EU-contract and will include the annual cost claims of all the project 
partners. 
D7.4: Meeting minutes [By: UB; Type: R; Delivery date: M2, M12, M24, M32, M42 and M48]. Reports of the project 
development discussed in the kick-off meeting (M1), midterm meetings (M11, M23), field monitoring and meeting (M31, M41) 
and final meeting (M47). 
 
Milestones 
 
M7.1: NEURICE consortium agreement [By: UB; Type: R; Delivery date: M1]. 
M7.2: Updated NEURICE work plan [By: UB; Type: R; Delivery date: M1]. 
M7.3: NEURICE objectives successfully completed [By: IRIS; Type: R; Delivery date: M48]. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  52 
Table 3.1b: List of work packages 
 
WP 
number WP title Type of 
activity 
Lead 
participant 
number 
Lead participant 
short name 
Person 
months 
Start 
month 
End 
month 
WP1 
Germplasm evaluation 
and genetic mapping 
for salt tolerance 
RTD P5 Gian Attilio 
Sacchi (UMIL) 139 M1 M34 
WP2* Salt tolerance 
introgression RTD P3 Brigitte Courtois 
(CIRAD) 118.5 M(-1) M22 
WP3 Salt tolerance 
validation RTD P2 Blanca San 
Segundo (CRAG) 131 M21 M46 
WP4 
Field assays of the 
advanced breeding 
lines 
RTD P10 Xavier Serrat 
(CAMARA) 177 M25 M48 
WP5 
Development of a 
wireless sensor 
network 
RTD P11 Pau Puigdollers 
(IRIS) 47 M0 M45 
WP6 
Communication, 
dissemination, 
knowledge transfer and 
exploitation of results 
RTT P7 M Mar Català 
(IRTA) 90 M1 M48 
WP7 Project management MTG P1 Salvador Nogués 
(UB) 58.8 M0 M47 
WP = Work Package; RTD = Research and technological development; MTG = Management of the consortium; RTT = 
Research and technological transfer. *  = WP2 (Salt tolerance introgression) will began in January 2016 after the project is 
accepted.  
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  53 
Table 3.1c: List of Deliverables2   
 
Deliverable 
(number) Deliverable name 
Work 
package 
number 
Short name 
of lead 
participant 
Type Dissemination 
level Delivery date 
D1.1 Identification of salt tolerant rice 
cultivars/genotypes 1 UMIL R CI M24 
D1.2 In-depth physiological study of 
FL478 1 UGLA R CO M25 
D1.3 Salt tolerant loci identified by GWAS 
and linkage mapping 1 CRA, 
INDEAR R CO M36 
D1.4 
Allelic variation of candidate salt 
tolerance genes and their utilization 
in breeding 
1 CAAS R CO M48 
D2.1 Spanish BC3F3 seeds from 20 
BC3F2 introgressed lines 2 UB R CI M22 
D2.2 Italian BC3F3 seeds from 20 BC3F2 
introgressed lines 2 CRA R CI M22 
D2.3 French BC3F3 seeds from 20 
BC3F2 introgressed lines 2 CIRAD R CI M22 
D3.1 Validation of salt tolerant lines 3 CRAG R CO M27 
D3.2 In-depth physiological and 
biochemical analysis 3 UGLA R CO M37 
D3.3 
Integrated genomic and 
transcriptomic information of salt 
tolerance validation  
3 CRAG R CO M45 
D3.4 List of potential rice markers for salt 
tolerance 3 UB R CO M47 
D4.1 Mid-scale fields trials report 4 CFR R PU, CO M37 
D4.2 Large-scale fields trials report 4 CAMARA R PU, CO M48 
D5.1 Technical requirements and end 
user specifications 5 IRIS R PU M11 
D5.2 Design and manufacturing of the 
NEURICE prototype 5 IRIS R CO M23 
D5.3 Preliminary testing and fine-tuning 
report 5 IRIS R CO M24 
                                                 
2  If your action taking part in the Pilot on Open Research Data, you must include a data management plan as a distinct 
deliverable within the first 6 months of the project.  This deliverable will evolve during the lifetime of the project in order to 
present the status of the project's reflections on data management. A template for such a plan is available on the Participan t 
Portal (Guide on Data Management). 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  54 
D5.4 2018 Field assays implementation 
tests 5 IRIS R PU M32, M44 
D6.1 Image and logo design of the 
NEURICE project 6 IRTA DEC PU M1 
D6.2 NEURICE website 6 IRTA DEC PU M2 
D6.3 Presentation (Power Point), poster, 
roll-up, etc. templates  6 IRTA DEC PU M2 
D6.4 
Leaflet about the objectives and 
general information about NEURICE 
project 
6 IRTA DEC PU M2 
D6.5 NEURICE roll-up with the general 
description and objectives 6 IRTA DEC PU M3 
D6.6 Social Networks: Twitter, Linked-in 
and Facebook 6 IRTA DEC PU M1-M48 
D6.7 Videos with different contents about 
the project 6 IRTA DEC PU M1-M48 
D6.8 Newsletter 6 IRTA DEC PU 
M6-M12, M18, 
M24, M30, M36, 
M42, M48 
D6.9 An evaluation report on the success 
of the open field days and seminars 6 IRTA R PU M32, M42, M47 
D6.10 Leaflet about results of NEURICE 
project 6 IRTA DEC PU M48 
D6.11 
A collection of Press Releases 
about activities of NEURICE project 
and other themes 
6 IRTA R PU M48 
D6.12 
Final report about communication 
and spreading, impacts, materials 
and actions 
6 IRTA DEC PU M50 
D6.13 Exploitation agreement  6 IRTA R CO M24 
D7.1 Consortium agreement 7 UB R CO M1 
D7.2 Creation of updated timetable, work 
plan, protocols, action plan 7 UB R CO M1 
D7.3 Creation of consolidated annual 
technical and financial reports 7 UB R CO M13, M25, M37, 
M48 
D7.4 Meeting minutes 7 
UB, UMIL, 
CRA, 
CAMARA, 
CFR 
R CO M2, M12, M24, 
M32, M42, M48 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  55 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Flow diagram of the work packages and milestones of the NEURICE project.  Blue boxes are work packages, red boxes are milestones, white arrows are connections to 
milestones and blue arrows connections to work packages. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  56
3.2 Management structure and procedures  
 
3.2.1  Coordination and management 
The coordinator of the NEURICE project is the ‘Universitat de Barcelona’, represented by Dr. Salvador 
Nogués. His primary role is to represent the intermediary between the European Commission and the Consortium as 
well as to be the promoter and supervisor of the overall technical and scientific progress of NEURICE (Fig. 7). 
The Coordinator will be responsible, among other  tasks defined by the EC Contract and the Consortium Agreement 
for:  
 Chairing the Steering Committee and taking all actions to enable proper decision making by this decision 
body.  
 Ensuring smooth operation of the project: work plan maintenance, monitoring project progress, analysing 
result, identification of trouble and consequences for the future research.  
 Writing periodic reports on progress of the project, partner activity.  
 Submitting all required progress reports, deliverables and financial statement s to the European 
Commission.  
 Communicating all information in connection with the Project to the Commission.  
 Transferring the advanced payments and further payments to the participants as per the provisional 
budget and the actual expenses approved by the Steering Committee. 
 
The WP Leaders are in charge of monitoring all activities towards the objectives of their WP. They will take any operational 
decision regarding the WP day-to-day management. They will be in charge of preparing the decisions to be taken by the Steering 
Committee and ensuring that these decisions are properly implemented. They will be also in charge of addressing and 
documenting internal risks which may impair the progress towards the objectives of the WP and suggest strategies to anticipate 
and minimize such internal risks.  
In order to achieve an efficient coordination and management of the project, a steering committee will be established soon after 
the beginning of the project consisting from the coordinator and one representative per partner. 
The Consortium Agreement to be signed by all participants will include specific provisions covering the ownership, protection and 
dissemination of the project results as well as provisions explaining how access can be gained to them. Responsible  for the 
monitoring and correct functioning of such provisions will be the coordinator (UB, Spain) which will ensure that any future I PR 
provisions officially notified by the EC is included in the Description of Work and/or in the consortium Agreement. It will cover in 
more detail the aspects described below. 
Furthermore, the Consortium Agreement will also cover other issues such as : the time-limit for the prior notice to the rest of the 
partners, as well as the necessary information concerning the envisaged new owner of the foreground to assure the other partners 
can exercise their access rights. The time limit for objecting to any transfer of ownership, when a partner demonstrates that their 
access rights would be adversely affected.  The rules for the adeq uate and effective protection of the foreground capable of 
industrial or commercial application, having due regard to the legitimate and commercial interests of all partners. 
 
 
3.2.2.  Project manager 
Given the range of partners and work involved, the project will require dedicated and experienced project management 
to ensure that the objectives, time-scales and anticipated deliverables are met and that the overall budget and the specific sub -
project allocations are effectively monitored. This will be achie ved through the allocation of an experienced project manager, 
supporting the technical administration of the Project by the Coordinator (Partner 1, Universitat de Barcelona) with overall 
responsibility for the Project’s coordination and management. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  57 
Project Manager (PM): PM is responsible for the overall technical objectives achievements and reports to Project Coordinator. 
In this function:  
 
 PM prepares and presents the consolidated technical reports needed by the Project Coordinator.  
 PM ensures the overall technical and scientific consistency of the project  
 Follow up work progress very closely by reviewing work progress reports;  
 Exchange information regularly with WP leaders (WPL);  
 Ensure that information is circulating between WP leaders (WPL);  
 Organize and chair scientific meetings at least each 6 months.  
 Organize and chair any additional technical meeting ensuring the technical consistency of the Project.  
 The Project Manager will be appointed by the Project coordinator with the agreement of the Steering Comitee. 
 
 
3.2.3.  Steering Committee 
The Steering Committee is the decision -making body of the project. Chaired by the project Coordinator, it is 
composed of one representative per partner (including work package leaders), each having one vote for decision-
making. The Steering Committee will be in charge of the operational management of all activities of the Project and re-
orientation whenever necessary, budget revision, incorporation of new contractors, measures towards defaulting 
partners. It will integrate recommendations from the Intellectual Property Use and Dissemination Committee and survey 
ethical and gender issues. The Steering Committee will also be in charge of financial management of work packages. 
The Steering Committee will supervise th e work of the European Project Manager  including quality control and 
preparing meetings with the EC, including preparation and transmission of deliverables. Chaired by the Coordinator, 
the Steering Committee is composed of the following persons, each of th em holding both scientific excellence and 
strong experience in collaborative research projects:  
 Salvador Nogués - Universitat de Barcelona (UB), Coordinator 
 Blanca San Segundo - Centre for Research in Agricultural Genomics (CRAG) 
 Brigitte Courtois - Centre de Coopération Internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour le Développement 
(CIRAD) 
 Giampiero Valè - Consiglio per la Ricerca in Agricoltura e l’analisi dell’economia agraria (CRA) 
 Gian Attilio Sacchi - Università degli Studi di Milano (UMIL) 
 Michael Blatt - University of Glasgow (UGLA) 
 Mar Català - Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentària (IRTA) 
 María Mercedes Rivero Pérez - Instituto de Agrobiotecnología Rosario (INDEAR) 
 Jiankang Wang - Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences - Institute of Crop Sciences (CAAS) 
 Xavier Serrat - Càmara Arrossera del Montsià i Secció de Crèdit SCCL (CAMARA) 
 Pau Puigdollers - Innovació i Recerca Industrial i Sostenible (IRIS) 
 Arnaud Boisnard - Centre Français du Riz (CFR) 
 Stefano Ravaglia - Società Italiana Sementi Spa (SIS) 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  58 
3.2.4.  External Advisory Board  
The actors of the NEURICE project are constituting an External Advisory Board formed by internationally 
recognized scientists and managers who will participate in general coordination meetings and providing asse ssment 
of on the project development: Zaida Lentini from Universidad ICESI (Venezuela), Julian Hibberd (Cambridge 
University), Cathie Martin (John Innes Centre), and Michael J. Thompson and Ajay Kohli from IRRI (The Philippines). 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Management chart of the NEURICE project. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  59 
Table 3.2a: List of milestones  
 
Milestone 
number Milestone name Related work 
package(s) 
Estimated 
date 
Means of 
verification 
M1.1 Phenotyping of both germplasm collection and RILs 1 M24 
Validation in 
greenhouse and 
report 
M1.2 In-depth physiological study of FL478 1 M25 Report 
M1.3 GBS of the RIL population and map construction 1 M36 Report 
M1.4 Bioinformatics results of salt candidate genes 
search 1 M41 Report 
M2.1 BC3F3 seeds of BC3F2 Saltol introgressed Spanish 
lines 2 M22 Seed collection 
M2.2 BC3F3 seeds of BC3F2 Saltol introgressed Italian 
lines 2 M22 Seed collection 
M2.3 BC3F3 seeds of BC3F2 Saltol introgressed French 
lines 2 M22 Seed collection 
M3.1 List of validated salt tolerant lines for field assays 3 M27 Seed collection 
M3.2 In-depth physiological and biochemical analysis 
results 3 M37 Report/Publication 
M3.3 Salt tolerance rice transcriptome 3 M45 Report/Publication 
M3.4 Salinity tolerance markers of the assayed European 
rice lines 3 M47 Full report 
M4.1 Selection of assayed lines in mid-scale reports 4 M37 Report 
M4.2 Selection of assayed lines in large-scale reports 4 M48 Report 
M5.1 Wireless sensor network working prototype 5 M24 Prototype 
M5.2 Fully functioning wireless sensor network in rice 
paddies 5 M45 Report and field 
recording 
M6.1 NEURICE image, logo and website 6 M1, M2 Website 
M6.2 Public and scientific development and results 
divulgation report 6 M12, M24, 
M36, M48 
Report of published 
new, articles, posters 
and publications 
M6.3 End-users knowledge transfer evaluation 6 M32, M42, 
M47 
Open field days and 
seminars evaluations 
by end-users 
M7.1 NEURICE consortium agreement  7 M1 Official document 
M7.2 Updated NEURICE work plan 7 M1 Report 
M7.3 NEURICE objectives successfully complete d 7 M48 Report 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  60 
 
Table 3.2b: Critical risks for implementation  
 
Work 
package Description of risk Likelihood Severity Proposed risk-mitigation 
measures Responsibility 
WP1 
The imposed salt treatment 
could be: a) too strong and the 
accessions/lines could not 
survive; b) too weak and no 
sufficient phenotypical variability 
among the accessions/lines 
could result. 
low low 
We will assess the salt treatment 
evaluating both seed germination 
rate and early responses of the 
plants. In few time the experiment 
will be repeated coherently 
adjusting soil salinity. 
UMIL 
WP1 Accessions/lines will not attain 
the flowering stage. medium low 
This problem has been mitigated in 
the proposed methodology since 
300 accessions and 200 RILs will 
be assayed. 
CRA 
WP1 
Low variability in salt tolerance 
among the germplasm 
considered 
low low 
 New accessions will be included in 
the panel. They will be genotyped 
and  phenotyped in the 2nd year. 
UMIL 
WP2 Embryo rescue is not working in 
one partner low medium UB will assist and do the training of 
this technique for this partner. UB 
WP2 
The source of the high salinity 
tolerance in FL478 (also known 
as IR29-Pokkali) comes from 
Saltol and possibly other 
introgressions from Pokkali in 
other regions in the genome. 
low medium 
We will use IR64-Saltol instead of 
IR29-Pokkali (FL478), which has a 
more cleaned background to avoid 
those regions not wanted from 
Pokkali genome. 
CIRAD 
WP2 Delay in generating the BC3F2 
generation in one country medium high 
The greenhouse hydroponic 
experiment of WP3 will be delayed 
of six months and only one season 
of field trial will be conducted. 
CIRAD 
WP3 BC3F3 lines can have problems 
growing in hydroponic cultures. medium low 
CRAG as the WP leader will assist 
partners to properly evaluate the 
lines in hydroponic assays. 
CRAG 
WP3 
NaCl concentrations used in 
hydroponic assays are not 
appropriated. 
low low NaCl concentration will be adjusted 
as necessary. CRAG 
WP4 Too low BC3F4 seeds for mid-
scale field trials (2018). low low 
Smaller plots will be used to 
successfully evaluate lines in the 
field. 
CAMARA 
WP5 Delay in the production of the 
prototype. low low 
If the prototype is delayed, for the 
mid-scale trials (2018) conventional 
salt measuring techniques will be 
employed. 
IRIS 
WP6 
Problems transferring 
knowledge or capacitating rice 
farming and industry sector. 
low low More periodic seminars will be 
carried out. IRTA 
WP7 Delays due to disagreement 
between partners medium low 
Open discussions, close 
communication and referring to the 
agreed work plan and deliverables  
UB 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  61
3.3 Consortium as a whole  
 
3.3.1 Consortium description 
 
The NEURICE consortium proposes an equilibrium between public research and technological development universities 
(UB, UMIL, UGLA, CAAS) and private technological and farmer companies (CAMARA, CFR, SIS, IRIS). Moreover, in NEURICE 
there are research centres (CRAG, IRTA, CRA, CIRAD, INDEAR) involved which have wide experience in public research and 
private development. Thus, the consortium is whole and is complemented between all partners, and will surely integrate the work 
between all of the parties involved. 
With the idea of develop ing European salt tolerance rice varieties, it is imperative that the consortium has both, the knowledge 
and research experience of the universities and research c entres and the competence of the private companies to validate, 
register and commercialize the accessions generated. Thus, the partners  have well defined roles in laboratory research or field 
trials and  complement one another, covering the possible weak points of the consortium. 
Additionally, a benefit is that the majority of the partners are familiar with one another and have participated in other projects  
together; some of them working with rice (see Fig. 8). For example CIRAD, CFR, CRAG, IRTA and CRA,  are currently 
collaborating within the GREENRICE project, a European project funded by the FACCE -ERA-NET+ call on Climate Smart 
Agriculture, to evaluate the efficiency of a n Alternate Wetting and Drying rice production system (AWDS). The implications of 
AWD system on the rice environment and productivity is assessed in the project through monitoring of water consumption, soil 
salinity, plant x soil x microbial community interactions, GHG emission, soil chemistry and through the identification of rice cultivars 
that maintain their productivity under AWDS as well as the traits that contribute to this adaptability.  
 
 
Figure 8. Scheme showing the partners relations in different projects . Partners are represented by white -filled blue 
rectangles, projects by colored rectangles and other collaborations by dotted rectangles. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  62 
CRAG and CIRAD ha ve worked together before in other projects like EUROOT, and CRA has worked with UMIL in several 
projects like POLORISO or RISINNOVA (rice breeding and technology improvement) and have joint PhD programs. Furthermore, 
CRA has worked in the MARS project with SIS. Connecting with the other partners, IRTA has participated in some projects with 
CAMARA, IRIS and CFR together, like SMARTPADDY (a project to measure and manage salinity in rice fields) or RICEGUARD 
(a project to develop a wireless sensor network to predict rice blast). 
CRA, UMIL and CIRAD are collaborating in a project entitled “Genomic selection for resources use efficiency in rise- GS-RUSE” 
funded by Agroplis Foundation  (FR) and Cariplo Foundation (I) in the framework of the “French -Italian Rice Science and 
Technology Initiative”. The GS-Ruse project aims at contributing to tackle some of the conceptual issues of GS in plants and at 
providing rice breeders with tailored methods and tools for the integration of GS approach in their breeding strategies. 
 
UB has worked with other kind of projects and research activities with CRAG, CAMARA and IRTA. Actually is common the flow 
of knowledge and students between this partners because UB and IRTA are part of the CRAG consortium. Moreover, UB has an 
industrial PhD program based on rice with CAMARA and diverse PhD programs with UGLA. UB also has participated in European 
projects with the two international countries, in the OPTIMA project with INDEAR and in the OPTICHINA project with CAAS.  
 
3.3.2 Industrial/commercial involvement 
 
The NEURICE project will secure a full exploitation of the results generated. It will also generate findings that can be 
exploited commercially, like new salt tolerant rice varieties, salinity wireless sensor network prototype and decision support system 
software , see Table 2.2.c.). To achieve this goal, several SMEs (i.e. CAMARA, CFR, SIS and IRIS) are involved as farming 
partners. A description of these p artners can be found in Section 1.3.3. To maximize the commercial and industrial impact the 
consortium will be linked directly to the agricultural European Innovation Partnership (EIP -AGRI) featuring direct access to 
technological solution providers. In ad dition, an external advisory board formed by internationally recognized scientists and 
managers will participate in general coordination meetings and providing assessment of on the project development (see above). 
This will ensure cross -sector dissemination as well as promoting a direct dialogue between researchers and practitioners at a 
local, regional and international level.  
There is strong industry leadership and involvement in this consortium. Each industry participant has clear expectations and 
commitments towards commercially using the results of this project in their businesses, which is manifested through the initial 
exploitation and business plans presented in Section 2.2.  
While the involvement of industry in R&D consortia increases the success r ate of market -oriented exploitation, vertical 
integration (i.e. including the whole value chain) in R&D projects is a success factor for market-oriented exploitation. To this 
end, NEURICE includes technology SME companies (IRIS) and agricultural SMEs (CAMARA, CFR, SIS) with research performing 
capacity who can contribute to technology push, who are not only capacitated to contribute to the R&D effort, especially in the 
context of scale-up, integration and demonstration of the results during the project, but who can absorb the knowledge 
generated to protect it, in order to further develop and industrialise the outputs post-project towards commercialisation. The 
inclusion of SMEs will contribute end-user industry knowledge and experience to assist in mainstreaming the results of the project 
and in validating them in the field. Market actors (IRIS, SIS) will contribute to the exploitation pathways for the project results 
platform. They will also enable demand to be stimulated as a result of the market pull. Impo rtantly, the contacts with large 
enterprises can make a difference in successful market oriented exploitation as long as the research outcomes are in line wit h 
their ‘expectations’. NEURICE has secured the interest and involvement of this industry at the early stages of the preparation of 
this bid, and they all understand its scope and have been very committed in collaborating with the rest of the partners to contribute 
to the definition of the project. Their engagement during the proposal preparation stage  has helped to shape the scope and 
ambition of this bid. 
 
3.3.3 Other countries 
 
INDEAR: the participation of INDEAR is essential for the project because has the most advanced agro-biotech research platforms 
in Latin America, including a high performance D NA sequencing platform, essential for the NEURICE project. This Genomic 
capability is necessary for the project to accomplish the large genomic analyses to be done in WP1. Additionally, in the last  
decade Argentina has increased their rice production in a 121%, accompanied of an increase in the yield of 16%, and has 
increased their exportation in a 233%, principally to Brazil (Report “Informe de Coyuntura” of “Alimentos Argentinos” of the 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  63 
Argentinian Minister of Agriculture, livestock and fisheries) . Thus , INDEAR offers a great opportunity to internationalize the 
European rice varieties produces in the NEURICE project to the South American rice market. 
 CAAS: China is the World leading rice producer , so its involvement in a rice project is mandatory. The wid e knowledge, 
technological advances and competence are advantageous values for the NEURICE project. As this project uses European rice 
varieties, the implication of CAAS in the laboratory and field trials is not so necessary, but it is in the bioinformatics of the genomic 
analysis. CAAS is an expert in bioinformatics, and it has worked with similar crop data before.
3.4 Resources to be committed 
 
BUDGET: 
The overall consortium during the four years of the proposed project (from the first hybridizations t o the final field 
assays, Figures 2 and 4 ) has an estimation of 4 .608.975 Euros total cost. We have allocated in real value more resources to 
those teams in charge of laboratory and field trials and tried to maximize the amount of staff engaged in these ex periments to 
ensure the data needed in this proposal.  
 
Table 3.4a: Summary of staff effort 
 
 WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 
Total Person/ 
Months per 
Participant 
1/ UB  15 30 12 11  18 42 128 
2/ CRAG  10 47   3 3 63 
3/ CIRAD   34.5 10   1 0.5 46 
4/ CRA  28 34  16 1 4 1 84 
5/ UMIL  30  22 17  3 3 75 
6/ UGLA  12  40   3 0.3 55.3 
7/ IRTA    39 5 31 1 76 
8/ INDEAR 34     3 1 38 
9/ CAAS 20     3 1 24 
10/ CAMARA  8  40 5 4 3 60 
11/ IRIS     9 32 10 1 52 
12/ CFR   2  25 1 4 1 33 
13/ SIS    20 3 3 1 27 
Total Person/Months 139 118.5 131 177 47 90 58.8 761.3 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  64 
Table 3.4b: ‘Other direct cost’ items (travel, equipment, other goods and services, large research infrastructure) 
 
1/ UB Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 25000 
Travel expenses for the staff involved in the project to attend congresses and the project meetings 
(kick-off meeting, annual meetings, workshop meetings, sectorial meetings for dissemination 
activities and final meeting of the project, etc.).  
Equipment   
Other 
goods and 
services 
89250 
Consumables: pots, fertilizers, and several disposables for crosses performed on greenhouse 
(WP2). Liquid nitrogen for sampling and reagents for molecular analyses for KASPar markers 
detection (expression analysis of candidate gens) in WP2. 
Reagents to perform biochemical analyses on salt tolerant candidates in WP3 (measurement of 
MDA level and GSH/GSSG ratio). 
Laboratory disposable for WP2, WP3 and WP4.  
Open access publications. 
Financial audits  
Total 114250  
 
 
2/ CRAG Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 25000 Participation in project meetings and scientific exchanges, participation in congresses/Workshops 
where advances in the project are presented, dissemination activities. 
Equipment   
Other 
goods and 
services 
66000 
Consumables are requested for reagents in molecular biology, disposable labwares and supplies 
necessary to execute activities related to marker assisted back-crossing selection (MABCS; WP2) 
Salt-tolerance validation and physiological, biochemical and membrane function analysis of salt-
tolerant rice lines (WP3). It includes costs of greenhouse and tissue culture, microscopy, genomic 
and DNA sequencing. 
Open access publications. 
Financial audits 
Total 91000  
 
 
3/ CIRAD Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 19000 Kick-off meeting, project technical meetings; Arles-Montpellier trips. 
Equipment   
Other 
goods and 
services 
69500 
Consumables: Greenhouse and growth chamber costs; KASPar primers and lab costs (WP2). 
Open access publications. 
Financial audits 
Total 88500  
 
 
4/ CRA Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 15000 
Travel expenses for permanent and non-permanent staff involved in the project, for participation to 
kick-off meeting, annual meetings, workshop meetings, sectorial meetings for dissemination 
activities and final meeting of the project. 
Equipment   
Other 
goods and 
services 
52400 
Consumables: genotyping by sequencing of the 200 RILs, re-sequencing for allele mining of 
candidate genes (WP1) 
Consumables for growing plants, marker-assisted (WP2) 
Consumables for growing and selecting the BC3F2 homozygous lines through MAS; selection of 
Saltol locus in the BC generations and background selection of the BC lines (WP2) 
Consumables expenses related to materials necessary for the organization of field trials (materials 
for the identification and harvesting of the rice genotypes in the field trials) and evaluation of 
performances (WP4). 
Open access publications. 
Financial audits 
Total 67400  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  65 
5/ UMIL Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 25000 
We have planned in WP1 about 150 travels to the greenhouse in Tavazzano (25 Km far from 
UMIL) for a constant and accurate phenotyping, in WP3 about 10 travels to the fields close to 
Ferrara (260 Km far from UMIL) to follow the field trials, in WP7 the participation to at least 2 
International  and 1 National conferences for at least the PI, the researcher and the Pos Doc, 
which will be recruited for NEURICE, and in WP7 the participation to the 4 project meetings of at 
least the PI. 
Equipment   
Other 
goods and 
services 
58000 
Consumables: Pots, sand, amendments, fertilizers, and disposable for greenhouse experiments in 
WP1.  
Reagents for biochemical analyses (hydroponic culture nutrients and reagents, measurement of 
MDA level and GSH/GSSG ratio) and reagents for molecular analyses (expression analysis of 
candidate gens) in WP3. 
Liquid nitrogen for sampling and solvents, ACS-grade acids, technical gases and standards for 
ICP-MS analyses in WP3 (Na+ and K+ measurements on root, shoot  and xylem sap of Na+ and 
K+) and WP4 (ionomic analyses for nutritional traits and exclusion of toxic heavy metal in rice 
seeds).  
Disposable consumables for laboratory in WP1, WP3 and WP4.  
Expenses for enrolment in conferences, organization workshop of project 
Open access publications. 
Financial audits  
Total 83000  
 
 
6/ UGLA Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 10000 Consortium meetings (five in total), field monitoring - two meetings. 
Equipment   
Other 
goods and 
services 
114550 
Costs of consumables for this project is in line with combined molecular, biophysical and 
physiological research and includes roughly €22K for VAT alone for UGLA involvement in WP1, 
WP3 and WP6. In addition to general chemical needs and plasticware, there will be a need for 
molecular biologicals, related materials and resources (restriction and other enzymes, sequencing 
services, protein markers, gel materials, etc.), cell culture and transformation media as well as 
speciality dyes/markers, channel reagents/blockers/conjugates that will be required for the 
electrophysiological studies. Substantial costs are expected for electrophysiology, notably for 
chamber construction, glass, silver, halfcells and connectors, etc. Glasgow Plant Science Unit 
usage (contract, maintenance, parts and consumables for shared facilities) are included and have 
been estimated pro rata, based on historical cost/expenditure and expected requirements for this 
project. These costs are broken down between Protein/Molecular, Biological, Microscopy/imaging, 
Glasshouse/Growthroom and Extraordinary costs in line with RCUK guidance. A complete 
breakdown of Unit costs based on estimated time/space requirements is held on file with the 
Institute as requested by RCUK. Controlled growth conditions are essential in preparation for 
voltage and patch clamp studies, for which a daily supply of tissue is needed, and for phenotyping, 
and alone comes to €18K under the Glasshouse/Growthroom Unit heading for the period of the 
project. Finally, €3K are included to cover recruitment, advertising and interviewing candidates for 
the PDRA post. 
Open access publications. 
Financial audits. 
Total 124550  
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  66 
7/ IRTA Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 19733 
Travel expenses for permanent and non-permanent staff involved in the project, for participation to 
kick-off meeting, annual meetings, workshop meetings, sectorial meetings for dissemination 
activities and final meeting of the project. 
Field travels for video shooting: 
- 2 trips to Spain (2 persons) 
- 2 trips to Italia (2 persons) 
- 2 trips to France (2 persons) 
Equipment   
Other 
goods and 
services 
46200 
Field rental; Farmers compensation, rice plantlets, Seed fertilizers pesticides, sampling material 
(bags labels identifiers…etc.) (WP4). 
Reagents needed for field trials (WP4). 
One hard disc for video and documents storage, 1 domain (www.neurice.eu) for 4 years; 1 web 
housing 3G for 4 years, 1 HootSuite Pro for management social networks for 4 years, 1 CF video 
storage 64GB, and Roll up, leaflets and panels. 
Open access publications. 
Financial audits. 
Total 58033  
 
 
8/ INDEAR Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 30000 
Costs of travel expenses from Argentina to European destinations (i.e. Madrid/Rome) so as to 
assist to the Kick-off Meeting, to the Annual Project Consortium Meetings, to a project Technical 
Meeting and to a Management Revision Meeting. 
Equipment   
Other 
goods and 
services 
43000 
Molecular Biology Reagents as restriction enzymes, oligonucleotides. Different HiSeq® Kits (for 
example GD-402-4002n SR Rapid Cluster Kit v2; PE-402-4002 PE Rapid Cluster Kit v2; FC-402-
4022 Rapid SBS Kit v2; FC-402-4021 Rapid SBS Kit v2 ; FC-402-4023 Rapid SBS Kit v2; CT-403-
2001 Rapid Duo cBot Sample Loading Kit). Several plastic disposable items such as 96 wells 
plates and tips.  
For GBS TASSEL Package (Trait Analysis by aSSociation, Evolution and Linkage). 
Total 73000  
 
 
9/ CAAS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 30000 
Costs of travel expenses from China to European destinations (i.e. Madrid/Rome) so as to assist 
to the Kick-off Meeting, to the Annual Project Consortium Meetings, to a project Technical Meeting 
and to a Management Revision Meeting. 
Equipment   
Other 
goods and 
services 
43000 Licence of commercial software Intel Fortran Compiler, Visual C# Studio, Microsoft Office; 
Software development; Disposable items  
Total 73000  
 
 
10/ 
CAMARA Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 14500 Kick-off meeting, project consortium meetings, project review meetings, project technical meetings. 
Equipment 33000 Laboratory equipments such as a new rice bender, a new thermoregulated thermal bath, new 
micropipettes, pipettes and tubes to be able to speed up the amylose content analysis (WP4) 
Other 
goods and 
services 
26200 
Daily mobility from lab to test fields. 
Consumables: pots, fertilizers, and several disposables for crosses performed on greenhouse 
(WP2). Reagents to perform amylose content quantification analysis. 
Laboratory disposable. 
Open access publications. 
Financial audits. 
Total 73700  
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  67 
 
11/IRIS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 12500 
1 trip for 2 people to Kick-off meeting; 4 trips to project Consortium meetings for 2 people; 3 trips to 
Project Technical meetings for 2 people; 2 trips to review meetings for 2 people; 3 trips to 
installations in the field for 1 person; 2 trips to conferences for 1 person 
Equipment   
Other 
goods and 
services 
64000 
Server space, computers and software (WP5). 
Mechanic and electronic components for WSN (WP5). 
ICT components such as modems, PCBs, Alix microcomputers and sensors (WP5). 
Seminars and conferences fees (WP6). 
IPR consultations (WP6). 
Financial audits (WP7). 
Open access publications. 
Total 76500  
 
 
12/CFR Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 15000 Kick-off meeting, project consortium meetings, project review meetings, project technical 
meetings, field trial journeys and field days. 
Equipment   
Other 
goods and 
services 
15000 
Field trials fees, consumables and small equipments (WP1 and WP4). 
Post-harvesting analyses (WP4). 
Publications and communications to farmers (WP6). 
Open access publications (WP6), 
Total 30000  
 
 
13/SIS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 17000 Kick-off meeting, project consortium meetings, project review meetings, project technical 
meetings, field trial journeys and field days 
Equipment   
Other 
goods and 
services 
10000 
Consumables equipments for experimental fields preparation and management (Field laser 
levelling, and preparation, fertilizer, herbicide, sampling material, bags, labels, etc...., seedling and 
harvest operations, consumables for post-harvest analysis. 
Total 27000  
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  68 
References 
 
1. Agriculture and rural development, in Cereals, oilseeds and protein crops, rice. 2014, European Commission. 
2. Yáñez, M.V., Cambio climático en el Mediterráneo español. 2010: Inst. Español de Oceanografía. 
3. Munns, R., Comparative physiology of salt and water stress. Plant Cell Environ, 2002. 25(2): p. 239-250. 
4. Horie, T., I. Ka rahara, and M. Katsuhara, Salinity tolerance mechanisms in glycophytes: An overview with the 
central focus on rice plants. Rice, 2012. 5(1): p. 1-18. 
5. Burlakova, L.E., et al., Wetland Restoration and Invasive Species: Apple snail (Pomacea insularum) Feeding on 
Native and Invasive Aquatic Plants. Restoration Ecology, 2009. 17(3): p. 433-440. 
6. Karatayev, A.Y., et al., Introduction, distribution, spread, and impacts of exotic freshwater gastropods in Texas. 
Hydrobiologia, 2009. 619: p. 181-194. 
7. Naylor, R., Invasions in Agriculture: Assessing the Cost of the Golden Apple Snail in Asia.  Ambio, 1996. 25(7): 
p. 443-448. 
8. Halwart, M., The golden apple snail Pomacea canaliculata in Asian rice farming systems: Present impact and 
future threat. International Journal of Pest Management, 1994. 40(2): p. 199-206. 
9. Cowie, R.H., Apple snails (Ampullariidae) as agricultural pests: their biology, impacts and management , in 
Molluscs as crop pests, G.M. Baker, Editor. 2002, CABI Publishing: Wallingford. p. 145–192. 
10. Joshi, R.C. and L.S. Sebastian, Global advances in ecology and management of golden apple snails . 2006, 
Nueva Ecija: Philippine Rice Research Institute. 
11. Balsells, F. La erradicación del caracol manzana en el delta del Ebro ya es imposible. El País, 2010. 
12. Moreso, L. Comença a retrocedir la plaga del cargol poma. El Punt Avuí +, 2014. 
13. Karan, R., et al., Salt Stress Induced Variation in DNA Methylation Pattern and Its Influence on Gene Expression 
in Contrasting Rice Genotypes. PLoS ONE, 2012. 7(6): p. e40203. 
14. EFSA_PLH, Scientific Opinion on the evaluation of the pest risk analysis on Pomacea insularum, the island 
apple snail, prepared by the Spanish Ministry of Environment and Rural and Marine Affairs EFSA Journal 2012. 
10(1): p. 57. 
15. Krishnamurthy, S.L., et al., Assessment of genetic diversity in rice genotypes for salinity tolerance using Saltol 
markers of Chromosome 1. Indian Journal of Genetics and Plant Breeding, 2014. 74(2): p. 243-247. 
16. Byers, J.E., et al., Climate and pH predict t he potential range of the invasive apple snail (Pomacea insularum) 
in the southeastern United States. PLoS One, 2013. 8(2): p. e56812. 
17. Estebenet, A.L. and P.R. Martin, Pomacea canaliculata (Gastropoda: Ampullariidae): life-history traits and their 
plasticity. Biocell, 2002. 26(1): p. 83-9. 
18. Rawlings, T.A., et al., The identity, distribution, and impacts of non-native apple snails in the continental United 
States. Bmc Evolutionary Biology, 2007. 7: p. 14. 
19. Hayes, K.A., et al., Out of South  America: multiple origins of non -native apple snails in Asia.  Diversity and 
Distributions, 2008. 14(4): p. 701-712. 
20. Moreso, L. El govern es replantejarà la lluita contra el cargol poma. El Punt Avuí +, 2014. 43. 
21. Munns, R. and M. Tester, Mechanisms of salinity tolerance. Annu Rev Plant Biol, 2008. 59: p. 651-81. 
22. Ayers, R.S. and D.W. Westcot, Water quality for agriculture. Vol. 29. 1985: Fao Rome. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE  69 
23. Hu, Y. and U. Schmidhalter, Drought and salinity: A comparison of their effects on mineral nutri tion of plants. 
Journal of Plant Nutrition and Soil Science, 2005. 168(4): p. 541-549. 
24. FAO FAO Rice Market Monitor, January 2013, Volume XVI - Issue No. 1. 2013. 15. 
25. Lach, L., et al., Food Preference and Reproductive Plasticity in an Invasive Fresh water Snail.  Biological 
Invasions, 2000. 2(4): p. 279-288. 
26. Burks, R.L., C.H. Kyle, and M.K. Trawick, Pink eggs and snails: field oviposition patterns of an invasive snail, 
Pomacea insularum, indicate a preference for an invasive macrophyte. Hydrobiologia, 2010. 646(1): p. 243-251. 
27. Estebenet, A.L. and N.J. Cazzaniga, Growth and demography of Pomacea canaliculat (Gastropoda: 
Ampullariidae) under laboratory conditions. Malacological Review, 1992. 25: p. 1-12. 
28. Estoy, G.F., Jr., et al., Size and age at first copulation and spawning of the apple snail, Pomacea canaliculata 
(Gastropoda: Ampullariidae). Applied entomology and zoology, 2002. 37(1): p. 199-205. 
29. Miyahara, Y., Y. Hirai, and S. Oya, Oviposition and hatching rate of Ampullarius insularus D'Orbigny in Kyushu. 
Kyushu Plant Protection Research, 1986. 32: p. 96-100. 
30. Qin, J., et al., Growth and physiological performance responses to drought stress under non -flooded rice 
cultivation with straw mulching. Plant Soil Environ, 2010. 56(2): p. 51-59. 
31. Serrat, X., et al., A Mediterranean japonica rice (Oryza sativa) cultivar improvement through anther culture.  
Euphytica, 2014. 195(1): p. 31-44. 
32. Serrat, X., et al., EMS mutagenesis in mature seed -derived rice calli as a new method for rapidly o btaining 
TILLING mutant populations. Plant Methods, 2014. 10(1): p. 5. 
33. Babu, N.N., et al., Marker based haplotype diversity of Saltol QTL in relation to seedling stage salinity tolerance 
in selected genotypes of rice. Indian Journal of Genetics and Plant Breeding, 2014. 74(1): p. 16-25. 
34. Krishnendu, C., et al., Diversity and validation of microsatellite markers in Saltol QTL region in contrasting rice 
genotypes for salt tolerance at the early vegetative stage.  Australian Journal of Crop Science, 2014 . 8(3): p. 
356-362. 
35. Thomson, M., et al., Characterizing the Saltol Quantitative Trait Locus for Salinity Tolerance in Rice. Rice, 2010. 
3(2-3): p. 148-160. 
36. Huyen, L.T.N., et al., Introgression the salinity tolerance QTLs Saltol into AS996, the elite rice variety of Vietnam. 
American Journal of Plant Sciences, 2012. 3(7): p. 981-987. 
37. Linh, L.H., et al., Molecular Breeding to Improve Salt Tolerance of Rice (Oryza sativa L.) in the Red River Delta 
of Vietnam. International Journal of Plant Genomics, 2012. 2012: p. 949038. 
38. Mondal, U., et al., Foreground selection through SSRs markers for the development of salt tolerant rice variety. 
Journal of the Bangladesh Agricultural University, 2013. 11(1). 
39. Lu, J.J. and T.T. Chang, Rice in its temporal and spatial perspectives, in Rice: Production and Utilization. 1980, 
Avi Publishing Co., Inc: Westport, Conn. p. P1-74. 
40. Jeffery, K.G. Open Access: An Introduction . 2006  January 2006]; Available from: 
http://www.ercim.eu/publication/Ercim_News/enw64/jeffery.html. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    1 
Section 4: Members of the consortium  
 
 4.1. Participants (applicants) 
 
Participant name: Salvador Nogués 
Participant organization name: Universitat de Barcelona (UB) 
Description of legal entity and its main 
tasks, with an explanation of how its 
profile matches the tasks in the 
proposal:  
The University of Barcelona (UB) was founded in 1450. Today it boasts of a 
student body of 63,020 and a research staff of 5,312 members. Degrees are offered 
in 73 different areas of teaching with numerous postgraduate an d doctorate 
programs as well as continuing education courses. The University of Barcelona 
(UB) is the largest of the six universities of Barcelona and of the ten in Catalonia. 
The UB is ranked the first Spanish university, and the twenty third European 
institutions in scientific quality and productivity. The Department of Plant Biology of 
the UB is the oldest in Spain with Plant Physiology as a discipline and has a long 
experience on the photosynthetic mechanisms, the ecophysiology of plant 
productivity and  the identification of selection criteria for cereals under 
Mediterranean conditions. 
The UB manages in average 150 European projects per  year, for an amount of 
about 8,6 million euro  a year. Since 2002, the Department of Plant Biology of the 
UB has been coordinated the EC project: OPTICHINA (FP7-KBBE-2010-4 266045) 
Jose Luis Araus; and has been participating on several EC projects: SUSTAIN 
(QLKS-CT-2001-01461) Jose Luis Araus; MABDE (ICA3 -CT-2002-10026) Jordi 
Bort; IDuWUE (ICA3- CT-2002-10028) Jordi Bort; T RITIMED (INCO -CT-2004-
509136) Jordi Bort; PERMED (INCO -CT-2004-509140) Salvador Nogués; 
WATNITMED (INCO-CT-2004-509107) Salvador Nogués; OPTIWHEAT (INCO –T-
2006-015460) José Luis Araus; MELIA (INCO -CT-2006-517612) José Luis Araus; 
VITAL (FNC2008D) Salvador Nogués; SIBAE (COST ES0806) Salvador Nogués 
and OPTIMA (FP7-KBBE-2011-5) Salvador Nogués. 
The University of Barcelona develops all its activities related to the research in 
Europe through its European Research Projects Office, a unit in charge of the 
promotion of EC programmes, technical assistance to the elaboration of proposals 
and management of projects with participation of researchers of the UB, 
coordinated by the Vice -rector for Innovation and Transfer of Knowledge. Since 
January 2010, Universitat de Barcelona is part of the prestigious League of 
European Universities Research (LERU).  Fundació Bosch i Gimpera (FBG) is a 
third party of Universitat de Barcelona (UB). FBG was created and is controlled by 
UB, and  has an a uthorisation to a dminister International f unds on behalf of UB. 
According to the “Annotated General G rant Agreement”, FBG f alls u nder the 
specific case “Foundations, spin-off companies, etc., created in order to handle the 
administrative/financial tasks of the beneficiary”, and  it’s in charge of the 
administrative and financial management of European projects at the UB. FBG does 
not perform scientific/technical work in the project. 
Curriculum vitae:  The Plant Physiology Unit at the Department of Plant Biology (DPB) has more than 
30 years o f experience in RTD in plant physiology, molecular and biochemistry 
studies. 
Dr. S. Nogués (Male, M) is Associated Professor in Plant Physiology at DPB. He is 
specialist in metabolomics (carbon and n itrogen metabolisms in cereals  using 
stable isotopes) and plant responses to abiotic (including salt) and biotic stresses.  
He has participated in 12  EU-funded projects, 16 national projects and 3 contracts 
with private companies and regional administration. He has published more than 70 
scientific papers and 13 international book chapters.  
Prof. J. Azcón-Bieto (M) is Full Professor in Plant Physiology at DPB. He is a well-
known specialist of plant responses to C limate Change. He has participated in 15 
national projects. He has published 54 papers in SCI journals , 3 books in Plant 
Physiology and 35 international book chapters. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    2 
 
Dr. M. Lopéz-Carbonell (Female, F) is Associated Professor in Plant Physiology at 
DPB. She is specialist in plant hormone analysis, transmission electron microscopy  
and plant responses to a biotic stress. She has participated in 12 national funded 
projects and she has published 21 scientific papers in SCI journals. 
Dr. T. Sauras (F) is Associated Professor in Plant Physiology at DPB. She is 
specialist in plant physiological responses to nutri ent stress, soil fertility and 
mechanistic modelling of nutrient root uptake. She has participated in 10 EU-funded 
projects, 7 national projects and 8 contracts with private companies and regional 
administration. She has published 20 papers in SCI journals  and 3 international 
book chapters. 
Camilo López (M) is a PhD student at DPB. He is working on improving the salinity 
tolerance in different rice ( Oryza sativa) varieties. He has also worked in seaweed 
physiology to understand their tolerance to abiotic st resses and their stress 
oxidative responses. He has participated in 3 national projects, and has published 3 
articles and an international book chapter. 
Relevant publications (up to 5):  1. Serrat X., Esteban R., Guibourt N., Moysset L., Nogués S., Lalanne E . (2014) 
EMS mutagenesis in mature seed-derived rice calli as a new method for rapidly 
obtaining TILLING mutant populations. Plant Methods, 10(1): p. 5. DOI: 
10.1186/1746-4811-10-5 
2. Nogués S., Alja zairi S., Arias C., Sánchez E., Aranjuelo I. (2014) Two distinct 
plant respiratory physiotypes might exist which correspond to fast -growing and 
slow-growing species. Journal of Plant Physiology, 171(13): 1157 -1163. DOI: 
10.1016/j.jplph.2014.03.006 
3. Gauthier P., Lamothe M., Mahé A., Molero G., Nogués S., Hodges M., 
Tcherkez G. (2013) Metabolic origin of δ15N in nitrogenous compounds from 
Brassica napus leaves. Plant, Cell and Enviroment, 36(1): p. 128 -137. DOI: 
10.1111/j.1365-3040.2012.02561.x 
4. Renato M., Pateraki I., Boronat A., Azcón -Bieto, J. (2015) Tomato fruit 
chromoplasts behave as respiratory bioenergetics organelles during ripening. 
Plant Physiology, 166(2): p. 920-933. DOI: 10.1104/pp.114.243931 
5. Joseph M., Papdi C., Kozma -Bognár L., Nagy I ., López-Carbonell M., Konncz 
C., Szabados L. (2014) The Arabidopsis Zinc Finger Protein3 interferes with 
ABA and li ght signalling in seed germination and plant development. Plant 
Physiology, 165(3): p. 1203-1220. DOI: 10.1104/pp.113.234294  
Relevant previous projects (up to 5):  1. Improvement of Native Pere nnial forage plants for sustainability of 
Mediterranean farming systems (PERMED). 2004 -2009. Funded by the 
European Commission. Total budget: 1.365. 000€. Ref: INCO -CT-2004-
509140. 
2. Management Improvements of WUE and NUE of Mediterranean Strategic 
Crops (Wheat and Barley) (WatNitMED). 2004 -2009. Funded by the European 
Commission. Total budget: 1.800.000€. Ref: INCO-CT-2004-509107 
3. Ecosystem service provi sion from coupled plant and microbial functional 
diversity in managed grasslands (VITAL). 2004-2009. Funded by the European 
Commission. Total budget: 1.191.100€. Ref: FNC2008D BIODIVERSA 
(ERANET). 
4. Stable Isotopes in Biosphere -Atmosphere-Earth System Resear ch (SIBAE -
COST). 2009 -2013. Funded by the European Commission. Total budget: 
500.000€. Ref: ES0806 
5. Optimization of perennial grasses for biomass production in the Mediterranean 
environment (OPTIMA). 2011 -2015. Funded by the European Commission. 
Total budget: 2.998.322€. FP7-KBBE-2011-5, ref: 573543. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    3 
Description of any significant 
infrastructure and/or any major items 
of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work:  
Lab-scale and greenhouse facilities and instruments for carrying out experimental 
analysis, in accordance with WP2 and WP3 activities. 
The UB Experimental Fields Facility composed by (i) croplands allowed to apply 
different types of irrigation and fertirrigation with meteorological station, computer 
storage and data grid, (ii) 500 m 2 greenhouse for research and teaching with four 
modules with automatic climate regulation, (iii) growth chambers with light intensity, 
temperature, humidity, CO 2 concentration and photoperiod scheduled and (iv) 
Specialized equipment for plant ecophysiology measu rements including 
photosynthesis, fluorescence and transpiration (Li6400, Walz IMAGING - PAM, 
Walz GFS-3000). 
CCiT-UB (Scientific and technological centres  of UB) : Infrastructure facility with 
several technological units which include microscopy and advance d 
characterization techniques, nuclear magnetic resonance, mass spectrometry, 
chemical spectroscopy, high -performance biotechnology, radiological protection, 
and animal facilities. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    4 
 
Participant name: Blanca San Segundo 
Participant organization name: Centre for Research in Agricultural Genomics (CRAG)  
Description of legal entity and its main 
tasks, with an explanation of how its 
profile matches the tasks in the 
proposal: 
The Centre for Research in Agricultural Genomics, ( CRAG) is an independent 
research Institution that originated in 2003, established as a Consortium that 
includes the Spanish National Research Council (Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas, CSIC), Institute of Agrifood Research and Technology 
(Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentàries, IRTA), Autonomous University of 
Barcelona (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, UAB), and University of Barcelona 
(Universitat de Barcelona, UB). CRAG is devoted to leading -edge research in the 
study of molecular and genetic characters of interest in plants and farm animals and 
in the application of molecular approaches for breeding of species important for 
agriculture and food production. Research at CRAG spans from primarily research 
of excellence in basic science (e.g. CSIC) to applied stu dies in collaboration with 
industry (e.g. IRTA, whose purpose is to contribute to the modernization and 
sustainable development of agriculture and food sectors).  
CRAG has been awarded "Human Resources Excellence in Research -HRS4R" - 
European Commission (http://www.cragenomica.es/human-resources-strategy-for-
researchers). 
CRAG is partner in BIOVEGEN (Spanish Technology  Platform for Plant 
Biotechnology), a private -public cooperation network for Research and 
Development involving stakeholders from industry, academia and the farming 
community in the field of Plant Biotechnology. 
Curriculum vitae: Dr. B . San Segundo (F) has more than 25 -years experience in plant molecular 
biology. The research goal at BSS’ group is to understand the molecular 
mechanisms involved in the plant response to environmental stress (biotic and 
abiotic stress), and ultimately to develop effective me ans for crop protection. 
Breakthroughs have been made in signalling  pathways and regulation of stress -
associated genes in rice plants, including sensing systems, initiation and 
maintenance of the host response, signal transduction pathways and effector 
elements in the plant response, and crosstalk events between biotic (pathogen 
infection) and abiotic (salinity, drought) stress. The functional analysis of genes 
identified at BSS’s laboratory has led to the identification of positive and negative 
regulators in salt tolerance in rice. 
Publications: 75 articles in International Journals (SCI), 8 Book Chapters (2 more in 
press), and 11 technical/scientific dissemination articles.  H-index: 28 (list of 
publications available at http://www.researcherid.com/rid/C-2417-2009). Invited 
Speaker in 40 International Congresses/Workshops. More than 30 
Seminars/conferences. Supervisor of 14 Ph.D. Thesis (4 more in progress) and 24 
Master Thesis. 
Dr. M. Coca (F) staff scientist from CSIC (“Científico Titular”), also has experience 
in plant molecular biology and adaptive responses to biotic and abiotic stress in rice. 
MC was partner in a Plant-KBBE project (Spain-France-Germany) for the production 
and accumulation of antimicrobial peptides in rice. 
Sonia Campo (F) is a Marie Curie  Postdoctoral Researcher integrated in the study 
of plant response to environmental stress at the BSS research group. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    5 
Relevant publications (up to 5): 1. Campo S., Baldrich P., Messeguer J., Lalanne E., Coca M., San Segundo B. 
(2014) Overexpression of a Calcium -Dependent Protein Kinase Confers Salt 
and Drought Tolerance in Rice by Preventing Membrane Lipid Peroxidation. 
Plant Physiology 165(2): p. 688-704. DOI: 10.1104/pp.113.230268 
2. Campo S., Peris -Peris C., Montesinos L., Peñas G., Messeguer J., San  
Segundo B.  (2012) Expression of a maize ZmGF14 -6 gene in rice confers 
tolerance to drought stress while enhancing susceptibility to pathogen infection. 
Journal Experimental Botany 63(2): p. 983-999. DOI: 10.1093/jxb/err328 
3. Quilis J., Peñas G., Messeguer J., Brugidou C., San Segundo B. (2008) The 
Arabidopsis AtNPR1 inversely modulat es defence responses against fungal, 
bacterial or viral pathogens while conferring hypersensitivity to abiotic stresses 
in transgenic rice. Mol ecular Plant-Microbe Interactions Journal 21(9): p. 1215-
1231. DOI: 10.1094/MPMI-21-9-1215 
4. Schmidt R., Mieulet D., Hubberten H-M., Obata T., Hoefgen R., Fernie A. R., 
Fisahn J., San Segundo B., Guiderdoni E.,  Schippers J.H.M., Mueller-Roeber 
B. (2013) SALT-RESPONSIVE ERF1 regulates ROS -dependent signalling 
during the initial response to salt stress in rice. Plant Cell 25 (6): p. 2115-2131. 
DOI: 10.1105/tpc.113.113068 
5. Campo S. , Peris-Peris C., Siré C., Moreno A.B., Donaire L., Zytnicki M., 
Notredame C., Llave C., San Segundo B.  (2013) Identification of a Novel 
miRNA (miRNA) from rice that targets an alternatively spliced transcript of the 
Nramp6 (Natural resistance-associated macrophage protein 6) gene involved in 
pathogen resistance. New Phytologist 199 (1): p.  212-227. DOI: 
10.1111/nph.12292 
Relevant previous projects (up to 5): 1. Trilateral Initiative for enhancing salt tolerance in rice (TRIESTER). 2007 -2010. 
Funded by ERA-NET Plant Genomics (European Research Area-PG, 06.018B). 
Budget allocated: 300.000€. 
2. Sustainable and environmental friendly rice cultivation system in Europe 
(GREENRICE). 2014-2016. Funded by FACCE Era Net Plus. Budget allocated: 
145.000€. 
3. Enhancing Resource Uptake from Roots under stress in cereal crops 
(EUROOT). 2012-2015. Funded by the European Community -  7th Framework 
Programme - Cooperation Knowledge - based bio-economy. Budget allocated: 
162.000€. KBBE.2011.1.2-05, ref 289300. 
4. Regulation o f the rice immune response by microRNAs (miRNAs): protection 
against fungal diseases. 2010 -2012. Funded by CSIC and National Science 
Council of Taiwan. Budget allocated: 99.950€.  
5. European Rice: transgenes for crop protection against fungal diseases -
EURICE. 2000 -2003. Funded by the European Community – 5th Framework 
Programme - Quality of Life. Budget allocated: 195.000€. Ref. QLK5 -1999-
01484. 
Description of any significant 
infrastructure and/or any major items 
of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work: 
CRAG hosts several core units, the facilities include: 
Greenhouses and plant grow facilities. These include confined greenhouses 
(GMOs), plant growth chambers and facilities for in vitro plant culture (13 confined -
greenhouses, 6 walk -in chambers,  26 small chambers and 5 in vitro  cultures 
chambers): 
• Genomics and Sequencing Service , which include a Personal Genome 
Machine (Ion Torrent), a microfluidic -based Real-Time PCR system, Real-Time 
PCR machines, DNA microarrays (Agilent, Affymetrix), Bioanaly zers, and a 
high-performance sonicator for DNA fragmentation (Bioruptor, Diagenode). 
• The Microscopy Service hosts a variety of microscopes (Olympus FV1000 
spectral inverted confocal microscope, Leica SP5II spectral vertical confocal 
microscope, Axiophot Ze iss vertical fluorescence microscope, Leica vertical 
fluorescence microscope, Olympus Stereoscope microscope SZX16, 
workstation for Image processing/data analysis, and a Leica laser 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    6 
microdissector LMD6000. 
• The Metabolomics and Proteomics Core Unit  is specialized in qualitative and 
quantitative changes in metabolite and protein composition. Among others, the 
main technical platforms include liquid chromatography (Micromass Quattro 
Micro LC-MS-MS System, UPLC 1290 Infinity LC, and HPLC Series 1200), gas 
chromatography (7890A/5975C GC/MSD, FOCUS GC Gas Chromatograph), 
and an AKTA FPLC Chromatographic System. 
• The Bioinformatics Core Unit  manages a high -performance computer cluster 
with a total aggregated capacity of +350 cores and +2500 GB of RAM (+6000 
cores, incl. GPUs), +150 TB of storage (+500 TB, incl. backup & redundancy) 
and several high speed networks. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    7 
 
 
Participant name: Brigitte Courtois 
Participant organization name: Centre de Coopération Internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour le 
Développement (CIRAD) 
Description of legal entity and its main 
tasks, with an explanation of how its 
profile matches the tasks in the 
proposal:  
The Centre de Coopération Internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour le 
Développement (CIRAD) is a French agricultural r esearch centre conducting 
research for development in collaboration with developing countries. It employs 
1820 people and has an annual operating budget of 200 million Euros. About 60 
scientists are working on rice. CIRAD has a long standing collaboration with rice 
growing countries in the area of genetic improvement and is permanently involved 
in research programs dealing with rice varietal improvement, notably for tolerance 
to abiotic stresses.  
Its Genetic Improvement and Adaptation of Mediterranean and Tropical Crops Unit 
(UMR AGAP) has been involved in European projects dealing with the improvement 
of European rice and was notably in charge of the work packages on the 
improvement of rice salinity tolerance in EURIGEN and GreenRice projects. UMR 
AGAP has a long experience in using molecular markers for genetic analyses and 
marker-assisted breeding projects and, recently, started using them for genomic 
selection. 
Curriculum vitae:  Three permanent members of UMR AGAP will participate in NEURICE: 
Dr. B. Courtois (F) is a senior rice breeder and molecular geneticist with 30 years 
of experience, mostly in rice. She is presently working on association mapping for 
tolerance to abiotic stresses (drought, salinity) in the Rice Development and 
Adaptation team of U MR AGAP. She has published 80 papers in international 
journals. 
Dr. N. Ahmadi (M) is a senior plant breeder and molecular geneticist with 35 years 
of experience in rice. He is in charge of the Varietal Innovation Team of UMR AGAP 
and is coordinating all CI RAD rice breeding activities. He is also CIRAD 
representative in the Global Rice Science Partnership (GRiSP) Program Planning 
and Management Team. 
Axel Labeyrie  (M) is a junior rice breeder, member of the Varietal Innovation 
Team, based in Arles, in French  Camargue, and developing a joint rice breeding 
program for European rice in collaboration with Arnaud Boisnard at Centre Français 
du Riz. 
Relevant publications (up to 5):  1. Gómez-Ariza J., Brambilla V., Shrestha R., Galbiati F., Pappolla A., Courtois 
B., Fornara F. (2015) Loss of floral repressor function adapts rice to higher 
latitudes in Europe.  Journal of Experimental Botany 66(7): p. 2027 -2039. DOI: 
10.1093/jxb/erv004 
2. Negrão S., Almadanim M.C., Pires I.S., Abreu I.A., Maroco J., Courtois B., 
Gregorio G., McNally K., Oliveira M.M. (2013) New allelic variants found in key 
rice salt -tolerance genes: an association study. Plant Biotechnology Journal 
11(1): p. 87-100. DOI: 10.1111/pbi.12010 
3. Courtois B., Frouin J., Greco R., Bruschi G., Droc G., Hamelin C., Ruiz M., 
Clément G.,  Evrard J. -C., van Coppenole S., Katsantonis D., Oliveira M., 
Negrão S., Matos C., Cavigiolo S., Lupotto E., Piffanelli P.,  Ahmadi N. (2012) 
Genetic diversity and population structure in a European collection of rice. Crop 
Science 52(4): p. 1663-1675. DOI: 10.2135/cropsci2011.11.0588 
4. Ahmadi N., Negrao S., Katsantonis D., Frouin J., Ploux J., Letourmy P., Droc 
G., Babo P., Trindade H., Bruschii G., Greco R., Oliveira M.M., Piffanelli P., 
Courtois B. (2011) Targeted association analysis identified ja ponica rice 
varieties achieving Na+/K+ homeostasis without the allelic make -up of the salt 
tolerant indica variety Nona Bokra. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 123(6): p. 
881-895. 
DOI: 10.1007/s00122-011-1634-4 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    8 
 
5. Negrao S., Courtois B., Ahmadi N., Abreu I., Saibo N., Oliveira M.M. (2011) 
Recent updates on salinity stress in rice: from physiological to molecular 
responses. Critical Review in Plant Science 30(4): p. 329 -37. DOI: 
10.1080/07352689.2011.587725 
Relevant previous projects (up to 5):  1. Rice genetic resources for Europe (RESGEN). 1999 -2002. Funded by the 
European Commission. Budget allocated to Cirad: 300 k€ 
2. Genotyping for the conservation and valorization of European rice germplasm 
(EURIGEN). 2007 -2010. Funded by the European Commission . Budget 
allocated to Cirad: 330 k€. Ref: 870/2004 AGRI GEN RES PROGRAM. 
3. Enhancing Resource Uptake from Roots under stress in cereal crops 
(EUROOT). 2012-2015. Funded by the European Community -  7th Framework 
Programme - Cooperation Knowledge - based bio-economy. Budget allocated 
to Cirad: 330 k€ KBBE.2011.1.2-05, ref 289300. 
4. Sustainable and environmental friendly rice cultivation system in Europe 
(GREENRICE). 2014-2016. Funded by FACCE Era Net Plus. Budget allocated 
to Cirad: 160 k€ 
Description of any signific ant 
infrastructure and/or any major items 
of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work:  
CIRAD will put at the disposal of the NEURICE project: 
• Space in a greenhouse and the necessary elements to undertake crosses. 
• Its genomic laboratories (PCR ma chine, genotyping platform, sequencers, 
molecular biology robots, imaging platform). 
• A growth chamber and the necessary elements to run hydroponic experiments. 
• Its bioinformatics infrastructure: servers, software platform, web databases. 
• Since CIRAD is joi ntly developing a breeding program on European rice with 
CFR, they benefits of a station to run breeding experiments with the large and 
small farm equipment necessary for all operations (sowing, harvesting, etc.). 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    9 
 
Participant name: Giampiero Valè  
Participant organization name: Consiglio per la Ricerca Sperimentazione in Agricoltura e l’analisi 
dell’economia agraria (CRA) 
Description of legal entity and its main 
tasks, with an explanation of how its 
profile matches the tasks in the 
proposal:  
The Consiglio per la Ricerca in Agricoltura e l’Analisi dell’Economia Agraria 
(CRA) is a National Research Organization which operates under the supervision of 
the Ministry of Agriculture, with general scientific competence within the fields of 
agriculture, agroin dustry, food, fishery and forestry. The distribution of the CRA 
offices throughout national territory allows it to widely extend its expertise and 
proficiency, and to closely operate in conjunction with central administrations, local 
and regional instituti ons, companies and various trade, industrial and legal 
associations. 
Curriculum vitae:  Dr. G. Valè (M) is in charge director of the CRA -RIS. His expertise  are related to 
plant-pathogens interaction studies that include map -based cloning of disease 
resistance genes in barley, identification and mapping of disease resistance genes 
in barley, durum wheat and rice. Research activities also include the development 
of a physical map for bread wheat chromosome 5A, identification and mapping of 
useful traits in e ggplant and evaluation of rice germplasm for agronomical relevant 
traits to be used in association mapping studies. He has participated to 18 national 
and 2 international projects as responsible of research unit and was coordinator in 2 
national projects. He has published more than 100 publications, 41 in ISI-WoS. 
Dr. L. Cattivelli (M) has a degree in Agricultural Science at the Catholic University 
of Piacenza (1986). LC worked at the Max Planck Institute of Cologne (Germany, 
1987-1989), and at the Experime ntal Institute for Cereal Research of Fiorenzuola 
d’arda (Italy 1990 - 2005). Professor in Plant Genetics at the University of Verona 
(1997-2003), from 2005 to 2009 LC has been director of the CRA -Cereal Research 
Centre in Foggia and from 2010 is director o f the CRA-Genomics Research Centre 
in Fiorenzuola d’Arda. LC is member of in the coordinating committee of the 
International Wheat Genome Sequencing Consortium (IWGSC), Italian 
representative in the research committee of the Wheat Initiative, member of the  
editorial boards of “Plant Science” and of “Journal of Cereal Science”. 
Dr. A. Tondelli (M) is researcher at CRA-GPG. The research activity of Alessandro 
Tondelli is mainly dedicated to the genetic dissection of quantitative traits through 
linkage and ass ociation mapping approaches, in different cereal crop species 
including rice, barley and wheat. In particular, research works focus on several 
aspects of plant adaptation to the environment, such as tolerance to low 
temperatures, regulation of plant phenol ogy and morphology, yield adaptation to 
Mediterranean conditions, plant biomass and straw -related traits for energy 
conversion. In the RISINNOVA project, association mapping for different agronomic 
traits has been carried out in a large rice germplasm coll ection. He has participated 
to 2 national and 4 EU -funded projects and published 20 manuscripts on peer -
reviewed journals. 
Dr. G. Tacconi (M) is researcher at CRA-GPG since 2001. PhD in Biotechnology in 
2004, Master Degree in Biotechnology at University of  Verona in 1999. Research 
works focus on:  molecular breeding and MAS in barley and rice; diseases 
resistances and plant -pathogen interaction in barley, rice, wheat, kiwifruit; 
phenotyping of root development in rice and barley; transcriptome analysis. He i s 
involved in DROPSA EU project for plant -pathogen interaction. He was involved in 
RISINNOVA project for mapping of new disease resistance loci and marker -
assisted selection and for genome wide association studies for root traits in rice. He 
has published 17 manuscripts on peer-reviewed journals. 
Dr. M. Stefano (M) is researcher at CRA-RIS. His main research topic is the study 
of the fate of carbon and nitrogen in agro -ecosystems (nitrates leaching, ammonia 
emissions, soil carbon changes), using laboratory,  field and modelling approaches. 
He has been involved in consulting activity in the field of agronomy and 
environment for the local and the national public authorities and research 
organizations (EU Nitrate Directive; agro -environmental measures of the Rur al 
Development Program of Piemonte Region), as expert at the Nitrate Directive 
Committee of the Piemonte Region in Italy and at the Northern Italy inter -regional 
working group for the designing the request from Italy for a derogation to the Nitrate 
Directive. He has published 8 papers in ISI journals and 12 technical publications. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    10 
 Relevant publications (up to 5):  1. Biselli C ., Cavalluzzo D ., Perrini R ., Gianinetti A ., Bagnaresi P ., Urso S ., 
Orasen G ., Lupotto E ., Cattivelli L., Valè G . (2014) Improvement o f marker -
based predictability of Apparent Amylose Content in japonica rice throu gh 
GBSSI allele mining. Rice, 7(1). DOI: 10.1186/1939-8433-7-1 
2. Tondelli A., Xu X., Moragues M., Sharma R., Schnaithmann F., Ingvardsen C., 
Manninen O ., Comadran J ., Russell J., Waugh R ., Schulman A ., Pillen K ., 
Rasmussen S ., Kilian B ., Cattivelli L ., Thomas W ., Flavell A .J., (2013) 
Structural and temporal variation in the genetic diversity of a European 
collection of b arley cultivars and utility for association mapping of quantitative 
traits. Plant Genome, 6 (2): p. 1-14. DOI: 10.3835/plantgenome2013.03.0007 
3. Campos-Soriano L., Valè G., Lupotto E., San Segundo B . (2013) Investigation 
of rice blast development in susceptible and resistant rice cultivars using a gfp -
expressing Magnaporthe oryzae strain. Plant Pathology, 62 (5): p. 1030-1037. 
DOI: 10.1111/ppa.12023 
4. Bagnaresi P., Biselli C ., Orrù L., Urso S ., Crispino L., Abbruscato P., Piffanelli 
P., Lupotto E., Cattivelli L., Valè G . (2012) Comparative transcriptome profiling 
of the early response to Magna porthe oryzae in durable resistant vs 
susceptible rice (Oryza sativa L.) genotypes. PLoS ONE, 7(12): e51609.  DOI: 
10.1111/ppa.12023 
5. Tacconi G., Baldassarre V ., Lanzanova C ., Faivre-Rampant O., Cavigiolo S ., 
Urso S., Lupotto E., Valè G. (2010) Polymorphism analysis of genomic regions 
associated to broad effective blast resistance genes for marker development in 
rice. Molecular Breeding, 26(4): p. 595–617. DOI: 10.1007/s11032-010-9394-4 
Relevant previous projects (up to 5):  1. Genomics-Assisted Analysis and Exploitation of Barley Diversity (EXBARDIV). 
2007-2010. Funded by ERA -NET Plant Genomics, FP6. Total Budget: 
2.396.667€. 
2. Integrated genetic and genomic approaches for new Italian rice breeding 
strategies (RISINNOVA). 2011 -2014. Funded by AGER foundation. Total 
budget: 2.480.000€. 
3. Research, innovative processes and technologies for the National research on  
rice (POLORISO). 2011-2013. Funded by MiPAF. Total budget: 2.180.000€. 
4. Genomic selection for resources use efficiency in rice (GS -RUSE). 2012-2016. 
Funded by Cariplo and Agripolis Foundations. Total budget: 639.514 €. Ref: 
1201-006. 
5. Sustainable and environ mental friendly rice cultivation systems in Europe 
(GREENRICE). 2014 -2017. Funded by FACCE -JPI ERA Net Plus. Total 
budget: 1.447.000€. 
Description of any significant 
infrastructure and/or any major items 
of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work:  
CRA participates to this project with two research stations: the Rice research unit 
(CRA-RIS) and the Genomics Research Centre (CRA-GPG).  
CRA-RIS is devoted to research on rice genetics and breeding for tolerance to 
biotic and abiotic stresses and gr ain quality parameters. CRA -RIS has 30 Ha of 
experimental fields located in the main rice growing areas and possess different rice 
genetic resources including a large rice germplasm collection, a TILLING population 
and several recombinant inbred lines (RIL
s) populations segregating for different 
agronomical relevant traits (including salt tolerance). CRA -RIS has the small farm 
equipment necessary for all operations (sowing, harvesting, threshing, drying) to 
growth rice and for conducting pre- and post-harvest phenotyping.  
CRA-GPG has expertise in molecular biology, bioinformatics, genetic and genomics 
on barley, rice and wheat, with a specific focus on biotic and abiotic stress 
resistance and yield and quality-related traits, QTLs identification, positional cloning 
of genes, transcriptomic and functional genomics. The Centre applies genome-wide 
association scans and genomic selection in barley, rice and wheat. The Centre has 
a fully equipped laboratory for plant genomics and bioinformatics; growth chambers, 
green houses, an experimental farm of 16 ha. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    11 
 
Participant name: Gian Attilio Sacchi  
Participant organization name: Università degli Studi di Milano (UMIL) 
Description of legal entity and its main 
tasks, with an explanation of how its 
profile matches the tasks in the 
proposal:  
The University of Milano  (UMIL) is a public teaching and research University, 
which - with 8 faculties and 2 schools and a teaching staff of 2000 professors -  is 
distinguished by its wide variety of disciplinary fields. The Depa rtment of 
Agricultural and Environmental Sciences -  Production, Land, Agroenergy (DiSAA) 
develops its activities with a view to advancement through scientific research, 
knowledge about farming systems, forestry, livestock, environment and energy 
based on a multidisciplinary approach aimed at promotion of effective and efficient 
management of complex agricultural systems.  
Research at the DiSAA Division of Plant Production aims at improving crop 
productivity and sustainability applying approaches ranging fro m a macroscopic 
level-system to the molecular level, including the use of both traditional and 
innovative biotechnological methods (molecular biology, genomics, proteomics, 
metabolomics, ionomics, system biology). The group around Prof. G.A. Sacchi at 
DiSAA is working since many years on plant physiology, biochemistry and 
molecular biology topics devoted to plant mineral nutrition and responses to abiotic 
stress. Recently the group developed ionomic and metabolomic approaches 
adopting ICP -MS, GC -MS, LC -ESI-MS/MS, and NMR techniques, and their 
informatics-based overlap, with the aim to evaluate the effects and the molecular 
bases of different paddy field managements (water and fertilizers) on quantitative 
and qualitative aspect of rice yield, with particular regards to grain nutritional value 
(density in microelements and vitamins) and safety (absence of toxic trace 
elements as Cd, As and Pb). 
Curriculum vitae:  Dr. G. A. Sacchi (M) is Full Professor of Agricultural Chemistry at UMIL -DiSAA. 
Topics of his rese arch are: a) molecular, biochemical and physiological aspects of 
plant mineral nutrition and response to abiotic stresses; b) molecular and 
biochemical basis of uptake, accumulation, toxicity and detoxification of organic and 
inorganic pollutants in plants ; c) ionomic and metabolomics approaches for food 
security and safety. He is authors of 45 articles in peer -reviewed international 
journals, several book chapters and many conference papers. 
He is the coordinator of the “Plant Ionomics Lab” of UMIL -DiSAA. He has been 
group leader in the following national and international research programs: a) Life 
Environment Project LIFE99 ENV/IT/0078 PhyLeS : Phytoextraction of Le ad from 
Soil - PHYLES”; b) Prin -MiUR (1997- 2009); c) Regione Lombardia “Safety and 
quality o f Italian  rice -  SIQURISO” (2007 -2009); d) “Measure and modelling of 
water and carbon fluxes in Mays agro -system – AC-CA (2009.2011); e) AGER -
Foundation “Integrated genetic and genomic approaches for new Italian rice 
breeding strategies - RISINNOVA” (2011-2014); f) MiPAAF “Research, innovative 
technologies, environmental sustainability for the improvement of Italian rice -  
POLORISO” (2012 -2015); g) UE -FP7 Marie Curie Initial Training Network  
“Biochemical and Genetic Dissection of Control of Plant Mineral N utrition - 
BIONUT" (2011-2014). He has been scientific coordinator of the projects: a) Banca 
del Monte di Pavia Foundation “Metabolomics and ionomics for quality and safety of 
Italian rice: development of a service platform –  MEIORYZA” (2010 -2013); b) 
Regione Lombardia “Platform of green biotechnologies and management 
techniques for agricultural systems at high environmental sustainability –  
BIOGESTECA” (2011-2014).  
Dr. F. F. Nocito (M) is currently Senior Researcher at UMIL -DiSAA. His research 
activities focus on: plant physiology, biochemistry and molecular biology; mineral 
nutrition of higher plants; heavy -metal transport and detoxification in higher plant; 
fruit ripening and quality. He is co -author of 25 articles in peer -reviewed 
international journals, 3 book chapters, and 60 conference papers and abstracts. 
Dr. E. Baldoni (F) is Post Doc researcher at UMIL- DiSAA. Her research topic is 
focused on the study of plant–environment interactions, with a particular attention to 
abiotic stress response (especi ally salt and drought) and to sensing and signalling 
mechanisms of plant mineral nutritional status, especially in rice. These activities 
have been carried out through the functional characterization of specific genes 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    12 
involved in the stress response, as we ll as using transcriptomic and metabolomic 
approaches. She has participated to 1 EU-funded project and to 4 national projects. 
She has published 11 scientific papers on international journals, and 28 
communications at International and National congresses. 
Livia Paleari (F) is PhD student at UMIL -DiSAA. Her research work is focused on 
model-based studies aimed at identifying ideotypes improved for 
resistance/tolerance traits to diseases (fungal pathogens) and extreme 
environmental conditions (especially tem perature and salinity). In this context, she 
developed integrated approaches to support breeding programs, based on the in 
silico introgression of traits from traditional resistant/tolerant varieties in modern 
genotypes. She has participated to 1 national project and she is currently involved 
in 1 EU-funded project. She is the co -author of 3 scientific papers on  international 
journals, and 2 communications at International congresses. 
Gabriele Orasen (M) is PhD student at UMIL-DiSAA. His research work is focused 
on a genome wide association study of a population of 300 rice accessions. He has 
participated to the national project Ager RISINNOVA . He is co -
author of five 
scientific papers and two conference communications. 
Relevant publications (up to 5):  1. Sghayar S., Ferri A., Lancilli C., Lucchini G., Abruzzese A., Porrini M., 
Ghnaya T., Nocito F.F., Abdelly C., Sacchi G.A. (2015) Analysis of cadmium 
translocation, partitioning and tolerance in six barley ( Hordeum vulgare L .) 
cultivars as a function of thiol metabolism. Biology and Fertility of Soils, 51(3): 
p. 311–320. DOI: 10.1007/s00374-014-0977-9 
2. Lancilli C., Giacomini B., Lucchini G., Davidian J., Cocucci M., Sacchi G.A., 
Nocito F.F. (2014) Cadmium exposure and sulfate limitation reveal 
differences in the transcriptional control of three sulfate transporter (Sultr1;2) 
genes in Brassica juncea. BMC Plant Biology 14(1) : p. 132. DOI: 
10.1186/1471-2229-14-132 
3. Baldoni E.,  Mattana M., Locatelli  F., Consonni  R., Cagliani L.R., Picchi  V., 
Abbruscato P., Genga A. ( 2013) Transcriptional and metabolic responses of 
Italian rice ( Oryza sativa L. ) cultivars to osmotic stress or benz othiadiazole 
treatment. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 70 (1) : p. 492-503. DOI: 
10.1016/j.plaphy.2013.06.016 
4. Nocito F.F., Lancilli C., Dendena B., Lucchini G., Sacchi G. A. (2011) 
Cadmium retention in rice roots is influenced by cadmium availability, 
chelation and translocation. Plant and Cell Environment 34 (6): p. 994-1008. 
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3040.2011.02299.x  
5. Fumagalli E., Baldoni E., Abbruscato P., Piffanelli P., Genga A., Lamanna R., 
Consonni R. (2009) NMR techniques coupled multivariate statistical analysis: 
tools to analyze Oryza sativa  metabolic content under stresses.  Journal of 
Agronomy and Crop Science  195(2): p. 77–88. DOI: 10.1111/j.1439-
037X.2008.00344.x 
Relevant previous projects (up to 5):  1. Genomic selection for resources use efficiency in rice (GS-RUSE). 2012-2016. 
Funded by Cariplo and Agripolis Foundations. Total budget: 639.514€. Ref: 
1201-006. 
2. Research, innovative processes and technologies for the National research on 
rice (POLORISO). 2011-2013. Funded by MiPAF. Total budget: 2.180.000€. 
3. Biochemical and genetic dissection of control of plant nutrition (BIONUT). 
2011-2014.Funded by the European Community - FP7 - MC-ITN. Total budget: 
2.400.000 €. Ref: 264292. 
4. Platform of green biotechnologies and management techniques for  an 
agricultural system with high environmental sustainability (BIOGESTECA). 
2011-2014. Funded by Lombardy Region research program. Total budget: 
2.500.000€. Ref: 15083/RCC. 
5. Integrated genetic and genomic approaches for new Italian rice breeding 
strategies (RISINNOVA). 2011 -2014. Funded by AGER foundation. Total 
budget: 2.480.000€. Ref: 2010-2369 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    13 
Description of any significant 
infrastructure and/or any major items 
of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work:  
The research team from UMIL -DiSAA has a long standing expertise in plant 
physiology, biochemistry and molecular biology of plant mineral nutrition and 
tolerance to abiotic stress. State of the art technical platforms include: i) C/H/N/S 
elemental analyzer; ii) a fully equipped ionomic platfor m, with ICP -MS; a fully 
equipped metabolomic platform with HPLC, Gas -Chromatograph Mass 
Spectrometer, LC -MS and LC -MS-MS spectrometer, 600 MHz Nuclear Magnetic 
Resonance spectrometer, Near Infrared spectrometer; iii) fully equipped 
laboratories for physiol ogical, biochemical and molecular biology analysis; iv) 
platforms for large -scale phenotype screening in controlled environment 
(greenhouses; plant growth chambers).  
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    14 
 
Participant name: Michael Blatt  
Participant organization name: University of Glasgow (UGLA) 
Description of legal entity and its main 
tasks, with an explanation of how its 
profile matches the tasks in the 
proposal:  
After Oxford, Cambridge and Durham, the University of Glasgow  (UGLA) is the 
fourth oldest higher -education institution in t he English -speaking world. It is a 
member of the elite Russell Group of universities in the UK, a founding member of 
the Scottish Universities Life Science Alliance (SULSA) and of Universitas -21, an 
international consortium of universities setting standard s for higher education 
globally. The University of Glasgow caters for some 22,000 undergraduate and 
postgraduate students, roughly 6000 of whom are enrolled within the College of 
Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences. The College comprises some 300 full -time 
academic and research staff and over 500 postdoctoral researchers and 
technicians. It maintains close research and teaching connections with a several 
associated centres situated around Glasgow, including the Beatson Institute of 
Cancer Research, the Mo redun Institute of Animal Research, and the James 
Hutton Institute (Dundee), and it operates the Scottish Centre for Ecology and the 
Natural Environment (SCENE) based at nearby Loch Lomond.  
The Institute of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology (MCSB), to w hich Prof. Blatt 
and six other Plant Science Group (PSG) staff belong, is one of five premier 
research institutes within the College and accounts for 35% of the annual €50M 
research income to the College. Overall Glasgow currently attracts over €160M in 
research income annually, making it one of the top ten centres  for academic 
research in the UK. The University of Glasgow provides a number of underpinning 
support services beyond the standard financial management, estates and 
maintenance services. Among the se, MRB works closely with the Research and 
Enterprise Office, and has drawn on their expertise in expanding technological 
applications within the commercial sector as well as establishing research and pre -
commercial interactions. MRB has developed links w ith industrial/technology 
transfer partners (Agrisera, Dualsystems, Plant Bioscience) and research institutes 
(James Hutton Institute, the John Innes Centre in Norwich). 
Curriculum vitae:  Prof. M.R. Blatt (M) is the Regius Professor of Botany and Head of Plant Sciences 
at Glasgow. His Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biophysics is one of a handful 
of centres worldwide at the frontiers of research in plant membrane biology. He has 
long researched closely related themes of membrane biophysics, signalling  and 
cellular homeostasis in plants, much of this work on stomatal guard cells and ion 
channels. He originally defined the characteristics of intact guard cells, including the 
roles for extracellular K + and cytosolic pH in K + channel control. His laboratory  
identified the coupling of Ca 2+ oscillations to membrane voltage, its relationship to 
ABA and voltage-gated Ca2+ channels at the plasma membrane, its integration with 
endomembrane Ca 2+ release as well as critical binding sites for reactive oxygen 
species mediating channel regulation. He developed the first quantitative systems 
model for guard cell membrane transport and homeost asis with real predictive 
power and is currently engaged in a major research project to expand this model to 
the field. 
MRB also st udies the coordination of vesicle traffic with ion transport for cell 
expansion. He discovered the syntaxin SYP121 (=SYR1/PEN1) of tobacco and 
Arabidopsis, demonstrating its role in signalling and ion channel control. His 
laboratory found that SYP121, and its homologues in other species, binds plant Kv 
(K+) channels, regulating their gating for K + uptake and growth via binding sites on 
the two proteins. MRB recently identified the Sec1/Munc18 (SM) protein SEC11 as 
a regulatory partner with SYP121 in its SNA RE cycle], and he addressing the 
regulatory role of Kv channel binding exchange as a key step in the control of 
vesicle fusion and K+ transport control.  
MRB has contributed directly to economic competitiveness and quality of life 
through agro-industrial applications of research, including IPR development through 
patents (UK 9720784.9, 9720785.6, Intnl. Patent WO 99/16880, US Patent 
6,821,735), education and research training. MRB continues to develop a range of 
methods for multiprotein interaction and in v ivo trafficking analysis all of which are 
available through the laboratory website. Some will find application i n this project. 
The laboratory is among a small number of sites worldwide pushing the frontiers of 
knowledge in plant membrane biology, biophysi cs and cellular signalling. MRB 
trains some the best researchers in these fields, and has attracted research visitors 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    15 
from around the world (in past 10 years, including students, fellows and sabbatical 
visitors from within the UK as well as Spain, Germany,  Italy, Mexico, France, 
Sweden, Argentina, China, USA, and Australia). He currently hosts the Carnegie 
Centenary Professorial Fellow, Prof. Graham Farquhar (ANU, Canberra). Research 
staff and students have gone on to substantive posts, including within Imp erial 
College London, Universities of Cork, Dundee, Seville, Sydney (Australia), Louvain 
(Belgium), Tübingen, and Salzburg, as well as management and industrial 
situations. MRB is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh; he has established 
collaborations with industry (Zeiss, Agrisera, Plant Biosciences) and research 
institutes in the UK (JHI) and the USA (NIH, PRL); he is recognized internationally 
with a prestigious John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Fellowship (USA); and he 
has served in various roles, in cluding the BBSRC panel experts and as a Site 
Assessor for the Chilean Science Foundation (CONICYT). He is currently Editor -in-
Chief of the premier international journal PLANT PHYSIOLOGY. MRB hosts Prof. 
Mary Williams, the ASPB Education and Features Editor, and contributes to the 
award-winning Teaching Tools by the ASPB. He developed the SEEING! 
minicourses and outreach program at Glasgow, to introduce young minds to the 
world of imaging and cell biology. 
Relevant publications (up to 5):  1. Karnik R., Zhang B., Waghamare S., Alderhold C., Grefen C., Blatt M. R. 
(2015) Binding of SEC11 Indicates Its Role in SNARE Recycling after Vesicle 
Fusion and Identifies Two Pathways for Vesicular Traffic to the Plasma 
Membrane. Plant Cell, in press. DOI: 10.1105/tpc.114.134429 
2. Wang Y., Hills A., Blatt M.R. (2014) Systems analysis of guard cel l membrane 
transport for enhanced stomatal dynamics and water use e fficiency. Plant 
Physiology 164(4): p. 1593-99. DOI: 10.1104/pp.113.233403 
3. Eisenach C., Papanatsiou M., Hillert E. -K., Blatt M.R. (2014) Clustering of the 
K+ channel GORK parallels its gating by extracellular K+. Plant J. 78(2): p. 203-
14. DOI: 10.1111/tpj.12471 
4. Lawson T., Blatt M.R. (2014) Size, speed and responsiveness of stomata 
impact on photosynthesis and water use efficiency. Plant Physiol. 164 (4): p. 
1556-70. DOI: 10.1104/pp.114.237107 
5. Wang Y., Papanatsiou M., Eisenach C., Karnick R., Williams M., Hills A., Lew  
V.L., Blatt M.R. (2012) Systems dynamic modelling of a guard cell Cl - channel 
mutant uncovers an emergent homeostatic network regulating stomatal 
transpiration. Plant Physiol. 160(4): p. 1956-72. DOI: 10.1104/pp.112.207704 
Relevant previous projects (up to 5):  1. GORK K+ channel clustering. 2015-2018. Funded by BBSRC Research Grant. 
Total budget: 512.000 £ (≈715.000 €). 
2. Synthetic manipulation of guard cell transport. 2015 -2018. Funded by BSRC 
Research Grant. Total budget: 541.000 £ (≈750.000 €). 
3. Next-generation OnGuard. 2014 -2017. Funded  by BBSRC Research Grant. 
Total budget: 765.000 £ (≈ 1.000.000 €). 
4. SNARE-VSD interactions. 2013 -2016. Funded by BBSRC Research Grant. 
Total budget: 589.000 £ (≈ 820.000 €). 
5. Mult-tiered approach to gaining increased carbon (MAGIC). 2011 -2018. 
Funded by BBSRC/NSF Consortium Grant UK/USA Photosynthesis Ideas Lab 
consortium. Total budget: 4.800.000 US $ (≈ 4.400.000 €). 
Description of any significant 
infrastructure and/or any major items 
of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work:  
MRB is a member of MCSB at Glasgow and heads the Plant Sciences Group 
(PSG) with g lasshouses, growth rooms  and cell culture facilities. His laboratory is 
equipped for protein biochemistry and molecular biology; it includes state -of-the-art 
confocal microscope facilities with FRET/FLIM used by the PS G as a whole; and it 
houses electrophysiology workstations for single- cell and patch clamp analysis, 
including one fitted with an intensified, cooled -CCD camera for measurements of 
cytosolic Ca 2+ and pH, and a second fitted with a 10kHz imaging 
microspectrofluorimeter for concurrent fluorescence spectral analysis. Workstations 
are on hand for measurements in plant roots, guard cells, Xenopus oocytes, and 
patch recordings from plant protoplasts, mammalian and Sf9 insect cells. The 
laboratory houses facilities for gas exchange and PAM analysis of photosynthetic 
activities as well as a variety of in vivo tools for quantification of inorganic ion s and 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    16 
their transport in cells and plant tissues. The laboratory continues to develop 
custom software for electrophysiology, imaging, and morphometry. It introduced the 
OnGuard software for quantitative systems dynamic modelling of transport, 
signalling and homeostasis in guard cells as well as the EZ -Rhizo software for 
quantitative trait analys is of root growth in plants,  all freely available through the 
laboratory website (psrg.org.uk). 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    17 
 
Participant name: Mar Català 
Participant organization name: Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentària (IRTA)  
Description of legal entity and its main 
tasks, with an explanation of how its 
profile matches the tasks in the 
proposal:  
The Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentària (IRTA) is a public 
research institution, part of the Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural Action of 
the regional  Government of Catalonia, Spain. IRTA's mission is to contribute to 
modernizing, improving, boosting competitiveness, and fostering sustainable 
development in the sectors of: i) agriculture, ii) animal and plant production, iii) food 
technology, iv) agroforestry, v) aquaculture, vi) fisheries, vii) agro -food economy 
and vii) environment and global change, with the aim of consolidating a sustainable 
bio-based economy. Other areas of activity are those which are directly or indirectly 
related to the supply of  healthy, high -quality foodstuffs to end consumers, food 
safety and safe processing of foodstuffs and in general enhancing the health and 
well-being of the population. Ebr o Experimental Station, located in the Ebro  Delta 
area, was created in 1987 with the main objective to promote rice competitiveness, 
focusing on innovation, experimentation and knowledge and technology transfer to 
rice producers. During this period it has become the reference centre  for the rice 
sector in the area. 
Curriculum vitae:  Mar Catalá (F), leader of rice research at Ebre Experimental Station (IRTA), is 
secretary of the National Rice Agronomy and Breeding Group since 1996, Group 
that coordinates since 2008. From 2011 she is member of the Rice National 
Commission of Agriculture Office for new released varieties as rice expert. She is a 
collaborative member of ANEP (Evaluation National Agency of Researcher 
Projects) for the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness.  In the last five 
years: 
She has participated in more than five national and international congresses 
She has developed more than twenty experimental trials for private companies. 
To transfer the new developed technologies, she has written more than 25 
technician papers, one book chapter and she has organized more tha n ten open 
days for rice farmers, training courses and meetings with rice grower leaders and 
relevant technicians. 
Dr. F. Álvaro (F) is the Head of the Field Crops Program at IRTA, where she is 
scientist and breeder, Her current research activities are foc used on increasing 
wheat breeding efficiency to develop new varieties adapted to Mediterranean 
environments, with an emphasis on tolerance to abiotic stresses and improving 
technological quality. She coordinates the Spanish Wheat Breeding Program. In the 
last five years she has coordinated three national projects, She is author of 12 SCI 
papers and a number of contributions to international conferences. 
Mr. Albert Gurri  (M) is de the Head of the Communication Department in IRTA. 
Degree in Veterinary Science  (1986) is an expert in agrofood communication from 
1988. He has been editor of several magazines: Selecciones Avícolas, Cunicultura, 
Lagomorpha, EdiPorc and PorcPress. Secretary of Spanis h Rabbit Association 
1997-2001 (ASESCU) and press officer in Expoaviga Exhibition (Fira de Barcelona) 
2005-2008. 
Relevant publications (up to 5):  1. Maris S. C., Teira-Esmatges M. R., Català M. M., (2015) Influence of irrigation 
frequency on greenhouse gases emission from a paddy soil. Paddy and Water 
Environment. DOI: 10.1007/s10333-015-0490-2 
2. Serrat X., Esteban R., Peñas G., Català M. M., Melé E.,  Messeguer J.  (2013) 
Direct and reverse pollen- mediated gene flow between GM rice and red rice 
weed. AoB plants 5(1): plt050. DOI: 10.1093/aobpla/plt050 
3. Martinez M., Zhu D., Català M.M., Pla E., Tomas N. (2012) Water, nitrogen and 
plant density affect to response of leaf appearance of direct seeded rice to 
thermal time. Rice Science,  20(1): p. 52- 60. DOI: 10.1016/S1672-
6308(13)60108-0 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    18 
 
4. Breitler J. C., Vassal J.  M., Català M. M. (2004) Bt rice harbouring cry genes 
controlled by a constitutive or wound -inducible promoter: protection and 
transgene expression under Mediterranean fi eld conditions. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 2(5): p. 417- 430. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-
7652.2004.00086.x 
5. Sanchez-Garcia M., Álvaro F., Martín- Sánchez JA., Sillero JC. , Escribano J., 
Royo C. (2012) Breeding effects on the genotype x environment interaction for 
yield of bread wheat grown in Spain during the 20th century. Field Crops 
Research, 126(1): p. 79-86. DOI: 10.1016/j.fcr.2011.10.001 
Relevant previous projects (up to 5):  1. Sustainable and environmental friendly rice cultivation systems in Europe 
(GREENRICE). 2014 -2017. Funded by FACCE -JPI ERA  Net Plus. Total 
budget: 1.447.000€. 
2. Proyecto piloto de medidas de mitigación y adaptación al cambio climático en 
el Delta del Ebro  (EBRO-ADMICLIM). 2014- 2017. Funded by the European 
Community Life Plus. Total budget: 1.124.341 € Ref: ENV/ES/001182. 
3. Molecular and agronomic characterization to salinity tolerance of rice mutants. 
2010-2013- Funded by INIA. Total budget: 95.164,80 €. Ref: RTA2010 -00048-
00-00. 
4. Constitution, description et gestion dynamique des resources genétiques du riz 
(Oryza sativa), a vocat ion européene. 1995-1998. Funded by EC. Ref: UE -  
PL95-RG3. 
Description of any significant 
infrastructure and/or any major items 
of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work:  
The IRTA/ Ebre experimental Station has human resources with deep know ledge 
on rice agronomy and field testing. IRTA is owner of more than 8 ha of rice fields, 
and counts with the collaboration of rice farmers which can provide all necessary 
soil/water/weather conditions to fit the most proper experiment to guarantee the 
goals of the project. 
Most of the equipment needed for experimental purposes is available: a threshing 
machine for experimental rice plots, equipment for postharvest control quality as 
milling quality and whiteness. 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    19 
 
Participant name: María Mercedes Rivero Pérez 
Participant organization name: Instituto de Agrobiotecnología Rosario (INDEAR) 
Description of legal entity and its main 
tasks, with an explanation of how its 
profile matches the tasks in the 
proposal:  
The Instituto de Agrobiotecnología Rosario (INDEAR)  is a new model for the 
strategic integration between the Argentine National Council for Scientific and 
Technical Research (CONICET) and the private sector in the scientific -technology 
field, where CONICET contributes with qualified research resources and INDEAR 
provides funds, management and competences for the technology transference. 
The intention of this approach is to deliver financial value and social benefit through 
the development of products and services in the agricultural biotechnology industry. 
INDEAR has the most advanced agro -biotech research platforms in Latin America, 
including the first high performance DNA sequencing platform available in 
Argentina. INDEAR labs host highly qualified scientific groups in the areas of 
genomics and b ioinformatics, molecular biology, synthetic biology and protein 
research. R&D areas at the Institute are consolidated with a plant transformation 
and tissue culture facility and with a multidisciplinary group engaged in the 
development of field technologie s. Furthermore, INDEAR has a prestigious team 
devoted to regulatory affairs, working on its different projects. INDEAR devotes its 
research efforts in technologies designed to increase crop yield, including drought 
and salinity tolerance, pest and herbicide resistance, efficient use of nutrients, and 
crop health.  
The Genomics and Bioinformatics platform of our Institution is equipped with two 
high performance sequencing systems which are complementary to each other: 
454 GS FLX+ Roche and Illumina HiSeq 150 0. The specialized support staff not 
only conducts internal research projects at INDEAR and collaboration work, but 
also provides sequencing services to various universities and national / 
international research centres. From the sequencing of complex plant genomes, the 
processing of thousands of metagenomic environmental samples significant work in 
bacterial and viral genomes, to the addressing of transcriptomic studies and health -
related projects, the Genomics team is constantly busy delivering valuable 
contributions in the form of massive data of high quality DNA sequences. The 
sequencing activities are supported by the Bioinformatics department and its highly 
trained team in the scientific and technical arena, with deep expertise in Biology, 
Computing an d Stats. Data are processed by a sophisticated system including 
automated pipelines for sequence quality control, assembly, annotation, and 
manual support tools for finishing and annotation.  
Our Molecular Biology platform is composed by a group of experie nced 
professionals and technicians. The main tasks of this Laboratory are to design and 
build binary vectors intended for plant transformation, the molecular -level analysis 
of the transgenic events generated, and the identification of genes of interest and  
regulatory sequences.  
Our Plant Transformation Laboratory has the ability to transform numerous plant 
species such as soybean, alfalfa, maize, rice, safflower, switchgrass , as well as 
other model plant species. We have focused on generating freedom to operate  
efficient transformation technologies. Besides, we apply complementary techniques 
such as multiplication and micropropagation of selected materials (GM events, 
mother plants, elite  materials), rescue of embryos and generation of doubled 
haploid lines for the accelerated development of new varieties in wheat and maize.  
INDEAR also has an important Field Testing and Breeding area that applies the 
most advanced breeding techniques to wheat, soybean, corn and alfalfa crops. The 
main role of this platform  is to validate technologies in breeding chamber, 
greenhouse and field conditions. The assessment of the technologies delivered via 
transgenesis requires the adherence to stringent biosecurity protocols; to that end, 
we have a sound, expert Regulatory Affa irs team. On the Metabolic Engineering 
platform of our Institute genetically optimized organisms are developed for the 
production of high valued -added and minimum environmental impact compounds 
from low cost raw materials. 
Curriculum vitae:  Dr. M. Rivero Pérez (F) is a PhD b iologist dedicated to Plant Biotechnology. 
Continuous professional exercise for 20 years in public renowned scientific and 
academic Institutions (ONU - PNUD/ INTECH -CONICET; INGEBI -CONICET; 
FCEyN-UBA; INDEAR, Argentina). Labor related t o plant tissue culture, genetic 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    20 
transformation, and crop genetic improvement (i. e. potato, soybean, alfalfa, maize, 
safflower, rice). Trained at well -known international scientific centres : CIAT (Cali, 
Col.), Universidad Javeriana (Bogotá, Col), INIA (Reme hue-Cl); Plant 
Transformation Facility, Iowa State University (Io, USA). Great professional 
expertise gained from 2000 to 2007 as group -leader of the Plant Transformation 
and Tissue Culture Area, Lab. Agrobiotecnología, Universidad de Buenos Aires 
(FCEyN, UBA). For the last 8 years in INDEAR as Head of Plant Transformation 
and Tissue Culture platform. From August 2014 until date Early Development 
Scientist in INDEAR.  
Dr. M. P. Vázquez  (M) is a PhD s pecialist in next generation sequencing, 
bioinformatics an d Biotechnology. Particularly interested in gene discovery for 
biotechnological innovation, and in the revolution of personal genomics on Human 
health. Has published more than 40 scientific papers and contributed in different 
book chapters related to his s cientific specialties: Genomics, Bioinformatics, HT -
sequencing, Biotechnology. Independent researcher of CONICET since 1999. Chief 
Scientific Officer in INDEAR. Director of the CGTA Argentinian Node on Genomic 
Technology. 
Soledad Romero (F) is a b iotechnologist graduated from the Universidad de 
Rosario, Argentine. Work experience in Indear from 2011 until present. First 
position as Lab Manager, lately as Services Manager in the Genomics and 
Bioinformatics Laboratory.  
Mónica Fabbro (F) is a  Bioinformatics Analyst. Joined Indear on 2013. Previous 
experience at Universidad de Entre Ríos, Argentina. 
Relevant publications (up to 5):  1.    Perullini M., Rivero M., Jobbagy M., Mentaberry A., Bilmes, S.A. (2007) Plant 
cell proliferation inside an inorganic host. Jou rnal of Biotechnology 127(3): p. 
542-548. DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2006.07.024. 
2.    Rivero M.M., Furman N., Mencacci N., Picca P., Toum L., Lentz E., Bravo-
Almonacid F., Mentaberry A.N. (2011) Stacking of antimicrobial genes in potato 
transgenic plants confers increased resistance to bacterial and fungal 
pathogens. Journal of Biotechnology 157(2): p. 334 -43. DOI: 
10.1016/j.jbiotec.2011.11.005. 
3.    Rascovan N., Carbonetto B., Revale S., Reinert M.D., Alvarez R., Godeas A., 
Colombo R., Aguilar M., Iannone L., Novas V., Zelada A., Pardo A., Schrauf G., 
Mentaberry A.N., Vazquez M.P. (2013) The PAMPA D atasets: A metagenomic 
survey of microbial communities in Argentinean pampean soils. Microbiome 1: 
21. DOI: 10.1186/2049-2618-1-21 
4.    Rivera D., Revale S., Molina R., Gualpa J., Puente M., Ma roniche G., Paris G., 
Baker D., Clavijo B., McLay K., Spaepen S., Perticari A., Vazquez M.P., 
Wisnieswski-Dyé F., Watkins C., Martinez -Abarca F., Vanderleyden J., Cassán 
F. (2014) Complete genome sequence of the model rhizosphere strain 
Azospirillum brasilense Az39, successfully applied in agriculture. Genome 
Announcements 2(4): p. 1-2. DOI: 10.1128/genomeA.00683-14 
5.    Torres, D., Revale, S., Obando, M., Maroniche, G., Paris, G., Perticari, A., 
Vazquez, M.P., Wisnieswski -Dyé, F., Martínez -Abarca, F. and Cassán, F. 
(2015). Genome sequence of Bradyrhizobium japonicum E109, one of the most 
agronomically used nitrogen fixing rhizobacteria in Argentina. Genome 
Announcements 3(1): p. 1-2. DOI: 10.1128/genomeA.01566-14 
Relevant previous projects (up to 5):  1. Soil Genetic Network for Agriculture Sustainability: One of the largest Mega -
scale genome wide association analysis in soil (Soi lGeNe). 2008 -2014. 
Consortium funded by the Program of Strategic Areas (PAE -37164), ANPCyT, 
MinCyT, Argentina – FONCyT. Total budget: 7.642.307 ARs $ (≈ 800.000 €). 
2. Consortium on Argentinian Pastures (FSAGROBIO "PASARG"). 2009 -2015. 
Funded by the National Agency for the Scientific and Technology Promotion 
(ANPCyT, MinCyT) – Argentine Sector Fund (FONARSEC).Total budget: 
13.101.267 Ar$ (≈ 1.350.000 €). 
3. Consortium for the Optimization of new generation bioalcohol production in 
sweet sorghum (FITS "nBIO). 2012 -2015. Funded by FO NARSEC-ANPCyT, 
MinCyT. Funding: 14.786.310 Ar$  (≈ 1.530.000 €). 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    21 
4. Desarrollo de soluciones de Ingeniería metabólica para la producción 
microbiana de Biocombustibles  (EMPRETECNO). 2011 -2015. Funded by 
FONARSEC-ANPCyT, MinCyT. Total budget:  2.475.660 Ar$ (≈ 255.000 €).  
PAEBT 041/2011 "INMET". 
5. Development of rice GM varieties tolerant to drought and salinity by the 
expression of Hahb4 gene (HB4 technology).  Submitted (ANR 2020 Call). 
Funded by ANPCyT-FONTAR. 
Description of any significant 
infrastructure and/or any major items 
of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work:  
  
INDEAR is a model research Institute with several platforms and laboratories: 
Genomics and Bioinformatics, Molecular Biology, Metabolic Engineering, 
Technology of  proteins; Plant Transformation and Tissue Culture; Plant Breeding 
and Field Testing and a Pilot Plant for Molecular Farming. 
The Genomics and Bioinformatics platform of Indear is equipped with two high -
performance sequencing complementary systems: a 454 s equencer of Roche 
(Genome Sequencer FLX System) and HiSeq 1500 Illumina sequencer. It is the 
only platform of its kind in the country. Illumina HiSeq1500 technology offers a 
unique combination of high performance and exceptional accuracy; therefore it is 
suitable for large -scale genomics projects. For the analysis of 16S rRNA we 
dispose of a Benchtop NGS (Next Generation Sequencing) -  MiSeq Illumina. This 
technology allows smaller-scale, shorter runs and best accuracy at lower costs. At 
the Lab we also have  an automatic production system of clonal clusters for 
sequencing (Illumina cBOT), an Agilent BioAnalyzer 2100 so as to quantify, to 
control quality and to determine DNA, RNA, proteins, and cells size; an Agilent 
SureScan reader of microarrays; a fluoresce nce reader in microplate (FLUOstar 
best); a Beckman particle counter; a fragmentator system of DNA Digilab Hydro 
Shear; a system of real -time PCR (LightCycler 480 Roche); a system of mills for 
mechanical disruption for bacteria (TissueLyser QIAGEN); a cent rifugal 
concentrator, necessary for the preparation of libraries of next generation 
sequencing (HiSeq 1500/MiSeq Illumina and GS FLX Roche). This platform also 
includes a server room equipped with 2 HPC clusters with 96 cores in 12 nodes and 
a server of 8 cores and 32 GB of RAM. 
The Molecular Biology platform has the necessary instruments for basic genetic 
engineering: cloning of DNA sequences, bacterial transformation and molecular 
characterization of bacterial organisms. There are also equipments for Quantitative 
PCR (LightCycler 480), real time PCR and an automated liquid handling station 
(Lifor quid Handling Biomek 3000) for large scale experiments and routine work.  
The laboratory of Proteins and the Metabolic Engineering platform have the basic 
equipment required for isolation and functional characterization of proteins such as 
an AKTA chromatography equipment and an ultrafiltration equipment. These areas 
also have equipment for liquid chromatography associated to a mass spectrometer 
(Triple quadruple -LC-MSMS), equipment for gas chromatography with mass 
spectroscopy (GC -MS), a lyophilizer, an autoclave and an UV detector for the 
analysis of samples. It also has a fully automated New Brunswick 3 liters 
fermentator for the scaling-up of fermentation laboratory processes.  
The platform for Plat Transformation and Tissue Culture has 6 laminar -flow double-
cabinets, 8 growthrooms for in vitro  culture of plants with automated and 
independent control of temperature and photoperiod; independent growth chambers 
with humidity control; microscopes equipped with high resolution camera; automatic 
dispenser of media and other minor equipment. There are also greenhouse facilities 
and instruments for carrying out experimental analysis in plants. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    22 
 
Participant name: Jiankang Wang 
Participant organization name: Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences -  Institute of Crop Sciences 
(CAAS) 
Description of legal entity and its main 
tasks, with an explanation of how its 
profile matches the tasks in the 
proposal:  
Institute of C rop Science (ICS) is the largest professional crop science institute 
affiliated to the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS) . ICS has four 
departments on Genetic Resources, Molecular Biology, Crop Breeding and Crop 
Physiology. There are 40 resear ch groups in the four departments to work on 
wheat, maize, rice, soybean, and many other small crops. ICS is the national centre 
of China for scientific innovations, international collaborations, and advanced 
educations. Currently, ICS has more than 300 st affs, among which there are 83 
professors.  
The Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS) is a national agricultural 
research institution undertaking China’s agricultural research and development in 
both basic and applied sciences as well as new and advanced application 
technology. Mission of CAAS is to solve the fundamental and strategic 
technological issues in agriculture and rural economic development, training of 
advanced researchers, integration of agriculture with science and technology, and 
development of agricultural science and technology exchanges and cooperation. 
CAAS achieves this mission through its various research institutes, graduate 
school, agricultural publisher, key laboratories, testing centres, crop improvement 
centres, technology centres, crop germplasm banks, databases and Internet 
resources.  
Curriculum vitae:  
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Wang is a Professor in the Institute of Crop Science, CAAS. His research team 
at CAAS has 4 research staffs, and about 10 MSc and PhD students, mainly 
working on the following three areas.  
a) Genetic Analysis Methods in Plants: Inclusive Composite Interval Mapping 
(ICIM) for additive and digenic epistatic QTL of quantitative traits were 
proposed in 2006 and 2007. ICIM is computationally less intensive, and has 
increased detection power, reduced false discovery rate, and less biased 
estimates of QTL effects. This method has been extended to F2 population, 
NAM population, and QTL by environmental analysis, and is being extended to 
other multi-parental genetic populations.  
b) Modeling and Simulation in Plant Breeding: The genetics and breeding tool of 
QuLine he developed can simulate most breeding methodologies for 
developing inbred lines. QuLine has been used to compare two different 
selection strategies in CIMMYT’s wheat  breeding programs, study the effects 
on selection of dominance and epistasis, predict cross performance using 
known gene information in wheat quality, and optimize marker assisted 
selection to efficient pyramid multiple genes. The other two tools are QuHy brid 
for simulating hybrid development breeding, and QuMARS for simulating 
marker assisted recurrent selection.  
c) Integrated Genetics and Breeding Tool: QTL IciMapping is freely -available 
public software, capable of building high -density linkage genetic map s and 
mapping quantitative trait loci (QTL). Version 3.3 of the software was released 
in July 2013. Eight fully implemented functionalities in QTL IciMapping v3.3 
are: (1) BIN: Binning of redundant markers; (2) MAP: Construction of genetic 
linkage maps in biparental populations; (3) BIP: Mapping of additive and 
digenic epistasis genes in biparental populations; (4) CSL: Mapping of additive 
and digenic epistasis genes with chromosome segment substitution lines; (5) 
MET: QTL by environment interaction in bipa rental populations; (6) NAM: QTL 
mapping in nested association mapping populations; (7) SDL: Mapping of 
segregation distortion loci in biparental populations; and (8) CMP: Consensus 
map construction from multiple genetic linkage maps sharing common 
markers. Two supplementary tools are: (1) 2pointREC: Estimation of 
recombination frequency between two loci in 20 biparental populations; and (2) 
ANOVA: Analysis of variance of multi-environmental trials.  
In addition to research, Dr. Wang has been teaching the Q uantitative Genetics 
Course to the CAAS Graduate School since 2005. Each year, he has 50 -70 
graduate students in his class. A textbook in Chinese was published in 2007. He 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    23 
started to teach the Experimental Design and Statistical Analysis for foreigner 
students at the CAAS Graduate School since 2012.  
Relevant publications (up to 5):  1. Ma J., Wingen L. U., Orford S., Fenwick P., Wang J., Griffiths S. (2015). Using 
the UK reference population Avalon×Cadenza as a platform to compare 
breeding strategies in elite Western European bread wheat. Molecular 
Breeding, 35(70). DOI: 10.1007/s11032-015-0268-7 
2. Zhang L., Li H., Wang J. (2015). Linkage analysis and map construction in 
genetic populations of clonal F1 and double cross. 
G3·Genes|Genomes|Genetics, 5: p. 427-439. DOI: 10.1534/g3.114.016022 
3. Meng L., Li H., Zhang L., Wang J. (2015). QTL IciMapping: Integrated software 
for genetic linkage map construction and quantitative trait locus mapping in bi-
parental populations. The Crop Journal (in press). DOI: 
10.1016/j.cj.2015.01.001 
4. Guo T., Li H., Tan J., Yan J., Li J., Wang J. (2013). Performance prediction of 
F1 hybrids between recombination inbred lines derived from two elite maize 
inbred lines. Theor. Appl. Genet. 126(1): p. 189-201. DOI: 10.1007/s00122-
012-1973-9 
5. Wang J., Li H., Wan X., Pfeiffer W., Crouch J. and Wan J. (2007). Application 
of identified QTL-marker associations in rice quality improvement through a 
design breeding approach. Theor. Appl. Genet. 115(1): p. 87-100. DOI: 
10.1007/s00122-007-0545-x 
Relevant previous projects (up to 5):  1. Integrated Breeding Platform. 2009 -2014. Funded by Bill & Melinda  Gates 
Foundation and Generatio n Challenge Program of CGIAR. Budget allocated: 
400.000$ (≈350.000€). 
2. Computing System for Planning Molecular Breeding and Genetic Analysis for 
Multi-Parental Populations. Generation. 2012- 2014. Funded by Challenge 
Program of CGIAR. Total budget: 300.000$ (≈260.000€). 
3. Breeding to Optimise Chinese Agriculture (OP TICHINA). 2011-2014Funded by 
the European Community -  7th EU Framework Program. Total budget: 
500.000€. 
4. Theory on Pyramiding Multiple Genes and Its Application in Rice Quality 
Improvement. 2006 -2010. Funded by the National 863 (High Science and 
Technology) Research Program of China. Total budget: 700.000 ￥ 
(≈100.000€). 
5. Approaches and Integrated Tools for the Efficient Use of Genetic Populations 
and Gene Information in Plant Breeding. 2013 -2016. Funded by the Natural 
Science Foundation of China. Total budget: 850.000￥ (≈120.000€). 
Description of any significant 
infrastructure and/or any major items 
of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work:  
Dr. Wang leads the Quantitative Genetics Research Group at CAAS. The group 
has two quantitative geneticists , one biometrician, and two programmers. The 
group owns more than 20 personal computers and 2 servers. The group has 
developed the integrated linkage map construction and QTL mapping software, 
breeding simulation tools which can be readily used in this pro ject. These software 
and tools are freely available, and can be used to build genetic linkage maps, 
mapping quantitative genes, and simulate and optimize marker assisted and 
conventional breeding strategies, required by the project.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    24 
Participant name: Xavier Serrat  
Participant organization name: Càmara Arrossera del Montsià i Secció de Crèdit SCCL (CAMARA) 
Description of legal entity and its main 
tasks, with an explanation of how its 
profile matches the tasks in the 
proposal:  
The Càmara Arrossera de l Montsià (CAMARA)  is a rice farmer cooperative 
founded in 1927, bringing together 3200 partners and their rice production, which is 
manufactured and marketed under the PDO “Arroz del Delta del Ebro”. It is the only 
Cooperative that has received twice the recognition from the LIFE EU program for 
the respect to the environment. CAMARA has obtained the most demanding 
certifications in terms of food security as a result of their efforts to innovate and 
improve product quality. The R+D team focus their efforts to modernize the seed 
development section, which ensures high quality rice seed varieties distribution to 
CAMARA farmers and other Spanish rice Cooperatives. CAMARA is the biggest 
farmer cooperative in Delta del Ebro and produce and commercialize certified  
seeds all over Spain while is constantly breeding and registering new rice varieties. 
Curriculum vitae:  Xavier Serrat (M), is the principal investigator of the Seed department in CAMARA, 
he is licensed in Biology and Genetics and MSc. in Molecular Biote chnology. He 
has been working in plant biotechnology since 2001, mainly in rice. Although he is 
finishing his PhD in Applied Biotechnology on Mediterranean rice cultivars, he has 
been working for long time as Research Leader in Oryzon Genomics 
(Biotechnology SME) In vitro lab and Germplasm department. He is widely 
experienced in rice Biotechnology, plant in vitro  culture techniques such as rice 
agro-transformation, biolistic, anther culture, cell suspension, protoplast culture, in 
vitro mutagenesis for TILL ING proposes among others. He has been working on  
biotic and abiotic stress resistance/tolerance, functional genomics improvement, 
delayed senescence and other yield improvement through GM and non -GM 
approaches on Spanish rice and other crops. 
Juanjose Roig Reverté (M), is the R+D department Director in CAMARA, he is a 
bioinformatics with MSc. in Sap consultancy , MSc. in Project management  and 
MSc. In Quality management. He has also  several specialized courses including IT 
management and new ICT applied to business management. He has been working 
in la CAMARA as Systems department Director, Quality department Director before 
being in charge of the R+D department Director. 
Roser Llaò (F) is the Seed department Director in CAMARA. She is an Agricultural 
Engineer widely experienced in rice seed breeding and certified seed production 
management. She has also worked in several rice improvement research projects 
based in rice anther culture and rice mutagenesis. She has developed and 
registered commercial improved rice varieties. 
Monica Revertè (F) is the Quality department Director in CAMARA. She is licenced 
in Chemistry and MSc. in Chemistry and food engineering. She is widely 
experienced in rice pests detection/eradication and evaluation of rice quality using 
different techniques such as amylose content evaluation, rice cooking tests, 
chemical contaminants detection, heavy metals contamination detection, optic 
devices assisted quality determination (shape, length, width, whiteness and 
pearliness) and industrial yield determination. 
Relevant publications (up to 5):  1. Serrat X., Cardona M., Gil J., Brito A.M., Moysset L., Nogués S., Lalanne E. 
(2014) A Mediterranean japonica rice ( Oryza sativa ) cultivar improvement 
through anther culture. Euphytica, 195(1):  p. 31-44. DOI: 10.1007/s10681-013-
0955-6 
2. Serrat, X., Esteban, R., Peñas, G., Català, M. M., Melé, E., Messeguer, J. 
(2013). Direct and reverse pollen-mediated gene flow between GM rice and red 
rice weed. AoB Plants, 5(1). DOI: 10.1093/aobpla/plt050 
 
Relevant previous projects (up to 5):  1. Demonstration title of the progressive elimination of Methyl Bromide in the 
processed rice fumigation, due to the substitution of the vacuum packed 
rice, minimised the environmental impact and the emission of gases into 
the atmosphere (ENVACIO). 2002-2005. Funded by the Environment LIFE 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    25 
 
programme. Total budget: 444.582€ 
2. Montsianell (DOP) variety improvement to perpetuate the traditional rice 
producción in Delta del Ebro (EBRO). 2008 -2010. Funded by ACC1O. 
Total budget: 350.000€. 
3. New no transgenic Montsianell rice variety development using chemic 
mutagenesis and molecular screening (ORYCAMB ). 2005 -2007. Funded 
by CIDEM (ACC1O). 
4. Smart on-line water salinity measurement network to manage and protect 
rice fields (SMART -PADDY). 2011-2013. Funded by Research Executive 
Agency (REA). Total budget: 815.139€. Ref: FP7 (285861).   
5. In-field wireless sensor network to predict rice blast (RICE-GUARD). 2013-
2016. Funded by Research Executive Agency (REA). Total budget: 
1.406.924€, budget allocated: 233.375€. Ref: FP7 (606583). 
Description of any significant 
infrastructure and/or any major items 
of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work:  
CAMARA owns two stations of experimental rice fields (10 ha in total) in Ebro River 
Delta (Spain) to ass ay rice lines.  CAMARA also disposes of Certified Seed 
production infrastructures and fields. Additionally,  CAMARA disposes of fully 
equipped Rice Quality and Industrial Yield Laboratories  in CAMARA facilities.  
CAMARA will put at disposal of the NEURICE project all the infrastructures and 
trained personal needed to develop the field trials work , as well as thei r associated 
farmers, which have long experience in excellent Certified Seed production. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    26 
 
Participant name: Pau Puigdollers 
Participant organization name: Innovació i Recerca Industrial i Sostenible (IRIS) 
Description of legal entity and its main 
tasks, with an explanation of how its 
profile matches the tasks in the 
proposal:  
Innovació i Recerca Industrial i Sostenible (IRIS) was established in Spain in 
2007 as an advanced engineering and R&D company, specialising in process 
engineering. IRIS speciali ses in three fields of engineering: Production Processes 
(with strong specialisation in novel technologies); Smart Systems; Optical Systems, 
combined with knowledge and research capacity in food science, materials science 
and environmental science. IRIS ap plies its knowledge and expertise to develop 
solutions for industry in the fields of advanced monitoring and control, surface 
activation and decontamination, as well as waste valorisation strategies. IRIS also 
provides contract research and advanced engine ering services to the food, 
agriculture, chemical and pharmaceutical industries, among others. The company 
has a policy of continuous investment for growth, and currently employs 48 staff 
based in two sites (Barcelona and Dublin). IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 cer tified and also 
is certified under UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i. 
Curriculum vitae:  Dr. P. Puigdollers  (M), BSc in Environmental Science from the Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona. MSc in Terrestrial Ecology (Research Thesis: "Effects of 
biochar from fast pyrolysis on soil water availability and basal respiration", 2010) 
from the same university and MSc in Renewable Energy Engineering and 
Management from the Universitat de Barcelona. Prior to joining IRIS he held 
positions as technical sales  person on Servicios Normativos consultancy group, 
quality field inspector on waste treatment plants for Ingeniería IDOM International, 
performing quality audits and reports. He has also held different research positions 
at the CSIRO in Australia and in th e CREAF in Barcelona. He has also experience 
as environmental consultant at Eco Intelligent Growth, working with renewable 
energies, life cycle assessment, C2C certifications and green building.  
Dr. M. R. Pinilla (F), Doctor of Science and Technology from the Helsinki University 
of Technology in 2004 (PhD thesis - “Signatures of Superfluidity in Atomic Fermi 
Gases"). Degree in Physics from the Universidad Complutense de Madrid. Masters 
in Energy and Sustainable Development from the Universitat Politècnica d e 
Catalunya. Prior to joining IRIS she held different research positions CSIC (National 
Research Council of Spain), Institute of Photonic Sciences in Barcelona, University 
of Oxford and the Nanoscience Centre in Jyväskylä, Finland. Expertise in the 
management and development of scientific projects in theoretical quantum physics. 
Author of over 23 scientific papers in peer reviewed Journals (Science, Nature 
Physics, Nature Photonics, and Physical Review Letters). Co -supervised a doctoral 
thesis. Member of th e ANEP, National Evaluation Agency and has participated in 
several evaluation panels for the Ministry of Science and Innovation of Spain.  
Joan A. Martínez  (M), Telecommunications Engineer from the Universitat 
Politècnica de Catalunya specialising in Elect ronic Systems. Broad experience in 
the development of embedded systems working with microcontrollers from Intel, 
Nec, Motorola, National Semiconductor, Zilog, Renesas (Hitachi) and Atmel and its 
related software written in C and assembler. Expertise in R&D  and industrial 
development- Indomatic Elite, Dam Alignment By Means Of Laser for Endesa and 
test devices (control of the electropneumatic test device for the SEAT Toledo 
dashboard manufactured by VDO). His communications libraries following the V.21, 
V22, V.22bis and X.25 standards for Electronic Funds Transfer terminals were 
deployed on a few million payment terminals around the world and his teleloading 
system allowed some hundreds of thousands of terminals to collect the transactions 
and update their software online. He also has led the development of some security 
EFT terminals following the EMV, ZKA, VISA PED and PCI PED standards. His 
programming skills include assembler, C, C++, Java, Visual Studio, .NET, Linux, Qt, 
Gtk, HTML, CSS, Javascript, PHP. 
David Montes (M), BSc in Mechanical Engineering (2011), Polytechnic University 
of Catalonia (UPC), Barcelona. Prior to joining the Production Processes group at 
IRIS as Mechanical Design Engineer, he gained wide experience in product design 
and development,  including dosing systems for the chemical industry and both 
industrial and domestic appliances for the water treatment sector. He has also held 
positions as Engineering Team Manager, applying renewable energies to industrial-
sized drinking water plants am ong other projects.  He is specialized in design for 
manufacturing and is proficient in SolidWorks, design software which has taught to 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    27 
 
several companies as a freelancer.  
Sergi Casbas (M), Computer Science Engineer by Open University of Catalonia 
and Certified Scrum Master by Scrum Alliance. He has worked as Scrum Master 
with numerous scrum teams in diverse areas (Game Developing, IT department, 
R&D) applying agile techniques adapted for each team and project. His large 
experience in programming management  tools, accountability applications, 
statistical and data collection systems on many programming languages like C, 
C++, VisualBasic, PHP, ASP, Java and .NET gets him an extended background to 
help product owners in his work. Also he have a wide knowledge o n database 
design and Database Management Systems (MySQL, Postgres and 
MSSQLServer). 
Relevant publications (up to 5):  1. López M., Martinez -Farre X., Casas O., Quilez M., Pinilla M.R., Rovira C., 
Ramos P. M., Borges B., Marques H., Silva -Girao P.   (2014). I ntelligent 
composting assisted by a wireless sensing network. Waste Management, 
34(4): p. 738–746. DOI: 10.1016/j.wasman.2013.12.019 
2. Casas O., López M., Quílez M., Martinez-Farre X., Homer G., Rovira C., Pinilla 
M.R., Ramos P.M., Borges B., Marques H., Silva- Girao P. (2014) Wireless 
sensor network for smart composting monitoring and control. Measurement, 
47(1): p. 483–495. DOI: 10.1016/j.measurement.2013.09.026  
3. Mc Nerney O., Stachowicz A., Czuprynski P., Philpott E., Kolman D., Martin D., 
Herrmann E.  (2010). Strategic guide to successful use and dissemination of 
the results of research and development projects. 1st edition, Steinbeis -Edition 
Stuttgart 2010. ISBN 978-3-941417-27-4. 
Relevant previous projects (up to 5):  1. WaterBee Smart Irrigation Systems Demonstration Action (WATER -BEE DA). 
2011-2013. Funded by the European Community. Total bu dget: 1.138.000 €, 
budget allocated: 108.800€ . Ref: FP7 (283638). 
2. Smart on-line water salinity measurement network to manage and protect rice 
fields (SMART -PADDY). 2011-2013. Funded by Research Executive Agency 
(REA). Total budget: 815.139€, budget allocated:  333.280€. Ref: FP7 
(285861).   
3. In-field wireless sensor network to predict rice blast (RICE -GUARD). 2013 -
2016. Funded by Research Executive Agency (REA). Total budget: 
1.406.924€, budget allocated: 576.560€. Ref: FP7 (606583). 
4. Novel on -line composting monitoring sys tem (COMPO -BALL). 2010 -2013. 
Funded by the European Community. Total budget: 1.952.820€, budget 
allocated: 694.132€.  Ref: FP7 (243625). 
Description of any significant 
infrastructure and/or any major items 
of technical equipment, relevant to 
the proposed work:  
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up -
to-date hardware and tools: signal generators, wide band oscilloscopes, PCB 
design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for programming 
microcontrollers, CNC-milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, 
and CAD software [SolidWorks], among others. Food and water testing and wet 
chemistry laboratory equipped with HPLC with UV-Vis detector, DSC machine, NIR-
VIS spectrophotometer, climatic chamber and  microbiological safe area among 
others.  In terms of programming and advanced ITs capabilities, IRIS has a 
specialized staff (software and  telecommunication engineers with programming 
experience) that work on the basis of the Agile methodology and philos ophy (scrum 
and kanban) for developing complex applications that include hardware interfaces, 
SQL and No-SQL databases (MySQL, PostgresDB, Couchbase among others) and 
advanced and user -friendly graphic user interfaces not only for computers (using 
Windows Presentation Foundation) but also for smartphones (Android, iOS)  or 
web-based access (HTML 5). In order to work under scrum and kanban 
methodologies, IRIS has dedicated project corners and sprint rooms in which 
programming teams can develop their duty in a creative atmosphere. 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    28 
 
 
Participant name: Arnaud Boisnard 
Participant organization name: Centre Français du Riz (CFR) 
Description of legal entity and its main 
tasks, with an explanation of how its 
profile matches the tasks in the 
proposal:  
Centre Fr ançais du Riz  (CFR) is the French technical institute created in 1985 
whose aim is to conduct research and extension work on rice. It is based in the 
heart of the French rice growing area, and is headed by a committee composed of 
farmers, rice industrials and scientists. It has close links with both upstream and 
downstream sectors: INRA, CIRAD, rice growers, rice industries, and food 
companies. It employs 8 people working on several programs: agronomy and 
environment, crop protection, breeding, grain quality. Since 2001, it registered more 
than 20 new rice varieties through its rice breeding program. In NEURICE project, 
CFR will be responsible for salinity tolerant improved rice line development and 
field trials conducted in France. Salinity tolerant varieti es are expected to be 
obtained at the end of NEURICE project for a future registration and 
commercialization to the Camargue and European farmers. CFR will also contribute 
in communication to the public, through the organization of a farmers’ field day, 
named «  Les Prémices du Riz », the annual reports to the rice farmers named 
“Bilan de Campagne”, and to the scientific community. 
CFR has more than 30 years of experience in RTD in rice agronomy and breeding. 
Curriculum vitae:  Dr A. Boisnard (M) is rice br eeder at CFR. He is responsible of the rice breeding 
program for Camargue conducted in collaboration with CIRAD. He has more than 
10 years of experience in rice quantitative genetics (molecular genotyping, QTL 
analyses, QTL fine mapping) and breeding (high -throughput phenotyping, 
conventional breeding, marker -assisted breeding). He participated to national and 
international projects, like a Genoplante project on rice partial resistance to Rice 
yellow mottle virus, a BBSRC -SARID project on Striga resistance in cereals, and 
the European project GreenRice on an alternative wetting and drying system to 
reduce greenhouse emission and water consumption during rice growing. 
Cyrille Thomas (M) is agronomist at CFR. He has more than 15 years of 
experience in rice, re sponsible of the agronomy and crop protection programs. He 
participated to national and European projects like the FranceAgriMer annual 
projects, FACCE-ERA-NET+ European project GreenRice, ADEME project Eco -C-
Réal. 
Relevant publications (up to 5):  1. Clément G., Louvel D. (2013) Rice varietal improvement for Mediterranean  
France. Cahiers Agriculture 22(5): p. 1 -7 (in French). DOI: 
10.1684/agr.2013.0647 
2. Boisnard A., Cissoko M., Rodenburg J., Press M., Scholes J. (2011) New Rice 
for Africa (NERICA) cultivars exhibit different levels of postattachment 
resistance against the parasitic weeds Striga hermonthica and Striga asiatica. 
New Phytologist 192: p. 952-963. DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2011.03846.x. 
3. Thiémélé D., Boisnard A., Ndjiondjop M.N., Chéron S., Séré Y., Aké S., 
Ghesquière A., Albar L. (2010). Identificatio n of a second major resistance 
gene to Rice yellow mottle virus, RYMV2, in the African cultivated rice species, 
O. glaberrima . Theoretical and Applied Genetics 121(1): p. 169 -179. DOI: 
10.1007/s00122-010-1300-2. 
4. Boisnard A., Albar L., Thiémélé D., Rondeau M., Ghesquière A. (2007) 
Evaluation of genes from eIF4E and eIF4G multigenic families as potential 
candidates for partial resistance QTLs to Rice yellow mottle virus in rice.  
Theoretical and Applied Genetics 116(1): p. 53 -62. DOI: 10.1007/s00122-007-
0646-6. 
5. Thomas C. (2004). Managing weeds in rice fields of Camargue (France).  
XIXth Conference of COLUMA, 8 -10 December 2 004, Dijon, France. Paris, 
AFPP (in French). 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    29 
Relevant previous projects (up to 5):  1. Sustainable and environmental friendly rice cultivation systems in Europe 
(GREENRICE). 2014 -2017. Funded by FACCE -JPI ERA Net Plus. Total 
budget: 1.447.000€, budget allocated: 38.000€. 
2. Smart on-line water salinity measurement network to manage and protect rice 
fields (SMART -PADDY). 2011-2013. Funded by Research Executive Agency 
(REA). Total budget: 815.139€, budget allocated: 13.000€. 
3. FranceAgriMer annual p rojects on various rice research and development 
activities, including salinity management in Camargue rice fields and rice 
breeding program. Budget annually allocated: 162.000€ 
Description of any significant 
infrastructure and/or any major items 
of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work:  
CFR has a station for field experiment that is located within the main rice growing 
areas of French Camargue and a breeding nursery. CFR has access to farmers’ 
field as well, particularly those with relativel y high salinity levels. CFR has the large 
and small farm equipment necessary to all field operations (soil preparation, rice 
experimental plot sowing and harvesting), to monitor soil salinity and a dedicated 
laboratories to analyze kernel quality. CFR has the necessary contacts with local 
farmers’ organizations and other stakeholders. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    30 
 
 
 
Participant name: Stefano Ravaglia  
Participant organization name: Società Italiana Sementi Spa (SIS) 
Description of legal entity and its main 
tasks, with an explanation of how its 
profile matches the tasks in the 
proposal:  
The Società Italiana Sementi Spa (SIS) was set up in 1947 with the aim of taking 
care of the multiplication of the certified seed obtained by public and private 
breeders for different species. Now t he Company is controlled by Producer’s 
Cooperatives of North, Centre and South of Italy and deals with different species 
(wheat, rice, maize, prote -oleaginous crops, forage and turf grasses). Research 
(breeding) activities mainly concentrates on wheat (com mon and durum) and rice. 
Thanks to the collaboration and exchange of genetic material with public and 
private Research Centers in Italy and abroad, SIS carries out a continuous activity 
of germplasm evaluation and comparison. On wheat and rice the R&D team  
manages directly trials in different locations (5 for rice and 7 for wheat) around Italy. 
Post-
harvest test are done in the lab to evaluate the quality of tested genotypes 
with different microtest (e.g.: milling yield evaluation, RVA analysis, yellow inde x, 
gluten index, protein content, SDS sedimentation test, electrophoresis of protein). 
The Company participate to different research projects in collaboration with public 
and private research groups. 
Curriculum vitae:  
Stefano Ravaglia (M), after 11 years of experience with Produttori Sementi Spa of 
Bologna as wheat breeder and 1 year with Danisco Seed Spa  as seed 
multiplication responsible for sugar -beet in Italy,  and from 1998 is in charge of 
Research and Development programs for wheat and rice of SIS. I n this position he 
coordinates the breeding programs for each crop above mentioned and maintains 
relations with Public Institutions, Food Industries and others Seed Companies in 
Italy and abroad. 
Giacomo Gavina (M) from 2005 is in charge of breeding and re search in rice. He 
manages lab and field activities for projects developed in collaboration with Public 
and Private institutions. 
Relevant publications (up to 5):  
1. Caffagni A., Albertazzi G., Gavina G., Ravaglia S., Gianinetti A., Pecchioni N., 
Milc J. (2 013). Characterization of an Italian rice germplasm collection with 
genetic markers useful for breeding to improve eating and cooking quality. 
Euphytica, 194(3): p. 383–399. DOI: 10.1007/s10681-013-0954-7 
2. Lagomarsino A., Agnelli A., Ferrara R.M., Adviento -Borbe M.A., Linquist B., 
Gavina G., Ravaglia S. (2012). Impact of rice varieties and irrigation 
management in GHGs emissions from a rice paddy -experimental set-up and 
preliminary results (poster). Workshop: The importance of land -atmosphere 
fluxes of methane and nitrous oxide for the global greenhouse -gas balance –  
The need for a FLUXNET -GHG. Hyytiälä, Finland 2 -7 September 2012. 
Abstract 
3. Morcia C., Rattotti E., Stanca A. M., Tumino G., Rossi V., Ravaglia S. 
Germeier, C.U., Herrmann M., Polisenska I.,Terzi V. (2013). Fusarium genetic 
traceability: role for mycotoxin control in small grain cereals agro -food chains. 
Journal of Cereal Science, 57: p. 175-182. DOI: 10.1016/j.jcs.2012.09.016 
4. Albertazzi G., Ravaglia S., Gavina G., Gianinetti A., Milc J., Caffagni A., 
Pecchioni N. (2009). Rice marker-assisted breeding for better cooking quality 
(poster). Proceedings of the 53rd Italian Society of Agricultural Genetics 
Annual Congress Torino, Italy 16-19 September 2009. Abstract 
Relevant previous projects (up to 5):  
1. Granaio Italiano. 2007-2011. MiiPAF. Total Budget: 13.747.880€ 
2. Wheat and barley legacy for Breeding Improvement (WHEALBI). 2013 -2017. 
Seventh Framework Programme. Food, Agriculture, Fisheries, and 
Biotechnology Collaborative Project. Total Budget: 4.999.996€  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    31 
Description of any significant 
infrastructure and/or any major items 
of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work:  
SIS has different experimental farms in the main rice growing area, experimental 
machineries for field activities and technicians able to manage the plot network. 
Laboratory for rice quality evaluations, greenhouses and growth-chambers. 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    32 
 
 4.2. Third parties involved in the project 
 
PARTNER 1 - UNIVERSITAT DE BARCELONA (UB) 
 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks   (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
No 
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted 
  
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties[1]  No 
  
Does the participant  envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
Yes 
Fundació Bosch i Gimpera (FBG) (Bosch i Gimpera Foundation, http://www.fbg.ub.edu) is a non -profit foundation and is 
considered a third party of Universitat de Barcelona (UB). FBG was created by UB in 1983, and is governed by a long lasting 
agreement signed between UB and FBG. According to the “Annotated General Grant Agreement” (art. 41.2), FBG is a UB third 
party that makes available some of its resources to the beneficiary for free, and falls under the specific case of “Foundatio ns, 
spin-off companies, etc., created in order to handle the administrative/financial tasks of the beneficiary” . Thus, FBG handles 
the financial and administrative aspects of the beneficiary UB involvement in research projects, including all issues relating to 
the employment and payment of additional personnel, purchase of equipment and consumables, etc. The person nel hired for 
the project by the foundation works on the premises of the beneficiary UB and under its responsibility. FBG does not carry ou t 
part of the work in the project, and no resources are allocated for FBG in the project. This will imply during the project that: 
 UB remains the beneficiary of the project and is thus responsible for the scientific and financial aspects of the project. 
 UB and FBG together complete the financial forms (Form C) needed for the management report when requested. 
FBG will prepare this Form C, which is signed by the authorised representative of the UB. 
 UB and FBG will prepare and submit Certificate on Financial Statements when applicable  following the current 
guidelines. 
 
 
PARTNER 2-CENTRE FOR RESEARCH IN AGRICULTURAL GENOMICS (CRAG) 
 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
Yes 
Activities planned in WP3 at CRAG need to subcontract tasks related to: 
i) Transcriptomic (RNASeq) plus bioinformat ic analyses will be performed to identify of salt -associated markers (e.g. 
gene markers, and signal transduction pathways for salt tolerance).   
ii) Metabolomic analysis will be performed for determination of major membrane sterols in rice lines with a known 
phenotype of salt tolerance. 
 
Overall budget: 34.000€ 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties1  
 
No third parties involved 
No 
                                                 
1  A third party that is an affiliated entity or has a legal link to a participant implying a collaboration not limited to the a ction. 
(Article 14 of the Model Grant Agreement). 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    33 
 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the foreseen tasks to 
be performed by the third party 
 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
No 
 
No third parties involved 
 
PARTNER 10-CAMARA 
 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
Yes 
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted 
 
Seedbed nursery for  field trials in WP4 have to be planted by hand at a regular distance between plants to perform the 
field trials in WP4, years 2018 and 2019. 
Standard agrochemical treatments (tractor and plane) mainly fungicides (three applications) and insecticides (one 
application) are also subcontracted to perform the field trials in WP4, years 2018 and 2019. 
Harvester machine works will be also subcontracted to carefully harvest lines individually, although seed samples will be 
harvested manually. 
Overall budget: 4.500€ 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties2  
 
No third parties involved 
 
No 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the foreseen tasks to 
be performed by the third party 
 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
No 
 
No third parties involved 
 
                                                 
2  A third party that is an affiliated entity or has a legal link to a participant implying a collaboration not limited to the action. 
(Article 14 of the Model Grant Agreement). 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    34 
Section 5: Ethics and Security
5.1 Ethics 
No ethic issue arises in the proposed project. Research will be conducted within EU-countries, namely France, Italy, United 
Kingdom and Spain and foreign countries, namely Argentina and China. All participants have been made perfectly aware of 
their counties’ legal framework and also of the terms & conditions for their participation at the Research for the Benefit of SMEs 
or H2020 Calls. None of the Ethics Issues in the Table below is relevant to the proposed project. 
 
ETHICS ISSUES TABLE 
 
Research on Human Embryo/ Foetus YES Page 
Does the proposed research involve human Embryos?     
Does the proposed research involve human Foetal Tissues/ Cells?     
Does the proposed research involve human Embryonic Stem Cells (hESCs)?     
Does the proposed research on human Embryonic Stem Cells involve cells in culture?     
Does the proposed research on Human Embryonic Stem Cells involve the derivation of cells from Embryos?     
I CONFIRM THAT NONE OF THE ABOVE ISSUES APPLY TO MY PROPOSAL X   
   
Research on Humans YES Page 
Does the proposed research involve children?     
Does the proposed research involve patients?     
Does the proposed research involve persons not able to give consent?     
Does the proposed research involve adult healthy volunteers?     
Does the proposed research involve Human genetic material?     
Does the proposed research involve Human biological samples?     
Does the proposed research involve Human data collection?     
I CONFIRM THAT NONE OF THE ABOVE ISSUES APPLY TO MY PROPOSAL X   
   
Privacy YES Page 
Does the proposed research involve processing of genetic information or personal data (e.g. health, sexual 
lifestyle, ethnicity, political opinion, religious or philosophical conviction)?     
Does the proposed research involve tracking the location or observation of people?     
I CONFIRM THAT NONE OF THE ABOVE ISSUES APPLY TO MY PROPOSAL X   
   
Research on Animals1 YES Page 
Does the proposed research involve research on animals?     
Are those animals transgenic small laboratory animals?     
Are those animals transgenic farm animals?     
Are those animals non-human primates?     
Are those animals cloned farm animals?     
I CONFIRM THAT NONE OF THE ABOVE ISSUES APPLY TO MY PROPOSAL X   
   
Research Involving non-EU Countries (ICPC Countries2) YES Page 
Is any material used in the research (e.g. personal data, animal and/or human tissue samples, genetic material, 
live animals, etc) :     
a) Collected and processed in any of the ICPC countries?     
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
NEURICE    35 
b) Exported to any other country (including ICPC and EU Member States)?     
I CONFIRM THAT NONE OF THE ABOVE ISSUES APPLY TO MY PROPOSAL X   
   
Dual Use3 YES Page 
Research having direct military use     
Research having the potential for terrorist abuse     
I CONFIRM THAT NONE OF THE ABOVE ISSUES APPLY TO MY PROPOSAL X   
 
1 The type of animals involved in the research that fall under the scope of the Commission’s Ethical Scrutiny procedures are defined in the 
Council Directive 86/609/EEC of 24 November 1986 on the approximation of laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member 
States regarding the protection of animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes Official Journal L 358 , 18/12/1986 p. 0001 –  
0028  
2 In accordance with Article 12(1) of the Rules for Participation in FP7, ‘International Cooperation Partner Country (ICPC) means 
a third country which the Commission classifies as a low-income (L), lower-middle- income (LM) or upper-middle-income (UM) 
country. Countries associated to the Seventh EC Framework Programme do not qualify as ICP Countries and therefore do not 
appear in this list.  
3 Dual-use items’ means items, including software and technology, which can be used for both civil and  
military purposes (Ref: Article 3, Council Regulation (EC) No 428/2009 of 5 May 2009 setting up a Community regime for the 
control of exports, transfer, brokering and transit of dual-use items
5.2 Security3 
Security   
Activities or results raising security issues: NO 
‘EU-classified information’ as background or results NO 
 
 
 
                                                 
3  Article 37.1 of Model Grant Agreement.  Before disclosing results of activities raising security issues to  a third party 
(including affiliated entities), a beneficiary must inform the coordinator —  which must request written approval from 
the Commission/Agency; Article 37. Activities related to ‘classified deliverables’  must comply with the ‘ security 
requirements’ until they are declassified; Action tasks related to classified deliverables may not be subcontracted 
without prior expl icit written approval from the Commission /Agency.; The beneficiaries must inform the coordinator 
— which must imm ediately inform the Commission/Agency — of any changes in the security context and —  if 
necessary —request for Annex 1 to be amended (see Article 55) 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
AgrupaciódeDefensaVegetal
del'arrósialtrescultiusal
Deltadel'Ebre
IFG43657493
Apt.Correus,86
Ctra.deBaladaKm. I
43870Amposta
tlf.977704068 Amposta, 22th ofMay, 2015
Attention:
European Commission
Horizon 2020 - the
Framework Programme for
research and Innovation
(2014-2020)
Subject: LetterofIntentforthe NEURICE Project Proposal
The "ADV de l'arrós i altres cultiusal Delta de l'Ebre"has been informed about the contents
and the actions proposed by the proposed NEURICE project proposal, corresponding to the call
ofSustainable Food Securityand the sub-call ofH2020-SFS-2014-2015 and topic Strategiesfor
crop productivity,stabilityand qualitySFS-05-2015,_witha closure date ofri"June 2015. We
would liketo express our highest appreciation ofthe project approach and targeted objectives.
"ADV de l'arrósialtrescultiusal Delta de l'Ebre"hereby expresses the intentto give support to
the NEURICE project. At "ADV de l'arrosi altres cultiusal Delta de l'Ebre",we agree on the
significance ofthe problems that are addressed by the NEURICE project.We also see the need
to improve soilorganic matter as a major priorityforthe European arable and horticulture
sector.
Therefore, we have a serious interestin the approach of the NEURICE thematic network to
improving identification,prediction and introduction of usefulgenetic variation in crops ..We
believe this project, ifsuccessful, willindeed help to bring farmers, industry and researchers
together to improve while seeking fornovel breeding targets to improve yield,yieldstability,
quality,biotic/abioticstressresistance/tolerance and environmental benefits.
"ADV de l'arros i altres cultius al Delta de l'Ebre'"score business isin rice pest management
and taking care ofthe rice crops issues.
"ADV de l'arros i altres cultius al Delta de l'Ebre"has a strong track record in rice crops by
improving itsproductivityas well as improving efficiencyin management fields
"ADV de l'arrosialtrescultiusal Delta de l'Ebre"istherefore interested inthe NEURICE project
and would envisage being involved in helping the project by:
Participating to provide feedback and advice on salinitysoiltrials
Participating inthe proposed dissemination activities.
Sincerely,
11IDElAgrupaciódeDefensaVegetaldeI'arrós
Ia1trescultiusalDeltade¡'Ebre
NIFG43657493
JordiMarcel Matamoros,
"ADV de l'arrosialtrescultiusal Delta de l'Ebre"'sPresident
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
COMUNITAT GENERAL DE REGANTS:
DELCANAL DELA DRETA DEL'EBRE
NIFQ-4367035-E
AENOR
9G~-Ambiental
GA-ZeoSifl.07 ISO 14001
-
ComunitatGeneralRegants
CanalDretadel'Ebre
2 1 MAIG2015
S~~'~A -jENTRADA
- ---,:;;;;..
Amposta May 20,2015
Attention: European Commission
Horizon2020 - the Framework
Programme forresearch and Innovation
(2014-2020)
Subject:LetterofIntentforthe NEURICE Project Proposal
The Comunidad General de Regantes del Canal de la Derecha del Ebro has been informed about the
contents and the actions proposed by the proposed NEURICE project proposal, corresponding to the
call ofSustainableFood Securityand the sub-call of H2020-SFS-2014-2015 and topic Strategies
forcropproductivity,stabilityand qualitySFS-05-2015,_witha closure date of11th June 2015. We
would like to express our highest appreciation of the project approach and targeted objectives.
Comunidad General de Regantes hereby expresses the intentto give support to the NEURICE
project.At Comunidad General de Regantes, we agree on the significance ofthe problems that are
addressed by the NEURICE project.We also see the need to improve soilorganic matter as a majar
priorityforthe European arable and horticulturesector.
Therefore,we have a serious interestinthe approach ofthe NEURICE thematic network to improving
identification,predictionand introductionofusefulgenetic variationincrops. We believe thisproject,if
successful, willindeed help to bring farmers, industryand researchers together to inprove while
seeking for novel breeding targets to improve yield,yield stability,quality,biotic/abioticstress
resistanceltolerance and environmental benefits.
Comunidad General de Regantes del Canal de la Derecha del Ebro is a non profitorganization
responsible forthe collection and distributionof water from the riverEbro to their almost 5.000
members irrigatorswho form part ofthe righthemidelta ofthe Ebro,as wellas ponds, bay and natural
areas ofthe Delta.A 90% ofitsland isoccupied by rice fields,reason forwhy isso important the rice
growing inour organization.
Also,as founder ofDeltamed, we are aware ofthe common problem problems faced by wetlands and
particularlythe deltas,such as the salinityinfields.
Comunidad General de Regantes isthereforeinterestedinthe NEURICE projectand would envisage
being involvedin helping the projectby:
Participatingto providefeedback and advice on salinitysoiltrials
Participating inthe proposed dissemination activities
Manuel Masiá Marsá
President,Comunidad General de Regantes del Canal de la Derecha del Ebro.
Passeig Canal,43-49·43870 AMPOSTA· Te19777004 51 ·9777000 81 .Fax 9777045 23· admin@comunitatregants,org
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
Amposta May 20,2015
Attention: European Commission
Horizon2020 - the Framework
Programme forresearch and Innovation
(2014-2020)
Subject:LetterofIntentforthe NEURICE Project Proposal
The DELTAMED has been informed about the contents and the actions proposed by the proposed
NEURICE project proposal, corresponding to the call ofSustainable Food Security and the sub-call
ofH2020-SFS-2014-2015 and topic Strategies for crop productivity,stabilityand qualitySFS-05-
2015,_with a closure date of11th June 2015. We would liketo express our highest appreciation ofthe
projectapproach and targeted objectives DELTAMED hereby expresses the intentto give supportto
the NEURICE project. At DELTAMED, we agree on the significance of the problems that are
addressed by the NEURICE project.We also see the need to improve soilorganic matter as a major
priorityforthe European arable and horticulturesector.
Therefore,we have a serious interestinthe approach ofthe NEURICE thematic network to improving
identification,predictionand introductionofusefulgenetic variation incrops. We believe thisproject,if
successful, willindeed help to bring farmers, industryand researchers together to inprove while
seeking for novel breeding targets to improve yield,yield stability,quality,biotic/abioticstress
resistance/tolerance and environmental benefits.
DELTAMED core business isinthe objectives ofthe Association are to constitutea permanent forum
in order to analyse, discuss and deal with the specific problems of a natural, water, coastal,
environmental, economic production and social nature concerning the Mediterranean deltas,
particularlywith a view to achieving sustainable development inthese deltas.Inaddition,itsoperations
can be extended to dealing with the problems involvingthe Coastal Wetlands ofthe Mediterranean
area where there are similar issues tothose which concern the deltas.
DELTAMED is thereforeinterestedin the NEURICE project and would envisage being involved in
helpingthe projectby:
Participatingto providefeedback and advice on salinitysoiltrials
Participatinginthe proposed dissemination activities
DELTAMED PRESIDENT.
GENERAL PURPOSE INFORMATION ABOUT THE SIGNINGENTITY
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
PROD~?
Amposta, 19 May 2015
Attention: European Commission
Horizon 2020 - the Framework Programme
forresearch and Innovation (2014-2020)
Subject:LetterofIntentforthe NEURICE Project Proposal
The Prodelta has been informed about the contents and the actions proposed by the proposed NEURICE
project proposal, corresponding to the cal! ofSustainable Faad Securityand the sub-cal! ofH2020-SFS-2014-
2015 and topic Strategiesfor crop productivity,stabi/ityand qualitySFS-05-2015,_with a closure date ofu"
June 2015. We would like to express our highest appreciation ofthe project approach and targeted objectives.
Prodelta hereby expresses the intent to give support to the NEURICE project. At Prodelta, we 'agree on the
significance ofthe problems that are addressed by the NEURICE project.We also see the need to improve soil
organic matter as a major priorityforthe European arable and horticulturesector.
Therefore, we have a serious interest in the approach of the NEURICE thematic network to improving
identification,prediction and introduction of usefulgenetic variation in crops. We believe this project, if
successful,wil! indeed help to bring farmers, industryand researchers together to improve while seeking for
novel breeding targets to improve yield,yield stability,quality,biotic/abiotic stressresistance/tolerance and
environmental benefits.
Prodelta's core business is in representing the rice cooperatives "Camara Arrossera del Montisá"and
"Arrossairesdel Delta de l'Ebre",the irrigationcommunities "Comunitat General de Regants del Canal de la
dreta de l'Ebre"and "Comunitat de Regants - Sindicat Agrícola de l'Ebre",and the association or rice farmers
"Agrupació de Defensa Vegetal de l'arrósialtrescultiusdel Delta de l'Ebre".
Prodelta istherefore interested in the NEURICE project and would envisage being involved in helping the
projectby:
Participatingto provide feedback and advice on salinitysoiltrials
Participating inthe proposed dissemination activities
Sincerely,
Francisco Casanova Santamaria
(President)
1-\550IdClO d Fr e,J ., r, b ! t 'e • 1 (
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
LETTER OF SUPPORT (Associated Stakeholder) for the NEURICE project
"New commercial EUropean RICE (Oryza sativa) harbouring salt tolerance alleles
to protect the rice sector against climate change and apple snail (Pomacea
insularum) invasion"
Name of the organization Syndicut des Riziculteurs de Frunce et Filière
Having its registered address at Mas du Sonnailler, no80, VCl08 de Gimeaux,
13200 Arles, France
26/Os/201s
The organization Syndicot des Riziculteurs de France et Filière represented by its
President Bertrand MAZEL declares its interest in NEURICE project and wish to be
involved in the project as Associated Stakeholder, if the proposal is accepted for
funding by the European Commission.
The status Associated Stakeholder implies being regularly informed about the progress
of project, the practical results and planned activities. Our personnel will be
preferentially invited to the end-user conferences with reduced registration fee.
As Associated Stakeholder, the organization Syndicot des Riziculteurs de Fronce et
Filière will assist especially in the dissemination of the project results and the transfer
of knowledge generated within the NEURICE project, when this knowledge and results
are of potential interest to our associates or members.
Please find attached a brief description of our institution.
The organization will also undertake a protective approach and keep all information
confidential that pertains to the structure as well as the technical content of the
proposal set-up. lt will only disclose said information to third parties upon the
coord inator's approval.
Signed in Arles, 26/05/201,5
Organisation name: Syndicat des Riziculteurs de France et Filière
Representative name: Bertrand MAZEL
Position: President
Signature: Syndicat des Riziculteurs
de France et Filière
Mas du Sonnriller, n'80. VC tOB de Gimcaur- t3200Arles
www.rhdacamargue.com - lvr,Nw.rizù.tv - srfi@vanadoo.fr
Tô1, +13 16;1 99 4t 82 00. Fax +33 (0)t 90 93 74 Bl
rhrt 41,{ t{t O0g 000 1E
The Syndicat des Riziculteurs de France et Filière priority defends the interests of the
entire French rice sector and take decisions about its future. lt also manages and
promotes, as an Organisation for the Defence and Management (ODG in French) of the
rice of Camargue, the Protected geographical indication (PGl).
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OGGETTO: 
 
 
Via dell’Industria n. 33,  40138 Bologna  –  Tel 051.503881 - Fax 051.355166  –  C.F. 80119770586  –  info@sementi.it 
Bologna, 
 
Prot. n° 
 
Risposta  a: 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
ASSOSEMENTI, on behalf of its member companies active in the sector of plant variety 
research and seed production,  expresses its deepest interest in the research project 
NEURICE (New commercial EUropean RICE (Oryza sativa) harbouring salt tolerance 
alleles to protect the rice sector against climate change and apple snail (Pomacea insu-
larum) invasion) (program Horizon2020 SFS-05-2015, topic: Strategies for crop produc-
tivity, stability and quality). 
In case the proposal is accepted for funding by the European Commission, 
ASSOSEMENTI:  
 will fully support the research project “NEURICE”, that could result in improving 
the tolerances of new rice varieties to salt and climate changes;  
 is available in particular for the dissemination activities and to actively contribute 
to extend the research results among Italian seed companies and plant breeders for 
a further implementation.  
Yours sincerely. 
 
 
 
TO WHOM 
IT MAY CONCERN    1st June 2015 
 
   519  / MN.ec 
       --- 
  LETTER  OF  SUPPORT  FOR  THE  NEURICE PROJECT  
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
Consorzio di Tutela della IGP Riso Nano Vialone Veronese 
Sede legale ed amministrativa: 37063 Isola della Scala, via Vittorio Veneto 4 (VR) 
Iscritto al Registro delle Imprese di Verona n. 04030700233 
Codice Fiscale e Partita i.v.a. n. 04030700233 
Telef. 3381446712  fax 0457302596  
www.risovialonenanoveronese.it  –  risoveronese.igp@gmail.com  
CONSORZIO DI TUTELA DELLA IGP 
RISO NANO VIALONE VERONESE  
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________  
LETTER OF SUPPORT (Associated Stakeholder) for the NEURICE project 
“Consorzio di tutela della Igp del riso Nano Vialone Veronese.” 
 
Name of the organization: Consorzio di tutela della Igp del riso Nano Vialone Veronese 
Having its registered address at:  37063 Isola della Scala, via Vittorio Veneto 4 (VR) 
  
29/05/2015 
 
The organization “Consorzio di tutela della Igp del  riso Nano Vialone Veronese ” represented 
by “Filippo Sussi” declares its interest in NEURICE  (New commercial EUropean RICE (Oryza 
sativa) harbouring salt tolerance alleles to protec t the rice sector against climate change and 
apple snail ( Pomacea insularum ) invasion) project and wish to be involved in the project as 
Associated Stakeholder, if the proposal is accepted for funding by the European Commission. 
 
The status Associated Stakeholder implies being reg ularly informed about the progress of 
project, the practical results and planned activiti es. Our personnel will be preferentially 
invited to the end-user conferences with reduced registration fee. 
 
As Associated Stakeholder, “Consorzio di tutela del la Igp del riso Nano Vialone Veronese” 
will assist especially in the dissemination of the project results and the transfer of knowledge 
generated within the NEURICE project, when this kno wledge and results are of potential 
interest to our associates or members. 
Please find attached a brief description of our institution. 
 
The organization will also undertake a protective a pproach and keep all information 
confidential that pertains to the structure as well  as the technical content of the proposal 
set-up. It will only disclose said information to third parties upon the coordinator’s approval. 
 
Signed in Verona, date 29-05-15 
Organisation name: Consorzio di tutela della Igp del riso Nano Vialone Veronese 
Representative name: Filippo Sussi 
Position: President 
Signature: 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________                     
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
______________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
APARROZ – AGRUPAMENTO DE PRODUTORES DE ARROZ DO VALE DO SADO, LDA. 
         Rua do Arroz nº 1                                                               Tel.: 265 619180  
7580 - 161 Alcácer do Sal                                                             Fax. 265 619181 
                             NIPC:504 056 301                                                        E.mail: aparroz@mail.telepac.pt  
 
                                                                                  Alcácer do Sal, 4th of June of 2015  
 
 
 
 
 
To Whom It May Concern 
 
 
 
APARROZ – Agrupamento de Produtores de Arroz do Vale do Sado, Portugal  expresses 
its deepest interest in the research project NEURICE (New commercial European RICE 
(Oryza sativa) harbouring salt tolerance alleles to protect the rice sector against climate 
change and apple snail ( Pomacea insularum ) invasion) (program  Horizon2020 Call 
“SUSTAINABLE FOOD SECURITY”), to be pursued in cooperation with UB (Spain), CRAG 
(Spain), CIRAD (France), CRA (Italy), UMIL (Italy), UGLA (Scotland), IRTA (Spain), 
INDEAR (Argentina), CAMARA (Spain), IRIS (Spain), CFR (France), CAAS (China), SIS 
(Italy) and its eagerness to be a non-academic Associated Partner of the project. 
The NEURICE framework may constitute a mission-critical part of APARROZ and its 
collection history. Participation in its support and development is therefore of strategic 
importance to us. 
We, at the APARROZ, commit ourselves to support the researchers involved in the 
project, granting all the needed facilities and accessibility to support the NEURICE project 
when deemed convenient by all parties.  The APARROZ is also most willing to facilitate 
and promote the dissemination and knowledge exchange connected to the project. 
APARROZ is keenly interested in the issues addressed by this Project and looks forward 
to its success as an excellent opportunity to enhance the cooperation between the 
institutions concerned. 
    
Your´s sincerely, 
    APARROZ – AGRUPAMENTO DE PRODUTORES 
DE ARROZ DO VALE DO SADO, LDA                  
Pelo Conselho de Gerência 
 
   
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
Thessaloniki , 5-6-2014
To Whom It May Concern
The Institute of Plant Breeding and Genetic Resources (IPB&GR) of the Hellenic
Agricultural Organization – Demeter (Greece) expresses its deepest interest in the
research project NEURICE (New commercial European RICE ( Oryza sativa )
harbouring salt tolerance alleles to protect the rice sector against climate change and
apple snail ( Pomacea insularum ) invasion) (program Horizon2020 Call
“SUSTAINABLE FOOD SECURITY” ), to be pursued in cooperation with UB
(Spain), CRAG (Spain), CIRAD (France), CRA (Italy), UMIL (Italy), UGLA
(Scotland), IRTA (Spain), INDEAR (Argentina), CAMARA (Spain), IRIS (Spain),
CFR (France), CAAS (China), SIS (Italy) and its eagerness to be a non-academic
Associated Partner of the project.
The NEURICE framework may constitute a mission-critical part of IPB&GR and its
collection history. Participation in its support and development is therefore of strategic
importance to us.
We, at the IPB&GR , commit ourselves to support the researchers involved in
the project, granting all the needed facilities and accessibility to support the
NEURICE project when deemed convenient by all parties. The IPB&GR is also
most willing to facilitate and promote the dissemination and knowledge exchange
connected to the project.
IPB&GR is keenly interested in the issues addressed by this Project and looks
forward to its success as an excellent opportunity to enhance the cooperation
between the institutions concerned.
Yours sincerely,
Dr. Eleni Maloupa
D
i
r
e
c
t
o
r
_..-..........
.,. • ...
This proposal version was submitted by salvador NOGUES on 11/06/2015 15:44:52 CET. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public-private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Participant Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integrity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can be verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Participant Portal. 
(http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/portal/page/faq)