3.2 Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole #@CON-SOR-CS@# #@PRJ-MGT-PM@#

NEXTSTEEL brings together a world-class team to drive the transition to carbon-neutral steelmaking through system-level R&D that tackles material and process challenges while ensuring efficiency, sustainability, and high product quality. The 14-partner NEXTSTEEL consortium integrates complementary expertise across the research-industry value chain (refer to fig. 1): leading steelmakers (CELSA, ERAMET, AMMR), machinery (HAE), Industry 4.0 tech providers (IRIS), technical facilitators & process experts (BRITEST), as well as business experts (ICP) ensure market-oriented innovation and scale-up. Research excellence is provided by universities and institutes (REC, POLITO, CEA, TEC, SINTEF), who are committed to both Open Science and industrial exploitation. UNE contributes standards alignment, and WIP supports communication, dissemination, and IP-Open Science balance. The consortium also demonstrates strong gender equity, with 11 partners having Gender Equality Plans and active participation of women across all roles. Together the consortium brings the expertise needed to design, validate, and scale integrated solutions while ensuring lasting impact. Partners comes from 6 EU Member States (Italy, France, Spain, Germany, Ireland) and 2 Associated Countries (UK, Norway). ERAMET has a global footprint (& also involves its French R&D unit, ERAMET IDEAS).
Our Project Coordinator, Andrea Salimbeni, Head of Unit of “Raw materials & carbon recycling” REC, senior R&D engineer, is expert in thermochemical processes for the valorisation of waste streams for biofuels and biomaterials production. He possesses the knowledge, experience and skills to lead and ensure the seamless cooperation, Scientific and Technical decision-making process  and transfer of strategic information across teams, to ensure a high quality and innovative outcome. He is an excellent communicator, analytical thinker & problem solver and is effective in team mobilisation. He is inventor of two patents and author of 12 peer-reviewed articles focused on the NEXTSTEEL concept. Overall, REC, with its experienced research teams & excellent research infrastructure, will lead the consortium, tackling the S&T challenges, and uniting their expertise, patents, coordination of EU projects & cutting-edge facilities.
The table below outlines each partner’s core expertise, role, and key infrastructure contributions.
Table 11- Core Expertise, Equipment/Critical Infrastructure and Role of each partner in the project
At a total budget of under €13.9 M, this is a carefully co-designed plan that ensures value for money and supports delivery of project objectives. Personnel costs are based on actual staff rates (researchers, engineers, developers) and realistic person-months, reflecting sector norms and regional cost differences. Equipment costs cover depreciation only, and travel budgets allow essential mobility for knowledge exchange, onsite testing, collaboration, complemented by extensive virtual engagement to ensure resilience and carbon responsibility. Only limited subcontracting is required, as the team possesses the necessary expertise and infrastructure. Goods and services include lab consumables, prototyping materials, OA publishing, patenting, and dissemination activities (Table 3.1h).

Other countries and international organisations: Not applicable

Participant No. * | Participant organisation name | Short name | Coun
try | Type | Core role/expertise
1
Coordinator | Renewable Energy Consortium for Research and Demonstration | REC | IT | RTO | Design & construction 250 kg/h continuous fast HTT unit, Experimental campaign on HTT pilot, Leaching of hydrochar & inorganics recovery, pyrolysis of leached hydrochar, Pilot scale pyrolysis for bioanthracite production
2 | IRIS Technology Solutions | IRIS | ES | SME | Industry 4.0 Digitalisation. Process Analytical Technologies, Quality by Design, Holonics Agent Based Modelling Digital Twin
3 | Commissariat à l'énergie atomique et aux énergies Alternatives | CEA | FR | RTO | Lab scale Fast-HTT experiments & Supercritical Water Gasification (SCWG) of HTT water phase. Pilot tests on continuous catalytic SCWG
4 | Politecnico di Torino | POLI | IT | RTO | Bioenergy & Bioeconomy System Modelling, process energy integration in steelmaking Energy balance, LCA, carbon balance assessment
5a | ERAMET Norway AS | ERA | NO | LE | Si-Manganese alloy (SiMn) production tests. Production of Fe-rich slag for methane catalytic pyrolysis and carbon deposition
5b | ERAMET Ideas | IDE | FR | LE | Si-Manganese alloy (SiMn) production tests. Production of Fe-rich slag for methane catalytic pyrolysis and carbon deposition
6 | ArcelorMittal Maizieres Research SA | AMMR | FR | LE | Viability assessment of process products (biocarbon & process gases) application in different steelmaking processes at pilot scale. Development of alternative processes for biochar integration in ironmaking
7 | Fundación TECNALIA Research & Innovation | TEC | ES | RTO | Lab scale Iron ore reduction tests, products quality assessment, bioanthracite agglomeration, steelmaking process assessment
8 | Wirtschaft und Infrastruktur GmbH & Co Planungs -KG | WIP | DE | SME | Dissemination and communication strategy. IP and Exploitation Strategy
9 | Asociación Española de Normalización | UNE | ES | Other | Standardization activities to facilitate market uptake
10 | Inlecom Commercial Pathways | ICP | IE | SME | IPR Management, Business Case and Exploitation Development
11 | CELSA OPCO, S.A. | CELSA | ES | LE | Producer of low-emission circular steel
12 | SINTEF AS | SIN | NO | RTO | SiMn pilot scale production test with bioanthracite and with C-enriched slag
13 | BRITEST | BRI | UK | SME | Industry 5.0: industry cocreation, skills development, ESG, plant design requirements
14 | HÄNDLE GmbH | HAE | DE | SME | Bioanthracite compactation by testing different binders
1. To develop the optimal NextSteel process for bioanthracite production bench scale (TRL4)
Biowastes for bioanthracite production for metallurgy industry are selected from among sludge, urban waste and agrifood waste. The optimal HT conditions for biowaste pretreatment are identified to maximize the carbon recovery. Moreover, chemical leaching and pyrolysis in presence of additives are also tested in small pilot units (TRL4), so that to maximize the extraction of inorganic nutrients and obtain a low ash bioanthracite from the solid. From each selected biowaste, >200 g bioanthracite will be produced at and work will be performed to maximize the carbon recovery rate as biogenic reducing agents (bioanthracite, gas). The work will, in combination with tests on liquid phase, culminate in the optimal process configuration being determined, and the selection of 4 biowastes (or mixtures) for the pilot scale tests by M24. KPIs: HTyields > carbon yield into hydrochar Carbon content of produced bioanthracite samples > % d.b; Ash content of produced bioanthracite samples 20%; Extraction of >9% phosphorous by leaching of hydrochar
To develop and determine the optimal NextSteel process for green gas production bench scale (TRL4)
The optimal conditions to convert the biogenic organic carbon from the liquid by AD and SCWG are tested. Particularly, the aqueous phase from HTT is processed to maximize the production of a green gaseous reducing agent. The AD tests will be performed in 500 ml glass stirred reactors by REC, while catalytic SCWG will be performed in continuous mode by CEA with an innovative catalyst. Validation of hydrogen production at pilot scale with new catalyst for SCWG and limitation of conversion temperature. The organic carbon conversion rate is determined for both AD and SCWG tests. Moreover, gas composition will be determined to assess the applicability as reducing agent in multiple routes, including DRI, EAF and BF-BOF processes. KPIs
To test the combined production of green hydrogen and carbon by methane cracking (TRL 4)
The green gas produced processing the HTT liquid by means of anaerobic digestion and SCWG, after CO2 separation, consist of CH4 (From AD) and a mix CH4/H2 (from SCWG). As for fossil methane, catalytic pyrolysis represents a promising process to obtain pure hydrogen, usable to decarbonize the direct reduction of Iron. The objective is to use bioanthracite and SiMn slag as catalyst in a 900°C methane pyrolysis reactor, to maximize the methane cracking and fully valorise the spent catalyst a C-enriched bioanthracite from both the steelmaking and SiMn production processes.  Tests are performed by RE-CORD in a quartz furnace. KPI: >70% methane conversion into hydrogen; >5% C on dry basis deposited on SiMn slag after cracking
To scale up the integrated process and to perform experiments in real environment (TRL4-6)
A continuous fast-HTT prototype of > 250 kg/h capacity will be constructed, and the process will be validated in a real environment for minimum 120 hours. The performance of SCWG for turning the HTT aqueous phase into green gas will be assessed in a pilot scale unit, upscaled to TRL6 by using new design catalytic reactor, coupling with salt separation and long test runs with real HTT aqueous phase. AD tests will be also performed in a 1 m3 anaerobic digester. Leaching trials (>20 tests) will be performed on produced hydrochar as an input to pyrolysis in pilot plants of up to 50 kg/h capacity. The optimised conditions for upgrading hydrochar by chemical leaching at pilot scale will be determined. Final pyrolysis step and production runs of bioanthracite will be performed in a real scale plant installed in a steelmaking site of >80 kg/h and furtherly 300 kg/h capacity for large tests execution. KPIs: Fast-HTT prototype with a capacity of >250 kg/h of wet biowaste; >6000kg of bioanthracite produced; Long run test with upgraded 10 lt/h SCWG unit; Producing >100 Nm3 of hydrogen by processing methane into the 2 Nm3/h pilot methane catalytic pyrolysis unit (MCP)
To test and validate the use of the bioanthracite and H2-rich gas produced from different waste streams as reducing agents in metallurgical processes (TRL 5-6)
The mixtures will be optimised with the goal of being able to optimize the gas quality and to use the maximum amount of bioanthracite in substitution of coal. The impact of iron ore properties and bioanthracite composition on the reduction kinetics of iron ore at high temperatures will be assessed. Moreover, the applicability of SCWG as reducing agent in DRI and Blast furnaces will be assessed by pilot tests with reproduced gas mixture in bench furnaces. In addition, the bioanthracite performance in both steel and SiMn EAF will be assessed regarding slag foaming, metal carburization and environmental impact. KPIs: 5 reduction tests with gas with composition of produced SCWG gas.
To assess the NEXTSTEEL concept in terms of green H2 and C integration in steelmaking, as well as its environmental, economic, and social benefits (TRL5-6)
Lifecycle assessment (LCA) of the full-scale multipurpose biorefinery will be performed covering the whole life cycle of the proposed value-chains (starting with the main feedstocks and ending with possible uses of the products). A Techno-Economic Assessment (TEA) of the integrated concept and an analysis of the profitability of the biorefinery plant under the various scenarios will be performed (and this will inform the Business Cases). Recommendations for meeting EU decarbonisation goals will be formulated for dissemination to policy makers. A social impact assessment will be carried out, and the potential barriers to the acceptance of the new technology will be identified. KPIs: GHG emission reduction: target >60% compared to baseline using coke/coal and gas-based processes; Estimated payback period of <6 years for integrated plant under defined scenarios; 1x whitepaper on recommendations for meeting EU steelmaking decarbonisation goals. 1 x social impact assessment report. Green hydrogen competitive price of < 2.5 €/kgH2 by methane catalytic cracking.
To develop and deploy HoloSteel, a modular digital intelligence layer that enables adaptive control, quality assurance, and operational resilience in low-CO₂ steelmaking by integrating Process Analytical Technologies (PAT), Quality by Design (QbD), and holonic AI-based agent system within a digital twin framework.
This objective will deliver HoloSteel, a modular digital intelligence layer that combines QbD, PAT, and a holonic AI-based multi agent system (MAS) digital twin to enable adaptive control and decision support in low-CO₂ steelmaking. QbD-informed process maps will define linkages between input variability (e.g. ash content, SiO₂, fixed carbon in bioanthracite) and critical product attributes (e.g. slag chemistry, steel mechanical strength). A robust suite of PAT sensors (e.g. optical, spectroscopic, and thermal systems) engineered for high temperature environments will provide data across key process stages. These feed into a decentralised digital twin structured around functional ‘holons’ (e.g. reduction, melting, slag, off-gas, energy) that form the agent-based simulation and decision engine. The system will be validated in a pilot steelmaking environment, providing real-time insights, scenario modelling, and predictive control tools, and operator-oriented dashboards to extend the operational window of the novel process routes. It will support process stability, quality assurance, and real-time operator guidance under fluctuating biogenic input conditions. KPIs:
To ensure the human, organisational and strategic investment readiness of the steel industry for low-CO₂ transition by co-developing new operational roles, skills frameworks, and business case decision tools that empower both technical staff and business leaders to manage process variability, adopt digital solutions, and support long-term investment in sustainable steelmaking pathways.
A human-centric transition framework for low-CO₂ steelmaking will be developed that includes: (1) co-created operational role profiles and workflows adapted to digitalised, low-carbon steel plants; (2) targeted training programmes for operators and business decision-makers; (3) a skills roadmap aligned with Industry 5.0 principles; and (4) an evidence-based business case framework co-developed with industrial stakeholders, to prioritise viable decarbonised process routes and support investment-readiness by integrating techno-economic, operational, market, and risk insights. KPIs:
To implement a proactive IPR management strategy that safeguards project innovations, facilitates their exploitation by partners, and maximises the long-term impact of NextSteel by enabling technology transfer, licensing opportunities, and industrial uptake beyond the project duration.
NextSteel aims to generate IP assets as a key impact KPI from our R&D work. As such, an IPR strategy and management plan will be further developed building from the approach defined in this proposal. A Freedom-to-Operate (FTO) analysis will be performed for key innovations. Joint ownership and licensing agreements will be drawn up (where applicable). An Exploitation roadmap linked to protected results will also be created. KPIs:  key exploitable results identified and assessed;
To maximise the visibility, uptake, and long-term impact of NextSteel results through a proactive strategy for communication, dissemination, standardisation, and ecosystem engagement.
This strategy will include: Targeted outreach to stakeholders across the steel value chain; Cross-project clustering under the Clean Steel Partnership and the HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-TWIN-TRANSITION-37 topic (and DIGITAL-61); Participation in joint events, consultations and shared activities on cross-cutting issues; Contribution to standardisation efforts where appropriate, to support future interoperability, certification, and industrial scaling of NextSteel innovations. KPIs:
To ensure the effective, transparent, and value-driven delivery of the NextSteel project through robust governance, strategic risk management, and proactive coordination across all technical, industrial, and societal components.
The objective includes maintaining scientific excellence, aligning cross-sectoral contributions, enabling agile decision-making, and coordinating synergies with other EU initiatives to ensure strategic clustering and ecosystem engagement (linked to Objective 12). A central focus is managing interdisciplinarity across a diverse consortium, fostering integration between scientific, industrial, and digital disciplines. The management approach will support coherence across work packages, ensure structured collaboration, and create dynamic interfaces for knowledge exchange and shared decision-making. It will enable adaptive planning, risk mitigation, and strategic alignment of the project’s components to deliver high-impact results at scale. KPIs:
Technology | Start | End | Activities to advance TRL
Fast hydrothermal pretreatment | TRL4 | TRL6 | Construction of pilot continuous plant
Chemical leaching + precipitation | TRL5 | TRL6 | Upgrade and test multi-batch demo scale leaching & precipitation plant at RE-CORD
Slow pyrolysis with additive + chemical leaching | TRL4 | TRL6 | Upgrade a continuous pilot plant for higher T, with alkali dosage system
Slow pyrolysis of hydrochar | TRL5 | TRL6 | Construction of a new high-T pyrolysis unit for bioanthracite production
Supercritical water gasification of wet biogenic streams | TRL4 | TRL6 | Upgrade existing pilot SCWG unit with new pumping system and a continuous separator of inorganic precipitates
Methane catalytic pyrolysis with biobased catalyst | TRL4 | TRL6 | Upgrade existing pilot with continuous feeding and discharging & gas recycling
In summary: The integrated NEXSTEEL process converts the biowaste streams (sewage sludge, industrial sludge, digestate, vinasse) into two high value biogenic reducing agents to replace coke in the steel and non-ferrous alloys production sector: 1) Bio-anthracite with a carbon content between 70 to 90% and a low volatile content; 2) a biobased gas rich in hydrogen (H2) & methane (CH4). Three additional by-products are obtained: Inorganic P-rich fertiliser for use as a component material in the fertilizer sector; Al and Fe for reuse in the concrete sector or for chemical production (Iron or Aluminium chloride).
Challenges | How they will be overcome
Carbon & resource losses in material pretreatment/
upgrading | Process optimisation strategies, including temperature control and selective leaching, will be applied to maximise carbon retention and recovery of valuable inorganics.
Catalyst degradation and salt interference in aqueous phase valorisation | The supercritical gasification route will incorporate mitigation techniques, such as salt separation and robust catalyst design in order to ensure process stability and hydrogen yield.
Process sensitivity to variability in biobased reductants and green hydrogen | Quality thresholds and process tuning strategies are introduced to accommodate heterogeneity in input materials, ensuring stable metallurgical performance. The HoloSteel layer will also contribute to adjusting process conditions based on the monitoring of the critical quality attributes during processing.
Maintaining sensor and analyser reliability under harsh conditions | A modular, high-temperature-compatible monitoring infrastructure is developed to enable real-time visibility in extreme process environments (via rugged enclosures, probing systems, among other strategies).
Lack of integrated process intelligence across multiple steelmaking routes | HoloSteel digital layer consolidates real-time data, simulations & predictive models to manage complex interactions across process steps & materials. Interoperable & robust data integration, preparation, fusion and management.
Scaling up novel processes: lab/pilot to industrial scale | A hybrid approach combining empirical pilot data with simulation and digital twin models supports robust scale-up and de-risking of industrial deployment.
Resistance to operational change and skills gap in digitalised low-CO₂ processes | Project supports a human-centric transition by co-designing roles, training & ESG integration with operators, decision makers (governance) & stakeholders. Led by BRITEST-expert in bridging process innovation & workplace adoption.
Fragmented value chains and lack of common standards | Stakeholder engagement, clustering (EU initiatives) & standardisation activities (UNE as partner) ensure transferability, replication, and policy alignment.
Project: Brief outline of the results that are feeding in and how they will be used in NextSteel
H2STEEL: POLI is coordinator & REC is beneficiary of this ongoing EIC project that aims to ‘Produce green hydrogen and biocoal for steel sector’ focussed on the production of a biobased coal by slow pyrolysis and chemical leaching.
: POLI coordinator/REC beneficiary: ongoing (1/11/23) Research Fund for Coal and Steel (RFCS) project to ‘Produce of biocoal by pyrolysis from biowaste for the use in EAF’. Experience & knowhow will be leveraged.
: Partner REC is involved in this ongoing RFCS project that aims to ‘Produce of biocoal by pyrolysis from biowaste for the use in Sintering process’. Experience & knowhow will be leveraged.
IDRO.SMART: REC was a partner in this completed project funded by Italian regional funds POR FESR Regione Toscana, the goal of which was to ‘Extract carbon and phosphorus from sewage sludge’.
Waste2Road: CEA was partner working on HTL of food wastes & black liquor. Treatment of the resulting aqueous phase was studied by supercritical gasification (with & without catalysts). Tests with catalysts led to the production of high calorific gas rich in Hydrogen & methane, which will contribute valuable knowledge for NEXTSTEEL.
Pulp&Fuel: Project coordinated by CEA, who worked on the SCWG of black liquor, side stream from pulp production, for hydrogen production to feed a FT synthesis. The global concept results in an interesting cost for biofuel production.
CIRMET: CEA responsible for selecting different biomasses & producing reducing agent materials used in metallurgical industries to replace fossil coal. CEA produced 1 ton of the reducing agents in the Torrefaction pilot plant. TEC worked in preparing mixtures of these reducing agents with the metallic oxides to be reduced with good results.
Digiser++: Goal to reduce carbon footprint in nonferrous metallurgical furnaces, replacing fossil coal by biocoal from agri wastes as reducing agent. CEA produced reducing agents from biomasses & wastes using Torrefaction pilot plant. TEC developed & validated process to valorise wastes from copper smelting process using biocoal as reducing agent.
Heat to Fuel POLI: development of Aqueous Phase Reforming reactor and collaboration in the design of the reactor coupling APR and Fischer-Tropsch. REC: building & operating a hydrothermal liquefaction unit for conversion of selected feedstock and bio-based residue and performing hydrotreating test of bio-oil.
BiO4A: REC coordinator & POLITO beneficiary in this ended H2020 project focused on production of biochar used to increase productivity yield of marginal lands for the additional production of sustainable aviation fuel feedstocks.
PREMA: ERA & SINTEF involved in this completed H2020 project on ‘Sustainable production of manganese alloys’ and developed energy efficient, primary production of manganese ferroalloys via the application of novel energy systems in the drying and pre-heating of furnace feed material. The test protocol from pilot scale Mn-alloy production will be used in NEXTSTEEL, along with the mass and energy balance simulations tools of the performance of the bioanthracite for Si-Mn production. The use of CO/H2 gases for pre-reduction of Mn-ore was also studied.
TripleLink: ERA was a partner in this EIT RawMaterials project on ‘Linking software solutions and advanced resource-oriented sustainability indicators to improve product life cycle and circularity assessment’.
RE4Industry: WIP was responsible for knowledge transfer, engaging representatives of EII sectors, C&D&E activities in this H2020 project aimed at facilitating EU EEIs in secure RE adoption in production processes & facilities.
GIFFT: WIP leads activities on communication, dissemination & exploitation developing a sustainable, hybrid, and biofuel flexible heat production technology and process that can be integrated into industrial glass manufacturing.
ETERNAL IRIS
Types of data/research outputs and estimated size: In the project we will generate data in relation to the process parameters (WP1, WP2, WP5), data from product testing and quality analysis (WP3), for performing the LCA (WP4). In as much as possible we will make this data available for re-use, e.g. while we may not be able to disclose sensitive process data, we can show ordered data on the results of testing- experimental images, text, numerical, etc.
Findability of data/research outputs: We will ensure we make the data readily findable. Using different types of persistent and unique identifiers (e.g., digital object identifiers) and trusted repositories.
Accessibility of data/research outputs. Data will be deposited in a trusted repository (e.g. Zenodo) and made openly accessible as early as possible (& aligned with robust IPR management, whereby data linked to IP will be available following timely IP protection mechanisms). Provisions will be made for providing controlled access to restricted data for verification purposes & providing access to the EC if requested in response to states of emergency.
Interoperability of data/research outputs: We will use open, internationally recognised standards (e.g. ISO 10303, CEN, ISO) to ensure interoperability, data integration, long-term accessibility, and freedom from vendor lock-in. These standards support CAD, CAE, PLM, IoT, and AI/ML data management. UNE (representing CEN & CENELEC) as a consortium partner strengthens our standardisation capacity. We will also engage with other funded products in the topic (and other relevant Horizon Europe topics) to align data definitions and ensure interoperability.
Reusability of data/research outputs: Project data will be made reusable by third parties where possible, including post-project. Provide clear documentation (eg. methodology, codebooks, variable definitions) & use standard reuse licences (eg. Creative Commons) for wide access. Data provenance & quality assurance as per recognised standards.
Curation and storage/preservation costs: Research data/output management will be managed through Subtask 7.2.2 Data Management and FAIR compliance. A core team with prior expertise in Data Management (and data quality assurance) will be mobilised under the leadership of the Project Coordinator. Moreover, a reasonable budget has been planned under ‘Other Costs, Works and Services’ for making data FAIR and for long term preservation.
Data Security: The data will be safely stored in trusted repositories for long term preservation and curation. Provisions will be made for data recovery as well as secure storage and transfer of sensitive data.
Regulatory and Ethical aspects: e.g., compliance with GDPR for any personal data gathered during the project.
HAE | Bioanthracite compaction system to facilitate bioanthracite use in existing furnaces, reducing ignition risks.
Target Group: Benefit
Steel industry: Access to validated low-CO₂ steelmaking solutions using biogenic anthracite & enriched hydrogen derived from biowaste. HoloSteel digital intelligence layer ensures feedstock flexibility, process stability & product quality via real-time monitoring & predictive control. NextSteel supports process innovation, energy efficiency & operational resilience in real world conditions: strengthen global competitiveness in low-carbon steelmaking.
Ferroalloy and non-ferrous metal producers: Demonstrated use of C–SiO₂-rich bioanthracite and process gas in SiMn alloy production, and circular valorisation of Mn-rich slag as catalyst. Expands decarbonisation options for high-temperature metallurgical sectors beyond steel.
Producers of  biowaste streams: Creation of a new circular market for underutilised biowastes (e.g. sewage sludge, digested sludge, agri-food waste), turning costly residues (currently ≤€310/t in disposal fees) into valuable feedstock for biogenic reducing agents and by-products. Become vital actors in a bioeconomy-driven steel value chain.
Plant operators and technical workforce: Co-created roles, training pathways, and decision-support dashboards empower operators to handle digital workflows, carbon-reduced processes, and variable biogenic inputs. Aligns with Industry 5.0 principles, improving job quality and human–machine collaboration in advanced steelmaking contexts.
Business decision makers and investors: Access to dashboard-driven scenarios, business case data, and investment-ready KPIs for validated low-carbon pathways. Supports strategic decisions, cost-benefit analysis, and risk assessment, accelerating market deployment and transition financing for cleaner steelmaking.
Standardisation bodies and regulators: Robust pilot-scale evidence, harmonised data, and LCA/TEA outputs inform the development of standards and best practices for alternative reducing agents and integrated clean steel processes. Contributes to EU-wide alignment in climate-compatible heavy industry.
Research and Scientific Community: advances research on biowaste valorisation, alternative reducing agents, and digital twins in steelmaking. FAIR-compliant datasets (e.g. LCA, TEA), academic outputs, publications, and training
Factor | Consideration | Consideration
Political | Recent recognition by European Parliament's ITRE (Industry, Research and Energy) Committee of all steel decarbonization technologies as net-zero and introducing binding sustainability criteria in public procurement through the Net Zero Industry Act should be positive for accelerating the implementation of large-scale EU steel decarbonization projects. Strong political will at national levels across EU should favour our technologies. | Enabler
Economic | Favourable revenue streams, e.g. €73 to €75/MWhHCV guaranteed for 12 years for synthetic methane injected into gas grid in the example of Netherlands ‘Groen Gas 2030’. | Enabler
Economic | Introduction of sustainability criteria in all public procurement auctions for net-zero technologies will help establish much-needed lead markets for green products53. | Enabler
Economic | General economic conditions, inflation rates, currency exchange rates may influence overall cost-effectiveness. Risk of carbon leakage of steelmakers to laxer global locations. | Barrier/
Threat
Economic | Need to secure financing for scale up and industrial implementation (evidence of scalability, cost-effectiveness a strong Business case will be essential) | Barrier
Social | User Acceptance and willingness of business leaders from steel industry (&value chain) to engage (functioning demonstrators are vital, as are the results of LCA-LCC, ROI case, etc.) | Barrier
Technolo-gical | Hydrothermal gasification is a viable and scalable technology for producing renewable gas: total gas production capacity is estimated at 11.5 TWh/year. | Enabler
Technolo-gical | Circular value chain requires the mobilisation of the supply side, logistics, among others | Barrier
Technolo-gical | Ongoing R&D efforts will be essential to stay competitive and improve the technological aspects of the biorefinery. Continuous advancements in the technologies used in      NEXTSTEEL to enhance efficiency and reduce costs (facilitated by the HoloSteel DT). | Enabler
Technolo-gical | Presence or absence of standardised protocols & practices can impact the efficiency and effectiveness of processes (UNE ensure we have a credible approach to standards) | Enable/
Barrier
Legal | E.g. tighter EU legislation on acceptable pollutant levels and P recovery from biowaste use will open potential waste streams for NEXTSTEEL solution | Enabler
Legal | Pre-standardisation documents and technical reports to support achieving innovative industrial applications of advanced clean steel grades. | Enabler
Environ-mental | ontributes to environmental sustainability by reducing carbon emissions (>70% of substitution of fossil-based reducing agents by gas with biogenic origin in steelmaking), aligned with global efforts to combat climate change & helping decarbonise steelmaking. | Enabler
Environ-mental | Recovery/reuse 90% P, Al, Fe, Si, Mg from NextSteel integrated process-Circular model. | Enabler

KER1. Industrial-grade validated bioanthracite for steel and ferroalloy production | High-quality coal alternative derived from biowastes, validated for use in BF, EAF, DRI & silico-manganese production. Designed to meet industrial specifications for energy density, reactivity, and process compatibility. | REC,
AMMR TEC, HAE, SIN, ERA, CELSA | Steelmakers, ferroalloy producers, environmental solution providers | Commercial production and sale; licensing to steelmakers; supplier partnerships; joint ventures for regional rollout
KER2. Validated green hydrogen production route from biowastes | Process to produce enriched hydrogen via SCWG/AD of HTC aqueous phase, integrated with energy recovery and valorisation of residuals. Validated for use in hydrogen-based steel routes. | REC, CEA, SIN | Steelmakers, EPC (Engineering, Procurement, and Construction) | Technology transfer; licensing; integration into green H₂ value chains; engineering services
KER3. Integrated biorefinery process design and engineering package | End-to-end engineering package combining fast HTC, leaching, pyrolysis, SCWG for decentralised conversion of biowaste into bioanthracite and hydrogen. Includes energy integration options. | REC, TEC, CEA, AMMR | Steelmakers, EPC contractors, waste management firms, regional bioeconomy actors | Licensing of process design; EPC contracts; consultancy and process customization.
KER4. Validated circular uses of steelmaking residues | Validated applications for EAF and SiMn slags and iron powder in bioanthracite briquettes and catalytic applications in gas cracking. Supports circular use and waste reduction. | REC, TEC, CELSA, ERA, SIN | Steelmakers, residue processors, industrial mineral suppliers | Licensing; integration into reductant production; partnerships for circular valorisation pathways
KER5. HoloSteel digital intelligence platform (software + architecture) | Agent-based DT for biogenic steelmaking, integrating PAT, QbD, real-time monitoring, predictive simulation, DSS & dashboards. Enables stable operation under feedstock variability. | IRIS | Steelmakers, plant operators, systems integrators, industrial software providers (for integrations) | Sale & service model of PAT analysers (HW); SaaS or on-premise licensing; integration services; support and upgrades.
KER6. Industry 5.0 skills & organisational transformation toolkit | Co-created operational roles, training modules, and workforce empowerment tools aligned with digitalised low-CO₂ steelmaking. | BRI, CELSA, AMMR,
ERA | Steel plant HR /training departs., training providers, policy makers | Deployment of training programmes; consultancy & knowledge transfer
KER7. Techno-economic and environmental impact and scaling models | LCA–LCC–TEA models, mass /energy balance frameworks, and value-chain scaling scenarios to support replication, and deployment. | POLI, REC, AMMR, SIN | Steel industry, investors, policy makers, cluster networks | Decision support tools; Use in commercial projects; contribution to standards & funding frameworks
SPECIFIC NEEDS | EXPECTED RESULTS | D&E&C MEASURES
Low-CO₂ steel industry's real-world challenges: 
■Handling feedstock variability and quality
■Maintaining product quality while reducing emissions
■Managing economic risk and cost
■Dealing with plant integration, residual heat, and process stability
■Bridging the skills gap and workforce readiness for digital/green transitions
■Ensuring standardisation and policy alignment
■Enabling scalable and replicable solutions, not isolated pilots | KER1. Industrial grade validated bioanthracite for steel and ferroalloy production
KER2. Validated green gas and hydrogen production routes from HTT liquid (AD, SCWG, methane pyrolysis)
KER3. Integrated biorefinery process design and engineering package
KER4. Validated circular uses of steelmaking residues
KER5. HoloSteel digital intelligence platform (software + architecture)
KER6. Industry 5.0 skills & organisational transformation toolkit
KER7. Techno-economic and environmental impact and scaling models | Exploitation Pathways prepared: ■ Steel industry adoption of the NextSteel Biorefinery processes and the new bioproducts); ■ Use of knowledge/ knowhow in training and skills development; ■ ■ Further research activities (scale up activities) and new research lines, and post project Scientific Publications; ■ Contribution to standards (≥2 standardisation inputs submitted) 
Dissemination:
Communication: ■ Stakeholder engagement across society, industry, academia/research, policy, standards ■ Website, social media, PR, video (1) + clips, infographics, articles (4), newsletters (6), tradeshows (>6) ■ ≥1500 stakeholders reached.
TARGET GROUPS | OUTCOMES | IMPACTS
Steelmakers: Proven biogenic reductants & H₂ solutions with HoloSteel for stable, low-CO₂ steelmaking. Enhances flexibility, quality, and competitiveness.
Ferroalloy / Non-ferrous: Validated use of SiO₂-rich bioanthracite and catalyst reuse from SiMn slag.
Biowaste Producers: Turns costly waste into valuable feedstock for green steel inputs.
Operators / Workforce: New roles, training, and tools for digital, low-CO₂ workflows. Supports Industry 5.0 and better job quality.
Decision-makers / Investors: Business cases, KPIs & dashboards for clean steel investments and strategy.
Standards / Regulators: Data and pilots inform new standards for green reductants and steel processes | ■Viable pathway to valorise up to 15 Mt/year of biowaste in the EU into biogenic carbon-based reductants.
■>70% carbon recovery via fast HTT and catalytic SCWG, outperforming traditional pyrolysis methods.
■Reduced reliance on fossil carbon in steelmaking and ferroalloy production, lowering GHG emissions and improving energy efficiency.
■ Integration of HTT systems in steel plants using residual heat from EAF and DRI processes, optimising energy balance and circularity.
■ Enhanced business competitiveness via new Circular Bioeconomy-based value chains. | Scientific Impact: New data on biowaste-derived reductants and gas-solid reduction kinetics. Insights into slag, gas and metal interactions in low-CO₂ steelmaking. Evidence for ESG, QbD and Industry 5.0 models in heavy industry.
Technological Impact: Pilot-scale validation of bioanthracite, green gas, H₂, and slag reuse. Deployment of HoloSteel with predictive control and PAT sensors. Integration of thermochemical units with waste heat recovery from steel plants.
Economic Impact: Business case for three process routes (DRI, BF, SiMn). <6-year payback period; green H₂ <2.5 €/kg. TEA-backed cost competitiveness; market for waste-derived feedstocks. Circular market for biowaste feedstocks created. Exploitation roadmap and IP strategy defined.
Societal Impact: New digital roles and training aligned with Industry 5.0; 60% GHG reduction supports EU climate goals; Broad engagement with industry and policy actors.
WP
No | Work Package Title | Lead Particip. No | Lead Partic. Short Name | Person/
Month | Start month | End month
1 | Bioantracite production | 1 | REC | 205.0 | M1 | M40
2 | Green Hydrogen Production | 3 | CEA | 141.0 | M1 | M40
3 | Testing low-CO2 steelmaking practices at TRL6 | 7 | TEC | 181.0 | M7 | M44
4 | Energy integration, environmental and techno-economic assessments (POL) | 4 | POLI | 98.0 | M1 | M46
5 | Industry 4.0 Digital Intelligence Layer | 2 | IRIS | 113.0 | M3 | M48
6 | Industry 5.0 Human and Business Centric Pillar | 13 | BRI | 76.5 | M4 | M48
7 | Clustering, Ecosystem Engagement and Impact Valorisation | 8 | WIP | 95.5 | M1 | M48
8 | Integrated and Inclusive Project Coordination | 1 | REC | 63.0 | M1 | M48
TOTAL | 974.0
Work Package No. | Work Package No. | 1 | Lead: RE-CORD (REC)
Work Package Title | Work Package Title | Bioanthracite production | Bioanthracite production
Start Month | 1 | End Month | 40
Objectives: ■ Validation of fast HTT treatment at pilot scale on 5 different wet biowaste streams and identification of optimized operational parameters ■ Designing, constructing and starting a new ≥250 kg/h HTC pilot plant for wet biowaste conversion ■ Validating HTT-derived hydrochar leaching post-treatment at pilot scale with 50 kg/h plant for inorganic removal and recovery ■ Pyrolysing ≥12 metric tons raw and leached hydrochar for wet-biowaste-derived bioanthracite production ■ Producing ≥4 tons of bioanthracite in brand-new designed and constructed demo plant for hydrochar conversion into bioanthracite ■ Compactation of produced bioanthracite for industrial storage, shipping and injection purposes | Objectives: ■ Validation of fast HTT treatment at pilot scale on 5 different wet biowaste streams and identification of optimized operational parameters ■ Designing, constructing and starting a new ≥250 kg/h HTC pilot plant for wet biowaste conversion ■ Validating HTT-derived hydrochar leaching post-treatment at pilot scale with 50 kg/h plant for inorganic removal and recovery ■ Pyrolysing ≥12 metric tons raw and leached hydrochar for wet-biowaste-derived bioanthracite production ■ Producing ≥4 tons of bioanthracite in brand-new designed and constructed demo plant for hydrochar conversion into bioanthracite ■ Compactation of produced bioanthracite for industrial storage, shipping and injection purposes | Objectives: ■ Validation of fast HTT treatment at pilot scale on 5 different wet biowaste streams and identification of optimized operational parameters ■ Designing, constructing and starting a new ≥250 kg/h HTC pilot plant for wet biowaste conversion ■ Validating HTT-derived hydrochar leaching post-treatment at pilot scale with 50 kg/h plant for inorganic removal and recovery ■ Pyrolysing ≥12 metric tons raw and leached hydrochar for wet-biowaste-derived bioanthracite production ■ Producing ≥4 tons of bioanthracite in brand-new designed and constructed demo plant for hydrochar conversion into bioanthracite ■ Compactation of produced bioanthracite for industrial storage, shipping and injection purposes | Objectives: ■ Validation of fast HTT treatment at pilot scale on 5 different wet biowaste streams and identification of optimized operational parameters ■ Designing, constructing and starting a new ≥250 kg/h HTC pilot plant for wet biowaste conversion ■ Validating HTT-derived hydrochar leaching post-treatment at pilot scale with 50 kg/h plant for inorganic removal and recovery ■ Pyrolysing ≥12 metric tons raw and leached hydrochar for wet-biowaste-derived bioanthracite production ■ Producing ≥4 tons of bioanthracite in brand-new designed and constructed demo plant for hydrochar conversion into bioanthracite ■ Compactation of produced bioanthracite for industrial storage, shipping and injection purposes
Task 1.1. Maximizing the recovery of biogenic carbon by fast HTT (M1 - M18) (Lead: REC)
Subtask 1.1.1 Feedstocks collection, characterisation and quality validation. REC (M1-M5) The 5 feedstocks, selected in task 4.1. for the study will be collected by REC to be analysed and assessed. The laboratory analysis will enable to validate the chemical and physical composition of the identified biowaste, so that to determine their actual usability for the production of end-use specific reducing agents. In particular: calorific value, proximate and ultimate analysis, ash composition, halogens and moisture content will be determined. The characterization will be used by partners to estimate the most suitable conversion route and the achievable quality of the biogenic reducing agents to be used in steelmaking. For each feedstock, multiple conversion routes will be determined.
Subtask 1.1.2. Fast hydrothermal treatment (HTT) experiments at lab scale. REC (M4-M18) REC will collect samples of each feedstock identified in task 4.1 and process it in its bench scale hydrothermal treatment unit of 2 lt capacity. For each feedstock, a minimum of 5 trials will be performed, by changing the temperature (210-250°C), the residence time (0-10 min) and the solid content (5-15%). For each test, min 20 lt of prepared feedstock will be processed in the HTT unit available at REC. For each test, REC will monitor the process condition and collect the two main products: the solid, and the liquid. The 2 streams will be characterised in the laboratory & the following information will be determined: Mass balance, carbon distribution, slurry dewaterability. After each test, the samples will be collected and stored for being used in other tasks. In particular, the aqueous phase (AP) will be stored and sent to CEA (Grenoble) to perform the SCWG tests in WP2. Part of the AP (1 lt) will be used for AD tests.
Task 1.2. Construction and operation of fast-HTT unit (M5-M30) (Lead: REC. Participants: CEA, POLI)
Subtask 1.2.1. Design and construction of a continuous fast HTT unit. REC (M5 – M15). The objective of this task is to demonstrate the performances and the feasibility of fast-HTT at pilot scale. REC will design, construct and install a continuous HTT pilot unit with a processing capacity of >250 kg/h of wet biowaste. The HTT unit will be designed to ensure a high heating rate and a short residence time (up to 10 minutes). The equipment will be installed at REC experimental area (REC PARK), authorised as an experimental waste treatment site. The HTC plant will have a net reaction volume of less than 40 litres and it will operate in subcritical conditions, with temperatures between 210 and 240°C, pressures between 15 and 40 bar, and residence time between 2 and 10 minutes. The heating system will be designed to ensure a fast-heating rate and, thus, reduce the plant size. The reactor will have a U-shape horizontal reactor with two sections: a heating section, and a cooling section. The cooling section will be equipped with cold water jacked, cooled by a chiller. After cooling, the depressurization system will be designed to let the plant operate continuously. Depressurization tanks will ensure a safe recovery of process vapours, and slurry. The plant will be equipped with a filter-press to perform a solid-liquid separation of the liquid phase from the hydrochar. The filter-press will also function as a dryer, with compressed hot air blown after the filtration to dry the cakes. The plant will be engineered and constructed by REC following the CE manufacturing conditions. After the construction, the plant will be firstly tested with water, and furtherly commissioned with a standard sludge with one-day test. Subtask 1.2.2. Experimental campaign on HTT pilot unit. REC (M16-M30): REC will perform an experimental activity on three main substrates, and mixtures of them, based on the results obtained in WP1. REC will collect the feedstock from companies already cooperating with the consortium. REC is authorized for processing 48 EWC (European Waste categories) and it has received an authorization by the Region of Tuscany to produce an End-of-Waste biocoal for the steel sector. With the cooperation of CEA and POLI, REC will perform different tests by changing the following parameters: temperature between 190°C and 250°C; residence time from 5 to 20 minutes; solid content in the feedstock between 10 and 25 % wt. In total, the design of experiments will include 30 tests to be performed in the pilot plant. All the solid and liquid samples will be collected and characterised in the laboratory. The hydrochar and the AP will be characterised by CHN, ash, volatiles, HHV and inorganic elements (ICP OES) to determine the distribution of inorganics between the two phases and to assess the quality of the produced material. From this task, the optimal HTC process conditions, identified in T1.1, will be validated. For the two feedstocks, the optimal conditions will be identified for the following parameters: Residence time, solid content, temperature. Following this, 4 best conditions will be selected, two for each of the 2 feedstocks processed. For each of the selected conditions, the solid will be processed by chemical leaching, while the liquids will be sent to CEA for testing in WP2. Finally, two production routes will be identified, to be reproduced in long run tests, producing > 8 tons of dry hydrochar to be used for demo-scale tests.
Task 1.3. Converting HTT solid into bioanthracite (Lead: REC. Participants: POLI, TEC) (M5-M24)
Subtask 1.3.1. Inorganic extraction from HTT solid by chemical leaching tests. REC (M5-M12): In this task, REC will process the hydrochar obtained by task 1.1 by chemical leaching in laboratory. The following parameters will be varied: operating temperature (40-90°C), liquid to solid ratio (5-20 m/m), reagent to solid ratio (0.2-2 m/m), contact time (0.5-3 h). In addition, the trials will involve different type of reagents (organic/inorganic and acid/basic). The tests performances will be evaluated by means of three indicators: (i) extraction efficiency of the target inorganic elements (phosphorous, calcium, magnesium, iron, etc.), to evaluate the amount of recovered element compared to the amount in the processed hydrochar; (ii) degree of demineralisation, that is the percentage of extracted mineral matter (ash) from the processed hydrochar, (iii) carbon balance of the process. For these evaluations, the concentration of inorganic elements in the produced liquid phase (leachate) and the ash content in the produced solid will be determined. Further analysis will be performed on the products from the best performing leaching tests, which will be adopted for the next pyrolysis trials. The target inorganic compounds will be recovered by precipitation, by the dosage of appropriate reagents, to modify the pH of the processed leachate and recover the dissolved compounds in the form of salts. The salts recovered will be characterized to assess the content of inorganic elements. Subtask 1.3.2. Experimental campaign on chemical leaching pilot unit. REC (M10-M18). The experimental campaign on pilot scale will be performed based on the results of the laboratory scale leaching trials. The trials will be carried on by a pilot leaching unit with a capacity of 500 lt/h, which is installed at REC’s facilities. For the tests, the optimal operating conditions determined by small scale trials will be adopted. In the plant, the char is processed with the acid solution in is a stirred and heated reactor. Then, the slutty is pumped to the solid-liquid separation, where a filter press is used to separate the leached solid from the liquid phase. The resulting liquid phase is precipitated to recover nutrients, while the dewatered solid is washed by water and air dried inside the filter-press prior to its collection. One among the two selected feedstock in WP1 will be adopted for the trials or, as an alternative, a mixture of both. The experimental campaign will include the variation of the acid and/or acid mixtures (organic acids, inorganic acids); and of the acid/solid ratio (0.2-0.6). The solids and liquids will be characterised so that the optimal conditions could be identified. Subtask 1.3.3. Processing of leached hydrochar by pyrolysis in laboratory. REC  (M10-M24): REC will process the leached hydrochar obtained by task 1.3 by slow pyrolysis in a TGA leco 701 furnace to turn it into a low volatile, low ash bioanthracite. Particularly, the hydrochar, collected after acidification and leaching process, will be dried and processed by slow pyrolysis at temperature between 600°C and 900°C, in absence of oxygen, for a residence time between 15 min and 2 hours. After the process, the pyrolysed solid will be collected and analysed, in order to evaluate the chemical and physical composition in comparison with the fossil coal used by the industrial actors. Subtask 1.3.4. Processing raw hydrochar by alkali-aided pyrolysis in laboratory. REC (M10-M24): REC will process raw hydrochar obtained by task 1.1 in a lab scale furnace able to achieve a temperature of up to 900°C. The dry hydrochar will be mixed with alkali reagents such as Na2CO3, at different mixing rates and then pyrolysed in absence of oxygen to promote the solubilization of silica and of phosphates. The solid obtained from the test will be analysed and further processed by hot water washing to remove the solubilized compounds and the remaining sodium. Moreover, the resulting solid, based on the resulting quality, could be furtherly processed by leaching steps to achieve the quality parameters required by the steelmakers, such as: P < 800 ppm wt, Zn < 200 ppm wt, volatiles < 20% wt, moisture < 3% wt. The tests will be performed on all the samples obtained by task 1.1., and the following parameters will be changed during the campaign: pyrolysis temperature (600-900°C), alkali:char ratio (0.1-0.5), leaching conditions and reagents. The best conditions will be selected for being replicated at larger scale in task 1.4.
Task 1.4 Production of bioanthracite at demo-scale (M16-M40) (Lead: AMMR. Particip.: REC, POL, ERA)
Subtask 1.4.1. Testing the integrated process in real environment. REC (M16-M30): The raw and leached hydrochar will be processed following the two alternative processes described in T1.3. The tests will be performed starting from the hydrochar produced in T1.2. For each test, > 400 kg of both raw and leached hydrochar, obtained from the 4 selected conditions, will be processed in a pyrolysis rotary kiln of 80 kg/h capacity operated by REC, to test the process at real scale and produce required amounts for the testing activities to be performed in WP3. The tests will bring to obtain pyrolysed hydrochar (bioanthracite), with reduced heavy metals and phosphorus content, and low volatility. In total, 8 pyrolysis tests will be performed. The amount of bioanthracite produced in this subtask is estimated about 1.2 tons (> 150 kg per test). Subtask 1.4.2. Construction and testing on a new demo-scale plant with 300 kg/h capacity. AMMR (M24-M40) AMMR will construct a newly designed prototype based on the results of tasks 1.1. And 1.2, able to turn hydrochar into bioanthracite at demo scale and produce enough sample for testing it in its proper EAF, and for validating the process. The plant will consist in a two-unit facility, including a pyrolysis reactor, a pyrogas oxidizer, and a char leaching plant. The components will be designed by REC and AMMR and purchased by suppliers based on the required process conditions. The plant will have a capacity of 300 kg/h of raw hydrochar inlet, and it will be used to process >8 tons of hydrochar to be unturned into > 4 tons of bioanthracite to be used for testing the EAF.
Task 1.5. Studies on bioanthracite compaction for application in steelmaking (M13-M40). Leader: HEA. Participants: REC, TEC, ERA, CELSA, AMMR): HEA will study and apply different compaction solutions to turn the bioanthracite produced into granules, briquettes, and pellets, with suitable density and dimension for being used in different furnaces used by steel industries. The compaction tests will be first performed in lab bench scale units, with inorganic and organic binders, mixed at different rates. The tests will be done using also recycled materials produced by steelmaking processes, such as EAF and BF slag, as well as biobased binders (e.g. starch) and other binding agents (e.g. PVA). Moreover, different size of compacted bio-anthracite will be obtained to enable the use as injected granules or charged briquettes in pilot tests with EAFs and BFs. | Task 1.1. Maximizing the recovery of biogenic carbon by fast HTT (M1 - M18) (Lead: REC)
Subtask 1.1.1 Feedstocks collection, characterisation and quality validation. REC (M1-M5) The 5 feedstocks, selected in task 4.1. for the study will be collected by REC to be analysed and assessed. The laboratory analysis will enable to validate the chemical and physical composition of the identified biowaste, so that to determine their actual usability for the production of end-use specific reducing agents. In particular: calorific value, proximate and ultimate analysis, ash composition, halogens and moisture content will be determined. The characterization will be used by partners to estimate the most suitable conversion route and the achievable quality of the biogenic reducing agents to be used in steelmaking. For each feedstock, multiple conversion routes will be determined.
Subtask 1.1.2. Fast hydrothermal treatment (HTT) experiments at lab scale. REC (M4-M18) REC will collect samples of each feedstock identified in task 4.1 and process it in its bench scale hydrothermal treatment unit of 2 lt capacity. For each feedstock, a minimum of 5 trials will be performed, by changing the temperature (210-250°C), the residence time (0-10 min) and the solid content (5-15%). For each test, min 20 lt of prepared feedstock will be processed in the HTT unit available at REC. For each test, REC will monitor the process condition and collect the two main products: the solid, and the liquid. The 2 streams will be characterised in the laboratory & the following information will be determined: Mass balance, carbon distribution, slurry dewaterability. After each test, the samples will be collected and stored for being used in other tasks. In particular, the aqueous phase (AP) will be stored and sent to CEA (Grenoble) to perform the SCWG tests in WP2. Part of the AP (1 lt) will be used for AD tests.
Task 1.2. Construction and operation of fast-HTT unit (M5-M30) (Lead: REC. Participants: CEA, POLI)
Subtask 1.2.1. Design and construction of a continuous fast HTT unit. REC (M5 – M15). The objective of this task is to demonstrate the performances and the feasibility of fast-HTT at pilot scale. REC will design, construct and install a continuous HTT pilot unit with a processing capacity of >250 kg/h of wet biowaste. The HTT unit will be designed to ensure a high heating rate and a short residence time (up to 10 minutes). The equipment will be installed at REC experimental area (REC PARK), authorised as an experimental waste treatment site. The HTC plant will have a net reaction volume of less than 40 litres and it will operate in subcritical conditions, with temperatures between 210 and 240°C, pressures between 15 and 40 bar, and residence time between 2 and 10 minutes. The heating system will be designed to ensure a fast-heating rate and, thus, reduce the plant size. The reactor will have a U-shape horizontal reactor with two sections: a heating section, and a cooling section. The cooling section will be equipped with cold water jacked, cooled by a chiller. After cooling, the depressurization system will be designed to let the plant operate continuously. Depressurization tanks will ensure a safe recovery of process vapours, and slurry. The plant will be equipped with a filter-press to perform a solid-liquid separation of the liquid phase from the hydrochar. The filter-press will also function as a dryer, with compressed hot air blown after the filtration to dry the cakes. The plant will be engineered and constructed by REC following the CE manufacturing conditions. After the construction, the plant will be firstly tested with water, and furtherly commissioned with a standard sludge with one-day test. Subtask 1.2.2. Experimental campaign on HTT pilot unit. REC (M16-M30): REC will perform an experimental activity on three main substrates, and mixtures of them, based on the results obtained in WP1. REC will collect the feedstock from companies already cooperating with the consortium. REC is authorized for processing 48 EWC (European Waste categories) and it has received an authorization by the Region of Tuscany to produce an End-of-Waste biocoal for the steel sector. With the cooperation of CEA and POLI, REC will perform different tests by changing the following parameters: temperature between 190°C and 250°C; residence time from 5 to 20 minutes; solid content in the feedstock between 10 and 25 % wt. In total, the design of experiments will include 30 tests to be performed in the pilot plant. All the solid and liquid samples will be collected and characterised in the laboratory. The hydrochar and the AP will be characterised by CHN, ash, volatiles, HHV and inorganic elements (ICP OES) to determine the distribution of inorganics between the two phases and to assess the quality of the produced material. From this task, the optimal HTC process conditions, identified in T1.1, will be validated. For the two feedstocks, the optimal conditions will be identified for the following parameters: Residence time, solid content, temperature. Following this, 4 best conditions will be selected, two for each of the 2 feedstocks processed. For each of the selected conditions, the solid will be processed by chemical leaching, while the liquids will be sent to CEA for testing in WP2. Finally, two production routes will be identified, to be reproduced in long run tests, producing > 8 tons of dry hydrochar to be used for demo-scale tests.
Task 1.3. Converting HTT solid into bioanthracite (Lead: REC. Participants: POLI, TEC) (M5-M24)
Subtask 1.3.1. Inorganic extraction from HTT solid by chemical leaching tests. REC (M5-M12): In this task, REC will process the hydrochar obtained by task 1.1 by chemical leaching in laboratory. The following parameters will be varied: operating temperature (40-90°C), liquid to solid ratio (5-20 m/m), reagent to solid ratio (0.2-2 m/m), contact time (0.5-3 h). In addition, the trials will involve different type of reagents (organic/inorganic and acid/basic). The tests performances will be evaluated by means of three indicators: (i) extraction efficiency of the target inorganic elements (phosphorous, calcium, magnesium, iron, etc.), to evaluate the amount of recovered element compared to the amount in the processed hydrochar; (ii) degree of demineralisation, that is the percentage of extracted mineral matter (ash) from the processed hydrochar, (iii) carbon balance of the process. For these evaluations, the concentration of inorganic elements in the produced liquid phase (leachate) and the ash content in the produced solid will be determined. Further analysis will be performed on the products from the best performing leaching tests, which will be adopted for the next pyrolysis trials. The target inorganic compounds will be recovered by precipitation, by the dosage of appropriate reagents, to modify the pH of the processed leachate and recover the dissolved compounds in the form of salts. The salts recovered will be characterized to assess the content of inorganic elements. Subtask 1.3.2. Experimental campaign on chemical leaching pilot unit. REC (M10-M18). The experimental campaign on pilot scale will be performed based on the results of the laboratory scale leaching trials. The trials will be carried on by a pilot leaching unit with a capacity of 500 lt/h, which is installed at REC’s facilities. For the tests, the optimal operating conditions determined by small scale trials will be adopted. In the plant, the char is processed with the acid solution in is a stirred and heated reactor. Then, the slutty is pumped to the solid-liquid separation, where a filter press is used to separate the leached solid from the liquid phase. The resulting liquid phase is precipitated to recover nutrients, while the dewatered solid is washed by water and air dried inside the filter-press prior to its collection. One among the two selected feedstock in WP1 will be adopted for the trials or, as an alternative, a mixture of both. The experimental campaign will include the variation of the acid and/or acid mixtures (organic acids, inorganic acids); and of the acid/solid ratio (0.2-0.6). The solids and liquids will be characterised so that the optimal conditions could be identified. Subtask 1.3.3. Processing of leached hydrochar by pyrolysis in laboratory. REC  (M10-M24): REC will process the leached hydrochar obtained by task 1.3 by slow pyrolysis in a TGA leco 701 furnace to turn it into a low volatile, low ash bioanthracite. Particularly, the hydrochar, collected after acidification and leaching process, will be dried and processed by slow pyrolysis at temperature between 600°C and 900°C, in absence of oxygen, for a residence time between 15 min and 2 hours. After the process, the pyrolysed solid will be collected and analysed, in order to evaluate the chemical and physical composition in comparison with the fossil coal used by the industrial actors. Subtask 1.3.4. Processing raw hydrochar by alkali-aided pyrolysis in laboratory. REC (M10-M24): REC will process raw hydrochar obtained by task 1.1 in a lab scale furnace able to achieve a temperature of up to 900°C. The dry hydrochar will be mixed with alkali reagents such as Na2CO3, at different mixing rates and then pyrolysed in absence of oxygen to promote the solubilization of silica and of phosphates. The solid obtained from the test will be analysed and further processed by hot water washing to remove the solubilized compounds and the remaining sodium. Moreover, the resulting solid, based on the resulting quality, could be furtherly processed by leaching steps to achieve the quality parameters required by the steelmakers, such as: P < 800 ppm wt, Zn < 200 ppm wt, volatiles < 20% wt, moisture < 3% wt. The tests will be performed on all the samples obtained by task 1.1., and the following parameters will be changed during the campaign: pyrolysis temperature (600-900°C), alkali:char ratio (0.1-0.5), leaching conditions and reagents. The best conditions will be selected for being replicated at larger scale in task 1.4.
Task 1.4 Production of bioanthracite at demo-scale (M16-M40) (Lead: AMMR. Particip.: REC, POL, ERA)
Subtask 1.4.1. Testing the integrated process in real environment. REC (M16-M30): The raw and leached hydrochar will be processed following the two alternative processes described in T1.3. The tests will be performed starting from the hydrochar produced in T1.2. For each test, > 400 kg of both raw and leached hydrochar, obtained from the 4 selected conditions, will be processed in a pyrolysis rotary kiln of 80 kg/h capacity operated by REC, to test the process at real scale and produce required amounts for the testing activities to be performed in WP3. The tests will bring to obtain pyrolysed hydrochar (bioanthracite), with reduced heavy metals and phosphorus content, and low volatility. In total, 8 pyrolysis tests will be performed. The amount of bioanthracite produced in this subtask is estimated about 1.2 tons (> 150 kg per test). Subtask 1.4.2. Construction and testing on a new demo-scale plant with 300 kg/h capacity. AMMR (M24-M40) AMMR will construct a newly designed prototype based on the results of tasks 1.1. And 1.2, able to turn hydrochar into bioanthracite at demo scale and produce enough sample for testing it in its proper EAF, and for validating the process. The plant will consist in a two-unit facility, including a pyrolysis reactor, a pyrogas oxidizer, and a char leaching plant. The components will be designed by REC and AMMR and purchased by suppliers based on the required process conditions. The plant will have a capacity of 300 kg/h of raw hydrochar inlet, and it will be used to process >8 tons of hydrochar to be unturned into > 4 tons of bioanthracite to be used for testing the EAF.
Task 1.5. Studies on bioanthracite compaction for application in steelmaking (M13-M40). Leader: HEA. Participants: REC, TEC, ERA, CELSA, AMMR): HEA will study and apply different compaction solutions to turn the bioanthracite produced into granules, briquettes, and pellets, with suitable density and dimension for being used in different furnaces used by steel industries. The compaction tests will be first performed in lab bench scale units, with inorganic and organic binders, mixed at different rates. The tests will be done using also recycled materials produced by steelmaking processes, such as EAF and BF slag, as well as biobased binders (e.g. starch) and other binding agents (e.g. PVA). Moreover, different size of compacted bio-anthracite will be obtained to enable the use as injected granules or charged briquettes in pilot tests with EAFs and BFs. | Task 1.1. Maximizing the recovery of biogenic carbon by fast HTT (M1 - M18) (Lead: REC)
Subtask 1.1.1 Feedstocks collection, characterisation and quality validation. REC (M1-M5) The 5 feedstocks, selected in task 4.1. for the study will be collected by REC to be analysed and assessed. The laboratory analysis will enable to validate the chemical and physical composition of the identified biowaste, so that to determine their actual usability for the production of end-use specific reducing agents. In particular: calorific value, proximate and ultimate analysis, ash composition, halogens and moisture content will be determined. The characterization will be used by partners to estimate the most suitable conversion route and the achievable quality of the biogenic reducing agents to be used in steelmaking. For each feedstock, multiple conversion routes will be determined.
Subtask 1.1.2. Fast hydrothermal treatment (HTT) experiments at lab scale. REC (M4-M18) REC will collect samples of each feedstock identified in task 4.1 and process it in its bench scale hydrothermal treatment unit of 2 lt capacity. For each feedstock, a minimum of 5 trials will be performed, by changing the temperature (210-250°C), the residence time (0-10 min) and the solid content (5-15%). For each test, min 20 lt of prepared feedstock will be processed in the HTT unit available at REC. For each test, REC will monitor the process condition and collect the two main products: the solid, and the liquid. The 2 streams will be characterised in the laboratory & the following information will be determined: Mass balance, carbon distribution, slurry dewaterability. After each test, the samples will be collected and stored for being used in other tasks. In particular, the aqueous phase (AP) will be stored and sent to CEA (Grenoble) to perform the SCWG tests in WP2. Part of the AP (1 lt) will be used for AD tests.
Task 1.2. Construction and operation of fast-HTT unit (M5-M30) (Lead: REC. Participants: CEA, POLI)
Subtask 1.2.1. Design and construction of a continuous fast HTT unit. REC (M5 – M15). The objective of this task is to demonstrate the performances and the feasibility of fast-HTT at pilot scale. REC will design, construct and install a continuous HTT pilot unit with a processing capacity of >250 kg/h of wet biowaste. The HTT unit will be designed to ensure a high heating rate and a short residence time (up to 10 minutes). The equipment will be installed at REC experimental area (REC PARK), authorised as an experimental waste treatment site. The HTC plant will have a net reaction volume of less than 40 litres and it will operate in subcritical conditions, with temperatures between 210 and 240°C, pressures between 15 and 40 bar, and residence time between 2 and 10 minutes. The heating system will be designed to ensure a fast-heating rate and, thus, reduce the plant size. The reactor will have a U-shape horizontal reactor with two sections: a heating section, and a cooling section. The cooling section will be equipped with cold water jacked, cooled by a chiller. After cooling, the depressurization system will be designed to let the plant operate continuously. Depressurization tanks will ensure a safe recovery of process vapours, and slurry. The plant will be equipped with a filter-press to perform a solid-liquid separation of the liquid phase from the hydrochar. The filter-press will also function as a dryer, with compressed hot air blown after the filtration to dry the cakes. The plant will be engineered and constructed by REC following the CE manufacturing conditions. After the construction, the plant will be firstly tested with water, and furtherly commissioned with a standard sludge with one-day test. Subtask 1.2.2. Experimental campaign on HTT pilot unit. REC (M16-M30): REC will perform an experimental activity on three main substrates, and mixtures of them, based on the results obtained in WP1. REC will collect the feedstock from companies already cooperating with the consortium. REC is authorized for processing 48 EWC (European Waste categories) and it has received an authorization by the Region of Tuscany to produce an End-of-Waste biocoal for the steel sector. With the cooperation of CEA and POLI, REC will perform different tests by changing the following parameters: temperature between 190°C and 250°C; residence time from 5 to 20 minutes; solid content in the feedstock between 10 and 25 % wt. In total, the design of experiments will include 30 tests to be performed in the pilot plant. All the solid and liquid samples will be collected and characterised in the laboratory. The hydrochar and the AP will be characterised by CHN, ash, volatiles, HHV and inorganic elements (ICP OES) to determine the distribution of inorganics between the two phases and to assess the quality of the produced material. From this task, the optimal HTC process conditions, identified in T1.1, will be validated. For the two feedstocks, the optimal conditions will be identified for the following parameters: Residence time, solid content, temperature. Following this, 4 best conditions will be selected, two for each of the 2 feedstocks processed. For each of the selected conditions, the solid will be processed by chemical leaching, while the liquids will be sent to CEA for testing in WP2. Finally, two production routes will be identified, to be reproduced in long run tests, producing > 8 tons of dry hydrochar to be used for demo-scale tests.
Task 1.3. Converting HTT solid into bioanthracite (Lead: REC. Participants: POLI, TEC) (M5-M24)
Subtask 1.3.1. Inorganic extraction from HTT solid by chemical leaching tests. REC (M5-M12): In this task, REC will process the hydrochar obtained by task 1.1 by chemical leaching in laboratory. The following parameters will be varied: operating temperature (40-90°C), liquid to solid ratio (5-20 m/m), reagent to solid ratio (0.2-2 m/m), contact time (0.5-3 h). In addition, the trials will involve different type of reagents (organic/inorganic and acid/basic). The tests performances will be evaluated by means of three indicators: (i) extraction efficiency of the target inorganic elements (phosphorous, calcium, magnesium, iron, etc.), to evaluate the amount of recovered element compared to the amount in the processed hydrochar; (ii) degree of demineralisation, that is the percentage of extracted mineral matter (ash) from the processed hydrochar, (iii) carbon balance of the process. For these evaluations, the concentration of inorganic elements in the produced liquid phase (leachate) and the ash content in the produced solid will be determined. Further analysis will be performed on the products from the best performing leaching tests, which will be adopted for the next pyrolysis trials. The target inorganic compounds will be recovered by precipitation, by the dosage of appropriate reagents, to modify the pH of the processed leachate and recover the dissolved compounds in the form of salts. The salts recovered will be characterized to assess the content of inorganic elements. Subtask 1.3.2. Experimental campaign on chemical leaching pilot unit. REC (M10-M18). The experimental campaign on pilot scale will be performed based on the results of the laboratory scale leaching trials. The trials will be carried on by a pilot leaching unit with a capacity of 500 lt/h, which is installed at REC’s facilities. For the tests, the optimal operating conditions determined by small scale trials will be adopted. In the plant, the char is processed with the acid solution in is a stirred and heated reactor. Then, the slutty is pumped to the solid-liquid separation, where a filter press is used to separate the leached solid from the liquid phase. The resulting liquid phase is precipitated to recover nutrients, while the dewatered solid is washed by water and air dried inside the filter-press prior to its collection. One among the two selected feedstock in WP1 will be adopted for the trials or, as an alternative, a mixture of both. The experimental campaign will include the variation of the acid and/or acid mixtures (organic acids, inorganic acids); and of the acid/solid ratio (0.2-0.6). The solids and liquids will be characterised so that the optimal conditions could be identified. Subtask 1.3.3. Processing of leached hydrochar by pyrolysis in laboratory. REC  (M10-M24): REC will process the leached hydrochar obtained by task 1.3 by slow pyrolysis in a TGA leco 701 furnace to turn it into a low volatile, low ash bioanthracite. Particularly, the hydrochar, collected after acidification and leaching process, will be dried and processed by slow pyrolysis at temperature between 600°C and 900°C, in absence of oxygen, for a residence time between 15 min and 2 hours. After the process, the pyrolysed solid will be collected and analysed, in order to evaluate the chemical and physical composition in comparison with the fossil coal used by the industrial actors. Subtask 1.3.4. Processing raw hydrochar by alkali-aided pyrolysis in laboratory. REC (M10-M24): REC will process raw hydrochar obtained by task 1.1 in a lab scale furnace able to achieve a temperature of up to 900°C. The dry hydrochar will be mixed with alkali reagents such as Na2CO3, at different mixing rates and then pyrolysed in absence of oxygen to promote the solubilization of silica and of phosphates. The solid obtained from the test will be analysed and further processed by hot water washing to remove the solubilized compounds and the remaining sodium. Moreover, the resulting solid, based on the resulting quality, could be furtherly processed by leaching steps to achieve the quality parameters required by the steelmakers, such as: P < 800 ppm wt, Zn < 200 ppm wt, volatiles < 20% wt, moisture < 3% wt. The tests will be performed on all the samples obtained by task 1.1., and the following parameters will be changed during the campaign: pyrolysis temperature (600-900°C), alkali:char ratio (0.1-0.5), leaching conditions and reagents. The best conditions will be selected for being replicated at larger scale in task 1.4.
Task 1.4 Production of bioanthracite at demo-scale (M16-M40) (Lead: AMMR. Particip.: REC, POL, ERA)
Subtask 1.4.1. Testing the integrated process in real environment. REC (M16-M30): The raw and leached hydrochar will be processed following the two alternative processes described in T1.3. The tests will be performed starting from the hydrochar produced in T1.2. For each test, > 400 kg of both raw and leached hydrochar, obtained from the 4 selected conditions, will be processed in a pyrolysis rotary kiln of 80 kg/h capacity operated by REC, to test the process at real scale and produce required amounts for the testing activities to be performed in WP3. The tests will bring to obtain pyrolysed hydrochar (bioanthracite), with reduced heavy metals and phosphorus content, and low volatility. In total, 8 pyrolysis tests will be performed. The amount of bioanthracite produced in this subtask is estimated about 1.2 tons (> 150 kg per test). Subtask 1.4.2. Construction and testing on a new demo-scale plant with 300 kg/h capacity. AMMR (M24-M40) AMMR will construct a newly designed prototype based on the results of tasks 1.1. And 1.2, able to turn hydrochar into bioanthracite at demo scale and produce enough sample for testing it in its proper EAF, and for validating the process. The plant will consist in a two-unit facility, including a pyrolysis reactor, a pyrogas oxidizer, and a char leaching plant. The components will be designed by REC and AMMR and purchased by suppliers based on the required process conditions. The plant will have a capacity of 300 kg/h of raw hydrochar inlet, and it will be used to process >8 tons of hydrochar to be unturned into > 4 tons of bioanthracite to be used for testing the EAF.
Task 1.5. Studies on bioanthracite compaction for application in steelmaking (M13-M40). Leader: HEA. Participants: REC, TEC, ERA, CELSA, AMMR): HEA will study and apply different compaction solutions to turn the bioanthracite produced into granules, briquettes, and pellets, with suitable density and dimension for being used in different furnaces used by steel industries. The compaction tests will be first performed in lab bench scale units, with inorganic and organic binders, mixed at different rates. The tests will be done using also recycled materials produced by steelmaking processes, such as EAF and BF slag, as well as biobased binders (e.g. starch) and other binding agents (e.g. PVA). Moreover, different size of compacted bio-anthracite will be obtained to enable the use as injected granules or charged briquettes in pilot tests with EAFs and BFs. | Task 1.1. Maximizing the recovery of biogenic carbon by fast HTT (M1 - M18) (Lead: REC)
Subtask 1.1.1 Feedstocks collection, characterisation and quality validation. REC (M1-M5) The 5 feedstocks, selected in task 4.1. for the study will be collected by REC to be analysed and assessed. The laboratory analysis will enable to validate the chemical and physical composition of the identified biowaste, so that to determine their actual usability for the production of end-use specific reducing agents. In particular: calorific value, proximate and ultimate analysis, ash composition, halogens and moisture content will be determined. The characterization will be used by partners to estimate the most suitable conversion route and the achievable quality of the biogenic reducing agents to be used in steelmaking. For each feedstock, multiple conversion routes will be determined.
Subtask 1.1.2. Fast hydrothermal treatment (HTT) experiments at lab scale. REC (M4-M18) REC will collect samples of each feedstock identified in task 4.1 and process it in its bench scale hydrothermal treatment unit of 2 lt capacity. For each feedstock, a minimum of 5 trials will be performed, by changing the temperature (210-250°C), the residence time (0-10 min) and the solid content (5-15%). For each test, min 20 lt of prepared feedstock will be processed in the HTT unit available at REC. For each test, REC will monitor the process condition and collect the two main products: the solid, and the liquid. The 2 streams will be characterised in the laboratory & the following information will be determined: Mass balance, carbon distribution, slurry dewaterability. After each test, the samples will be collected and stored for being used in other tasks. In particular, the aqueous phase (AP) will be stored and sent to CEA (Grenoble) to perform the SCWG tests in WP2. Part of the AP (1 lt) will be used for AD tests.
Task 1.2. Construction and operation of fast-HTT unit (M5-M30) (Lead: REC. Participants: CEA, POLI)
Subtask 1.2.1. Design and construction of a continuous fast HTT unit. REC (M5 – M15). The objective of this task is to demonstrate the performances and the feasibility of fast-HTT at pilot scale. REC will design, construct and install a continuous HTT pilot unit with a processing capacity of >250 kg/h of wet biowaste. The HTT unit will be designed to ensure a high heating rate and a short residence time (up to 10 minutes). The equipment will be installed at REC experimental area (REC PARK), authorised as an experimental waste treatment site. The HTC plant will have a net reaction volume of less than 40 litres and it will operate in subcritical conditions, with temperatures between 210 and 240°C, pressures between 15 and 40 bar, and residence time between 2 and 10 minutes. The heating system will be designed to ensure a fast-heating rate and, thus, reduce the plant size. The reactor will have a U-shape horizontal reactor with two sections: a heating section, and a cooling section. The cooling section will be equipped with cold water jacked, cooled by a chiller. After cooling, the depressurization system will be designed to let the plant operate continuously. Depressurization tanks will ensure a safe recovery of process vapours, and slurry. The plant will be equipped with a filter-press to perform a solid-liquid separation of the liquid phase from the hydrochar. The filter-press will also function as a dryer, with compressed hot air blown after the filtration to dry the cakes. The plant will be engineered and constructed by REC following the CE manufacturing conditions. After the construction, the plant will be firstly tested with water, and furtherly commissioned with a standard sludge with one-day test. Subtask 1.2.2. Experimental campaign on HTT pilot unit. REC (M16-M30): REC will perform an experimental activity on three main substrates, and mixtures of them, based on the results obtained in WP1. REC will collect the feedstock from companies already cooperating with the consortium. REC is authorized for processing 48 EWC (European Waste categories) and it has received an authorization by the Region of Tuscany to produce an End-of-Waste biocoal for the steel sector. With the cooperation of CEA and POLI, REC will perform different tests by changing the following parameters: temperature between 190°C and 250°C; residence time from 5 to 20 minutes; solid content in the feedstock between 10 and 25 % wt. In total, the design of experiments will include 30 tests to be performed in the pilot plant. All the solid and liquid samples will be collected and characterised in the laboratory. The hydrochar and the AP will be characterised by CHN, ash, volatiles, HHV and inorganic elements (ICP OES) to determine the distribution of inorganics between the two phases and to assess the quality of the produced material. From this task, the optimal HTC process conditions, identified in T1.1, will be validated. For the two feedstocks, the optimal conditions will be identified for the following parameters: Residence time, solid content, temperature. Following this, 4 best conditions will be selected, two for each of the 2 feedstocks processed. For each of the selected conditions, the solid will be processed by chemical leaching, while the liquids will be sent to CEA for testing in WP2. Finally, two production routes will be identified, to be reproduced in long run tests, producing > 8 tons of dry hydrochar to be used for demo-scale tests.
Task 1.3. Converting HTT solid into bioanthracite (Lead: REC. Participants: POLI, TEC) (M5-M24)
Subtask 1.3.1. Inorganic extraction from HTT solid by chemical leaching tests. REC (M5-M12): In this task, REC will process the hydrochar obtained by task 1.1 by chemical leaching in laboratory. The following parameters will be varied: operating temperature (40-90°C), liquid to solid ratio (5-20 m/m), reagent to solid ratio (0.2-2 m/m), contact time (0.5-3 h). In addition, the trials will involve different type of reagents (organic/inorganic and acid/basic). The tests performances will be evaluated by means of three indicators: (i) extraction efficiency of the target inorganic elements (phosphorous, calcium, magnesium, iron, etc.), to evaluate the amount of recovered element compared to the amount in the processed hydrochar; (ii) degree of demineralisation, that is the percentage of extracted mineral matter (ash) from the processed hydrochar, (iii) carbon balance of the process. For these evaluations, the concentration of inorganic elements in the produced liquid phase (leachate) and the ash content in the produced solid will be determined. Further analysis will be performed on the products from the best performing leaching tests, which will be adopted for the next pyrolysis trials. The target inorganic compounds will be recovered by precipitation, by the dosage of appropriate reagents, to modify the pH of the processed leachate and recover the dissolved compounds in the form of salts. The salts recovered will be characterized to assess the content of inorganic elements. Subtask 1.3.2. Experimental campaign on chemical leaching pilot unit. REC (M10-M18). The experimental campaign on pilot scale will be performed based on the results of the laboratory scale leaching trials. The trials will be carried on by a pilot leaching unit with a capacity of 500 lt/h, which is installed at REC’s facilities. For the tests, the optimal operating conditions determined by small scale trials will be adopted. In the plant, the char is processed with the acid solution in is a stirred and heated reactor. Then, the slutty is pumped to the solid-liquid separation, where a filter press is used to separate the leached solid from the liquid phase. The resulting liquid phase is precipitated to recover nutrients, while the dewatered solid is washed by water and air dried inside the filter-press prior to its collection. One among the two selected feedstock in WP1 will be adopted for the trials or, as an alternative, a mixture of both. The experimental campaign will include the variation of the acid and/or acid mixtures (organic acids, inorganic acids); and of the acid/solid ratio (0.2-0.6). The solids and liquids will be characterised so that the optimal conditions could be identified. Subtask 1.3.3. Processing of leached hydrochar by pyrolysis in laboratory. REC  (M10-M24): REC will process the leached hydrochar obtained by task 1.3 by slow pyrolysis in a TGA leco 701 furnace to turn it into a low volatile, low ash bioanthracite. Particularly, the hydrochar, collected after acidification and leaching process, will be dried and processed by slow pyrolysis at temperature between 600°C and 900°C, in absence of oxygen, for a residence time between 15 min and 2 hours. After the process, the pyrolysed solid will be collected and analysed, in order to evaluate the chemical and physical composition in comparison with the fossil coal used by the industrial actors. Subtask 1.3.4. Processing raw hydrochar by alkali-aided pyrolysis in laboratory. REC (M10-M24): REC will process raw hydrochar obtained by task 1.1 in a lab scale furnace able to achieve a temperature of up to 900°C. The dry hydrochar will be mixed with alkali reagents such as Na2CO3, at different mixing rates and then pyrolysed in absence of oxygen to promote the solubilization of silica and of phosphates. The solid obtained from the test will be analysed and further processed by hot water washing to remove the solubilized compounds and the remaining sodium. Moreover, the resulting solid, based on the resulting quality, could be furtherly processed by leaching steps to achieve the quality parameters required by the steelmakers, such as: P < 800 ppm wt, Zn < 200 ppm wt, volatiles < 20% wt, moisture < 3% wt. The tests will be performed on all the samples obtained by task 1.1., and the following parameters will be changed during the campaign: pyrolysis temperature (600-900°C), alkali:char ratio (0.1-0.5), leaching conditions and reagents. The best conditions will be selected for being replicated at larger scale in task 1.4.
Task 1.4 Production of bioanthracite at demo-scale (M16-M40) (Lead: AMMR. Particip.: REC, POL, ERA)
Subtask 1.4.1. Testing the integrated process in real environment. REC (M16-M30): The raw and leached hydrochar will be processed following the two alternative processes described in T1.3. The tests will be performed starting from the hydrochar produced in T1.2. For each test, > 400 kg of both raw and leached hydrochar, obtained from the 4 selected conditions, will be processed in a pyrolysis rotary kiln of 80 kg/h capacity operated by REC, to test the process at real scale and produce required amounts for the testing activities to be performed in WP3. The tests will bring to obtain pyrolysed hydrochar (bioanthracite), with reduced heavy metals and phosphorus content, and low volatility. In total, 8 pyrolysis tests will be performed. The amount of bioanthracite produced in this subtask is estimated about 1.2 tons (> 150 kg per test). Subtask 1.4.2. Construction and testing on a new demo-scale plant with 300 kg/h capacity. AMMR (M24-M40) AMMR will construct a newly designed prototype based on the results of tasks 1.1. And 1.2, able to turn hydrochar into bioanthracite at demo scale and produce enough sample for testing it in its proper EAF, and for validating the process. The plant will consist in a two-unit facility, including a pyrolysis reactor, a pyrogas oxidizer, and a char leaching plant. The components will be designed by REC and AMMR and purchased by suppliers based on the required process conditions. The plant will have a capacity of 300 kg/h of raw hydrochar inlet, and it will be used to process >8 tons of hydrochar to be unturned into > 4 tons of bioanthracite to be used for testing the EAF.
Task 1.5. Studies on bioanthracite compaction for application in steelmaking (M13-M40). Leader: HEA. Participants: REC, TEC, ERA, CELSA, AMMR): HEA will study and apply different compaction solutions to turn the bioanthracite produced into granules, briquettes, and pellets, with suitable density and dimension for being used in different furnaces used by steel industries. The compaction tests will be first performed in lab bench scale units, with inorganic and organic binders, mixed at different rates. The tests will be done using also recycled materials produced by steelmaking processes, such as EAF and BF slag, as well as biobased binders (e.g. starch) and other binding agents (e.g. PVA). Moreover, different size of compacted bio-anthracite will be obtained to enable the use as injected granules or charged briquettes in pilot tests with EAFs and BFs.
Work Package No. | Work Package No. | 2 | Lead: CEA
Work Package Title | Work Package Title | Green Hydrogen Production | Green Hydrogen Production
Start Month | 1 | End Month | 40
Objectives: ■ Cat HTG operating conditions for obtaining a high H2 composition (>60% H2) into gaz. ■ Improvement of selectivity towards H2 (molar ratio H2/CH4 >3) ■ Carbon conversion yield >75%■ High operating time in continuous mode (>16h for cat HTG) ■ High flow rate with Cat HTG >6 Kg/h in continuous operation mode | Objectives: ■ Cat HTG operating conditions for obtaining a high H2 composition (>60% H2) into gaz. ■ Improvement of selectivity towards H2 (molar ratio H2/CH4 >3) ■ Carbon conversion yield >75%■ High operating time in continuous mode (>16h for cat HTG) ■ High flow rate with Cat HTG >6 Kg/h in continuous operation mode | Objectives: ■ Cat HTG operating conditions for obtaining a high H2 composition (>60% H2) into gaz. ■ Improvement of selectivity towards H2 (molar ratio H2/CH4 >3) ■ Carbon conversion yield >75%■ High operating time in continuous mode (>16h for cat HTG) ■ High flow rate with Cat HTG >6 Kg/h in continuous operation mode | Objectives: ■ Cat HTG operating conditions for obtaining a high H2 composition (>60% H2) into gaz. ■ Improvement of selectivity towards H2 (molar ratio H2/CH4 >3) ■ Carbon conversion yield >75%■ High operating time in continuous mode (>16h for cat HTG) ■ High flow rate with Cat HTG >6 Kg/h in continuous operation mode
Description of work:  
Task 2.1 Experimental campaign on SCWG of biowaste and HTT liquid (Lead: CEA. Part: REC) M1-40
Subtask 2.1.1: Batch experimental campaign. CEA (M1 – M20): A first selection of aqueous phases coming from HTC from different initial biogenic wastes will be done by analytical characterizations (carbon content and inorganic content). Conversion efficiency of selected HTC aqueous phase will be done in a batch reactor. The maximum of hydrogen production will be searched at low temperature such as 450°C with catalyst. Tests at 450°C without catalyst and at high temperature (such as 600°C) with and without catalyst will be done for comparison. Tests will be performed first with a commercial catalyst, and different new innovative catalysts will be tested for the different resources. Results will consist in carbon conversion yields in the aqueous phase, hydrogen production yields as well as gas composition (hydrogen, methane, carbon dioxide content mainly) for different HTC aqueous phase. The impact of inorganic species in the aqueous phase will be particularly analysed if present regarding their influence on the viability of a catalysed process and if some precipitation phenomenon could occur. After each catalytic experiment, the catalyst surface will be characterized by BET, DRX and poisoning by leaching. Then the most promising catalyst will be identified. Inorganics in solution will be analysed by ICP and ionic chromatography.
Subtask 2.1.2: Small scale continuous experimental campaign. CEA (M20-M32): Same experimental conditions will be used in term of temperature and catalyst for continuous experiments at low flow rate (1 Kg/h) for some most representative HTC aqueous phases. If needed a first salt precipitation step in supercritical water conditions and continuous mode will be coupled before gasification for salt recovery and catalyst protection. Durability of the selected catalyst will be investigated through continuous experiment with a model molecule mixture. Duration of tests will be in the order of 5-10-15-20-25 hours. Same analyses as for subtask 2.1.1 will be done for catalyst and product characterizations (gases, aqueous phase and solids). A comparison will be done between a commercial catalyst and the new innovative one selected in task 2.1.1. Subtask 2.1.3: Design of a new catalytic reactor and testing. CEA (M12 – M32): A new reactor for the HTG pilot will be design, built and tested to handle the catalyst in order to optimise heat transfers, fluid velocity and contact between catalyst surface and organic compounds to be converted. This reactor will be installed and the thermal and flow behaviour characterized with non-reactive tests (residence time distribution and temperature distribution) before conversion tests with model molecule mixture.
Subtask 2.1.4: Continuous validation at pilot scale. CEA (M32–M40): Continuous conversion tests will be performed at a higher flow rate with the new design reactor for catalytic HTG on CEA pilot installation for supercritical water gasification (6-10 kg/h) for two different selected resources and a mixture to be representative of the project main resources at low temperature (around 400 -450 °C). For one resource with high inorganic content first a separation step for salts will be done sequentially before gasification. Long duration tests will be performed for performance and catalyst durability validation with a minimum duration of 8h and possibility up to16h. The catalyst selected in the previous tasks will be implemented. Validation of carbon conversion efficiency and hydrogen production will be done as well as gas composition determination. Finally, a test with a coupling will be done between a previous salt separation step and the catalytic gasification conversion in continuous mode. Feasibility of salt recovery and composition will be stated for a potential valorisation. The data will be used in the global process evaluation. 
Task 2.2 Turn biomethane into green H2 by methane catalytic pyrolysis (Lead: POLI. Participants: REC, SIN, TEC, ERA, AMMR) M8-M40
Subtask 2.2.1 Production and quality assessment of catalyst for methane cracking. POL (M8-M14): Tailor made catalysts will be produced to be used for methane cracking for hydrogen production. Two types of bioanthracite-based catalyst will be produced: a first catalyst will be developed by REC and it will consist of bioanthracite obtained in WP1. To enhance the catalytic properties of bioanthracite, specific compactaction tests and activation experiments will be performed to increase the porosity and ensure an optimal behaviour of the catalytic bed during the reaction. A second catalyst will be developed by mixing bioanthracite with pre-reduced Fe, and residual Fe derived by the SiMn and steel production process. The target is to produce a highly performing catalyst, containing Fe and carbon to be directlty used in the EAF. Subtask 2.2.2 Lab scale tests on biomethane catalytic cracking. REC (M12-M24): In this task, the prepared catalyst will be tested at TRL 4 in a batch methane cracking furnace operating at up to 1100 °C. The tests will be performed preparing a catalyst bed and fluxing CH4 adopting different spatial velocities, process durations and at different temperatures. The furnace will be directly connected with a MicroGC to continuously analyse the produced gas and to determine the methane-to-hydrogen conversion rate. Moreover, after each test, a solid mass balance and a physic-chemical characterization of the spent catalyst will be performed to determine the carbon deposition. These tests will be performed on both the obtained catalyst and compared with literature results in order to determine the optimal process conditions and the best catalyst to be used for pilot scale tests. Subtask 2.2.3 Pilot scale tests on biomethane catalytic cracking. REC (M24-M40): RE-CORD will use the TRL 4/5 plant developed within the H2STEEL project in its initial configuration, consisting of a fixed bed, 6 litres volume reactor where the pelletized catalyst flows with a residence time of max 20 minutes, in counterflow with the injected methane. This configuration allows to process 2 Nm3/h of methane, and needs about 50 kg of pelletized catalyst for one-day test. In this task, REC will perform several one-day tests in the CMP unit, using two different catalysts produced based on the outcomes of WP1 (bioanthracite) and WP3 (SiMn-slag) , aiming to fully characterize the plant status and identify all potential bottlenecks and promising aspects with respect to (i) the fed catalyst quality, and (ii) the CMP operational conditions. In each test, the produced gas will be analysed by Micro-GC, while after the test, the cooled spent catalyst will be collected and characterised in laboratory and by SEM by POLI. The C-enriched catalyst will be used for steel and SiMn alloy production at pilot scale in WP3.
Task 2.3 Experimental campaign on anaerobic digestion of HTT liquid (Lead: REC. Participants: CEA, POLI) M8-M40
Subtask 2.3.1 Testing the HTT liquid by anaerobic digestion at lab scale. REC (M8-M20): The HTT liquids produced by WP1 tests will be used to perform AD tests and identify the actual biomethane potential of the liquid stream, and the final organic carbon still remaining in the liquid. These tests will consist of batch anaerobic fermentation trials in 500 ml stirred and heated bottles. To maximize the methane generation, the HTT liquid will be tested alone, and with different inoculums, setting different conditions: mesophilic and thermophilic temperature, different retention times and liquid-water dilution rates. After each test, the methane potential (g CH4/g liquid) and the organic carbon degradation rate (% COD reduction) will be determined. After the tests, the optimal conditions for HTT liquid digestion will be determined, to be replicated at demo-scale. Subtask 2.3.2 Biomethane production by HTC liquid by anaerobic digestion at demo-scale. REC (M18-M40): After the optimal conditions are identified in subtask 2.3.1. demo-tests will be performed by REC on the HTT liquids produced in WP1 with the new unit. In each test, 1 m3 of HTT liquid will be processed in an anerobic digestion reactor, heated electrically and continuously stirred, owned by REC. The AD unit will be continuously connected with a gas volumetric meter. Moreover, gas bags will be periodically filled and analysed by Micro-GC to determine the methane concentration in the produced biogas during the test. Moreover, the finally obtained digestate will be collected and characterised, in order to determine the nutrient content, the COD, and the pH. The tests will demonstrate the methane productivity of the AD process and used in WP4 and WP5 to perform a techno-economic assessment of the process, in comparison with the SCWG results obtained in task 2.1.
Task 2.4 Inorganic recovery and treatment of wastewater from AD and SCWG processes (Lead: REC. Participants: CEA) M24-M40
 This task will focus on closing the loop of the whole treatment process, in a circular concept. The HTT liquid processed by SCWG and AD, contains not only organic carbon, but also nutrients and soluble salts, such as K, Na, Ca, N and phosphates. To make the water recyclable and valorise the nutrients, inorganic recovery processes will be tested in this task. More specifically, the recovered streams from task 2.1 and task 2.3 will be characterised and further processed to extract nutrients. Salts precipitation tests and membrane filtration trials will be performed by REC and CEA, on the residues obtained from AD and SCWG tests respectively. The final recovered nutrient compounds (in the form of salts, or concentrated liquids) will be characterized and assessed in comparison of the quality criteria identified by the EU fertilisers regulation EU 1009/2019. | Description of work:  
Task 2.1 Experimental campaign on SCWG of biowaste and HTT liquid (Lead: CEA. Part: REC) M1-40
Subtask 2.1.1: Batch experimental campaign. CEA (M1 – M20): A first selection of aqueous phases coming from HTC from different initial biogenic wastes will be done by analytical characterizations (carbon content and inorganic content). Conversion efficiency of selected HTC aqueous phase will be done in a batch reactor. The maximum of hydrogen production will be searched at low temperature such as 450°C with catalyst. Tests at 450°C without catalyst and at high temperature (such as 600°C) with and without catalyst will be done for comparison. Tests will be performed first with a commercial catalyst, and different new innovative catalysts will be tested for the different resources. Results will consist in carbon conversion yields in the aqueous phase, hydrogen production yields as well as gas composition (hydrogen, methane, carbon dioxide content mainly) for different HTC aqueous phase. The impact of inorganic species in the aqueous phase will be particularly analysed if present regarding their influence on the viability of a catalysed process and if some precipitation phenomenon could occur. After each catalytic experiment, the catalyst surface will be characterized by BET, DRX and poisoning by leaching. Then the most promising catalyst will be identified. Inorganics in solution will be analysed by ICP and ionic chromatography.
Subtask 2.1.2: Small scale continuous experimental campaign. CEA (M20-M32): Same experimental conditions will be used in term of temperature and catalyst for continuous experiments at low flow rate (1 Kg/h) for some most representative HTC aqueous phases. If needed a first salt precipitation step in supercritical water conditions and continuous mode will be coupled before gasification for salt recovery and catalyst protection. Durability of the selected catalyst will be investigated through continuous experiment with a model molecule mixture. Duration of tests will be in the order of 5-10-15-20-25 hours. Same analyses as for subtask 2.1.1 will be done for catalyst and product characterizations (gases, aqueous phase and solids). A comparison will be done between a commercial catalyst and the new innovative one selected in task 2.1.1. Subtask 2.1.3: Design of a new catalytic reactor and testing. CEA (M12 – M32): A new reactor for the HTG pilot will be design, built and tested to handle the catalyst in order to optimise heat transfers, fluid velocity and contact between catalyst surface and organic compounds to be converted. This reactor will be installed and the thermal and flow behaviour characterized with non-reactive tests (residence time distribution and temperature distribution) before conversion tests with model molecule mixture.
Subtask 2.1.4: Continuous validation at pilot scale. CEA (M32–M40): Continuous conversion tests will be performed at a higher flow rate with the new design reactor for catalytic HTG on CEA pilot installation for supercritical water gasification (6-10 kg/h) for two different selected resources and a mixture to be representative of the project main resources at low temperature (around 400 -450 °C). For one resource with high inorganic content first a separation step for salts will be done sequentially before gasification. Long duration tests will be performed for performance and catalyst durability validation with a minimum duration of 8h and possibility up to16h. The catalyst selected in the previous tasks will be implemented. Validation of carbon conversion efficiency and hydrogen production will be done as well as gas composition determination. Finally, a test with a coupling will be done between a previous salt separation step and the catalytic gasification conversion in continuous mode. Feasibility of salt recovery and composition will be stated for a potential valorisation. The data will be used in the global process evaluation. 
Task 2.2 Turn biomethane into green H2 by methane catalytic pyrolysis (Lead: POLI. Participants: REC, SIN, TEC, ERA, AMMR) M8-M40
Subtask 2.2.1 Production and quality assessment of catalyst for methane cracking. POL (M8-M14): Tailor made catalysts will be produced to be used for methane cracking for hydrogen production. Two types of bioanthracite-based catalyst will be produced: a first catalyst will be developed by REC and it will consist of bioanthracite obtained in WP1. To enhance the catalytic properties of bioanthracite, specific compactaction tests and activation experiments will be performed to increase the porosity and ensure an optimal behaviour of the catalytic bed during the reaction. A second catalyst will be developed by mixing bioanthracite with pre-reduced Fe, and residual Fe derived by the SiMn and steel production process. The target is to produce a highly performing catalyst, containing Fe and carbon to be directlty used in the EAF. Subtask 2.2.2 Lab scale tests on biomethane catalytic cracking. REC (M12-M24): In this task, the prepared catalyst will be tested at TRL 4 in a batch methane cracking furnace operating at up to 1100 °C. The tests will be performed preparing a catalyst bed and fluxing CH4 adopting different spatial velocities, process durations and at different temperatures. The furnace will be directly connected with a MicroGC to continuously analyse the produced gas and to determine the methane-to-hydrogen conversion rate. Moreover, after each test, a solid mass balance and a physic-chemical characterization of the spent catalyst will be performed to determine the carbon deposition. These tests will be performed on both the obtained catalyst and compared with literature results in order to determine the optimal process conditions and the best catalyst to be used for pilot scale tests. Subtask 2.2.3 Pilot scale tests on biomethane catalytic cracking. REC (M24-M40): RE-CORD will use the TRL 4/5 plant developed within the H2STEEL project in its initial configuration, consisting of a fixed bed, 6 litres volume reactor where the pelletized catalyst flows with a residence time of max 20 minutes, in counterflow with the injected methane. This configuration allows to process 2 Nm3/h of methane, and needs about 50 kg of pelletized catalyst for one-day test. In this task, REC will perform several one-day tests in the CMP unit, using two different catalysts produced based on the outcomes of WP1 (bioanthracite) and WP3 (SiMn-slag) , aiming to fully characterize the plant status and identify all potential bottlenecks and promising aspects with respect to (i) the fed catalyst quality, and (ii) the CMP operational conditions. In each test, the produced gas will be analysed by Micro-GC, while after the test, the cooled spent catalyst will be collected and characterised in laboratory and by SEM by POLI. The C-enriched catalyst will be used for steel and SiMn alloy production at pilot scale in WP3.
Task 2.3 Experimental campaign on anaerobic digestion of HTT liquid (Lead: REC. Participants: CEA, POLI) M8-M40
Subtask 2.3.1 Testing the HTT liquid by anaerobic digestion at lab scale. REC (M8-M20): The HTT liquids produced by WP1 tests will be used to perform AD tests and identify the actual biomethane potential of the liquid stream, and the final organic carbon still remaining in the liquid. These tests will consist of batch anaerobic fermentation trials in 500 ml stirred and heated bottles. To maximize the methane generation, the HTT liquid will be tested alone, and with different inoculums, setting different conditions: mesophilic and thermophilic temperature, different retention times and liquid-water dilution rates. After each test, the methane potential (g CH4/g liquid) and the organic carbon degradation rate (% COD reduction) will be determined. After the tests, the optimal conditions for HTT liquid digestion will be determined, to be replicated at demo-scale. Subtask 2.3.2 Biomethane production by HTC liquid by anaerobic digestion at demo-scale. REC (M18-M40): After the optimal conditions are identified in subtask 2.3.1. demo-tests will be performed by REC on the HTT liquids produced in WP1 with the new unit. In each test, 1 m3 of HTT liquid will be processed in an anerobic digestion reactor, heated electrically and continuously stirred, owned by REC. The AD unit will be continuously connected with a gas volumetric meter. Moreover, gas bags will be periodically filled and analysed by Micro-GC to determine the methane concentration in the produced biogas during the test. Moreover, the finally obtained digestate will be collected and characterised, in order to determine the nutrient content, the COD, and the pH. The tests will demonstrate the methane productivity of the AD process and used in WP4 and WP5 to perform a techno-economic assessment of the process, in comparison with the SCWG results obtained in task 2.1.
Task 2.4 Inorganic recovery and treatment of wastewater from AD and SCWG processes (Lead: REC. Participants: CEA) M24-M40
 This task will focus on closing the loop of the whole treatment process, in a circular concept. The HTT liquid processed by SCWG and AD, contains not only organic carbon, but also nutrients and soluble salts, such as K, Na, Ca, N and phosphates. To make the water recyclable and valorise the nutrients, inorganic recovery processes will be tested in this task. More specifically, the recovered streams from task 2.1 and task 2.3 will be characterised and further processed to extract nutrients. Salts precipitation tests and membrane filtration trials will be performed by REC and CEA, on the residues obtained from AD and SCWG tests respectively. The final recovered nutrient compounds (in the form of salts, or concentrated liquids) will be characterized and assessed in comparison of the quality criteria identified by the EU fertilisers regulation EU 1009/2019. | Description of work:  
Task 2.1 Experimental campaign on SCWG of biowaste and HTT liquid (Lead: CEA. Part: REC) M1-40
Subtask 2.1.1: Batch experimental campaign. CEA (M1 – M20): A first selection of aqueous phases coming from HTC from different initial biogenic wastes will be done by analytical characterizations (carbon content and inorganic content). Conversion efficiency of selected HTC aqueous phase will be done in a batch reactor. The maximum of hydrogen production will be searched at low temperature such as 450°C with catalyst. Tests at 450°C without catalyst and at high temperature (such as 600°C) with and without catalyst will be done for comparison. Tests will be performed first with a commercial catalyst, and different new innovative catalysts will be tested for the different resources. Results will consist in carbon conversion yields in the aqueous phase, hydrogen production yields as well as gas composition (hydrogen, methane, carbon dioxide content mainly) for different HTC aqueous phase. The impact of inorganic species in the aqueous phase will be particularly analysed if present regarding their influence on the viability of a catalysed process and if some precipitation phenomenon could occur. After each catalytic experiment, the catalyst surface will be characterized by BET, DRX and poisoning by leaching. Then the most promising catalyst will be identified. Inorganics in solution will be analysed by ICP and ionic chromatography.
Subtask 2.1.2: Small scale continuous experimental campaign. CEA (M20-M32): Same experimental conditions will be used in term of temperature and catalyst for continuous experiments at low flow rate (1 Kg/h) for some most representative HTC aqueous phases. If needed a first salt precipitation step in supercritical water conditions and continuous mode will be coupled before gasification for salt recovery and catalyst protection. Durability of the selected catalyst will be investigated through continuous experiment with a model molecule mixture. Duration of tests will be in the order of 5-10-15-20-25 hours. Same analyses as for subtask 2.1.1 will be done for catalyst and product characterizations (gases, aqueous phase and solids). A comparison will be done between a commercial catalyst and the new innovative one selected in task 2.1.1. Subtask 2.1.3: Design of a new catalytic reactor and testing. CEA (M12 – M32): A new reactor for the HTG pilot will be design, built and tested to handle the catalyst in order to optimise heat transfers, fluid velocity and contact between catalyst surface and organic compounds to be converted. This reactor will be installed and the thermal and flow behaviour characterized with non-reactive tests (residence time distribution and temperature distribution) before conversion tests with model molecule mixture.
Subtask 2.1.4: Continuous validation at pilot scale. CEA (M32–M40): Continuous conversion tests will be performed at a higher flow rate with the new design reactor for catalytic HTG on CEA pilot installation for supercritical water gasification (6-10 kg/h) for two different selected resources and a mixture to be representative of the project main resources at low temperature (around 400 -450 °C). For one resource with high inorganic content first a separation step for salts will be done sequentially before gasification. Long duration tests will be performed for performance and catalyst durability validation with a minimum duration of 8h and possibility up to16h. The catalyst selected in the previous tasks will be implemented. Validation of carbon conversion efficiency and hydrogen production will be done as well as gas composition determination. Finally, a test with a coupling will be done between a previous salt separation step and the catalytic gasification conversion in continuous mode. Feasibility of salt recovery and composition will be stated for a potential valorisation. The data will be used in the global process evaluation. 
Task 2.2 Turn biomethane into green H2 by methane catalytic pyrolysis (Lead: POLI. Participants: REC, SIN, TEC, ERA, AMMR) M8-M40
Subtask 2.2.1 Production and quality assessment of catalyst for methane cracking. POL (M8-M14): Tailor made catalysts will be produced to be used for methane cracking for hydrogen production. Two types of bioanthracite-based catalyst will be produced: a first catalyst will be developed by REC and it will consist of bioanthracite obtained in WP1. To enhance the catalytic properties of bioanthracite, specific compactaction tests and activation experiments will be performed to increase the porosity and ensure an optimal behaviour of the catalytic bed during the reaction. A second catalyst will be developed by mixing bioanthracite with pre-reduced Fe, and residual Fe derived by the SiMn and steel production process. The target is to produce a highly performing catalyst, containing Fe and carbon to be directlty used in the EAF. Subtask 2.2.2 Lab scale tests on biomethane catalytic cracking. REC (M12-M24): In this task, the prepared catalyst will be tested at TRL 4 in a batch methane cracking furnace operating at up to 1100 °C. The tests will be performed preparing a catalyst bed and fluxing CH4 adopting different spatial velocities, process durations and at different temperatures. The furnace will be directly connected with a MicroGC to continuously analyse the produced gas and to determine the methane-to-hydrogen conversion rate. Moreover, after each test, a solid mass balance and a physic-chemical characterization of the spent catalyst will be performed to determine the carbon deposition. These tests will be performed on both the obtained catalyst and compared with literature results in order to determine the optimal process conditions and the best catalyst to be used for pilot scale tests. Subtask 2.2.3 Pilot scale tests on biomethane catalytic cracking. REC (M24-M40): RE-CORD will use the TRL 4/5 plant developed within the H2STEEL project in its initial configuration, consisting of a fixed bed, 6 litres volume reactor where the pelletized catalyst flows with a residence time of max 20 minutes, in counterflow with the injected methane. This configuration allows to process 2 Nm3/h of methane, and needs about 50 kg of pelletized catalyst for one-day test. In this task, REC will perform several one-day tests in the CMP unit, using two different catalysts produced based on the outcomes of WP1 (bioanthracite) and WP3 (SiMn-slag) , aiming to fully characterize the plant status and identify all potential bottlenecks and promising aspects with respect to (i) the fed catalyst quality, and (ii) the CMP operational conditions. In each test, the produced gas will be analysed by Micro-GC, while after the test, the cooled spent catalyst will be collected and characterised in laboratory and by SEM by POLI. The C-enriched catalyst will be used for steel and SiMn alloy production at pilot scale in WP3.
Task 2.3 Experimental campaign on anaerobic digestion of HTT liquid (Lead: REC. Participants: CEA, POLI) M8-M40
Subtask 2.3.1 Testing the HTT liquid by anaerobic digestion at lab scale. REC (M8-M20): The HTT liquids produced by WP1 tests will be used to perform AD tests and identify the actual biomethane potential of the liquid stream, and the final organic carbon still remaining in the liquid. These tests will consist of batch anaerobic fermentation trials in 500 ml stirred and heated bottles. To maximize the methane generation, the HTT liquid will be tested alone, and with different inoculums, setting different conditions: mesophilic and thermophilic temperature, different retention times and liquid-water dilution rates. After each test, the methane potential (g CH4/g liquid) and the organic carbon degradation rate (% COD reduction) will be determined. After the tests, the optimal conditions for HTT liquid digestion will be determined, to be replicated at demo-scale. Subtask 2.3.2 Biomethane production by HTC liquid by anaerobic digestion at demo-scale. REC (M18-M40): After the optimal conditions are identified in subtask 2.3.1. demo-tests will be performed by REC on the HTT liquids produced in WP1 with the new unit. In each test, 1 m3 of HTT liquid will be processed in an anerobic digestion reactor, heated electrically and continuously stirred, owned by REC. The AD unit will be continuously connected with a gas volumetric meter. Moreover, gas bags will be periodically filled and analysed by Micro-GC to determine the methane concentration in the produced biogas during the test. Moreover, the finally obtained digestate will be collected and characterised, in order to determine the nutrient content, the COD, and the pH. The tests will demonstrate the methane productivity of the AD process and used in WP4 and WP5 to perform a techno-economic assessment of the process, in comparison with the SCWG results obtained in task 2.1.
Task 2.4 Inorganic recovery and treatment of wastewater from AD and SCWG processes (Lead: REC. Participants: CEA) M24-M40
 This task will focus on closing the loop of the whole treatment process, in a circular concept. The HTT liquid processed by SCWG and AD, contains not only organic carbon, but also nutrients and soluble salts, such as K, Na, Ca, N and phosphates. To make the water recyclable and valorise the nutrients, inorganic recovery processes will be tested in this task. More specifically, the recovered streams from task 2.1 and task 2.3 will be characterised and further processed to extract nutrients. Salts precipitation tests and membrane filtration trials will be performed by REC and CEA, on the residues obtained from AD and SCWG tests respectively. The final recovered nutrient compounds (in the form of salts, or concentrated liquids) will be characterized and assessed in comparison of the quality criteria identified by the EU fertilisers regulation EU 1009/2019. | Description of work:  
Task 2.1 Experimental campaign on SCWG of biowaste and HTT liquid (Lead: CEA. Part: REC) M1-40
Subtask 2.1.1: Batch experimental campaign. CEA (M1 – M20): A first selection of aqueous phases coming from HTC from different initial biogenic wastes will be done by analytical characterizations (carbon content and inorganic content). Conversion efficiency of selected HTC aqueous phase will be done in a batch reactor. The maximum of hydrogen production will be searched at low temperature such as 450°C with catalyst. Tests at 450°C without catalyst and at high temperature (such as 600°C) with and without catalyst will be done for comparison. Tests will be performed first with a commercial catalyst, and different new innovative catalysts will be tested for the different resources. Results will consist in carbon conversion yields in the aqueous phase, hydrogen production yields as well as gas composition (hydrogen, methane, carbon dioxide content mainly) for different HTC aqueous phase. The impact of inorganic species in the aqueous phase will be particularly analysed if present regarding their influence on the viability of a catalysed process and if some precipitation phenomenon could occur. After each catalytic experiment, the catalyst surface will be characterized by BET, DRX and poisoning by leaching. Then the most promising catalyst will be identified. Inorganics in solution will be analysed by ICP and ionic chromatography.
Subtask 2.1.2: Small scale continuous experimental campaign. CEA (M20-M32): Same experimental conditions will be used in term of temperature and catalyst for continuous experiments at low flow rate (1 Kg/h) for some most representative HTC aqueous phases. If needed a first salt precipitation step in supercritical water conditions and continuous mode will be coupled before gasification for salt recovery and catalyst protection. Durability of the selected catalyst will be investigated through continuous experiment with a model molecule mixture. Duration of tests will be in the order of 5-10-15-20-25 hours. Same analyses as for subtask 2.1.1 will be done for catalyst and product characterizations (gases, aqueous phase and solids). A comparison will be done between a commercial catalyst and the new innovative one selected in task 2.1.1. Subtask 2.1.3: Design of a new catalytic reactor and testing. CEA (M12 – M32): A new reactor for the HTG pilot will be design, built and tested to handle the catalyst in order to optimise heat transfers, fluid velocity and contact between catalyst surface and organic compounds to be converted. This reactor will be installed and the thermal and flow behaviour characterized with non-reactive tests (residence time distribution and temperature distribution) before conversion tests with model molecule mixture.
Subtask 2.1.4: Continuous validation at pilot scale. CEA (M32–M40): Continuous conversion tests will be performed at a higher flow rate with the new design reactor for catalytic HTG on CEA pilot installation for supercritical water gasification (6-10 kg/h) for two different selected resources and a mixture to be representative of the project main resources at low temperature (around 400 -450 °C). For one resource with high inorganic content first a separation step for salts will be done sequentially before gasification. Long duration tests will be performed for performance and catalyst durability validation with a minimum duration of 8h and possibility up to16h. The catalyst selected in the previous tasks will be implemented. Validation of carbon conversion efficiency and hydrogen production will be done as well as gas composition determination. Finally, a test with a coupling will be done between a previous salt separation step and the catalytic gasification conversion in continuous mode. Feasibility of salt recovery and composition will be stated for a potential valorisation. The data will be used in the global process evaluation. 
Task 2.2 Turn biomethane into green H2 by methane catalytic pyrolysis (Lead: POLI. Participants: REC, SIN, TEC, ERA, AMMR) M8-M40
Subtask 2.2.1 Production and quality assessment of catalyst for methane cracking. POL (M8-M14): Tailor made catalysts will be produced to be used for methane cracking for hydrogen production. Two types of bioanthracite-based catalyst will be produced: a first catalyst will be developed by REC and it will consist of bioanthracite obtained in WP1. To enhance the catalytic properties of bioanthracite, specific compactaction tests and activation experiments will be performed to increase the porosity and ensure an optimal behaviour of the catalytic bed during the reaction. A second catalyst will be developed by mixing bioanthracite with pre-reduced Fe, and residual Fe derived by the SiMn and steel production process. The target is to produce a highly performing catalyst, containing Fe and carbon to be directlty used in the EAF. Subtask 2.2.2 Lab scale tests on biomethane catalytic cracking. REC (M12-M24): In this task, the prepared catalyst will be tested at TRL 4 in a batch methane cracking furnace operating at up to 1100 °C. The tests will be performed preparing a catalyst bed and fluxing CH4 adopting different spatial velocities, process durations and at different temperatures. The furnace will be directly connected with a MicroGC to continuously analyse the produced gas and to determine the methane-to-hydrogen conversion rate. Moreover, after each test, a solid mass balance and a physic-chemical characterization of the spent catalyst will be performed to determine the carbon deposition. These tests will be performed on both the obtained catalyst and compared with literature results in order to determine the optimal process conditions and the best catalyst to be used for pilot scale tests. Subtask 2.2.3 Pilot scale tests on biomethane catalytic cracking. REC (M24-M40): RE-CORD will use the TRL 4/5 plant developed within the H2STEEL project in its initial configuration, consisting of a fixed bed, 6 litres volume reactor where the pelletized catalyst flows with a residence time of max 20 minutes, in counterflow with the injected methane. This configuration allows to process 2 Nm3/h of methane, and needs about 50 kg of pelletized catalyst for one-day test. In this task, REC will perform several one-day tests in the CMP unit, using two different catalysts produced based on the outcomes of WP1 (bioanthracite) and WP3 (SiMn-slag) , aiming to fully characterize the plant status and identify all potential bottlenecks and promising aspects with respect to (i) the fed catalyst quality, and (ii) the CMP operational conditions. In each test, the produced gas will be analysed by Micro-GC, while after the test, the cooled spent catalyst will be collected and characterised in laboratory and by SEM by POLI. The C-enriched catalyst will be used for steel and SiMn alloy production at pilot scale in WP3.
Task 2.3 Experimental campaign on anaerobic digestion of HTT liquid (Lead: REC. Participants: CEA, POLI) M8-M40
Subtask 2.3.1 Testing the HTT liquid by anaerobic digestion at lab scale. REC (M8-M20): The HTT liquids produced by WP1 tests will be used to perform AD tests and identify the actual biomethane potential of the liquid stream, and the final organic carbon still remaining in the liquid. These tests will consist of batch anaerobic fermentation trials in 500 ml stirred and heated bottles. To maximize the methane generation, the HTT liquid will be tested alone, and with different inoculums, setting different conditions: mesophilic and thermophilic temperature, different retention times and liquid-water dilution rates. After each test, the methane potential (g CH4/g liquid) and the organic carbon degradation rate (% COD reduction) will be determined. After the tests, the optimal conditions for HTT liquid digestion will be determined, to be replicated at demo-scale. Subtask 2.3.2 Biomethane production by HTC liquid by anaerobic digestion at demo-scale. REC (M18-M40): After the optimal conditions are identified in subtask 2.3.1. demo-tests will be performed by REC on the HTT liquids produced in WP1 with the new unit. In each test, 1 m3 of HTT liquid will be processed in an anerobic digestion reactor, heated electrically and continuously stirred, owned by REC. The AD unit will be continuously connected with a gas volumetric meter. Moreover, gas bags will be periodically filled and analysed by Micro-GC to determine the methane concentration in the produced biogas during the test. Moreover, the finally obtained digestate will be collected and characterised, in order to determine the nutrient content, the COD, and the pH. The tests will demonstrate the methane productivity of the AD process and used in WP4 and WP5 to perform a techno-economic assessment of the process, in comparison with the SCWG results obtained in task 2.1.
Task 2.4 Inorganic recovery and treatment of wastewater from AD and SCWG processes (Lead: REC. Participants: CEA) M24-M40
 This task will focus on closing the loop of the whole treatment process, in a circular concept. The HTT liquid processed by SCWG and AD, contains not only organic carbon, but also nutrients and soluble salts, such as K, Na, Ca, N and phosphates. To make the water recyclable and valorise the nutrients, inorganic recovery processes will be tested in this task. More specifically, the recovered streams from task 2.1 and task 2.3 will be characterised and further processed to extract nutrients. Salts precipitation tests and membrane filtration trials will be performed by REC and CEA, on the residues obtained from AD and SCWG tests respectively. The final recovered nutrient compounds (in the form of salts, or concentrated liquids) will be characterized and assessed in comparison of the quality criteria identified by the EU fertilisers regulation EU 1009/2019.
Work Package No. | Work Package No. | 3 | Lead: TECNALIA (TEC)
Work Package Title | Work Package Title | Testing low-CO2 steelmaking practices | Testing low-CO2 steelmaking practices
Start Month | 7 | End Month | 44
Objectives: ■ Test and validate the use of bioanthracite in the production of high quality SiMn in the pilot scale SAF. ■ Assess the use of green gas to produce Mn oxide-C composites for SiMn production ■ Test and validate the use of bioanthracite in metal-containing waste’s valorisation processes. ■ Assess the impact of bioanthracite composition on the reduction kinetics of iron ore at high temperatures. ■ Test and validate the use of bioanthracite in EAF operation conditions at demonstration scale ■ Assess the use of green gas produced in the SCWG process as substitute of natural gas in burners. | Objectives: ■ Test and validate the use of bioanthracite in the production of high quality SiMn in the pilot scale SAF. ■ Assess the use of green gas to produce Mn oxide-C composites for SiMn production ■ Test and validate the use of bioanthracite in metal-containing waste’s valorisation processes. ■ Assess the impact of bioanthracite composition on the reduction kinetics of iron ore at high temperatures. ■ Test and validate the use of bioanthracite in EAF operation conditions at demonstration scale ■ Assess the use of green gas produced in the SCWG process as substitute of natural gas in burners. | Objectives: ■ Test and validate the use of bioanthracite in the production of high quality SiMn in the pilot scale SAF. ■ Assess the use of green gas to produce Mn oxide-C composites for SiMn production ■ Test and validate the use of bioanthracite in metal-containing waste’s valorisation processes. ■ Assess the impact of bioanthracite composition on the reduction kinetics of iron ore at high temperatures. ■ Test and validate the use of bioanthracite in EAF operation conditions at demonstration scale ■ Assess the use of green gas produced in the SCWG process as substitute of natural gas in burners. | Objectives: ■ Test and validate the use of bioanthracite in the production of high quality SiMn in the pilot scale SAF. ■ Assess the use of green gas to produce Mn oxide-C composites for SiMn production ■ Test and validate the use of bioanthracite in metal-containing waste’s valorisation processes. ■ Assess the impact of bioanthracite composition on the reduction kinetics of iron ore at high temperatures. ■ Test and validate the use of bioanthracite in EAF operation conditions at demonstration scale ■ Assess the use of green gas produced in the SCWG process as substitute of natural gas in burners.
Description of work:  
Task 3.1. Studies on the application of bioanthracite in the production of SiMn alloy (Lead: ERA. Participants: SIN, REC, TEC, HAE) M7-M44
Subtask 3.1.1. Requirements for the use of bioanthracite in the production of SiMn alloy. ERA (M7-M10): In this first subtask, the production process of SiMn starting from manganese ores in a Submerged Arc Furnace (SAF) will be assessed. The reduction of Mn ore involves a carbothermic reduction process where manganese oxides are reduced to metallic manganese by carbon. This process typically takes place in a SAF, and coke is usually used as reducing agent. As this reducing agent needs to be mixed with the Mn ore and fluxing agents, there are some requirements that need to be considered to use bioanthracite to substitute coke either partially or completely in these mixtures without having an impact in the final product properties or the process yield. 
Subtask 3.1.2. Pre-qualification tests. ERA (M10-M18): Different samples of bioanthracite produced in task 1.4 will be examined at ERA and SINTEF for pre-qualification tests before final testing & validation by pilot smelting. Parameters to be studied include: 1) Boudouard reactivity, and subsequent hot strength for partially reacted biocarbon raw materials; 2) Simultaneous studies of gas & ore reactivities under simulated furnace gas atmosphere; 3) Slag reactivities. 
Subtask 3.1.3 Testing and validation at pilot scale. SIN (M18-M44): Considering the results of the previous tests, the most promising bioanthracite reductant will be tested and validated in a pilot scale furnace. Charge materials such as Mn ore, FeMn slag, fluxes & reductants will be prepared at ERA following the optimal charge mix proposed by the mass & energy balance provided by the software Mn-Calc. To validate bioanthracite use as reductant under relevant furnace conditions, the pilot scale submerged-arc Mn-alloy furnace at SINTEF will be employed, and a test protocol developed in the EU PREMA project will be followed and optimized for the new reductant. The setup will include a 450 kVA pilot furnace operating at about 150 kW. The pilot campaigns will have a duration of about 12 hours, which in most cases has proven sufficient to reach a steady state for the process to simulate the relevant reactions in a furnace environment. The furnace will be tapped at regular intervals according to specific energy added to the furnace (each 80 kWh), and about 100 kg of both slag and metal will be tapped. Post tapping measurements will include the mass and chemical composition of both slag and metal, and a full material balance will be done to validate the chemical composition of the bioanthracite raw material. During the pilot, the process will be monitored with various sensors: the off-gas by micro-GC, the furnace charge temperature distribution with thermocouples and tapping temperatures with multi-spectral pyrometry. In addition, continuous mass and dust measurements will be performed. Once the first run is finished, the furnace will undergo an autopsy. The furnace burden will be excavated and the degree of ore prereduction will be investigated. Furthermore, the coke bed zone (high temperature area) of the furnace will be filled with epoxy, and the cross section will be cut and analysed. The impact of the bioanthracite on SiMn process will be evaluated using the thermodynamical simulation tool HSC Sim developed in PREMA. A minimum of two pilot runs and maximum of four will be conducted, each round demanding ⁓150 kg of bioanthracite.
Task 3.2. Studies on C-deposition on MnO by methane cracking (Lead: SINTEF. Participants: ERA, TEC) M13-M44
Subtask 3.2.1. Assessment of methane cracking for carbon deposition on Mn ores. SIN (M13-M18): In this task, C deposition on Mn ores and SiO2 by thermal methane cracking will be tested in a lab scale furnace by SIN. The objective is to decompose methane into carbon and hydrogen at high temperatures, with the carbon depositing on the ores. A synthetic gas will be produced with the composition of the CH4-containing green gas originated in the SCWG and AD tests. Energy effects for the overall process will in addition be evaluated by simulation of selected cases using and further developing HSC Sim tool developed in other projects (PREMA). In earlier investigations gas with more than 70% H2 was produced by cracking of methane. To identify conditions that gives both high H2 content in the off-gas, high amount of carbon deposited on the charge materials and suitable properties of the produced composites is crucial for further development of the proposed concept. Through a combination of experiments, thermodynamic calculations by Fact Sage and kinetic modelling this task will develop knowledge about reaction mechanism, reaction rates and product properties for the main involved reactions as a basis for this. Deposition of C from cracking of biomethane on different Mn-sources as well as silica sources will be planed and investigated by SINT and ERA in small (10 gram) and medium (up to 2 kg) scale in existing tube furnaces, built for controlled purging of combustible gas and equipped with continuous measurement of off-gas composition.  Near industrial sized particles and the effect of their physical properties will be studied. The focus will be to investigate the effect of hydrogen quality versus amount of deposited carbon under different conditions. Temperature and gas flow as well as retention times are important variables. Agglomerates (decomposed carbon on Mn source or quartz) produced in the experiments will be characterized by different methods including CT and SEM. Materials for further investigations of reduction reaction in Subtask 3.2.2. will be produced. Additionally, pressure drop tests could be conducted. Additional research will focus, among other aspects, on assessing whether iron (Fe), manganese (Mn) and potentially other elements present in high-carbon ferromanganese (HCFeMn) slag has a catalytic effect on methane (CH₄) cracking. This part of the work will be carried out in collaboration with POLI and REC to support and strengthen their ongoing research in catalytic pyrolysis of green methane (WP2).  The trials will be followed by an analysis of the outlet gas composition and of the substrate to determine the parameters that could potentially lead to the deposition of the carbon for the self-reduction of all the MnO in the subsequent SAF process. 
Subtask 3.2.2 Deposited carbon as an effective reductant in the production of SiMn alloy. SIN (M18-M44): Subtask focuses on how charge materials with deposited carbon from biogas affect reactions and reaction products in SiMn alloy production. The aim is to clarify the fundamental mechanisms for the main reactions involved and model the effect of important parameters on each of these as a basis for further upscaling. Energy effects for the overall process will in addition be evaluated by simulation of selected cases using and further developing HSC Sim tool developed in other EU projects (PreMa). Production of silicomanganese alloy from decomposed carbon on Mn source or quartz will be investigated experimentally in thermogravimetric (TG) and other tube furnaces. To avoid reaction with crucibles made from graphite, SiC crucibles will be used. Rate for reduction to alloy with deposited carbon versus with separate coke or coal particles will be compared to evaluate the potential for use of deposited carbon. Kinetic models will be developed based on data from the thermogravimetry experiments combined by FactSage calculations. For composites where the oxide is covered by carbon, reaction path is expected to be different from reactions between separate particles of carbon and oxides, and diffusion of gases through the deposited carbon layer, may play a role. Characterization of partly reduced materials with methods like EPMA, SEM, will be crucial to understand reaction mechanism by ERA, SINTEF, POLI. Supplementary investigations of melting & wetting properties in sessile drop apparatus may be included. Main goal is to obtain fundamental knowledge about reactions between deposited carbon & oxide material and effects of different properties of both deposited carbon and oxides.
Task 3.3. Studies on the use of biocarbon materials and green gas in iron and steelmaking processes (Lead: AMMR. Participants: CELSA, TEC, REC) M13-M44
Subtask 3.3.1 Preliminary assessment of the use of bioanthracite to reduce iron oxides. AMMR (M13-M18): The different bioanthracite materials will be analyzed concerning their reduction behavior on iron oxides by AMMR. Therefore, the materials will be agglomerated using different types of cold agglomeration process, including pelletizing, extrusion and briquetting. Development of non-fossil organic binders will also be evaluated. Different series will be performed with thermogravimetric analysis and muffle furnaces to study the chemical reactions between oxide materials and bioanthracite. Temperature range investigated will be up to 1600°C. Oxidative and inert atmosphere will be used in the tests. Mass proportion of the different components will depend on respective carbon and iron oxide content. The aim of the study is to analyze the impact of iron ore composition and granulometry. Comparison with metallurgical coal and coke will be done to compare the reduction behavior of the bioanthracite materials and their impact on the metal composition. Subtask 3.3.2 Preliminary assessment of the use of ASR polymers as carbon source in EAF. CELSA (M13-M18): CELSA will study the potential of Automobile Shredder Residue (ASR) polymers as carbon source for slag foaming in an EAF. Depending on the fixed carbon content and volatile matter and other impurities of the bioanthracite produced in task 1.4, mixing and agglomeration trials of bioanthracite and polymers will be performed at lab-scale. The different polymers to be included in the assessment (plastics, rubbers, textiles, etc.) will need to be pre-treated to obtain a product with the appropriate granularity for the mixing process and the following injection in EAF. Subtask 3.3.3 Simulation of green gas use in BF tuyeres. AMMR (M18-M30): The goal is the simulation of biocarbon valorisation through PCI coal replacement in BF-tuyeres. The material will be analysed on their handling concerning grindability in coal grinders and transportability in injection lines. All characterizations will follow well-known international standards and are regularly used inside AM to determine value in use of its PCI coals for procurement purposes. Results of characterization will be used as input data for assessing potential impacts on Blast Furnace (BF) process (limiting factors for biocarbon usability – value-in-use sensitivity) through modelling of BF inner state. Overall impacts on BF process will be assessed through existing well-known and reliable BF models such as: Heat and mass balance model, Thermodynamic modelling of slag composition and viscosity model, BF inner state global model, and other models that could contribute to a deeper understanding of impact when replacing PCI coals by biocarbon. Subtask 3.3.4. Use of bioanthracite in iron ore agglomeration processes. AMMR (M30-M44): Main effort in this subtask will be addressed onto the impact of bioanthracite use on pelletizing and sintering KPIs, such as quality, productivity and pollutant emissions. This includes the identification of the maximum possible solid fuel replacement by bioanthracite and the corresponding abatement of fossil-based CO2 emissions. As for pelletizing, the fired pellets will be prepared using standard pelletizing disks and fired in a muffle furnace. The impact of bioanthracite usage on quality KPIs will then be investigated by microstructural analysis and normed tests such as low temperature disintegration, reducibility and reduction underload and others. All characterizations will adhere to international standards and are common practice inside AM to determine value in use of solid fuels for procurement purposes.  As for sintering, the main tool for this study will be the sinter pot pilot installation. This pilot installation allows the simulation of the sintering process at reduced scale and is the standard test for the performance characterization of materials for sintering in ArcelorMittal (AM). Further, the sinter pot is equipped with off-gas measurements allowing to assess the environmental footprint in respect to critical pollutants such as NOX, SOx and PCDD/F, directly linked to the consumption of fossil solid fuels. Thus, the sinter pot represents the ideal tool for the assessment of the bioanthracite’s technical feasibility. Performance of sinter will then be analyzed under conditions of Blast furnace by using the BORIS furnace. This pilot installation is capable of simulating the behavior of pellets in the middle part of the blast furnace shaft. The totality of the described tests represents a rigorous viability assessment of solid fuel replacement by bioanthracite in the iron ore agglomeration process. Subtask 3.3.5. Validation of the bioanthracite application as foaming and carburizing agent in EAF steelmaking. AMMR (M30-M44): Work performed in this task will aim at fully substituting fossil coal used during EAF processing, in which carbonaceous materials are used as a foaming and carburizing agent. Two different modes of introduction are used for this purpose: top-charging and injection together with O2 below the slag layer. As a first step, mass & energy balance will be done, using existing tools adapted for the process. Secondly, foaming capacity and carburization yield of the different materials will be analyzed in a preliminary analysis at lab scale, using muffle & induction furnaces operated at temperatures of up to 1600°C. Minimum 4 tests will be performed and, for each test, about 800 kg bioanthracite will be used. Finally, selected candidate materials will be applied in the EAF demonstration plant of AMMR, the 6-ton furnace, to validate process application. This tool allows testing in EAF operation conditions at demonstration scale, including the different modes of biocarbon introduction into the industrial process. Within these tests, the impact of the tested materials will be quantified in regard to essential process KPIs, e.g. foaming capacity and carburization yield as well as the impact on metal quality and slag composition. Further, security risks such as flame development in the furnace during the introduction and the environmental impact of the biocarbon will be analyzed.
Task 3.4. Steel waste circular valorisation processes (Lead: TEC. Participants: REC, CELSA) M13-M44
Subtask 3.4.1. Requirements for the use of bioanthracite in waste valorisation processes. TEC (M13-M24) Waste valorisation processes to be studied in the project consist in mixing a-carbon based reducing agent with the metal-containing waste and some additives. In these processes carbothermic reduction reactions take place, so the fixed carbon content of the bioanthracite will be an important parameter to have into consideration. Apart from this, ash content or volatile content of the bioanthracite, its high heating value (HHV) and the reactivity will be also important parameters to be considered when defining the requirements of the bioanthracite. Subtask 3.4.2 Preliminary assessment. TEC (M13-M32): Different samples of bioanthracite produced in task 1.4 will be examined at TEC. This examination will include the proximate and ultimate analysis to determine moisture, volatile matter, ash and fixed carbon content, on the one hand, and the elemental composition of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, sulfur and oxygen on the other side. Apart from this, TGA analysis will also be carried out to assess its reactivity.  Having into account the characterization of the metal-containing waste to be processed, the optimum bioanthracite amount to be included in the mixtures will be calculated. Wastes from the EAF process (e.g. dusts or slags) could be potentially included in the assessment. Different mixtures will be prepared, and agglomeration tests will be carried out using a briquetting machine able to mix and compress the mixtures into a predefined geometry. The different briquettes will be subjected to standardized mechanical tests to study their compactness. Then preliminary trials will be carried out in a 50kW induction furnace where a base metal will be melted, and the briquettes will be added at different temperatures. The objective of these trials will be to determine the mass balances of the metallic elements of interests contained in the waste being processed. These calculations will help understand the carbothermic reduction reactions taking place in order to define the optimum mixtures and the optimum process parameters that lead to the highest recovery yield of valuable elements. ST3.4.3 Testing & validation. TEC (M24-M44) : With the results of the previous task a number of briquettes required for the validation trials will be prepared. These trials will be carried out at TEC using the thermal plasma technology. For these tests ⁓100kg of base metal will be used and the briquettes containing bioanthracite as reducing agent will be added at a previously defined feeding rate to be processed in the furnace. The different metallic elements of the waste will be reduced, and they will be recovered either in the molten metal, the slag or the dust concentrate. The chemical analysis of the 3 streams will be necessary to carry out the mass balances of the main elements to be recovered from the wastes. Analysis of these results will help determine validation trial success.
Task 3.5. Studies on the application of green gas in steel treatment processes (Lead: TEC. Participants: CEA, POLI, CELSA) M15-M44
Subtask 3.5.1 Requirements for the use of green gas in steelmaking processes. TEC (M15-M24): the use of green gas produced in the SCWG process in task 2.3 will be studied as a substitute for natural gas in burners, such as those employed in the reheating furnaces. To this end, both oxy-fuel and air combustion burners will be considered. These burners will be fed with gases via a gas skid system, and combustion will take place within a dedicated chamber specifically designed for this purpose. Accordingly, modifications to TEC’s facilities will be required. These adaptations will be analysed and implemented as part of the present subtask. In addition, the thermal cycles to be applied within the combustion chamber will be defined, aiming to replicate actual industrial heating processes. This will involve determining the specific process to be simulated (e.g. reheating furnace) as well as the characteristics of the materials to be treated, such as shape and steel grade. Subtask 3.5.2. Preliminary assessment of green gas as a fuel. TEC (M15-M32): TEC will work in the assessment of the use of green gas to partially or completely substitute natural gas in burner systems. The work will begin with a set-up phase in which the parameters of the combustion chamber will be adjusted to replicate the heating conditions corresponding to the selected industrial cycle. The baseline condition will consist of natural gas (NG) – air combustion, serving as a reference for subsequent comparisons. Following this, 3 to 5 alternative combustion conditions will be defined and tested. These conditions will include various blends of H2 and CH4, designed to cover a broad spectrum of mixing ratios. Additionally, the use of oxygen as an oxidiser will be assessed as a potential alternative to air, with the aim of reducing overall energy consumption during the trials. Subtask 3.5.3 Testing and validation. TEC (M24-M44): TEC will perform the experimental heat treatments in the combustion chamber under the defined combustion conditions using synthetically produced gases. The obtained results will include: 1) temperature RECs within both combustion chamber and steel sample; 2) measurement of main gaseous species of the off-gas; 3) fuel and energy consumption for each test condition; 4) evaluation of oxidation-induced weight loss in the steel samples. CELSA will supply material for tests with the dimensions agreed with TEC considering the trials’ objectives and the limitations of the combustion chamber. The results obtained will be compared with reference.
Task 3.6 HoloSteel System Deployment and Technical Integration with Pilot Test Assessment (Lead: IRIS. Participants: ALL WP3 TEAM) M21-M44: Deployment, integration & pilot assessment of the HoloSteel holonic multi-agent DT system (developed in WP5) to validate its real-time monitoring, predictive simulation & decision support capabilities for low-carbon, high-efficiency iron and steelmaking. IRIS in cooperation with owners of the pilot facilities will lead end-to-end integration of the platform, connecting real-time data streams from sensors and monitoring systems with the simulation & decision modules, ensuring full interoperability with existing control systems, data infrastructures, and process logic in the selected pilot routes. Holonic architecture will be configured for live operation in the pilots, enabling dynamic interaction with key process units (e.g. reductant feeding, furnace operation, emissions control). Real-time data acquisition & processing pipelines will support predictive analytics and scenario simulation. IRIS will also oversee the deployment of the frontend dashboards and decision interfaces for operators & business users. Pilot testing campaigns will evaluate the system’s technical performance under varying conditions, focusing on stability under high temperatures & harsh processing conditions, data accuracy, responsiveness, and usability. Results & user feedback will guide continuous optimisation/refinement work in T5.3. | Description of work:  
Task 3.1. Studies on the application of bioanthracite in the production of SiMn alloy (Lead: ERA. Participants: SIN, REC, TEC, HAE) M7-M44
Subtask 3.1.1. Requirements for the use of bioanthracite in the production of SiMn alloy. ERA (M7-M10): In this first subtask, the production process of SiMn starting from manganese ores in a Submerged Arc Furnace (SAF) will be assessed. The reduction of Mn ore involves a carbothermic reduction process where manganese oxides are reduced to metallic manganese by carbon. This process typically takes place in a SAF, and coke is usually used as reducing agent. As this reducing agent needs to be mixed with the Mn ore and fluxing agents, there are some requirements that need to be considered to use bioanthracite to substitute coke either partially or completely in these mixtures without having an impact in the final product properties or the process yield. 
Subtask 3.1.2. Pre-qualification tests. ERA (M10-M18): Different samples of bioanthracite produced in task 1.4 will be examined at ERA and SINTEF for pre-qualification tests before final testing & validation by pilot smelting. Parameters to be studied include: 1) Boudouard reactivity, and subsequent hot strength for partially reacted biocarbon raw materials; 2) Simultaneous studies of gas & ore reactivities under simulated furnace gas atmosphere; 3) Slag reactivities. 
Subtask 3.1.3 Testing and validation at pilot scale. SIN (M18-M44): Considering the results of the previous tests, the most promising bioanthracite reductant will be tested and validated in a pilot scale furnace. Charge materials such as Mn ore, FeMn slag, fluxes & reductants will be prepared at ERA following the optimal charge mix proposed by the mass & energy balance provided by the software Mn-Calc. To validate bioanthracite use as reductant under relevant furnace conditions, the pilot scale submerged-arc Mn-alloy furnace at SINTEF will be employed, and a test protocol developed in the EU PREMA project will be followed and optimized for the new reductant. The setup will include a 450 kVA pilot furnace operating at about 150 kW. The pilot campaigns will have a duration of about 12 hours, which in most cases has proven sufficient to reach a steady state for the process to simulate the relevant reactions in a furnace environment. The furnace will be tapped at regular intervals according to specific energy added to the furnace (each 80 kWh), and about 100 kg of both slag and metal will be tapped. Post tapping measurements will include the mass and chemical composition of both slag and metal, and a full material balance will be done to validate the chemical composition of the bioanthracite raw material. During the pilot, the process will be monitored with various sensors: the off-gas by micro-GC, the furnace charge temperature distribution with thermocouples and tapping temperatures with multi-spectral pyrometry. In addition, continuous mass and dust measurements will be performed. Once the first run is finished, the furnace will undergo an autopsy. The furnace burden will be excavated and the degree of ore prereduction will be investigated. Furthermore, the coke bed zone (high temperature area) of the furnace will be filled with epoxy, and the cross section will be cut and analysed. The impact of the bioanthracite on SiMn process will be evaluated using the thermodynamical simulation tool HSC Sim developed in PREMA. A minimum of two pilot runs and maximum of four will be conducted, each round demanding ⁓150 kg of bioanthracite.
Task 3.2. Studies on C-deposition on MnO by methane cracking (Lead: SINTEF. Participants: ERA, TEC) M13-M44
Subtask 3.2.1. Assessment of methane cracking for carbon deposition on Mn ores. SIN (M13-M18): In this task, C deposition on Mn ores and SiO2 by thermal methane cracking will be tested in a lab scale furnace by SIN. The objective is to decompose methane into carbon and hydrogen at high temperatures, with the carbon depositing on the ores. A synthetic gas will be produced with the composition of the CH4-containing green gas originated in the SCWG and AD tests. Energy effects for the overall process will in addition be evaluated by simulation of selected cases using and further developing HSC Sim tool developed in other projects (PREMA). In earlier investigations gas with more than 70% H2 was produced by cracking of methane. To identify conditions that gives both high H2 content in the off-gas, high amount of carbon deposited on the charge materials and suitable properties of the produced composites is crucial for further development of the proposed concept. Through a combination of experiments, thermodynamic calculations by Fact Sage and kinetic modelling this task will develop knowledge about reaction mechanism, reaction rates and product properties for the main involved reactions as a basis for this. Deposition of C from cracking of biomethane on different Mn-sources as well as silica sources will be planed and investigated by SINT and ERA in small (10 gram) and medium (up to 2 kg) scale in existing tube furnaces, built for controlled purging of combustible gas and equipped with continuous measurement of off-gas composition.  Near industrial sized particles and the effect of their physical properties will be studied. The focus will be to investigate the effect of hydrogen quality versus amount of deposited carbon under different conditions. Temperature and gas flow as well as retention times are important variables. Agglomerates (decomposed carbon on Mn source or quartz) produced in the experiments will be characterized by different methods including CT and SEM. Materials for further investigations of reduction reaction in Subtask 3.2.2. will be produced. Additionally, pressure drop tests could be conducted. Additional research will focus, among other aspects, on assessing whether iron (Fe), manganese (Mn) and potentially other elements present in high-carbon ferromanganese (HCFeMn) slag has a catalytic effect on methane (CH₄) cracking. This part of the work will be carried out in collaboration with POLI and REC to support and strengthen their ongoing research in catalytic pyrolysis of green methane (WP2).  The trials will be followed by an analysis of the outlet gas composition and of the substrate to determine the parameters that could potentially lead to the deposition of the carbon for the self-reduction of all the MnO in the subsequent SAF process. 
Subtask 3.2.2 Deposited carbon as an effective reductant in the production of SiMn alloy. SIN (M18-M44): Subtask focuses on how charge materials with deposited carbon from biogas affect reactions and reaction products in SiMn alloy production. The aim is to clarify the fundamental mechanisms for the main reactions involved and model the effect of important parameters on each of these as a basis for further upscaling. Energy effects for the overall process will in addition be evaluated by simulation of selected cases using and further developing HSC Sim tool developed in other EU projects (PreMa). Production of silicomanganese alloy from decomposed carbon on Mn source or quartz will be investigated experimentally in thermogravimetric (TG) and other tube furnaces. To avoid reaction with crucibles made from graphite, SiC crucibles will be used. Rate for reduction to alloy with deposited carbon versus with separate coke or coal particles will be compared to evaluate the potential for use of deposited carbon. Kinetic models will be developed based on data from the thermogravimetry experiments combined by FactSage calculations. For composites where the oxide is covered by carbon, reaction path is expected to be different from reactions between separate particles of carbon and oxides, and diffusion of gases through the deposited carbon layer, may play a role. Characterization of partly reduced materials with methods like EPMA, SEM, will be crucial to understand reaction mechanism by ERA, SINTEF, POLI. Supplementary investigations of melting & wetting properties in sessile drop apparatus may be included. Main goal is to obtain fundamental knowledge about reactions between deposited carbon & oxide material and effects of different properties of both deposited carbon and oxides.
Task 3.3. Studies on the use of biocarbon materials and green gas in iron and steelmaking processes (Lead: AMMR. Participants: CELSA, TEC, REC) M13-M44
Subtask 3.3.1 Preliminary assessment of the use of bioanthracite to reduce iron oxides. AMMR (M13-M18): The different bioanthracite materials will be analyzed concerning their reduction behavior on iron oxides by AMMR. Therefore, the materials will be agglomerated using different types of cold agglomeration process, including pelletizing, extrusion and briquetting. Development of non-fossil organic binders will also be evaluated. Different series will be performed with thermogravimetric analysis and muffle furnaces to study the chemical reactions between oxide materials and bioanthracite. Temperature range investigated will be up to 1600°C. Oxidative and inert atmosphere will be used in the tests. Mass proportion of the different components will depend on respective carbon and iron oxide content. The aim of the study is to analyze the impact of iron ore composition and granulometry. Comparison with metallurgical coal and coke will be done to compare the reduction behavior of the bioanthracite materials and their impact on the metal composition. Subtask 3.3.2 Preliminary assessment of the use of ASR polymers as carbon source in EAF. CELSA (M13-M18): CELSA will study the potential of Automobile Shredder Residue (ASR) polymers as carbon source for slag foaming in an EAF. Depending on the fixed carbon content and volatile matter and other impurities of the bioanthracite produced in task 1.4, mixing and agglomeration trials of bioanthracite and polymers will be performed at lab-scale. The different polymers to be included in the assessment (plastics, rubbers, textiles, etc.) will need to be pre-treated to obtain a product with the appropriate granularity for the mixing process and the following injection in EAF. Subtask 3.3.3 Simulation of green gas use in BF tuyeres. AMMR (M18-M30): The goal is the simulation of biocarbon valorisation through PCI coal replacement in BF-tuyeres. The material will be analysed on their handling concerning grindability in coal grinders and transportability in injection lines. All characterizations will follow well-known international standards and are regularly used inside AM to determine value in use of its PCI coals for procurement purposes. Results of characterization will be used as input data for assessing potential impacts on Blast Furnace (BF) process (limiting factors for biocarbon usability – value-in-use sensitivity) through modelling of BF inner state. Overall impacts on BF process will be assessed through existing well-known and reliable BF models such as: Heat and mass balance model, Thermodynamic modelling of slag composition and viscosity model, BF inner state global model, and other models that could contribute to a deeper understanding of impact when replacing PCI coals by biocarbon. Subtask 3.3.4. Use of bioanthracite in iron ore agglomeration processes. AMMR (M30-M44): Main effort in this subtask will be addressed onto the impact of bioanthracite use on pelletizing and sintering KPIs, such as quality, productivity and pollutant emissions. This includes the identification of the maximum possible solid fuel replacement by bioanthracite and the corresponding abatement of fossil-based CO2 emissions. As for pelletizing, the fired pellets will be prepared using standard pelletizing disks and fired in a muffle furnace. The impact of bioanthracite usage on quality KPIs will then be investigated by microstructural analysis and normed tests such as low temperature disintegration, reducibility and reduction underload and others. All characterizations will adhere to international standards and are common practice inside AM to determine value in use of solid fuels for procurement purposes.  As for sintering, the main tool for this study will be the sinter pot pilot installation. This pilot installation allows the simulation of the sintering process at reduced scale and is the standard test for the performance characterization of materials for sintering in ArcelorMittal (AM). Further, the sinter pot is equipped with off-gas measurements allowing to assess the environmental footprint in respect to critical pollutants such as NOX, SOx and PCDD/F, directly linked to the consumption of fossil solid fuels. Thus, the sinter pot represents the ideal tool for the assessment of the bioanthracite’s technical feasibility. Performance of sinter will then be analyzed under conditions of Blast furnace by using the BORIS furnace. This pilot installation is capable of simulating the behavior of pellets in the middle part of the blast furnace shaft. The totality of the described tests represents a rigorous viability assessment of solid fuel replacement by bioanthracite in the iron ore agglomeration process. Subtask 3.3.5. Validation of the bioanthracite application as foaming and carburizing agent in EAF steelmaking. AMMR (M30-M44): Work performed in this task will aim at fully substituting fossil coal used during EAF processing, in which carbonaceous materials are used as a foaming and carburizing agent. Two different modes of introduction are used for this purpose: top-charging and injection together with O2 below the slag layer. As a first step, mass & energy balance will be done, using existing tools adapted for the process. Secondly, foaming capacity and carburization yield of the different materials will be analyzed in a preliminary analysis at lab scale, using muffle & induction furnaces operated at temperatures of up to 1600°C. Minimum 4 tests will be performed and, for each test, about 800 kg bioanthracite will be used. Finally, selected candidate materials will be applied in the EAF demonstration plant of AMMR, the 6-ton furnace, to validate process application. This tool allows testing in EAF operation conditions at demonstration scale, including the different modes of biocarbon introduction into the industrial process. Within these tests, the impact of the tested materials will be quantified in regard to essential process KPIs, e.g. foaming capacity and carburization yield as well as the impact on metal quality and slag composition. Further, security risks such as flame development in the furnace during the introduction and the environmental impact of the biocarbon will be analyzed.
Task 3.4. Steel waste circular valorisation processes (Lead: TEC. Participants: REC, CELSA) M13-M44
Subtask 3.4.1. Requirements for the use of bioanthracite in waste valorisation processes. TEC (M13-M24) Waste valorisation processes to be studied in the project consist in mixing a-carbon based reducing agent with the metal-containing waste and some additives. In these processes carbothermic reduction reactions take place, so the fixed carbon content of the bioanthracite will be an important parameter to have into consideration. Apart from this, ash content or volatile content of the bioanthracite, its high heating value (HHV) and the reactivity will be also important parameters to be considered when defining the requirements of the bioanthracite. Subtask 3.4.2 Preliminary assessment. TEC (M13-M32): Different samples of bioanthracite produced in task 1.4 will be examined at TEC. This examination will include the proximate and ultimate analysis to determine moisture, volatile matter, ash and fixed carbon content, on the one hand, and the elemental composition of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, sulfur and oxygen on the other side. Apart from this, TGA analysis will also be carried out to assess its reactivity.  Having into account the characterization of the metal-containing waste to be processed, the optimum bioanthracite amount to be included in the mixtures will be calculated. Wastes from the EAF process (e.g. dusts or slags) could be potentially included in the assessment. Different mixtures will be prepared, and agglomeration tests will be carried out using a briquetting machine able to mix and compress the mixtures into a predefined geometry. The different briquettes will be subjected to standardized mechanical tests to study their compactness. Then preliminary trials will be carried out in a 50kW induction furnace where a base metal will be melted, and the briquettes will be added at different temperatures. The objective of these trials will be to determine the mass balances of the metallic elements of interests contained in the waste being processed. These calculations will help understand the carbothermic reduction reactions taking place in order to define the optimum mixtures and the optimum process parameters that lead to the highest recovery yield of valuable elements. ST3.4.3 Testing & validation. TEC (M24-M44) : With the results of the previous task a number of briquettes required for the validation trials will be prepared. These trials will be carried out at TEC using the thermal plasma technology. For these tests ⁓100kg of base metal will be used and the briquettes containing bioanthracite as reducing agent will be added at a previously defined feeding rate to be processed in the furnace. The different metallic elements of the waste will be reduced, and they will be recovered either in the molten metal, the slag or the dust concentrate. The chemical analysis of the 3 streams will be necessary to carry out the mass balances of the main elements to be recovered from the wastes. Analysis of these results will help determine validation trial success.
Task 3.5. Studies on the application of green gas in steel treatment processes (Lead: TEC. Participants: CEA, POLI, CELSA) M15-M44
Subtask 3.5.1 Requirements for the use of green gas in steelmaking processes. TEC (M15-M24): the use of green gas produced in the SCWG process in task 2.3 will be studied as a substitute for natural gas in burners, such as those employed in the reheating furnaces. To this end, both oxy-fuel and air combustion burners will be considered. These burners will be fed with gases via a gas skid system, and combustion will take place within a dedicated chamber specifically designed for this purpose. Accordingly, modifications to TEC’s facilities will be required. These adaptations will be analysed and implemented as part of the present subtask. In addition, the thermal cycles to be applied within the combustion chamber will be defined, aiming to replicate actual industrial heating processes. This will involve determining the specific process to be simulated (e.g. reheating furnace) as well as the characteristics of the materials to be treated, such as shape and steel grade. Subtask 3.5.2. Preliminary assessment of green gas as a fuel. TEC (M15-M32): TEC will work in the assessment of the use of green gas to partially or completely substitute natural gas in burner systems. The work will begin with a set-up phase in which the parameters of the combustion chamber will be adjusted to replicate the heating conditions corresponding to the selected industrial cycle. The baseline condition will consist of natural gas (NG) – air combustion, serving as a reference for subsequent comparisons. Following this, 3 to 5 alternative combustion conditions will be defined and tested. These conditions will include various blends of H2 and CH4, designed to cover a broad spectrum of mixing ratios. Additionally, the use of oxygen as an oxidiser will be assessed as a potential alternative to air, with the aim of reducing overall energy consumption during the trials. Subtask 3.5.3 Testing and validation. TEC (M24-M44): TEC will perform the experimental heat treatments in the combustion chamber under the defined combustion conditions using synthetically produced gases. The obtained results will include: 1) temperature RECs within both combustion chamber and steel sample; 2) measurement of main gaseous species of the off-gas; 3) fuel and energy consumption for each test condition; 4) evaluation of oxidation-induced weight loss in the steel samples. CELSA will supply material for tests with the dimensions agreed with TEC considering the trials’ objectives and the limitations of the combustion chamber. The results obtained will be compared with reference.
Task 3.6 HoloSteel System Deployment and Technical Integration with Pilot Test Assessment (Lead: IRIS. Participants: ALL WP3 TEAM) M21-M44: Deployment, integration & pilot assessment of the HoloSteel holonic multi-agent DT system (developed in WP5) to validate its real-time monitoring, predictive simulation & decision support capabilities for low-carbon, high-efficiency iron and steelmaking. IRIS in cooperation with owners of the pilot facilities will lead end-to-end integration of the platform, connecting real-time data streams from sensors and monitoring systems with the simulation & decision modules, ensuring full interoperability with existing control systems, data infrastructures, and process logic in the selected pilot routes. Holonic architecture will be configured for live operation in the pilots, enabling dynamic interaction with key process units (e.g. reductant feeding, furnace operation, emissions control). Real-time data acquisition & processing pipelines will support predictive analytics and scenario simulation. IRIS will also oversee the deployment of the frontend dashboards and decision interfaces for operators & business users. Pilot testing campaigns will evaluate the system’s technical performance under varying conditions, focusing on stability under high temperatures & harsh processing conditions, data accuracy, responsiveness, and usability. Results & user feedback will guide continuous optimisation/refinement work in T5.3. | Description of work:  
Task 3.1. Studies on the application of bioanthracite in the production of SiMn alloy (Lead: ERA. Participants: SIN, REC, TEC, HAE) M7-M44
Subtask 3.1.1. Requirements for the use of bioanthracite in the production of SiMn alloy. ERA (M7-M10): In this first subtask, the production process of SiMn starting from manganese ores in a Submerged Arc Furnace (SAF) will be assessed. The reduction of Mn ore involves a carbothermic reduction process where manganese oxides are reduced to metallic manganese by carbon. This process typically takes place in a SAF, and coke is usually used as reducing agent. As this reducing agent needs to be mixed with the Mn ore and fluxing agents, there are some requirements that need to be considered to use bioanthracite to substitute coke either partially or completely in these mixtures without having an impact in the final product properties or the process yield. 
Subtask 3.1.2. Pre-qualification tests. ERA (M10-M18): Different samples of bioanthracite produced in task 1.4 will be examined at ERA and SINTEF for pre-qualification tests before final testing & validation by pilot smelting. Parameters to be studied include: 1) Boudouard reactivity, and subsequent hot strength for partially reacted biocarbon raw materials; 2) Simultaneous studies of gas & ore reactivities under simulated furnace gas atmosphere; 3) Slag reactivities. 
Subtask 3.1.3 Testing and validation at pilot scale. SIN (M18-M44): Considering the results of the previous tests, the most promising bioanthracite reductant will be tested and validated in a pilot scale furnace. Charge materials such as Mn ore, FeMn slag, fluxes & reductants will be prepared at ERA following the optimal charge mix proposed by the mass & energy balance provided by the software Mn-Calc. To validate bioanthracite use as reductant under relevant furnace conditions, the pilot scale submerged-arc Mn-alloy furnace at SINTEF will be employed, and a test protocol developed in the EU PREMA project will be followed and optimized for the new reductant. The setup will include a 450 kVA pilot furnace operating at about 150 kW. The pilot campaigns will have a duration of about 12 hours, which in most cases has proven sufficient to reach a steady state for the process to simulate the relevant reactions in a furnace environment. The furnace will be tapped at regular intervals according to specific energy added to the furnace (each 80 kWh), and about 100 kg of both slag and metal will be tapped. Post tapping measurements will include the mass and chemical composition of both slag and metal, and a full material balance will be done to validate the chemical composition of the bioanthracite raw material. During the pilot, the process will be monitored with various sensors: the off-gas by micro-GC, the furnace charge temperature distribution with thermocouples and tapping temperatures with multi-spectral pyrometry. In addition, continuous mass and dust measurements will be performed. Once the first run is finished, the furnace will undergo an autopsy. The furnace burden will be excavated and the degree of ore prereduction will be investigated. Furthermore, the coke bed zone (high temperature area) of the furnace will be filled with epoxy, and the cross section will be cut and analysed. The impact of the bioanthracite on SiMn process will be evaluated using the thermodynamical simulation tool HSC Sim developed in PREMA. A minimum of two pilot runs and maximum of four will be conducted, each round demanding ⁓150 kg of bioanthracite.
Task 3.2. Studies on C-deposition on MnO by methane cracking (Lead: SINTEF. Participants: ERA, TEC) M13-M44
Subtask 3.2.1. Assessment of methane cracking for carbon deposition on Mn ores. SIN (M13-M18): In this task, C deposition on Mn ores and SiO2 by thermal methane cracking will be tested in a lab scale furnace by SIN. The objective is to decompose methane into carbon and hydrogen at high temperatures, with the carbon depositing on the ores. A synthetic gas will be produced with the composition of the CH4-containing green gas originated in the SCWG and AD tests. Energy effects for the overall process will in addition be evaluated by simulation of selected cases using and further developing HSC Sim tool developed in other projects (PREMA). In earlier investigations gas with more than 70% H2 was produced by cracking of methane. To identify conditions that gives both high H2 content in the off-gas, high amount of carbon deposited on the charge materials and suitable properties of the produced composites is crucial for further development of the proposed concept. Through a combination of experiments, thermodynamic calculations by Fact Sage and kinetic modelling this task will develop knowledge about reaction mechanism, reaction rates and product properties for the main involved reactions as a basis for this. Deposition of C from cracking of biomethane on different Mn-sources as well as silica sources will be planed and investigated by SINT and ERA in small (10 gram) and medium (up to 2 kg) scale in existing tube furnaces, built for controlled purging of combustible gas and equipped with continuous measurement of off-gas composition.  Near industrial sized particles and the effect of their physical properties will be studied. The focus will be to investigate the effect of hydrogen quality versus amount of deposited carbon under different conditions. Temperature and gas flow as well as retention times are important variables. Agglomerates (decomposed carbon on Mn source or quartz) produced in the experiments will be characterized by different methods including CT and SEM. Materials for further investigations of reduction reaction in Subtask 3.2.2. will be produced. Additionally, pressure drop tests could be conducted. Additional research will focus, among other aspects, on assessing whether iron (Fe), manganese (Mn) and potentially other elements present in high-carbon ferromanganese (HCFeMn) slag has a catalytic effect on methane (CH₄) cracking. This part of the work will be carried out in collaboration with POLI and REC to support and strengthen their ongoing research in catalytic pyrolysis of green methane (WP2).  The trials will be followed by an analysis of the outlet gas composition and of the substrate to determine the parameters that could potentially lead to the deposition of the carbon for the self-reduction of all the MnO in the subsequent SAF process. 
Subtask 3.2.2 Deposited carbon as an effective reductant in the production of SiMn alloy. SIN (M18-M44): Subtask focuses on how charge materials with deposited carbon from biogas affect reactions and reaction products in SiMn alloy production. The aim is to clarify the fundamental mechanisms for the main reactions involved and model the effect of important parameters on each of these as a basis for further upscaling. Energy effects for the overall process will in addition be evaluated by simulation of selected cases using and further developing HSC Sim tool developed in other EU projects (PreMa). Production of silicomanganese alloy from decomposed carbon on Mn source or quartz will be investigated experimentally in thermogravimetric (TG) and other tube furnaces. To avoid reaction with crucibles made from graphite, SiC crucibles will be used. Rate for reduction to alloy with deposited carbon versus with separate coke or coal particles will be compared to evaluate the potential for use of deposited carbon. Kinetic models will be developed based on data from the thermogravimetry experiments combined by FactSage calculations. For composites where the oxide is covered by carbon, reaction path is expected to be different from reactions between separate particles of carbon and oxides, and diffusion of gases through the deposited carbon layer, may play a role. Characterization of partly reduced materials with methods like EPMA, SEM, will be crucial to understand reaction mechanism by ERA, SINTEF, POLI. Supplementary investigations of melting & wetting properties in sessile drop apparatus may be included. Main goal is to obtain fundamental knowledge about reactions between deposited carbon & oxide material and effects of different properties of both deposited carbon and oxides.
Task 3.3. Studies on the use of biocarbon materials and green gas in iron and steelmaking processes (Lead: AMMR. Participants: CELSA, TEC, REC) M13-M44
Subtask 3.3.1 Preliminary assessment of the use of bioanthracite to reduce iron oxides. AMMR (M13-M18): The different bioanthracite materials will be analyzed concerning their reduction behavior on iron oxides by AMMR. Therefore, the materials will be agglomerated using different types of cold agglomeration process, including pelletizing, extrusion and briquetting. Development of non-fossil organic binders will also be evaluated. Different series will be performed with thermogravimetric analysis and muffle furnaces to study the chemical reactions between oxide materials and bioanthracite. Temperature range investigated will be up to 1600°C. Oxidative and inert atmosphere will be used in the tests. Mass proportion of the different components will depend on respective carbon and iron oxide content. The aim of the study is to analyze the impact of iron ore composition and granulometry. Comparison with metallurgical coal and coke will be done to compare the reduction behavior of the bioanthracite materials and their impact on the metal composition. Subtask 3.3.2 Preliminary assessment of the use of ASR polymers as carbon source in EAF. CELSA (M13-M18): CELSA will study the potential of Automobile Shredder Residue (ASR) polymers as carbon source for slag foaming in an EAF. Depending on the fixed carbon content and volatile matter and other impurities of the bioanthracite produced in task 1.4, mixing and agglomeration trials of bioanthracite and polymers will be performed at lab-scale. The different polymers to be included in the assessment (plastics, rubbers, textiles, etc.) will need to be pre-treated to obtain a product with the appropriate granularity for the mixing process and the following injection in EAF. Subtask 3.3.3 Simulation of green gas use in BF tuyeres. AMMR (M18-M30): The goal is the simulation of biocarbon valorisation through PCI coal replacement in BF-tuyeres. The material will be analysed on their handling concerning grindability in coal grinders and transportability in injection lines. All characterizations will follow well-known international standards and are regularly used inside AM to determine value in use of its PCI coals for procurement purposes. Results of characterization will be used as input data for assessing potential impacts on Blast Furnace (BF) process (limiting factors for biocarbon usability – value-in-use sensitivity) through modelling of BF inner state. Overall impacts on BF process will be assessed through existing well-known and reliable BF models such as: Heat and mass balance model, Thermodynamic modelling of slag composition and viscosity model, BF inner state global model, and other models that could contribute to a deeper understanding of impact when replacing PCI coals by biocarbon. Subtask 3.3.4. Use of bioanthracite in iron ore agglomeration processes. AMMR (M30-M44): Main effort in this subtask will be addressed onto the impact of bioanthracite use on pelletizing and sintering KPIs, such as quality, productivity and pollutant emissions. This includes the identification of the maximum possible solid fuel replacement by bioanthracite and the corresponding abatement of fossil-based CO2 emissions. As for pelletizing, the fired pellets will be prepared using standard pelletizing disks and fired in a muffle furnace. The impact of bioanthracite usage on quality KPIs will then be investigated by microstructural analysis and normed tests such as low temperature disintegration, reducibility and reduction underload and others. All characterizations will adhere to international standards and are common practice inside AM to determine value in use of solid fuels for procurement purposes.  As for sintering, the main tool for this study will be the sinter pot pilot installation. This pilot installation allows the simulation of the sintering process at reduced scale and is the standard test for the performance characterization of materials for sintering in ArcelorMittal (AM). Further, the sinter pot is equipped with off-gas measurements allowing to assess the environmental footprint in respect to critical pollutants such as NOX, SOx and PCDD/F, directly linked to the consumption of fossil solid fuels. Thus, the sinter pot represents the ideal tool for the assessment of the bioanthracite’s technical feasibility. Performance of sinter will then be analyzed under conditions of Blast furnace by using the BORIS furnace. This pilot installation is capable of simulating the behavior of pellets in the middle part of the blast furnace shaft. The totality of the described tests represents a rigorous viability assessment of solid fuel replacement by bioanthracite in the iron ore agglomeration process. Subtask 3.3.5. Validation of the bioanthracite application as foaming and carburizing agent in EAF steelmaking. AMMR (M30-M44): Work performed in this task will aim at fully substituting fossil coal used during EAF processing, in which carbonaceous materials are used as a foaming and carburizing agent. Two different modes of introduction are used for this purpose: top-charging and injection together with O2 below the slag layer. As a first step, mass & energy balance will be done, using existing tools adapted for the process. Secondly, foaming capacity and carburization yield of the different materials will be analyzed in a preliminary analysis at lab scale, using muffle & induction furnaces operated at temperatures of up to 1600°C. Minimum 4 tests will be performed and, for each test, about 800 kg bioanthracite will be used. Finally, selected candidate materials will be applied in the EAF demonstration plant of AMMR, the 6-ton furnace, to validate process application. This tool allows testing in EAF operation conditions at demonstration scale, including the different modes of biocarbon introduction into the industrial process. Within these tests, the impact of the tested materials will be quantified in regard to essential process KPIs, e.g. foaming capacity and carburization yield as well as the impact on metal quality and slag composition. Further, security risks such as flame development in the furnace during the introduction and the environmental impact of the biocarbon will be analyzed.
Task 3.4. Steel waste circular valorisation processes (Lead: TEC. Participants: REC, CELSA) M13-M44
Subtask 3.4.1. Requirements for the use of bioanthracite in waste valorisation processes. TEC (M13-M24) Waste valorisation processes to be studied in the project consist in mixing a-carbon based reducing agent with the metal-containing waste and some additives. In these processes carbothermic reduction reactions take place, so the fixed carbon content of the bioanthracite will be an important parameter to have into consideration. Apart from this, ash content or volatile content of the bioanthracite, its high heating value (HHV) and the reactivity will be also important parameters to be considered when defining the requirements of the bioanthracite. Subtask 3.4.2 Preliminary assessment. TEC (M13-M32): Different samples of bioanthracite produced in task 1.4 will be examined at TEC. This examination will include the proximate and ultimate analysis to determine moisture, volatile matter, ash and fixed carbon content, on the one hand, and the elemental composition of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, sulfur and oxygen on the other side. Apart from this, TGA analysis will also be carried out to assess its reactivity.  Having into account the characterization of the metal-containing waste to be processed, the optimum bioanthracite amount to be included in the mixtures will be calculated. Wastes from the EAF process (e.g. dusts or slags) could be potentially included in the assessment. Different mixtures will be prepared, and agglomeration tests will be carried out using a briquetting machine able to mix and compress the mixtures into a predefined geometry. The different briquettes will be subjected to standardized mechanical tests to study their compactness. Then preliminary trials will be carried out in a 50kW induction furnace where a base metal will be melted, and the briquettes will be added at different temperatures. The objective of these trials will be to determine the mass balances of the metallic elements of interests contained in the waste being processed. These calculations will help understand the carbothermic reduction reactions taking place in order to define the optimum mixtures and the optimum process parameters that lead to the highest recovery yield of valuable elements. ST3.4.3 Testing & validation. TEC (M24-M44) : With the results of the previous task a number of briquettes required for the validation trials will be prepared. These trials will be carried out at TEC using the thermal plasma technology. For these tests ⁓100kg of base metal will be used and the briquettes containing bioanthracite as reducing agent will be added at a previously defined feeding rate to be processed in the furnace. The different metallic elements of the waste will be reduced, and they will be recovered either in the molten metal, the slag or the dust concentrate. The chemical analysis of the 3 streams will be necessary to carry out the mass balances of the main elements to be recovered from the wastes. Analysis of these results will help determine validation trial success.
Task 3.5. Studies on the application of green gas in steel treatment processes (Lead: TEC. Participants: CEA, POLI, CELSA) M15-M44
Subtask 3.5.1 Requirements for the use of green gas in steelmaking processes. TEC (M15-M24): the use of green gas produced in the SCWG process in task 2.3 will be studied as a substitute for natural gas in burners, such as those employed in the reheating furnaces. To this end, both oxy-fuel and air combustion burners will be considered. These burners will be fed with gases via a gas skid system, and combustion will take place within a dedicated chamber specifically designed for this purpose. Accordingly, modifications to TEC’s facilities will be required. These adaptations will be analysed and implemented as part of the present subtask. In addition, the thermal cycles to be applied within the combustion chamber will be defined, aiming to replicate actual industrial heating processes. This will involve determining the specific process to be simulated (e.g. reheating furnace) as well as the characteristics of the materials to be treated, such as shape and steel grade. Subtask 3.5.2. Preliminary assessment of green gas as a fuel. TEC (M15-M32): TEC will work in the assessment of the use of green gas to partially or completely substitute natural gas in burner systems. The work will begin with a set-up phase in which the parameters of the combustion chamber will be adjusted to replicate the heating conditions corresponding to the selected industrial cycle. The baseline condition will consist of natural gas (NG) – air combustion, serving as a reference for subsequent comparisons. Following this, 3 to 5 alternative combustion conditions will be defined and tested. These conditions will include various blends of H2 and CH4, designed to cover a broad spectrum of mixing ratios. Additionally, the use of oxygen as an oxidiser will be assessed as a potential alternative to air, with the aim of reducing overall energy consumption during the trials. Subtask 3.5.3 Testing and validation. TEC (M24-M44): TEC will perform the experimental heat treatments in the combustion chamber under the defined combustion conditions using synthetically produced gases. The obtained results will include: 1) temperature RECs within both combustion chamber and steel sample; 2) measurement of main gaseous species of the off-gas; 3) fuel and energy consumption for each test condition; 4) evaluation of oxidation-induced weight loss in the steel samples. CELSA will supply material for tests with the dimensions agreed with TEC considering the trials’ objectives and the limitations of the combustion chamber. The results obtained will be compared with reference.
Task 3.6 HoloSteel System Deployment and Technical Integration with Pilot Test Assessment (Lead: IRIS. Participants: ALL WP3 TEAM) M21-M44: Deployment, integration & pilot assessment of the HoloSteel holonic multi-agent DT system (developed in WP5) to validate its real-time monitoring, predictive simulation & decision support capabilities for low-carbon, high-efficiency iron and steelmaking. IRIS in cooperation with owners of the pilot facilities will lead end-to-end integration of the platform, connecting real-time data streams from sensors and monitoring systems with the simulation & decision modules, ensuring full interoperability with existing control systems, data infrastructures, and process logic in the selected pilot routes. Holonic architecture will be configured for live operation in the pilots, enabling dynamic interaction with key process units (e.g. reductant feeding, furnace operation, emissions control). Real-time data acquisition & processing pipelines will support predictive analytics and scenario simulation. IRIS will also oversee the deployment of the frontend dashboards and decision interfaces for operators & business users. Pilot testing campaigns will evaluate the system’s technical performance under varying conditions, focusing on stability under high temperatures & harsh processing conditions, data accuracy, responsiveness, and usability. Results & user feedback will guide continuous optimisation/refinement work in T5.3. | Description of work:  
Task 3.1. Studies on the application of bioanthracite in the production of SiMn alloy (Lead: ERA. Participants: SIN, REC, TEC, HAE) M7-M44
Subtask 3.1.1. Requirements for the use of bioanthracite in the production of SiMn alloy. ERA (M7-M10): In this first subtask, the production process of SiMn starting from manganese ores in a Submerged Arc Furnace (SAF) will be assessed. The reduction of Mn ore involves a carbothermic reduction process where manganese oxides are reduced to metallic manganese by carbon. This process typically takes place in a SAF, and coke is usually used as reducing agent. As this reducing agent needs to be mixed with the Mn ore and fluxing agents, there are some requirements that need to be considered to use bioanthracite to substitute coke either partially or completely in these mixtures without having an impact in the final product properties or the process yield. 
Subtask 3.1.2. Pre-qualification tests. ERA (M10-M18): Different samples of bioanthracite produced in task 1.4 will be examined at ERA and SINTEF for pre-qualification tests before final testing & validation by pilot smelting. Parameters to be studied include: 1) Boudouard reactivity, and subsequent hot strength for partially reacted biocarbon raw materials; 2) Simultaneous studies of gas & ore reactivities under simulated furnace gas atmosphere; 3) Slag reactivities. 
Subtask 3.1.3 Testing and validation at pilot scale. SIN (M18-M44): Considering the results of the previous tests, the most promising bioanthracite reductant will be tested and validated in a pilot scale furnace. Charge materials such as Mn ore, FeMn slag, fluxes & reductants will be prepared at ERA following the optimal charge mix proposed by the mass & energy balance provided by the software Mn-Calc. To validate bioanthracite use as reductant under relevant furnace conditions, the pilot scale submerged-arc Mn-alloy furnace at SINTEF will be employed, and a test protocol developed in the EU PREMA project will be followed and optimized for the new reductant. The setup will include a 450 kVA pilot furnace operating at about 150 kW. The pilot campaigns will have a duration of about 12 hours, which in most cases has proven sufficient to reach a steady state for the process to simulate the relevant reactions in a furnace environment. The furnace will be tapped at regular intervals according to specific energy added to the furnace (each 80 kWh), and about 100 kg of both slag and metal will be tapped. Post tapping measurements will include the mass and chemical composition of both slag and metal, and a full material balance will be done to validate the chemical composition of the bioanthracite raw material. During the pilot, the process will be monitored with various sensors: the off-gas by micro-GC, the furnace charge temperature distribution with thermocouples and tapping temperatures with multi-spectral pyrometry. In addition, continuous mass and dust measurements will be performed. Once the first run is finished, the furnace will undergo an autopsy. The furnace burden will be excavated and the degree of ore prereduction will be investigated. Furthermore, the coke bed zone (high temperature area) of the furnace will be filled with epoxy, and the cross section will be cut and analysed. The impact of the bioanthracite on SiMn process will be evaluated using the thermodynamical simulation tool HSC Sim developed in PREMA. A minimum of two pilot runs and maximum of four will be conducted, each round demanding ⁓150 kg of bioanthracite.
Task 3.2. Studies on C-deposition on MnO by methane cracking (Lead: SINTEF. Participants: ERA, TEC) M13-M44
Subtask 3.2.1. Assessment of methane cracking for carbon deposition on Mn ores. SIN (M13-M18): In this task, C deposition on Mn ores and SiO2 by thermal methane cracking will be tested in a lab scale furnace by SIN. The objective is to decompose methane into carbon and hydrogen at high temperatures, with the carbon depositing on the ores. A synthetic gas will be produced with the composition of the CH4-containing green gas originated in the SCWG and AD tests. Energy effects for the overall process will in addition be evaluated by simulation of selected cases using and further developing HSC Sim tool developed in other projects (PREMA). In earlier investigations gas with more than 70% H2 was produced by cracking of methane. To identify conditions that gives both high H2 content in the off-gas, high amount of carbon deposited on the charge materials and suitable properties of the produced composites is crucial for further development of the proposed concept. Through a combination of experiments, thermodynamic calculations by Fact Sage and kinetic modelling this task will develop knowledge about reaction mechanism, reaction rates and product properties for the main involved reactions as a basis for this. Deposition of C from cracking of biomethane on different Mn-sources as well as silica sources will be planed and investigated by SINT and ERA in small (10 gram) and medium (up to 2 kg) scale in existing tube furnaces, built for controlled purging of combustible gas and equipped with continuous measurement of off-gas composition.  Near industrial sized particles and the effect of their physical properties will be studied. The focus will be to investigate the effect of hydrogen quality versus amount of deposited carbon under different conditions. Temperature and gas flow as well as retention times are important variables. Agglomerates (decomposed carbon on Mn source or quartz) produced in the experiments will be characterized by different methods including CT and SEM. Materials for further investigations of reduction reaction in Subtask 3.2.2. will be produced. Additionally, pressure drop tests could be conducted. Additional research will focus, among other aspects, on assessing whether iron (Fe), manganese (Mn) and potentially other elements present in high-carbon ferromanganese (HCFeMn) slag has a catalytic effect on methane (CH₄) cracking. This part of the work will be carried out in collaboration with POLI and REC to support and strengthen their ongoing research in catalytic pyrolysis of green methane (WP2).  The trials will be followed by an analysis of the outlet gas composition and of the substrate to determine the parameters that could potentially lead to the deposition of the carbon for the self-reduction of all the MnO in the subsequent SAF process. 
Subtask 3.2.2 Deposited carbon as an effective reductant in the production of SiMn alloy. SIN (M18-M44): Subtask focuses on how charge materials with deposited carbon from biogas affect reactions and reaction products in SiMn alloy production. The aim is to clarify the fundamental mechanisms for the main reactions involved and model the effect of important parameters on each of these as a basis for further upscaling. Energy effects for the overall process will in addition be evaluated by simulation of selected cases using and further developing HSC Sim tool developed in other EU projects (PreMa). Production of silicomanganese alloy from decomposed carbon on Mn source or quartz will be investigated experimentally in thermogravimetric (TG) and other tube furnaces. To avoid reaction with crucibles made from graphite, SiC crucibles will be used. Rate for reduction to alloy with deposited carbon versus with separate coke or coal particles will be compared to evaluate the potential for use of deposited carbon. Kinetic models will be developed based on data from the thermogravimetry experiments combined by FactSage calculations. For composites where the oxide is covered by carbon, reaction path is expected to be different from reactions between separate particles of carbon and oxides, and diffusion of gases through the deposited carbon layer, may play a role. Characterization of partly reduced materials with methods like EPMA, SEM, will be crucial to understand reaction mechanism by ERA, SINTEF, POLI. Supplementary investigations of melting & wetting properties in sessile drop apparatus may be included. Main goal is to obtain fundamental knowledge about reactions between deposited carbon & oxide material and effects of different properties of both deposited carbon and oxides.
Task 3.3. Studies on the use of biocarbon materials and green gas in iron and steelmaking processes (Lead: AMMR. Participants: CELSA, TEC, REC) M13-M44
Subtask 3.3.1 Preliminary assessment of the use of bioanthracite to reduce iron oxides. AMMR (M13-M18): The different bioanthracite materials will be analyzed concerning their reduction behavior on iron oxides by AMMR. Therefore, the materials will be agglomerated using different types of cold agglomeration process, including pelletizing, extrusion and briquetting. Development of non-fossil organic binders will also be evaluated. Different series will be performed with thermogravimetric analysis and muffle furnaces to study the chemical reactions between oxide materials and bioanthracite. Temperature range investigated will be up to 1600°C. Oxidative and inert atmosphere will be used in the tests. Mass proportion of the different components will depend on respective carbon and iron oxide content. The aim of the study is to analyze the impact of iron ore composition and granulometry. Comparison with metallurgical coal and coke will be done to compare the reduction behavior of the bioanthracite materials and their impact on the metal composition. Subtask 3.3.2 Preliminary assessment of the use of ASR polymers as carbon source in EAF. CELSA (M13-M18): CELSA will study the potential of Automobile Shredder Residue (ASR) polymers as carbon source for slag foaming in an EAF. Depending on the fixed carbon content and volatile matter and other impurities of the bioanthracite produced in task 1.4, mixing and agglomeration trials of bioanthracite and polymers will be performed at lab-scale. The different polymers to be included in the assessment (plastics, rubbers, textiles, etc.) will need to be pre-treated to obtain a product with the appropriate granularity for the mixing process and the following injection in EAF. Subtask 3.3.3 Simulation of green gas use in BF tuyeres. AMMR (M18-M30): The goal is the simulation of biocarbon valorisation through PCI coal replacement in BF-tuyeres. The material will be analysed on their handling concerning grindability in coal grinders and transportability in injection lines. All characterizations will follow well-known international standards and are regularly used inside AM to determine value in use of its PCI coals for procurement purposes. Results of characterization will be used as input data for assessing potential impacts on Blast Furnace (BF) process (limiting factors for biocarbon usability – value-in-use sensitivity) through modelling of BF inner state. Overall impacts on BF process will be assessed through existing well-known and reliable BF models such as: Heat and mass balance model, Thermodynamic modelling of slag composition and viscosity model, BF inner state global model, and other models that could contribute to a deeper understanding of impact when replacing PCI coals by biocarbon. Subtask 3.3.4. Use of bioanthracite in iron ore agglomeration processes. AMMR (M30-M44): Main effort in this subtask will be addressed onto the impact of bioanthracite use on pelletizing and sintering KPIs, such as quality, productivity and pollutant emissions. This includes the identification of the maximum possible solid fuel replacement by bioanthracite and the corresponding abatement of fossil-based CO2 emissions. As for pelletizing, the fired pellets will be prepared using standard pelletizing disks and fired in a muffle furnace. The impact of bioanthracite usage on quality KPIs will then be investigated by microstructural analysis and normed tests such as low temperature disintegration, reducibility and reduction underload and others. All characterizations will adhere to international standards and are common practice inside AM to determine value in use of solid fuels for procurement purposes.  As for sintering, the main tool for this study will be the sinter pot pilot installation. This pilot installation allows the simulation of the sintering process at reduced scale and is the standard test for the performance characterization of materials for sintering in ArcelorMittal (AM). Further, the sinter pot is equipped with off-gas measurements allowing to assess the environmental footprint in respect to critical pollutants such as NOX, SOx and PCDD/F, directly linked to the consumption of fossil solid fuels. Thus, the sinter pot represents the ideal tool for the assessment of the bioanthracite’s technical feasibility. Performance of sinter will then be analyzed under conditions of Blast furnace by using the BORIS furnace. This pilot installation is capable of simulating the behavior of pellets in the middle part of the blast furnace shaft. The totality of the described tests represents a rigorous viability assessment of solid fuel replacement by bioanthracite in the iron ore agglomeration process. Subtask 3.3.5. Validation of the bioanthracite application as foaming and carburizing agent in EAF steelmaking. AMMR (M30-M44): Work performed in this task will aim at fully substituting fossil coal used during EAF processing, in which carbonaceous materials are used as a foaming and carburizing agent. Two different modes of introduction are used for this purpose: top-charging and injection together with O2 below the slag layer. As a first step, mass & energy balance will be done, using existing tools adapted for the process. Secondly, foaming capacity and carburization yield of the different materials will be analyzed in a preliminary analysis at lab scale, using muffle & induction furnaces operated at temperatures of up to 1600°C. Minimum 4 tests will be performed and, for each test, about 800 kg bioanthracite will be used. Finally, selected candidate materials will be applied in the EAF demonstration plant of AMMR, the 6-ton furnace, to validate process application. This tool allows testing in EAF operation conditions at demonstration scale, including the different modes of biocarbon introduction into the industrial process. Within these tests, the impact of the tested materials will be quantified in regard to essential process KPIs, e.g. foaming capacity and carburization yield as well as the impact on metal quality and slag composition. Further, security risks such as flame development in the furnace during the introduction and the environmental impact of the biocarbon will be analyzed.
Task 3.4. Steel waste circular valorisation processes (Lead: TEC. Participants: REC, CELSA) M13-M44
Subtask 3.4.1. Requirements for the use of bioanthracite in waste valorisation processes. TEC (M13-M24) Waste valorisation processes to be studied in the project consist in mixing a-carbon based reducing agent with the metal-containing waste and some additives. In these processes carbothermic reduction reactions take place, so the fixed carbon content of the bioanthracite will be an important parameter to have into consideration. Apart from this, ash content or volatile content of the bioanthracite, its high heating value (HHV) and the reactivity will be also important parameters to be considered when defining the requirements of the bioanthracite. Subtask 3.4.2 Preliminary assessment. TEC (M13-M32): Different samples of bioanthracite produced in task 1.4 will be examined at TEC. This examination will include the proximate and ultimate analysis to determine moisture, volatile matter, ash and fixed carbon content, on the one hand, and the elemental composition of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, sulfur and oxygen on the other side. Apart from this, TGA analysis will also be carried out to assess its reactivity.  Having into account the characterization of the metal-containing waste to be processed, the optimum bioanthracite amount to be included in the mixtures will be calculated. Wastes from the EAF process (e.g. dusts or slags) could be potentially included in the assessment. Different mixtures will be prepared, and agglomeration tests will be carried out using a briquetting machine able to mix and compress the mixtures into a predefined geometry. The different briquettes will be subjected to standardized mechanical tests to study their compactness. Then preliminary trials will be carried out in a 50kW induction furnace where a base metal will be melted, and the briquettes will be added at different temperatures. The objective of these trials will be to determine the mass balances of the metallic elements of interests contained in the waste being processed. These calculations will help understand the carbothermic reduction reactions taking place in order to define the optimum mixtures and the optimum process parameters that lead to the highest recovery yield of valuable elements. ST3.4.3 Testing & validation. TEC (M24-M44) : With the results of the previous task a number of briquettes required for the validation trials will be prepared. These trials will be carried out at TEC using the thermal plasma technology. For these tests ⁓100kg of base metal will be used and the briquettes containing bioanthracite as reducing agent will be added at a previously defined feeding rate to be processed in the furnace. The different metallic elements of the waste will be reduced, and they will be recovered either in the molten metal, the slag or the dust concentrate. The chemical analysis of the 3 streams will be necessary to carry out the mass balances of the main elements to be recovered from the wastes. Analysis of these results will help determine validation trial success.
Task 3.5. Studies on the application of green gas in steel treatment processes (Lead: TEC. Participants: CEA, POLI, CELSA) M15-M44
Subtask 3.5.1 Requirements for the use of green gas in steelmaking processes. TEC (M15-M24): the use of green gas produced in the SCWG process in task 2.3 will be studied as a substitute for natural gas in burners, such as those employed in the reheating furnaces. To this end, both oxy-fuel and air combustion burners will be considered. These burners will be fed with gases via a gas skid system, and combustion will take place within a dedicated chamber specifically designed for this purpose. Accordingly, modifications to TEC’s facilities will be required. These adaptations will be analysed and implemented as part of the present subtask. In addition, the thermal cycles to be applied within the combustion chamber will be defined, aiming to replicate actual industrial heating processes. This will involve determining the specific process to be simulated (e.g. reheating furnace) as well as the characteristics of the materials to be treated, such as shape and steel grade. Subtask 3.5.2. Preliminary assessment of green gas as a fuel. TEC (M15-M32): TEC will work in the assessment of the use of green gas to partially or completely substitute natural gas in burner systems. The work will begin with a set-up phase in which the parameters of the combustion chamber will be adjusted to replicate the heating conditions corresponding to the selected industrial cycle. The baseline condition will consist of natural gas (NG) – air combustion, serving as a reference for subsequent comparisons. Following this, 3 to 5 alternative combustion conditions will be defined and tested. These conditions will include various blends of H2 and CH4, designed to cover a broad spectrum of mixing ratios. Additionally, the use of oxygen as an oxidiser will be assessed as a potential alternative to air, with the aim of reducing overall energy consumption during the trials. Subtask 3.5.3 Testing and validation. TEC (M24-M44): TEC will perform the experimental heat treatments in the combustion chamber under the defined combustion conditions using synthetically produced gases. The obtained results will include: 1) temperature RECs within both combustion chamber and steel sample; 2) measurement of main gaseous species of the off-gas; 3) fuel and energy consumption for each test condition; 4) evaluation of oxidation-induced weight loss in the steel samples. CELSA will supply material for tests with the dimensions agreed with TEC considering the trials’ objectives and the limitations of the combustion chamber. The results obtained will be compared with reference.
Task 3.6 HoloSteel System Deployment and Technical Integration with Pilot Test Assessment (Lead: IRIS. Participants: ALL WP3 TEAM) M21-M44: Deployment, integration & pilot assessment of the HoloSteel holonic multi-agent DT system (developed in WP5) to validate its real-time monitoring, predictive simulation & decision support capabilities for low-carbon, high-efficiency iron and steelmaking. IRIS in cooperation with owners of the pilot facilities will lead end-to-end integration of the platform, connecting real-time data streams from sensors and monitoring systems with the simulation & decision modules, ensuring full interoperability with existing control systems, data infrastructures, and process logic in the selected pilot routes. Holonic architecture will be configured for live operation in the pilots, enabling dynamic interaction with key process units (e.g. reductant feeding, furnace operation, emissions control). Real-time data acquisition & processing pipelines will support predictive analytics and scenario simulation. IRIS will also oversee the deployment of the frontend dashboards and decision interfaces for operators & business users. Pilot testing campaigns will evaluate the system’s technical performance under varying conditions, focusing on stability under high temperatures & harsh processing conditions, data accuracy, responsiveness, and usability. Results & user feedback will guide continuous optimisation/refinement work in T5.3.
Objectives: ■ Assessment of NEXTSTEEL concept in terms of green H2 and C integration in Steelmaking (Energy modelling & assessment of NEXTSTEEL integration in steelmaking). ■ Evaluation of environmental & social benefits of NEXTSTEEL concept. ■ Techno-economic assessment of the innovations and recommendations to meet EU decarbonisation goals. | Objectives: ■ Assessment of NEXTSTEEL concept in terms of green H2 and C integration in Steelmaking (Energy modelling & assessment of NEXTSTEEL integration in steelmaking). ■ Evaluation of environmental & social benefits of NEXTSTEEL concept. ■ Techno-economic assessment of the innovations and recommendations to meet EU decarbonisation goals. | Objectives: ■ Assessment of NEXTSTEEL concept in terms of green H2 and C integration in Steelmaking (Energy modelling & assessment of NEXTSTEEL integration in steelmaking). ■ Evaluation of environmental & social benefits of NEXTSTEEL concept. ■ Techno-economic assessment of the innovations and recommendations to meet EU decarbonisation goals. | Objectives: ■ Assessment of NEXTSTEEL concept in terms of green H2 and C integration in Steelmaking (Energy modelling & assessment of NEXTSTEEL integration in steelmaking). ■ Evaluation of environmental & social benefits of NEXTSTEEL concept. ■ Techno-economic assessment of the innovations and recommendations to meet EU decarbonisation goals.
Task 4.1 Logistic validation and biowaste selection [Lead: POL. Part.: REC, CEA, AMMR, TEC, ERA, 1-12] 
Subtask 4.1.1. Feedstock selection and characterization. REC (M1-M9): The feedstocks for the study will be mapped and selected among biogenic residual streams based on a literature review and their chemical composition, availability, and economic aspect. A techno-economic analysis will be developed, where the future prospects of the wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) will be assessed by considering factors such as the treatment technologies that will be applied and the sludge type that will prevail (flocculent or granular), to determine the feasibility of the implementation of the technologies proposed in the project. 3 main categories of feedstocks will be considered: urban, industrial and agricultural biowastes and 4 residues within these categories selected and physically-chemically characterised in more detail and adopted for the lab scale trials.  
Subtask 4.1.2 Feedstocks supply chain assessment. POL (M1-M9): The mapping procedure will involve the identification and categorization of the different types of biowaste. The four feedstocks mapped and characterised in subtasks 1.1.1 and 1.1.2,  will be selected experiments based on the following criteria: 1) literature review, 2) the physical-chemical composition of the feedstocks, which significantly impact the quality of the hydrochar obtained through the HTC process, 3) their availability in terms of volume production and seasonality in order to ensure a continuous supply for the HTC process, 4) their cost and 5) feedstocks used in AD are excluded to prevent competition. Given that the characteristics of each type of biowaste can impact its suitability for the HTC process, a study of the influence of wastewater treatment technologies on the characteristics of sewage sludge will be performed together with the assessment of the future prospects of WWTPs considering which treatment technologies will be most widely adopted and what is the prevalent type of sludge (flocculent or granular). 
Task 4.2 Energy integration and modelling of the NEXTSTEEL concept [Lead: POLI, partners: REC, CEA, AMMR, TEC, ERA, CELSA, M13-M42]     
On the basis of the results of Task 4.1, WP1-WP2 and WP3 trials, the NEXTSTEEL concept will be validated at the scale of an industrial steelmaking. In relation to the use of bioanthracite -and enriched-hydrogen gas in steelmaking processes-, AMMR, TEC and ERA will perform an energy assessment, considering different relevant steelmaking processes. The use of bioanthracite and enriched-hydrogen gas will be assessed considering both new application solutions and conventional uses, where they can replace natural gas and fossil coal, so effectively contributing to the sector decarbonization.  POLI, in collaboration with REC and CEA, will produce an energy model of a steelmaking benchmark process, to identify the most effective solutions for integrating NEXTSTEEL process in steelmaking, evaluating the reuse of waste heat, maximising the production and the utilisation of process gases for green energy generation. REC, CEA and POLI will integrate the data to perform modelling on biowaste conversion to biobased anthracite and enriched hydrogen gas, including technologies, processes performances, mass balance, energy balance of the whole NEXTSTEEL value chain. The study will include considerations on the process scale-up, identifying technical risks and best process conditions to minimize plant CAPEX and OPEX.
Task 4.3 LCA definition for the investigated value-chains and environmental assessment [Lead: POLI, partners: REC, CEA, M16-M44] 
The NEXTSTEEL concept will be continuously evaluated by means of a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), which will be carried in line with international standards ISO 14040, ISO 14044 and relevant EU Product Environmental Footprint category rules. The four core LCA steps will be defined for the specific case: (i) goal and scope definition; (ii) inventory analysis; (iii) impact assessment; and (iv) interpretation of the results. In particular, the goal of the study is to assess environmental impacts of the full-scale multipurpose biorefinery, and as such it will cover the whole life cycle of the proposed value-chains, starting with the main feedstocks and ending with possible uses of the products. Methodology will be tailored for the project scope and in line with specific PEF category rules, e.g.  allocation of environmental burdens between the co-products will be addressed. The process emissions will be compared with those of the fossil and/or bio-based benchmarks, so to define the improvement in environmental performance across the whole NEXTSTEEL value chain. POLI, and the involved partners, will define appropriate mid- and end-point indicators, to present the expected environmental benefits of the proposed value chain in the most effective form. Once LCA general framework is set and agreed with the partners, the data gathering will start, mainly fed by the other WPs. Integration of the primary data with existing datasets (e.g. Ecoinvent 3.1) may be considered. To perform LCA studies, POLI uses OpenLCA as main software, in the spirit of open science.  The results will be put in the context of the goals set in the EU Green Deal. The main findings of this task will be presented both in full- and Layman- level reports, so to be benefited by a wide public.
Task 4.4 Techno-economic assessment [Lead: POLI, partners: REC, CEA, CELSA M20-M46] 
In this task a thorough Techno-Economic Assessment (TEA) for the integrated concept will be performed to assess its high-gains. The techno-economic viability of the proposed concept will be assessed. The potential integration with the local energy market will be investigated to define the expected energy costs and the potential gains derived from acting as a balancing element for the grid. Besides the energy aspects, the market value for the various products of the biorefinery will be identified, with the support of the partners, using both literature and other market derived data. The profitability of the biorefinery plant will be analysed under the various scenarios, identifying how the CAPEX and OPEX will be affected by the local conditions. Socio-economic impact of the NEXTSTEEL concept will be carefully considered, so to widen the whole assessment of the potential benefits resulting from the proposed innovation. The biowaste identified task 1.4 will be used to define a methodological approach and perform the social impact assessment, while also identifying the potential barriers to the acceptance of the new technology. The social impact factors and barriers of the new technology acceptance will be determined through secondary data analysis, coupled with focus group discussions.
Task 4.5 Interpretation and recommendations to meet EU decarbonisation goals (M36-M46). Lead: POLI Partners: AMMR, TEC, ERA, CELSA
The aim of this task is to develop recommendations for strategies supporting the deployment of the proposed value chain, including cross sectorial strategies for the conversion of biogenic waste streams into enriched hydrogen gas, bioanthracite and critical Raw Materials. The strategies will be developed at local, national and European (Green Deal) levels and addressing the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. This task will also leverage on the identified potential benefits for society, related to the development of the NEXTSTEEL technologies. The quantified benefits will be put in the context of the EU effort (i.e. GreenDeal) for decarbonising the European economy. | Task 4.1 Logistic validation and biowaste selection [Lead: POL. Part.: REC, CEA, AMMR, TEC, ERA, 1-12] 
Subtask 4.1.1. Feedstock selection and characterization. REC (M1-M9): The feedstocks for the study will be mapped and selected among biogenic residual streams based on a literature review and their chemical composition, availability, and economic aspect. A techno-economic analysis will be developed, where the future prospects of the wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) will be assessed by considering factors such as the treatment technologies that will be applied and the sludge type that will prevail (flocculent or granular), to determine the feasibility of the implementation of the technologies proposed in the project. 3 main categories of feedstocks will be considered: urban, industrial and agricultural biowastes and 4 residues within these categories selected and physically-chemically characterised in more detail and adopted for the lab scale trials.  
Subtask 4.1.2 Feedstocks supply chain assessment. POL (M1-M9): The mapping procedure will involve the identification and categorization of the different types of biowaste. The four feedstocks mapped and characterised in subtasks 1.1.1 and 1.1.2,  will be selected experiments based on the following criteria: 1) literature review, 2) the physical-chemical composition of the feedstocks, which significantly impact the quality of the hydrochar obtained through the HTC process, 3) their availability in terms of volume production and seasonality in order to ensure a continuous supply for the HTC process, 4) their cost and 5) feedstocks used in AD are excluded to prevent competition. Given that the characteristics of each type of biowaste can impact its suitability for the HTC process, a study of the influence of wastewater treatment technologies on the characteristics of sewage sludge will be performed together with the assessment of the future prospects of WWTPs considering which treatment technologies will be most widely adopted and what is the prevalent type of sludge (flocculent or granular). 
Task 4.2 Energy integration and modelling of the NEXTSTEEL concept [Lead: POLI, partners: REC, CEA, AMMR, TEC, ERA, CELSA, M13-M42]     
On the basis of the results of Task 4.1, WP1-WP2 and WP3 trials, the NEXTSTEEL concept will be validated at the scale of an industrial steelmaking. In relation to the use of bioanthracite -and enriched-hydrogen gas in steelmaking processes-, AMMR, TEC and ERA will perform an energy assessment, considering different relevant steelmaking processes. The use of bioanthracite and enriched-hydrogen gas will be assessed considering both new application solutions and conventional uses, where they can replace natural gas and fossil coal, so effectively contributing to the sector decarbonization.  POLI, in collaboration with REC and CEA, will produce an energy model of a steelmaking benchmark process, to identify the most effective solutions for integrating NEXTSTEEL process in steelmaking, evaluating the reuse of waste heat, maximising the production and the utilisation of process gases for green energy generation. REC, CEA and POLI will integrate the data to perform modelling on biowaste conversion to biobased anthracite and enriched hydrogen gas, including technologies, processes performances, mass balance, energy balance of the whole NEXTSTEEL value chain. The study will include considerations on the process scale-up, identifying technical risks and best process conditions to minimize plant CAPEX and OPEX.
Task 4.3 LCA definition for the investigated value-chains and environmental assessment [Lead: POLI, partners: REC, CEA, M16-M44] 
The NEXTSTEEL concept will be continuously evaluated by means of a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), which will be carried in line with international standards ISO 14040, ISO 14044 and relevant EU Product Environmental Footprint category rules. The four core LCA steps will be defined for the specific case: (i) goal and scope definition; (ii) inventory analysis; (iii) impact assessment; and (iv) interpretation of the results. In particular, the goal of the study is to assess environmental impacts of the full-scale multipurpose biorefinery, and as such it will cover the whole life cycle of the proposed value-chains, starting with the main feedstocks and ending with possible uses of the products. Methodology will be tailored for the project scope and in line with specific PEF category rules, e.g.  allocation of environmental burdens between the co-products will be addressed. The process emissions will be compared with those of the fossil and/or bio-based benchmarks, so to define the improvement in environmental performance across the whole NEXTSTEEL value chain. POLI, and the involved partners, will define appropriate mid- and end-point indicators, to present the expected environmental benefits of the proposed value chain in the most effective form. Once LCA general framework is set and agreed with the partners, the data gathering will start, mainly fed by the other WPs. Integration of the primary data with existing datasets (e.g. Ecoinvent 3.1) may be considered. To perform LCA studies, POLI uses OpenLCA as main software, in the spirit of open science.  The results will be put in the context of the goals set in the EU Green Deal. The main findings of this task will be presented both in full- and Layman- level reports, so to be benefited by a wide public.
Task 4.4 Techno-economic assessment [Lead: POLI, partners: REC, CEA, CELSA M20-M46] 
In this task a thorough Techno-Economic Assessment (TEA) for the integrated concept will be performed to assess its high-gains. The techno-economic viability of the proposed concept will be assessed. The potential integration with the local energy market will be investigated to define the expected energy costs and the potential gains derived from acting as a balancing element for the grid. Besides the energy aspects, the market value for the various products of the biorefinery will be identified, with the support of the partners, using both literature and other market derived data. The profitability of the biorefinery plant will be analysed under the various scenarios, identifying how the CAPEX and OPEX will be affected by the local conditions. Socio-economic impact of the NEXTSTEEL concept will be carefully considered, so to widen the whole assessment of the potential benefits resulting from the proposed innovation. The biowaste identified task 1.4 will be used to define a methodological approach and perform the social impact assessment, while also identifying the potential barriers to the acceptance of the new technology. The social impact factors and barriers of the new technology acceptance will be determined through secondary data analysis, coupled with focus group discussions.
Task 4.5 Interpretation and recommendations to meet EU decarbonisation goals (M36-M46). Lead: POLI Partners: AMMR, TEC, ERA, CELSA
The aim of this task is to develop recommendations for strategies supporting the deployment of the proposed value chain, including cross sectorial strategies for the conversion of biogenic waste streams into enriched hydrogen gas, bioanthracite and critical Raw Materials. The strategies will be developed at local, national and European (Green Deal) levels and addressing the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. This task will also leverage on the identified potential benefits for society, related to the development of the NEXTSTEEL technologies. The quantified benefits will be put in the context of the EU effort (i.e. GreenDeal) for decarbonising the European economy. | Task 4.1 Logistic validation and biowaste selection [Lead: POL. Part.: REC, CEA, AMMR, TEC, ERA, 1-12] 
Subtask 4.1.1. Feedstock selection and characterization. REC (M1-M9): The feedstocks for the study will be mapped and selected among biogenic residual streams based on a literature review and their chemical composition, availability, and economic aspect. A techno-economic analysis will be developed, where the future prospects of the wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) will be assessed by considering factors such as the treatment technologies that will be applied and the sludge type that will prevail (flocculent or granular), to determine the feasibility of the implementation of the technologies proposed in the project. 3 main categories of feedstocks will be considered: urban, industrial and agricultural biowastes and 4 residues within these categories selected and physically-chemically characterised in more detail and adopted for the lab scale trials.  
Subtask 4.1.2 Feedstocks supply chain assessment. POL (M1-M9): The mapping procedure will involve the identification and categorization of the different types of biowaste. The four feedstocks mapped and characterised in subtasks 1.1.1 and 1.1.2,  will be selected experiments based on the following criteria: 1) literature review, 2) the physical-chemical composition of the feedstocks, which significantly impact the quality of the hydrochar obtained through the HTC process, 3) their availability in terms of volume production and seasonality in order to ensure a continuous supply for the HTC process, 4) their cost and 5) feedstocks used in AD are excluded to prevent competition. Given that the characteristics of each type of biowaste can impact its suitability for the HTC process, a study of the influence of wastewater treatment technologies on the characteristics of sewage sludge will be performed together with the assessment of the future prospects of WWTPs considering which treatment technologies will be most widely adopted and what is the prevalent type of sludge (flocculent or granular). 
Task 4.2 Energy integration and modelling of the NEXTSTEEL concept [Lead: POLI, partners: REC, CEA, AMMR, TEC, ERA, CELSA, M13-M42]     
On the basis of the results of Task 4.1, WP1-WP2 and WP3 trials, the NEXTSTEEL concept will be validated at the scale of an industrial steelmaking. In relation to the use of bioanthracite -and enriched-hydrogen gas in steelmaking processes-, AMMR, TEC and ERA will perform an energy assessment, considering different relevant steelmaking processes. The use of bioanthracite and enriched-hydrogen gas will be assessed considering both new application solutions and conventional uses, where they can replace natural gas and fossil coal, so effectively contributing to the sector decarbonization.  POLI, in collaboration with REC and CEA, will produce an energy model of a steelmaking benchmark process, to identify the most effective solutions for integrating NEXTSTEEL process in steelmaking, evaluating the reuse of waste heat, maximising the production and the utilisation of process gases for green energy generation. REC, CEA and POLI will integrate the data to perform modelling on biowaste conversion to biobased anthracite and enriched hydrogen gas, including technologies, processes performances, mass balance, energy balance of the whole NEXTSTEEL value chain. The study will include considerations on the process scale-up, identifying technical risks and best process conditions to minimize plant CAPEX and OPEX.
Task 4.3 LCA definition for the investigated value-chains and environmental assessment [Lead: POLI, partners: REC, CEA, M16-M44] 
The NEXTSTEEL concept will be continuously evaluated by means of a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), which will be carried in line with international standards ISO 14040, ISO 14044 and relevant EU Product Environmental Footprint category rules. The four core LCA steps will be defined for the specific case: (i) goal and scope definition; (ii) inventory analysis; (iii) impact assessment; and (iv) interpretation of the results. In particular, the goal of the study is to assess environmental impacts of the full-scale multipurpose biorefinery, and as such it will cover the whole life cycle of the proposed value-chains, starting with the main feedstocks and ending with possible uses of the products. Methodology will be tailored for the project scope and in line with specific PEF category rules, e.g.  allocation of environmental burdens between the co-products will be addressed. The process emissions will be compared with those of the fossil and/or bio-based benchmarks, so to define the improvement in environmental performance across the whole NEXTSTEEL value chain. POLI, and the involved partners, will define appropriate mid- and end-point indicators, to present the expected environmental benefits of the proposed value chain in the most effective form. Once LCA general framework is set and agreed with the partners, the data gathering will start, mainly fed by the other WPs. Integration of the primary data with existing datasets (e.g. Ecoinvent 3.1) may be considered. To perform LCA studies, POLI uses OpenLCA as main software, in the spirit of open science.  The results will be put in the context of the goals set in the EU Green Deal. The main findings of this task will be presented both in full- and Layman- level reports, so to be benefited by a wide public.
Task 4.4 Techno-economic assessment [Lead: POLI, partners: REC, CEA, CELSA M20-M46] 
In this task a thorough Techno-Economic Assessment (TEA) for the integrated concept will be performed to assess its high-gains. The techno-economic viability of the proposed concept will be assessed. The potential integration with the local energy market will be investigated to define the expected energy costs and the potential gains derived from acting as a balancing element for the grid. Besides the energy aspects, the market value for the various products of the biorefinery will be identified, with the support of the partners, using both literature and other market derived data. The profitability of the biorefinery plant will be analysed under the various scenarios, identifying how the CAPEX and OPEX will be affected by the local conditions. Socio-economic impact of the NEXTSTEEL concept will be carefully considered, so to widen the whole assessment of the potential benefits resulting from the proposed innovation. The biowaste identified task 1.4 will be used to define a methodological approach and perform the social impact assessment, while also identifying the potential barriers to the acceptance of the new technology. The social impact factors and barriers of the new technology acceptance will be determined through secondary data analysis, coupled with focus group discussions.
Task 4.5 Interpretation and recommendations to meet EU decarbonisation goals (M36-M46). Lead: POLI Partners: AMMR, TEC, ERA, CELSA
The aim of this task is to develop recommendations for strategies supporting the deployment of the proposed value chain, including cross sectorial strategies for the conversion of biogenic waste streams into enriched hydrogen gas, bioanthracite and critical Raw Materials. The strategies will be developed at local, national and European (Green Deal) levels and addressing the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. This task will also leverage on the identified potential benefits for society, related to the development of the NEXTSTEEL technologies. The quantified benefits will be put in the context of the EU effort (i.e. GreenDeal) for decarbonising the European economy. | Task 4.1 Logistic validation and biowaste selection [Lead: POL. Part.: REC, CEA, AMMR, TEC, ERA, 1-12] 
Subtask 4.1.1. Feedstock selection and characterization. REC (M1-M9): The feedstocks for the study will be mapped and selected among biogenic residual streams based on a literature review and their chemical composition, availability, and economic aspect. A techno-economic analysis will be developed, where the future prospects of the wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) will be assessed by considering factors such as the treatment technologies that will be applied and the sludge type that will prevail (flocculent or granular), to determine the feasibility of the implementation of the technologies proposed in the project. 3 main categories of feedstocks will be considered: urban, industrial and agricultural biowastes and 4 residues within these categories selected and physically-chemically characterised in more detail and adopted for the lab scale trials.  
Subtask 4.1.2 Feedstocks supply chain assessment. POL (M1-M9): The mapping procedure will involve the identification and categorization of the different types of biowaste. The four feedstocks mapped and characterised in subtasks 1.1.1 and 1.1.2,  will be selected experiments based on the following criteria: 1) literature review, 2) the physical-chemical composition of the feedstocks, which significantly impact the quality of the hydrochar obtained through the HTC process, 3) their availability in terms of volume production and seasonality in order to ensure a continuous supply for the HTC process, 4) their cost and 5) feedstocks used in AD are excluded to prevent competition. Given that the characteristics of each type of biowaste can impact its suitability for the HTC process, a study of the influence of wastewater treatment technologies on the characteristics of sewage sludge will be performed together with the assessment of the future prospects of WWTPs considering which treatment technologies will be most widely adopted and what is the prevalent type of sludge (flocculent or granular). 
Task 4.2 Energy integration and modelling of the NEXTSTEEL concept [Lead: POLI, partners: REC, CEA, AMMR, TEC, ERA, CELSA, M13-M42]     
On the basis of the results of Task 4.1, WP1-WP2 and WP3 trials, the NEXTSTEEL concept will be validated at the scale of an industrial steelmaking. In relation to the use of bioanthracite -and enriched-hydrogen gas in steelmaking processes-, AMMR, TEC and ERA will perform an energy assessment, considering different relevant steelmaking processes. The use of bioanthracite and enriched-hydrogen gas will be assessed considering both new application solutions and conventional uses, where they can replace natural gas and fossil coal, so effectively contributing to the sector decarbonization.  POLI, in collaboration with REC and CEA, will produce an energy model of a steelmaking benchmark process, to identify the most effective solutions for integrating NEXTSTEEL process in steelmaking, evaluating the reuse of waste heat, maximising the production and the utilisation of process gases for green energy generation. REC, CEA and POLI will integrate the data to perform modelling on biowaste conversion to biobased anthracite and enriched hydrogen gas, including technologies, processes performances, mass balance, energy balance of the whole NEXTSTEEL value chain. The study will include considerations on the process scale-up, identifying technical risks and best process conditions to minimize plant CAPEX and OPEX.
Task 4.3 LCA definition for the investigated value-chains and environmental assessment [Lead: POLI, partners: REC, CEA, M16-M44] 
The NEXTSTEEL concept will be continuously evaluated by means of a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), which will be carried in line with international standards ISO 14040, ISO 14044 and relevant EU Product Environmental Footprint category rules. The four core LCA steps will be defined for the specific case: (i) goal and scope definition; (ii) inventory analysis; (iii) impact assessment; and (iv) interpretation of the results. In particular, the goal of the study is to assess environmental impacts of the full-scale multipurpose biorefinery, and as such it will cover the whole life cycle of the proposed value-chains, starting with the main feedstocks and ending with possible uses of the products. Methodology will be tailored for the project scope and in line with specific PEF category rules, e.g.  allocation of environmental burdens between the co-products will be addressed. The process emissions will be compared with those of the fossil and/or bio-based benchmarks, so to define the improvement in environmental performance across the whole NEXTSTEEL value chain. POLI, and the involved partners, will define appropriate mid- and end-point indicators, to present the expected environmental benefits of the proposed value chain in the most effective form. Once LCA general framework is set and agreed with the partners, the data gathering will start, mainly fed by the other WPs. Integration of the primary data with existing datasets (e.g. Ecoinvent 3.1) may be considered. To perform LCA studies, POLI uses OpenLCA as main software, in the spirit of open science.  The results will be put in the context of the goals set in the EU Green Deal. The main findings of this task will be presented both in full- and Layman- level reports, so to be benefited by a wide public.
Task 4.4 Techno-economic assessment [Lead: POLI, partners: REC, CEA, CELSA M20-M46] 
In this task a thorough Techno-Economic Assessment (TEA) for the integrated concept will be performed to assess its high-gains. The techno-economic viability of the proposed concept will be assessed. The potential integration with the local energy market will be investigated to define the expected energy costs and the potential gains derived from acting as a balancing element for the grid. Besides the energy aspects, the market value for the various products of the biorefinery will be identified, with the support of the partners, using both literature and other market derived data. The profitability of the biorefinery plant will be analysed under the various scenarios, identifying how the CAPEX and OPEX will be affected by the local conditions. Socio-economic impact of the NEXTSTEEL concept will be carefully considered, so to widen the whole assessment of the potential benefits resulting from the proposed innovation. The biowaste identified task 1.4 will be used to define a methodological approach and perform the social impact assessment, while also identifying the potential barriers to the acceptance of the new technology. The social impact factors and barriers of the new technology acceptance will be determined through secondary data analysis, coupled with focus group discussions.
Task 4.5 Interpretation and recommendations to meet EU decarbonisation goals (M36-M46). Lead: POLI Partners: AMMR, TEC, ERA, CELSA
The aim of this task is to develop recommendations for strategies supporting the deployment of the proposed value chain, including cross sectorial strategies for the conversion of biogenic waste streams into enriched hydrogen gas, bioanthracite and critical Raw Materials. The strategies will be developed at local, national and European (Green Deal) levels and addressing the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. This task will also leverage on the identified potential benefits for society, related to the development of the NEXTSTEEL technologies. The quantified benefits will be put in the context of the EU effort (i.e. GreenDeal) for decarbonising the European economy.
Work Package No. | Work Package No. | 5 | Lead: IRIS
Work Package Title | Work Package Title | Industry 4.0: Digital Intelligence Layer | Industry 4.0: Digital Intelligence Layer
Start Month | 3 | End Month | 48
Objectives: ■ Define the quality and process monitoring requirements for adaptive, real-time control in low-CO₂ steelmaking processes, by identifying critical process parameters (CPPs) and critical quality attributes (CQAs) and mapping them into a holonic agent-based architecture to underpin the HoloSteel Digital Twin (DT). ■ Develop and validate an integrated, robust sensor infrastructure capable of reliable real-time monitoring in harsh, high-temperature steelmaking environments, including multivariate data fusion, chemometric models, and automated analytics. ■ Design, implement, and deploy the HoloSteel Digital Twin as a modular, holonic multi-agent system (MAS) that integrates real-time data streams, predictive models, and decision-support interfaces for operators and business decision-makers. ■ Engage and cluster with HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61 project s(AI Foundation Models in Science) to identify & exploit synergies in AI-driven modelling, knowledge sharing, and joint dissemination. ■ Ensure robust, FAIR-compliant, GDPR-responsible, and interoperable data management and governance, supporting transparency, replicability, and value creation from project data outputs. | Objectives: ■ Define the quality and process monitoring requirements for adaptive, real-time control in low-CO₂ steelmaking processes, by identifying critical process parameters (CPPs) and critical quality attributes (CQAs) and mapping them into a holonic agent-based architecture to underpin the HoloSteel Digital Twin (DT). ■ Develop and validate an integrated, robust sensor infrastructure capable of reliable real-time monitoring in harsh, high-temperature steelmaking environments, including multivariate data fusion, chemometric models, and automated analytics. ■ Design, implement, and deploy the HoloSteel Digital Twin as a modular, holonic multi-agent system (MAS) that integrates real-time data streams, predictive models, and decision-support interfaces for operators and business decision-makers. ■ Engage and cluster with HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61 project s(AI Foundation Models in Science) to identify & exploit synergies in AI-driven modelling, knowledge sharing, and joint dissemination. ■ Ensure robust, FAIR-compliant, GDPR-responsible, and interoperable data management and governance, supporting transparency, replicability, and value creation from project data outputs. | Objectives: ■ Define the quality and process monitoring requirements for adaptive, real-time control in low-CO₂ steelmaking processes, by identifying critical process parameters (CPPs) and critical quality attributes (CQAs) and mapping them into a holonic agent-based architecture to underpin the HoloSteel Digital Twin (DT). ■ Develop and validate an integrated, robust sensor infrastructure capable of reliable real-time monitoring in harsh, high-temperature steelmaking environments, including multivariate data fusion, chemometric models, and automated analytics. ■ Design, implement, and deploy the HoloSteel Digital Twin as a modular, holonic multi-agent system (MAS) that integrates real-time data streams, predictive models, and decision-support interfaces for operators and business decision-makers. ■ Engage and cluster with HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61 project s(AI Foundation Models in Science) to identify & exploit synergies in AI-driven modelling, knowledge sharing, and joint dissemination. ■ Ensure robust, FAIR-compliant, GDPR-responsible, and interoperable data management and governance, supporting transparency, replicability, and value creation from project data outputs. | Objectives: ■ Define the quality and process monitoring requirements for adaptive, real-time control in low-CO₂ steelmaking processes, by identifying critical process parameters (CPPs) and critical quality attributes (CQAs) and mapping them into a holonic agent-based architecture to underpin the HoloSteel Digital Twin (DT). ■ Develop and validate an integrated, robust sensor infrastructure capable of reliable real-time monitoring in harsh, high-temperature steelmaking environments, including multivariate data fusion, chemometric models, and automated analytics. ■ Design, implement, and deploy the HoloSteel Digital Twin as a modular, holonic multi-agent system (MAS) that integrates real-time data streams, predictive models, and decision-support interfaces for operators and business decision-makers. ■ Engage and cluster with HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61 project s(AI Foundation Models in Science) to identify & exploit synergies in AI-driven modelling, knowledge sharing, and joint dissemination. ■ Ensure robust, FAIR-compliant, GDPR-responsible, and interoperable data management and governance, supporting transparency, replicability, and value creation from project data outputs.
Task 5.1 QbD Framework, Critical Attribute Mapping & Holonic Digital Twin Architecture Design [Lead: IRIS. Participants: CEA, REC, ERA, AMMR, CELSA, TEC,  M3-M12]:Inspired by the QbD approach, in this task, IRIS will engage with the teams in WP1, WP2, the Pilots (WP3) and through participation in the cocreation sessions (T6.1), for mapping the processes & to identify the requirements in terms of the critical process parameters (CPPs) & critical quality attributes (CQA) of interest to monitor in real-time, along with the specifications (in terms of location/point of installation, Limits of Detection, etc.). These outputs will allow the Industry 4.0 grade quality assurance solutions to be developed in T5.2. In addition, this mapping will be used to design the holonic architecture for mapping the processes as holons, which will provide the scenario for the MAS framework that will underpin the DT that will be developed in T5.3. Finally (and in conjunction with T6.1 & 6.2), the existing digitalisation infrastructure at each of the steelmaking end-users and implications for integrations and future implementation will also be mapped. This task will output a Digitalisation Specification Package (D5.1) for internal use by T5.2 and T5.3 and in preparation for the Holosteel system deployment and technical integration as part of the pilot testing in T3.6. This task will also incorporate Ethical AI consideration to ensure full compliance with EU’s AI Act and to inform T5.3.  
Task 5.2 Integrated Sensor Infrastructure engineered for working in very high temperature environments [Lead: IRIS. Participants: POLI. M4-M32]
Based on the requirements & specifications from T5.1, IRIS will leverage its self-contained, versatile Multirange Spectroscopic test bed as an experimental unit for identifying the most suitable sensing techniques (from among SWIR spectroscopy, NIR spectroscopy, VIS spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, Fluorescence, Laser Induced Breakdown (LIBs) spectroscopy, among others) for the real-time and simultaneous measurement of diverse CQAs and CCPs, and enable seamless data fusion for obtaining dramatic improvements in precision, accuracy & limit of detection (LoD). Based on trials with the Multirange Spectroscopic experimental unit for measuring the predefined critical parameters and indicators and verified against reference methods, the optimum spectral data fusion techniques will be defined using innovative hybrid ensembling for their configuration into reliable and cost effective in-line monitoring devices (capable of withstanding harsh conditions and high temperatures), based on smart sensing devices with automated data acquisition system and machine learning algorithms to enable real-time data analysis and predictive systems. The chemometrics models for extracting actionable information from the spectroscopy data will be built. Once the chemometrics models are built, and lab tested and validated in IRIS, this task will culminate with the analysers being installed in the pilot units in WP3. Data gathered from this task will be used for building the DT in T5.3. In addition to multivariate data from spectroscopy analysers, the univariate data from available traditional sensors installed in the pilot units in WP3 will be assessed to identify data fusion opportunities. 
Task 5.3 Holosteel DT backend & frontend development [Lead: IRIS. Partici.: REC, CEA. M7-M48]
This task will deliver the full-stack implementation of the HoloSteel Digital Twin, structured around a holonic multi-agent system (MAS) architecture from T5.1. The backend will support dynamic simulation of steelmaking processes using holon-based agents representing physical, logical, and decision-making entities across the production chain. It will integrate real-time data from sensors and control systems, and embed predictive models for process behaviour, energy use, emissions, and steel quality outcomes. The frontend will provide industrial users with interactive dashboards and a decision support interface, enabling process transparency, what-if analysis, and scenario-based decision-making. This task ensures modularity, interoperability with existing IT/OT systems, and robust data governance, facilitating flexible deployment across varying plant configurations.  Data will be acquired thanks to operation of the pilot unit (in T3.3) with the installed analysers from T5.2 (and from the traditional sensors, e.g. pressure) in the HoloSteel data repository and fused for feeding the predictive models of the DT. IRIS will adapt its current Scadalytics software for the data collection, storage, fusion and processing.     
Task 5.4 Clustering activities with HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61 (AI Foundation models in science (GenAI4EU) [Lead: IRIS. Participants: REC, CEA, POLI. M7-M48]
In task, we will engage with the coordinators of the funded projects under HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61 to explore collaboration opportunities. In cooperation with T8.4, and with support from REC, IRIS will engage with the coordinators of the GenAI4EU initiative to identify synergies, particularly around applying advanced AI models to materials science, process data, & DT development. In cooperation with T8.4, joint meetings, knowledge-sharing workshops, & coordinated communication activities will be organised to align approaches, explore data exchange opportunities & co-develop cross-project insights to ensure that NextSteel leverages cutting-edge AI developments and contributes actively to the broader European digital and green industrial transition.     
Task 5.5 Data Management: FAIR principles & Interoperability of data sharing [Lead: IRIS. Participants: REC, CEA. POLI. M3-M48]
In this task, a formal FAIR and GDPR compliant data management plan (DMP) (D5.1) will be drawn up (building from the outline provided in Section 1.2), maintained & implemented. It will detail: which data will be generated during research; metadata, standards & quality assurance measures; plans for sharing data; copyright and IP rights of data; data storage and back-up measures; data management roles and responsibilities. The DMP will evolve during the lifetime of the project in order to present the status of the project's reflections on data management. | Task 5.1 QbD Framework, Critical Attribute Mapping & Holonic Digital Twin Architecture Design [Lead: IRIS. Participants: CEA, REC, ERA, AMMR, CELSA, TEC,  M3-M12]:Inspired by the QbD approach, in this task, IRIS will engage with the teams in WP1, WP2, the Pilots (WP3) and through participation in the cocreation sessions (T6.1), for mapping the processes & to identify the requirements in terms of the critical process parameters (CPPs) & critical quality attributes (CQA) of interest to monitor in real-time, along with the specifications (in terms of location/point of installation, Limits of Detection, etc.). These outputs will allow the Industry 4.0 grade quality assurance solutions to be developed in T5.2. In addition, this mapping will be used to design the holonic architecture for mapping the processes as holons, which will provide the scenario for the MAS framework that will underpin the DT that will be developed in T5.3. Finally (and in conjunction with T6.1 & 6.2), the existing digitalisation infrastructure at each of the steelmaking end-users and implications for integrations and future implementation will also be mapped. This task will output a Digitalisation Specification Package (D5.1) for internal use by T5.2 and T5.3 and in preparation for the Holosteel system deployment and technical integration as part of the pilot testing in T3.6. This task will also incorporate Ethical AI consideration to ensure full compliance with EU’s AI Act and to inform T5.3.  
Task 5.2 Integrated Sensor Infrastructure engineered for working in very high temperature environments [Lead: IRIS. Participants: POLI. M4-M32]
Based on the requirements & specifications from T5.1, IRIS will leverage its self-contained, versatile Multirange Spectroscopic test bed as an experimental unit for identifying the most suitable sensing techniques (from among SWIR spectroscopy, NIR spectroscopy, VIS spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, Fluorescence, Laser Induced Breakdown (LIBs) spectroscopy, among others) for the real-time and simultaneous measurement of diverse CQAs and CCPs, and enable seamless data fusion for obtaining dramatic improvements in precision, accuracy & limit of detection (LoD). Based on trials with the Multirange Spectroscopic experimental unit for measuring the predefined critical parameters and indicators and verified against reference methods, the optimum spectral data fusion techniques will be defined using innovative hybrid ensembling for their configuration into reliable and cost effective in-line monitoring devices (capable of withstanding harsh conditions and high temperatures), based on smart sensing devices with automated data acquisition system and machine learning algorithms to enable real-time data analysis and predictive systems. The chemometrics models for extracting actionable information from the spectroscopy data will be built. Once the chemometrics models are built, and lab tested and validated in IRIS, this task will culminate with the analysers being installed in the pilot units in WP3. Data gathered from this task will be used for building the DT in T5.3. In addition to multivariate data from spectroscopy analysers, the univariate data from available traditional sensors installed in the pilot units in WP3 will be assessed to identify data fusion opportunities. 
Task 5.3 Holosteel DT backend & frontend development [Lead: IRIS. Partici.: REC, CEA. M7-M48]
This task will deliver the full-stack implementation of the HoloSteel Digital Twin, structured around a holonic multi-agent system (MAS) architecture from T5.1. The backend will support dynamic simulation of steelmaking processes using holon-based agents representing physical, logical, and decision-making entities across the production chain. It will integrate real-time data from sensors and control systems, and embed predictive models for process behaviour, energy use, emissions, and steel quality outcomes. The frontend will provide industrial users with interactive dashboards and a decision support interface, enabling process transparency, what-if analysis, and scenario-based decision-making. This task ensures modularity, interoperability with existing IT/OT systems, and robust data governance, facilitating flexible deployment across varying plant configurations.  Data will be acquired thanks to operation of the pilot unit (in T3.3) with the installed analysers from T5.2 (and from the traditional sensors, e.g. pressure) in the HoloSteel data repository and fused for feeding the predictive models of the DT. IRIS will adapt its current Scadalytics software for the data collection, storage, fusion and processing.     
Task 5.4 Clustering activities with HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61 (AI Foundation models in science (GenAI4EU) [Lead: IRIS. Participants: REC, CEA, POLI. M7-M48]
In task, we will engage with the coordinators of the funded projects under HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61 to explore collaboration opportunities. In cooperation with T8.4, and with support from REC, IRIS will engage with the coordinators of the GenAI4EU initiative to identify synergies, particularly around applying advanced AI models to materials science, process data, & DT development. In cooperation with T8.4, joint meetings, knowledge-sharing workshops, & coordinated communication activities will be organised to align approaches, explore data exchange opportunities & co-develop cross-project insights to ensure that NextSteel leverages cutting-edge AI developments and contributes actively to the broader European digital and green industrial transition.     
Task 5.5 Data Management: FAIR principles & Interoperability of data sharing [Lead: IRIS. Participants: REC, CEA. POLI. M3-M48]
In this task, a formal FAIR and GDPR compliant data management plan (DMP) (D5.1) will be drawn up (building from the outline provided in Section 1.2), maintained & implemented. It will detail: which data will be generated during research; metadata, standards & quality assurance measures; plans for sharing data; copyright and IP rights of data; data storage and back-up measures; data management roles and responsibilities. The DMP will evolve during the lifetime of the project in order to present the status of the project's reflections on data management. | Task 5.1 QbD Framework, Critical Attribute Mapping & Holonic Digital Twin Architecture Design [Lead: IRIS. Participants: CEA, REC, ERA, AMMR, CELSA, TEC,  M3-M12]:Inspired by the QbD approach, in this task, IRIS will engage with the teams in WP1, WP2, the Pilots (WP3) and through participation in the cocreation sessions (T6.1), for mapping the processes & to identify the requirements in terms of the critical process parameters (CPPs) & critical quality attributes (CQA) of interest to monitor in real-time, along with the specifications (in terms of location/point of installation, Limits of Detection, etc.). These outputs will allow the Industry 4.0 grade quality assurance solutions to be developed in T5.2. In addition, this mapping will be used to design the holonic architecture for mapping the processes as holons, which will provide the scenario for the MAS framework that will underpin the DT that will be developed in T5.3. Finally (and in conjunction with T6.1 & 6.2), the existing digitalisation infrastructure at each of the steelmaking end-users and implications for integrations and future implementation will also be mapped. This task will output a Digitalisation Specification Package (D5.1) for internal use by T5.2 and T5.3 and in preparation for the Holosteel system deployment and technical integration as part of the pilot testing in T3.6. This task will also incorporate Ethical AI consideration to ensure full compliance with EU’s AI Act and to inform T5.3.  
Task 5.2 Integrated Sensor Infrastructure engineered for working in very high temperature environments [Lead: IRIS. Participants: POLI. M4-M32]
Based on the requirements & specifications from T5.1, IRIS will leverage its self-contained, versatile Multirange Spectroscopic test bed as an experimental unit for identifying the most suitable sensing techniques (from among SWIR spectroscopy, NIR spectroscopy, VIS spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, Fluorescence, Laser Induced Breakdown (LIBs) spectroscopy, among others) for the real-time and simultaneous measurement of diverse CQAs and CCPs, and enable seamless data fusion for obtaining dramatic improvements in precision, accuracy & limit of detection (LoD). Based on trials with the Multirange Spectroscopic experimental unit for measuring the predefined critical parameters and indicators and verified against reference methods, the optimum spectral data fusion techniques will be defined using innovative hybrid ensembling for their configuration into reliable and cost effective in-line monitoring devices (capable of withstanding harsh conditions and high temperatures), based on smart sensing devices with automated data acquisition system and machine learning algorithms to enable real-time data analysis and predictive systems. The chemometrics models for extracting actionable information from the spectroscopy data will be built. Once the chemometrics models are built, and lab tested and validated in IRIS, this task will culminate with the analysers being installed in the pilot units in WP3. Data gathered from this task will be used for building the DT in T5.3. In addition to multivariate data from spectroscopy analysers, the univariate data from available traditional sensors installed in the pilot units in WP3 will be assessed to identify data fusion opportunities. 
Task 5.3 Holosteel DT backend & frontend development [Lead: IRIS. Partici.: REC, CEA. M7-M48]
This task will deliver the full-stack implementation of the HoloSteel Digital Twin, structured around a holonic multi-agent system (MAS) architecture from T5.1. The backend will support dynamic simulation of steelmaking processes using holon-based agents representing physical, logical, and decision-making entities across the production chain. It will integrate real-time data from sensors and control systems, and embed predictive models for process behaviour, energy use, emissions, and steel quality outcomes. The frontend will provide industrial users with interactive dashboards and a decision support interface, enabling process transparency, what-if analysis, and scenario-based decision-making. This task ensures modularity, interoperability with existing IT/OT systems, and robust data governance, facilitating flexible deployment across varying plant configurations.  Data will be acquired thanks to operation of the pilot unit (in T3.3) with the installed analysers from T5.2 (and from the traditional sensors, e.g. pressure) in the HoloSteel data repository and fused for feeding the predictive models of the DT. IRIS will adapt its current Scadalytics software for the data collection, storage, fusion and processing.     
Task 5.4 Clustering activities with HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61 (AI Foundation models in science (GenAI4EU) [Lead: IRIS. Participants: REC, CEA, POLI. M7-M48]
In task, we will engage with the coordinators of the funded projects under HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61 to explore collaboration opportunities. In cooperation with T8.4, and with support from REC, IRIS will engage with the coordinators of the GenAI4EU initiative to identify synergies, particularly around applying advanced AI models to materials science, process data, & DT development. In cooperation with T8.4, joint meetings, knowledge-sharing workshops, & coordinated communication activities will be organised to align approaches, explore data exchange opportunities & co-develop cross-project insights to ensure that NextSteel leverages cutting-edge AI developments and contributes actively to the broader European digital and green industrial transition.     
Task 5.5 Data Management: FAIR principles & Interoperability of data sharing [Lead: IRIS. Participants: REC, CEA. POLI. M3-M48]
In this task, a formal FAIR and GDPR compliant data management plan (DMP) (D5.1) will be drawn up (building from the outline provided in Section 1.2), maintained & implemented. It will detail: which data will be generated during research; metadata, standards & quality assurance measures; plans for sharing data; copyright and IP rights of data; data storage and back-up measures; data management roles and responsibilities. The DMP will evolve during the lifetime of the project in order to present the status of the project's reflections on data management. | Task 5.1 QbD Framework, Critical Attribute Mapping & Holonic Digital Twin Architecture Design [Lead: IRIS. Participants: CEA, REC, ERA, AMMR, CELSA, TEC,  M3-M12]:Inspired by the QbD approach, in this task, IRIS will engage with the teams in WP1, WP2, the Pilots (WP3) and through participation in the cocreation sessions (T6.1), for mapping the processes & to identify the requirements in terms of the critical process parameters (CPPs) & critical quality attributes (CQA) of interest to monitor in real-time, along with the specifications (in terms of location/point of installation, Limits of Detection, etc.). These outputs will allow the Industry 4.0 grade quality assurance solutions to be developed in T5.2. In addition, this mapping will be used to design the holonic architecture for mapping the processes as holons, which will provide the scenario for the MAS framework that will underpin the DT that will be developed in T5.3. Finally (and in conjunction with T6.1 & 6.2), the existing digitalisation infrastructure at each of the steelmaking end-users and implications for integrations and future implementation will also be mapped. This task will output a Digitalisation Specification Package (D5.1) for internal use by T5.2 and T5.3 and in preparation for the Holosteel system deployment and technical integration as part of the pilot testing in T3.6. This task will also incorporate Ethical AI consideration to ensure full compliance with EU’s AI Act and to inform T5.3.  
Task 5.2 Integrated Sensor Infrastructure engineered for working in very high temperature environments [Lead: IRIS. Participants: POLI. M4-M32]
Based on the requirements & specifications from T5.1, IRIS will leverage its self-contained, versatile Multirange Spectroscopic test bed as an experimental unit for identifying the most suitable sensing techniques (from among SWIR spectroscopy, NIR spectroscopy, VIS spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, Fluorescence, Laser Induced Breakdown (LIBs) spectroscopy, among others) for the real-time and simultaneous measurement of diverse CQAs and CCPs, and enable seamless data fusion for obtaining dramatic improvements in precision, accuracy & limit of detection (LoD). Based on trials with the Multirange Spectroscopic experimental unit for measuring the predefined critical parameters and indicators and verified against reference methods, the optimum spectral data fusion techniques will be defined using innovative hybrid ensembling for their configuration into reliable and cost effective in-line monitoring devices (capable of withstanding harsh conditions and high temperatures), based on smart sensing devices with automated data acquisition system and machine learning algorithms to enable real-time data analysis and predictive systems. The chemometrics models for extracting actionable information from the spectroscopy data will be built. Once the chemometrics models are built, and lab tested and validated in IRIS, this task will culminate with the analysers being installed in the pilot units in WP3. Data gathered from this task will be used for building the DT in T5.3. In addition to multivariate data from spectroscopy analysers, the univariate data from available traditional sensors installed in the pilot units in WP3 will be assessed to identify data fusion opportunities. 
Task 5.3 Holosteel DT backend & frontend development [Lead: IRIS. Partici.: REC, CEA. M7-M48]
This task will deliver the full-stack implementation of the HoloSteel Digital Twin, structured around a holonic multi-agent system (MAS) architecture from T5.1. The backend will support dynamic simulation of steelmaking processes using holon-based agents representing physical, logical, and decision-making entities across the production chain. It will integrate real-time data from sensors and control systems, and embed predictive models for process behaviour, energy use, emissions, and steel quality outcomes. The frontend will provide industrial users with interactive dashboards and a decision support interface, enabling process transparency, what-if analysis, and scenario-based decision-making. This task ensures modularity, interoperability with existing IT/OT systems, and robust data governance, facilitating flexible deployment across varying plant configurations.  Data will be acquired thanks to operation of the pilot unit (in T3.3) with the installed analysers from T5.2 (and from the traditional sensors, e.g. pressure) in the HoloSteel data repository and fused for feeding the predictive models of the DT. IRIS will adapt its current Scadalytics software for the data collection, storage, fusion and processing.     
Task 5.4 Clustering activities with HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61 (AI Foundation models in science (GenAI4EU) [Lead: IRIS. Participants: REC, CEA, POLI. M7-M48]
In task, we will engage with the coordinators of the funded projects under HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61 to explore collaboration opportunities. In cooperation with T8.4, and with support from REC, IRIS will engage with the coordinators of the GenAI4EU initiative to identify synergies, particularly around applying advanced AI models to materials science, process data, & DT development. In cooperation with T8.4, joint meetings, knowledge-sharing workshops, & coordinated communication activities will be organised to align approaches, explore data exchange opportunities & co-develop cross-project insights to ensure that NextSteel leverages cutting-edge AI developments and contributes actively to the broader European digital and green industrial transition.     
Task 5.5 Data Management: FAIR principles & Interoperability of data sharing [Lead: IRIS. Participants: REC, CEA. POLI. M3-M48]
In this task, a formal FAIR and GDPR compliant data management plan (DMP) (D5.1) will be drawn up (building from the outline provided in Section 1.2), maintained & implemented. It will detail: which data will be generated during research; metadata, standards & quality assurance measures; plans for sharing data; copyright and IP rights of data; data storage and back-up measures; data management roles and responsibilities. The DMP will evolve during the lifetime of the project in order to present the status of the project's reflections on data management.
Work Package No. | Work Package No. | 6 | Lead: BRITEST (BRI)
Work Package Title | Work Package Title | Industry 5.0 Human and Business Centric Layer | Industry 5.0 Human and Business Centric Layer
Start Month | 3 | End Month | 48
Objectives: ■ Co-create with steel industry low carbon transition with decision makers and the workforce;  ■     Define needs for plant design optimisation and measures to mitigate risks during operation; ■ Integrate ESG into Business Governance for the Low-Carbon Transition;  ■ Build skills and capacity for the low carbon transition towards Operator 5.0; ■ Develop a business case and exploitation strategy for ≥1 validated low-carbon steelmaking route, supported by market-informed exploitation strategies for individual KERs that enable & underpin the route | Objectives: ■ Co-create with steel industry low carbon transition with decision makers and the workforce;  ■     Define needs for plant design optimisation and measures to mitigate risks during operation; ■ Integrate ESG into Business Governance for the Low-Carbon Transition;  ■ Build skills and capacity for the low carbon transition towards Operator 5.0; ■ Develop a business case and exploitation strategy for ≥1 validated low-carbon steelmaking route, supported by market-informed exploitation strategies for individual KERs that enable & underpin the route | Objectives: ■ Co-create with steel industry low carbon transition with decision makers and the workforce;  ■     Define needs for plant design optimisation and measures to mitigate risks during operation; ■ Integrate ESG into Business Governance for the Low-Carbon Transition;  ■ Build skills and capacity for the low carbon transition towards Operator 5.0; ■ Develop a business case and exploitation strategy for ≥1 validated low-carbon steelmaking route, supported by market-informed exploitation strategies for individual KERs that enable & underpin the route | Objectives: ■ Co-create with steel industry low carbon transition with decision makers and the workforce;  ■     Define needs for plant design optimisation and measures to mitigate risks during operation; ■ Integrate ESG into Business Governance for the Low-Carbon Transition;  ■ Build skills and capacity for the low carbon transition towards Operator 5.0; ■ Develop a business case and exploitation strategy for ≥1 validated low-carbon steelmaking route, supported by market-informed exploitation strategies for individual KERs that enable & underpin the route
Task 6.1 Co-creation of the low-carbon transition (BRI)
This task will implement a proven cocreation process in order to effectively engage key decision makers (business and plant-level), and workforce representatives (including operating and maintenance personnel) in an effective series of focused workshops and facilitated scoping sessions that are designed to gain industry insights and perspectives in relation to the low carbon transition. This process will progressively drill down into the requirements, specifications, anticipated adaptations, expected benefits and perceived risks in relation to the NextSteel technology, process and digital innovations, and act as preparation for pilots and future post-project scale up and adoption. The outputs from these sessions will be documented as confidential information for use within the project, informing WP1, WP2, WP3, and WP5 (especially T5.1), as well as T6.2-6.5. The outputs will also provide insights for the design of effective communication campaigns in WP7 and publicly sharable insights and perspectives to be presented in an engaging whitepaper publication (D6.1).       
Task 6.2 Needs for plant design optimisation and measures to mitigate risks during operation [Lead: BRI. Participants: REC, POL AMMR, ERA. CELSA. M12-M44]
Based on the findings in relation to plant design and operation from T6.1, and expert knowledge from WPs 1, 2 and 5, this task will define specific plant design optimisations to ensure that any preparations necessary for the pilot implementations in WP3 are actioned. On the same basis, the longer-term optimisations that could be necessary for the future adoption and implementation of the NextSteel technology, process and digital innovations will be developed into a roadmap (D6.2). Overall, this task will ensure that necessary inputs and engagements with WPs 1, 2, 3 and 5 (T5.1) are seamlessly enabled. Details of estimated plant design optimisation investments will be fed into T6.5 as part of the business case planning.
Task 6.3 Integrating ESG into Business Governance for the Low-Carbon Transition [Lead: BRI. Partici: REC, POL AMMR, ERA. CELSA M19-M46]
This task will focus on a deeper analysis of the ESG (Environmental Sustainability Governance) implications of the NextSteel innovations, and the wider ESG needs for enabling a low-carbon transition of the steel industry based on      the cocreation consultations in T6.1. Recommendations for business leaders will be drawn up in a public report (D6.3) focussing on the integration of EGS into Business Governance practices. 
Task 6.4 Skills and Capacity Building [Lead: BRI. Participants: WIP, REC, CEA, POLI. M19-M48]
on the learnings from the cocreation process, a skills gap analysis will be performed. NEXTSTEEL will contribute to skills development and knowledge sharing in the field through of webinars on selected topics in the field of clean steel production.  training workshops will be organised (to coincide with the validation phase of the demo prototype training workers on the operation of the NEXTSTEEL pilots and on the use of the innovations in steelmaking) for contributing to development of skills and competencies and to support future exploitation activities.
Task 6.5 Business Case and Exploitation Strategy development, incl. Roadmap and Market Analysis for Commercially Oriented KERs [Lead: ICP. Participants: REC, POL AMMR, ERA. CELSA, M4-M48]
This task will deliver a robust business case and exploitation strategy for at ≥1 validated low-carbon steelmaking route emerging from NextSteel (taking inputs from the in industrial validation progress in WP3 and LCA/TEA analysis in WP4), while also developing market-informed business roadmaps for project KERs with the highest commercial potential, through the following 2 subtasks: Subtask 6.5.1 Steelmaking End-user and Market Analysis. ICP (M4-M16): Aims to on the one hand build a clear understanding of the broad global and regional market context relevant to the NextSteel innovations. In addition, in cooperation with T6.1, 6.2 & 6.3, we will map the pathways for industrial adoption of the validated low-carbon route(s), and in parallel align the enabling KERs that emerge from NextSteel to actual client steelmaking requirements and market needs (see Table 10 for the initial summary of the expected project KERs). It evaluates techno-economic, and, where appropriate, socio-economic and sustainability indicators to assess market size, value, growth projections, revenue potential, competitive landscapes, barriers to entry, and investment readiness. The analysis aims to provide a solid foundation and orientation for defining pathways for industrial adoption of the validated low-carbon route(s) and the project’s business roadmap for commercially viable KERS within ST6.5.2. Subtask 6.5.2 Business Case for validated low-carbon steelmaking routes and Roadmap for Commercially Oriented KERs. ICP (M16-M48): Focuses on developing the business Case for the validated low-carbon steelmaking routes, along with a business roadmap for the most commercially viable KERs. It involves the use of state-of-the-art business modelling tools, templates, training and support from ICP. The goal is to deliver actionable strategies to incentivise successful adoption of the validated low-carbon routes, and commercial pathways that are aligned with identified customer and market opportunities, as well as aligned with the partners’ individual tactical and strategic business ambitions. It includes a) adjudicate and rank the low-carbon routes and KERs based on commercial viability and strategic alignment; b) articulating value propositions for the selected KERs in relevant customer and market contexts, c) conducting SWOT analyses to assess strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats, alongside d) PESTEL analyses (building from the preliminary PESTLE analysis presented in Table 9) to evaluate the external factors, including political, economic, social, technological, environmental and legal influences, after which e) Business Model Canvases are then developed to assess future exploitation pathways. | Task 6.1 Co-creation of the low-carbon transition (BRI)
This task will implement a proven cocreation process in order to effectively engage key decision makers (business and plant-level), and workforce representatives (including operating and maintenance personnel) in an effective series of focused workshops and facilitated scoping sessions that are designed to gain industry insights and perspectives in relation to the low carbon transition. This process will progressively drill down into the requirements, specifications, anticipated adaptations, expected benefits and perceived risks in relation to the NextSteel technology, process and digital innovations, and act as preparation for pilots and future post-project scale up and adoption. The outputs from these sessions will be documented as confidential information for use within the project, informing WP1, WP2, WP3, and WP5 (especially T5.1), as well as T6.2-6.5. The outputs will also provide insights for the design of effective communication campaigns in WP7 and publicly sharable insights and perspectives to be presented in an engaging whitepaper publication (D6.1).       
Task 6.2 Needs for plant design optimisation and measures to mitigate risks during operation [Lead: BRI. Participants: REC, POL AMMR, ERA. CELSA. M12-M44]
Based on the findings in relation to plant design and operation from T6.1, and expert knowledge from WPs 1, 2 and 5, this task will define specific plant design optimisations to ensure that any preparations necessary for the pilot implementations in WP3 are actioned. On the same basis, the longer-term optimisations that could be necessary for the future adoption and implementation of the NextSteel technology, process and digital innovations will be developed into a roadmap (D6.2). Overall, this task will ensure that necessary inputs and engagements with WPs 1, 2, 3 and 5 (T5.1) are seamlessly enabled. Details of estimated plant design optimisation investments will be fed into T6.5 as part of the business case planning.
Task 6.3 Integrating ESG into Business Governance for the Low-Carbon Transition [Lead: BRI. Partici: REC, POL AMMR, ERA. CELSA M19-M46]
This task will focus on a deeper analysis of the ESG (Environmental Sustainability Governance) implications of the NextSteel innovations, and the wider ESG needs for enabling a low-carbon transition of the steel industry based on      the cocreation consultations in T6.1. Recommendations for business leaders will be drawn up in a public report (D6.3) focussing on the integration of EGS into Business Governance practices. 
Task 6.4 Skills and Capacity Building [Lead: BRI. Participants: WIP, REC, CEA, POLI. M19-M48]
on the learnings from the cocreation process, a skills gap analysis will be performed. NEXTSTEEL will contribute to skills development and knowledge sharing in the field through of webinars on selected topics in the field of clean steel production.  training workshops will be organised (to coincide with the validation phase of the demo prototype training workers on the operation of the NEXTSTEEL pilots and on the use of the innovations in steelmaking) for contributing to development of skills and competencies and to support future exploitation activities.
Task 6.5 Business Case and Exploitation Strategy development, incl. Roadmap and Market Analysis for Commercially Oriented KERs [Lead: ICP. Participants: REC, POL AMMR, ERA. CELSA, M4-M48]
This task will deliver a robust business case and exploitation strategy for at ≥1 validated low-carbon steelmaking route emerging from NextSteel (taking inputs from the in industrial validation progress in WP3 and LCA/TEA analysis in WP4), while also developing market-informed business roadmaps for project KERs with the highest commercial potential, through the following 2 subtasks: Subtask 6.5.1 Steelmaking End-user and Market Analysis. ICP (M4-M16): Aims to on the one hand build a clear understanding of the broad global and regional market context relevant to the NextSteel innovations. In addition, in cooperation with T6.1, 6.2 & 6.3, we will map the pathways for industrial adoption of the validated low-carbon route(s), and in parallel align the enabling KERs that emerge from NextSteel to actual client steelmaking requirements and market needs (see Table 10 for the initial summary of the expected project KERs). It evaluates techno-economic, and, where appropriate, socio-economic and sustainability indicators to assess market size, value, growth projections, revenue potential, competitive landscapes, barriers to entry, and investment readiness. The analysis aims to provide a solid foundation and orientation for defining pathways for industrial adoption of the validated low-carbon route(s) and the project’s business roadmap for commercially viable KERS within ST6.5.2. Subtask 6.5.2 Business Case for validated low-carbon steelmaking routes and Roadmap for Commercially Oriented KERs. ICP (M16-M48): Focuses on developing the business Case for the validated low-carbon steelmaking routes, along with a business roadmap for the most commercially viable KERs. It involves the use of state-of-the-art business modelling tools, templates, training and support from ICP. The goal is to deliver actionable strategies to incentivise successful adoption of the validated low-carbon routes, and commercial pathways that are aligned with identified customer and market opportunities, as well as aligned with the partners’ individual tactical and strategic business ambitions. It includes a) adjudicate and rank the low-carbon routes and KERs based on commercial viability and strategic alignment; b) articulating value propositions for the selected KERs in relevant customer and market contexts, c) conducting SWOT analyses to assess strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats, alongside d) PESTEL analyses (building from the preliminary PESTLE analysis presented in Table 9) to evaluate the external factors, including political, economic, social, technological, environmental and legal influences, after which e) Business Model Canvases are then developed to assess future exploitation pathways. | Task 6.1 Co-creation of the low-carbon transition (BRI)
This task will implement a proven cocreation process in order to effectively engage key decision makers (business and plant-level), and workforce representatives (including operating and maintenance personnel) in an effective series of focused workshops and facilitated scoping sessions that are designed to gain industry insights and perspectives in relation to the low carbon transition. This process will progressively drill down into the requirements, specifications, anticipated adaptations, expected benefits and perceived risks in relation to the NextSteel technology, process and digital innovations, and act as preparation for pilots and future post-project scale up and adoption. The outputs from these sessions will be documented as confidential information for use within the project, informing WP1, WP2, WP3, and WP5 (especially T5.1), as well as T6.2-6.5. The outputs will also provide insights for the design of effective communication campaigns in WP7 and publicly sharable insights and perspectives to be presented in an engaging whitepaper publication (D6.1).       
Task 6.2 Needs for plant design optimisation and measures to mitigate risks during operation [Lead: BRI. Participants: REC, POL AMMR, ERA. CELSA. M12-M44]
Based on the findings in relation to plant design and operation from T6.1, and expert knowledge from WPs 1, 2 and 5, this task will define specific plant design optimisations to ensure that any preparations necessary for the pilot implementations in WP3 are actioned. On the same basis, the longer-term optimisations that could be necessary for the future adoption and implementation of the NextSteel technology, process and digital innovations will be developed into a roadmap (D6.2). Overall, this task will ensure that necessary inputs and engagements with WPs 1, 2, 3 and 5 (T5.1) are seamlessly enabled. Details of estimated plant design optimisation investments will be fed into T6.5 as part of the business case planning.
Task 6.3 Integrating ESG into Business Governance for the Low-Carbon Transition [Lead: BRI. Partici: REC, POL AMMR, ERA. CELSA M19-M46]
This task will focus on a deeper analysis of the ESG (Environmental Sustainability Governance) implications of the NextSteel innovations, and the wider ESG needs for enabling a low-carbon transition of the steel industry based on      the cocreation consultations in T6.1. Recommendations for business leaders will be drawn up in a public report (D6.3) focussing on the integration of EGS into Business Governance practices. 
Task 6.4 Skills and Capacity Building [Lead: BRI. Participants: WIP, REC, CEA, POLI. M19-M48]
on the learnings from the cocreation process, a skills gap analysis will be performed. NEXTSTEEL will contribute to skills development and knowledge sharing in the field through of webinars on selected topics in the field of clean steel production.  training workshops will be organised (to coincide with the validation phase of the demo prototype training workers on the operation of the NEXTSTEEL pilots and on the use of the innovations in steelmaking) for contributing to development of skills and competencies and to support future exploitation activities.
Task 6.5 Business Case and Exploitation Strategy development, incl. Roadmap and Market Analysis for Commercially Oriented KERs [Lead: ICP. Participants: REC, POL AMMR, ERA. CELSA, M4-M48]
This task will deliver a robust business case and exploitation strategy for at ≥1 validated low-carbon steelmaking route emerging from NextSteel (taking inputs from the in industrial validation progress in WP3 and LCA/TEA analysis in WP4), while also developing market-informed business roadmaps for project KERs with the highest commercial potential, through the following 2 subtasks: Subtask 6.5.1 Steelmaking End-user and Market Analysis. ICP (M4-M16): Aims to on the one hand build a clear understanding of the broad global and regional market context relevant to the NextSteel innovations. In addition, in cooperation with T6.1, 6.2 & 6.3, we will map the pathways for industrial adoption of the validated low-carbon route(s), and in parallel align the enabling KERs that emerge from NextSteel to actual client steelmaking requirements and market needs (see Table 10 for the initial summary of the expected project KERs). It evaluates techno-economic, and, where appropriate, socio-economic and sustainability indicators to assess market size, value, growth projections, revenue potential, competitive landscapes, barriers to entry, and investment readiness. The analysis aims to provide a solid foundation and orientation for defining pathways for industrial adoption of the validated low-carbon route(s) and the project’s business roadmap for commercially viable KERS within ST6.5.2. Subtask 6.5.2 Business Case for validated low-carbon steelmaking routes and Roadmap for Commercially Oriented KERs. ICP (M16-M48): Focuses on developing the business Case for the validated low-carbon steelmaking routes, along with a business roadmap for the most commercially viable KERs. It involves the use of state-of-the-art business modelling tools, templates, training and support from ICP. The goal is to deliver actionable strategies to incentivise successful adoption of the validated low-carbon routes, and commercial pathways that are aligned with identified customer and market opportunities, as well as aligned with the partners’ individual tactical and strategic business ambitions. It includes a) adjudicate and rank the low-carbon routes and KERs based on commercial viability and strategic alignment; b) articulating value propositions for the selected KERs in relevant customer and market contexts, c) conducting SWOT analyses to assess strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats, alongside d) PESTEL analyses (building from the preliminary PESTLE analysis presented in Table 9) to evaluate the external factors, including political, economic, social, technological, environmental and legal influences, after which e) Business Model Canvases are then developed to assess future exploitation pathways. | Task 6.1 Co-creation of the low-carbon transition (BRI)
This task will implement a proven cocreation process in order to effectively engage key decision makers (business and plant-level), and workforce representatives (including operating and maintenance personnel) in an effective series of focused workshops and facilitated scoping sessions that are designed to gain industry insights and perspectives in relation to the low carbon transition. This process will progressively drill down into the requirements, specifications, anticipated adaptations, expected benefits and perceived risks in relation to the NextSteel technology, process and digital innovations, and act as preparation for pilots and future post-project scale up and adoption. The outputs from these sessions will be documented as confidential information for use within the project, informing WP1, WP2, WP3, and WP5 (especially T5.1), as well as T6.2-6.5. The outputs will also provide insights for the design of effective communication campaigns in WP7 and publicly sharable insights and perspectives to be presented in an engaging whitepaper publication (D6.1).       
Task 6.2 Needs for plant design optimisation and measures to mitigate risks during operation [Lead: BRI. Participants: REC, POL AMMR, ERA. CELSA. M12-M44]
Based on the findings in relation to plant design and operation from T6.1, and expert knowledge from WPs 1, 2 and 5, this task will define specific plant design optimisations to ensure that any preparations necessary for the pilot implementations in WP3 are actioned. On the same basis, the longer-term optimisations that could be necessary for the future adoption and implementation of the NextSteel technology, process and digital innovations will be developed into a roadmap (D6.2). Overall, this task will ensure that necessary inputs and engagements with WPs 1, 2, 3 and 5 (T5.1) are seamlessly enabled. Details of estimated plant design optimisation investments will be fed into T6.5 as part of the business case planning.
Task 6.3 Integrating ESG into Business Governance for the Low-Carbon Transition [Lead: BRI. Partici: REC, POL AMMR, ERA. CELSA M19-M46]
This task will focus on a deeper analysis of the ESG (Environmental Sustainability Governance) implications of the NextSteel innovations, and the wider ESG needs for enabling a low-carbon transition of the steel industry based on      the cocreation consultations in T6.1. Recommendations for business leaders will be drawn up in a public report (D6.3) focussing on the integration of EGS into Business Governance practices. 
Task 6.4 Skills and Capacity Building [Lead: BRI. Participants: WIP, REC, CEA, POLI. M19-M48]
on the learnings from the cocreation process, a skills gap analysis will be performed. NEXTSTEEL will contribute to skills development and knowledge sharing in the field through of webinars on selected topics in the field of clean steel production.  training workshops will be organised (to coincide with the validation phase of the demo prototype training workers on the operation of the NEXTSTEEL pilots and on the use of the innovations in steelmaking) for contributing to development of skills and competencies and to support future exploitation activities.
Task 6.5 Business Case and Exploitation Strategy development, incl. Roadmap and Market Analysis for Commercially Oriented KERs [Lead: ICP. Participants: REC, POL AMMR, ERA. CELSA, M4-M48]
This task will deliver a robust business case and exploitation strategy for at ≥1 validated low-carbon steelmaking route emerging from NextSteel (taking inputs from the in industrial validation progress in WP3 and LCA/TEA analysis in WP4), while also developing market-informed business roadmaps for project KERs with the highest commercial potential, through the following 2 subtasks: Subtask 6.5.1 Steelmaking End-user and Market Analysis. ICP (M4-M16): Aims to on the one hand build a clear understanding of the broad global and regional market context relevant to the NextSteel innovations. In addition, in cooperation with T6.1, 6.2 & 6.3, we will map the pathways for industrial adoption of the validated low-carbon route(s), and in parallel align the enabling KERs that emerge from NextSteel to actual client steelmaking requirements and market needs (see Table 10 for the initial summary of the expected project KERs). It evaluates techno-economic, and, where appropriate, socio-economic and sustainability indicators to assess market size, value, growth projections, revenue potential, competitive landscapes, barriers to entry, and investment readiness. The analysis aims to provide a solid foundation and orientation for defining pathways for industrial adoption of the validated low-carbon route(s) and the project’s business roadmap for commercially viable KERS within ST6.5.2. Subtask 6.5.2 Business Case for validated low-carbon steelmaking routes and Roadmap for Commercially Oriented KERs. ICP (M16-M48): Focuses on developing the business Case for the validated low-carbon steelmaking routes, along with a business roadmap for the most commercially viable KERs. It involves the use of state-of-the-art business modelling tools, templates, training and support from ICP. The goal is to deliver actionable strategies to incentivise successful adoption of the validated low-carbon routes, and commercial pathways that are aligned with identified customer and market opportunities, as well as aligned with the partners’ individual tactical and strategic business ambitions. It includes a) adjudicate and rank the low-carbon routes and KERs based on commercial viability and strategic alignment; b) articulating value propositions for the selected KERs in relevant customer and market contexts, c) conducting SWOT analyses to assess strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats, alongside d) PESTEL analyses (building from the preliminary PESTLE analysis presented in Table 9) to evaluate the external factors, including political, economic, social, technological, environmental and legal influences, after which e) Business Model Canvases are then developed to assess future exploitation pathways.
Work Package No. | Work Package No. | 7 | Lead: WIP
Work Package Title | Work Package Title | Clustering, Ecosystem Engagement and Impact Valorisation | Clustering, Ecosystem Engagement and Impact Valorisation
Start Month | 1 | End Month | 48
Objectives: To maximize the dissemination, communication, and exploitation of the project results for impact, as well as to ensure the project plans and implements affective clustering activities with sister project(s) from the same call topics, as well as from the Clean Steel ecosystem, as follows: ■ Design, deploy and assess the project dissemination and communication strategy for reach targeted audiences. ■ Create a dissemination framework for engagement with industrial stakeholders, and R&I projects and initiatives, in collaboration with relevant associations & clusters at national/EU level. ■ Ensure the project adheres to and contributes actively to the principles of Open Science. ■ Manage and implement an IP strategy for protection of novel results via patents, utility models, trade secrets. ■ Ensure the exploitation of project results for commercial purposes, further research, and policymaking. ■ Provide starting information to ensure compatibility and interoperability with established technologies expressed through standards, and contribution to new standards to facilitate market acceptance. | Objectives: To maximize the dissemination, communication, and exploitation of the project results for impact, as well as to ensure the project plans and implements affective clustering activities with sister project(s) from the same call topics, as well as from the Clean Steel ecosystem, as follows: ■ Design, deploy and assess the project dissemination and communication strategy for reach targeted audiences. ■ Create a dissemination framework for engagement with industrial stakeholders, and R&I projects and initiatives, in collaboration with relevant associations & clusters at national/EU level. ■ Ensure the project adheres to and contributes actively to the principles of Open Science. ■ Manage and implement an IP strategy for protection of novel results via patents, utility models, trade secrets. ■ Ensure the exploitation of project results for commercial purposes, further research, and policymaking. ■ Provide starting information to ensure compatibility and interoperability with established technologies expressed through standards, and contribution to new standards to facilitate market acceptance. | Objectives: To maximize the dissemination, communication, and exploitation of the project results for impact, as well as to ensure the project plans and implements affective clustering activities with sister project(s) from the same call topics, as well as from the Clean Steel ecosystem, as follows: ■ Design, deploy and assess the project dissemination and communication strategy for reach targeted audiences. ■ Create a dissemination framework for engagement with industrial stakeholders, and R&I projects and initiatives, in collaboration with relevant associations & clusters at national/EU level. ■ Ensure the project adheres to and contributes actively to the principles of Open Science. ■ Manage and implement an IP strategy for protection of novel results via patents, utility models, trade secrets. ■ Ensure the exploitation of project results for commercial purposes, further research, and policymaking. ■ Provide starting information to ensure compatibility and interoperability with established technologies expressed through standards, and contribution to new standards to facilitate market acceptance. | Objectives: To maximize the dissemination, communication, and exploitation of the project results for impact, as well as to ensure the project plans and implements affective clustering activities with sister project(s) from the same call topics, as well as from the Clean Steel ecosystem, as follows: ■ Design, deploy and assess the project dissemination and communication strategy for reach targeted audiences. ■ Create a dissemination framework for engagement with industrial stakeholders, and R&I projects and initiatives, in collaboration with relevant associations & clusters at national/EU level. ■ Ensure the project adheres to and contributes actively to the principles of Open Science. ■ Manage and implement an IP strategy for protection of novel results via patents, utility models, trade secrets. ■ Ensure the exploitation of project results for commercial purposes, further research, and policymaking. ■ Provide starting information to ensure compatibility and interoperability with established technologies expressed through standards, and contribution to new standards to facilitate market acceptance.
Task 7.1 Dissemination, exploitation and communication activities [Lead: WIP, Participants: ALL. M1-M48]
Subtask 7.1.1 Communication activities WIP. (M1-M48): Project communication will focus on the promotion of NEXTSTEEL actions and results to industry, citizens, the media, and relevant stakeholders and target groups. Communicating the drivers, objectives and results of the project to a wider public is essential to boost the impact of the project and foster public understanding and acceptance. The NEXTSTEEL website will be launched by M4 and will include all relevant information about the project and its targets and will be regularly updated thereafter with news and public results (downloadable). Regular podcasts and short videoclips will be published to generate awareness and disseminate accurate information to the public. WIP will manage an effective social media content and engagement campaign in professional social networks (LinkedIn) as well as leveraging the channels of the partners, by providing regular content for posts. At the beginning of the project (by M4), “branding” material will be consolidated in a package (project logo/brand book), project flyer and poster/roll-ups in English, and presentation templates for systematic use by all partners. This task will also support in outputting of fit-for-purpose communication formats depending on the target groups (e.g. concise and informative Data Sheets, Application Notes for industry, Whitepapers for policy makers, etc.). Project activities and results will be continuously shared via newsletters (bi-annual), publications, and presentations/posters at relevant events.
Subtask 7.1.2 Dissemination activities in compliance with Open Science Practices. WIP (M1-M48): The project foresees a wide range of dissemination activities to interact directly with the identified target groups. In addition, NEXTSTEEL will contribute to common information and dissemination activities to increase the visibility and synergies between Horizon Europe supported actions. Specific activities include: Participation in international meetings and events presenting NEXTSTEEL results, Production of an animated introductory video by M9 presenting the innovative NEXTSTEEL concept, in person and online annual symposia on CO2-neutral steel production, a final dissemination conference in Brussels in M46 (organised in collaboration with the European Partnership on Clean Steel), dedicated policy brief providing an overview of recent developments and innovations on CO2-neutral steel production, and Peer reviewed publications (Open Access) of results from the project in scientific articles, targeting international journals with high impact factors. This subtask will also manage adherence of our project to the principles of 'open science', whereby we will ensure: 1) Early and open sharing of research; 2) Promote open access to research data and other related research outputs; 3) effective research output management; 4) implementation of measures to ensure reproducibility of research outputs; 5) meaningful engagement with all relevant knowledge actors including citizens, civil society and end users (in collaboration with Task 6.3,  6.4, 6.5).
 This subtask establishes a cohesive, strategy to maximise the exploitation, impact, and sustainability of the project’s results by identifying and refining exploitation pathways for all partners, monitoring the adoption of the project’s results, and capturing the industrial and societal impacts achieved. It focuses on clearly defining the value generated by each project result, formulating realistic and actionable plans for exploitation, articulating the specific benefits to the project’s partners, and tracking the implementation of exploitation pathways to ensure tangible outcomes, and a dynamic and iterative approach ensures continual evaluation and refinement of exploitation strategies. The exploitation methodology to be employed and the planned activities will be set out as part of D7.1 (in M6). A full Exploitation Report detailing the partners’ exploitation actions, pathways and sustainable impacts will be delivered (D7.4 at M24, D7.9 at M48). Enabling conditions for deployment and exploitation of project results will also be identified (e.g. policy frameworks, financing mechanisms, standardisation pathways and regulatory adjustments). In cooperation with T7.5 (Standardisation) and T7.2 (Clustering Activities) the project will engage relevant EU institutions, industry associations, and other initiatives (e.g., Clean Steel Partnership) to align with sectoral goals and propose actionable recommendations. The outputs will be reported in D7.8. Thought Leadership Paper outlining how NextSteel solutions and innovations can contribute to achieving the climate-neutral, circular steel production objectives and how systemic barriers can be addressed.
Task 7.2 Clustering Activities and Ecosystem Engagement for impact (Lead: WIP, Partners: All; M1-M48)
In cooperation with T5.4 and T8.4, and as part of the communication and dissemination strategy (T7.1), we will actively prepare for the clustering activities with other projects funded under this topic, as well as with HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61, whereby we envisage consultations, joint activities on cross-cutting issues, sharing of non-confidential results, participation in joint meetings and communication events. This task will also seek collaborations and establish a dialogue with a wider network of relevant EU/international projects & initiatives, and R&I projects implemented in the framework the European Partnership on Clean Steel.
Task 7.3 IPR Management and Technology watch (Lead: ICP. Partners: All; M1-M48)
Subtask 7.3.1 IP Protection. ICP (M1-M48). This subtask handles the filing of 3 commercially strategic patents from NextSteel. As such, the outputs/results generated by the project will be analysed as they emerge. Up-to-date reviews of the SOTA and patents will be performed periodically to continually confirm FTO and the novelty of the KERs. This ST includes: a) providing basic, intermediate and advanced IP and patent training sessions across the project’s duration to enhance the partners understanding of IP and patenting fundamentals and processes; b) analysing project workstreams and assisting partners in 1:1 sessions to identify and refine innovations from their work suitable for IP applications (Patenting, Trademark, Copyright, Trade Secrets, etc); c) ensuring that European Patent Office fundamentals are met in partners’ innovations including novelty, inventive step, technicity, industrial applicability and non-obviousness; d) prior art assessments to identify pre-existing IP and relevant prior patent art; e) scoring patents to determine suitability for formal filings using ICP’s commercial IP assessment framework; f) defining filing strategies for national and regional patent offices; g) selecting outside counsel in line with EC PP processes and engaging patent attorney support for patent application legal drafting; h) formal filing at regional patent office; i) patent office engagement for office actions, amendments and prosecution; j) guiding partners on paths to achieving EU-wide unitary patent protection which has the potential to significantly raise the commercial, asset and reputational value from their IP investment. 
Subtask 7.3.2 Technology Watch. IRIS (M1-M48): A ‘Technology Watch’ repository will be populated and actively updated with new literature, articles, publications, scientific journals, conference papers and media articles relevant to the research areas of the KERS. Relevant results regarding ongoing research and industry activity (identified using parameters defined with the consortium) will be summarised in periodic updates to keep partners informed on the evolving SOTA as the project progresses. These subtasks will output a consolidated report (D7.6- a first version at M24, and a final version at M48) on IP protection measures and patent activities, documenting implementation of IP Tools (Trademark, Copyright, Trade Secrets, etc.), patent landscape activity, external attorney tendering process, IP assessment framework and selection methodology, filing strategies undertaken, as well as reporting on the technology, KER, periodic updates and dedicated repository.
Task 7.4 Standardisation Strategy for Technical, Digital, and Sustainability Aspects [Lead: UNE. Participants: ALL. M1-M48]
Subtask 7.4.1: Analysis of the applicable standardisation landscape. UNE (M1-M6). The relevant standardization landscape together with applicable standards will be identified and reported. This work is led by UNE and performed in collaboration with all partners and will output a detailed overview on EU and international standardization committees and standards relevant for the project, and an explanation of the standardization system. Based on this report, the contribution to standardization will be planned and implemented in the next subtask. 
Subtask 7.4.2: Contribution to standardisation. UNE (M7-M48). The possibility & extent to which a contribution to standardisation can be made will be investigated through interacting with the relevant standardisation technical committees (ISO/TC 197 and CEN/CLC/JTC 6 on Hydrogen Technologies, CEN/TC 335 and ISO/TC 238 on Solid Biofuels, CEN/TC 308 and ISO/TC 275 on Sludge Recovery, etc.). Interaction can include monitoring their information, attending meetings, establishing formal liaisons, organising joint events, etc., to disseminate the project & get feedback from TC members. The main outcome will be NEXTSTEEL’s contribution to the development of new standards in related topics (e.g. product requirements, process indicators, test methods, etc., to be decided according to the external and internal constraints). Depending on the ongoing works of the TCs, at ⁓project interim, this may involve providing information, participating in ongoing works, submitting proposals for the modification of existing standards or promoting the elaboration of new standards like technical specifications. | Task 7.1 Dissemination, exploitation and communication activities [Lead: WIP, Participants: ALL. M1-M48]
Subtask 7.1.1 Communication activities WIP. (M1-M48): Project communication will focus on the promotion of NEXTSTEEL actions and results to industry, citizens, the media, and relevant stakeholders and target groups. Communicating the drivers, objectives and results of the project to a wider public is essential to boost the impact of the project and foster public understanding and acceptance. The NEXTSTEEL website will be launched by M4 and will include all relevant information about the project and its targets and will be regularly updated thereafter with news and public results (downloadable). Regular podcasts and short videoclips will be published to generate awareness and disseminate accurate information to the public. WIP will manage an effective social media content and engagement campaign in professional social networks (LinkedIn) as well as leveraging the channels of the partners, by providing regular content for posts. At the beginning of the project (by M4), “branding” material will be consolidated in a package (project logo/brand book), project flyer and poster/roll-ups in English, and presentation templates for systematic use by all partners. This task will also support in outputting of fit-for-purpose communication formats depending on the target groups (e.g. concise and informative Data Sheets, Application Notes for industry, Whitepapers for policy makers, etc.). Project activities and results will be continuously shared via newsletters (bi-annual), publications, and presentations/posters at relevant events.
Subtask 7.1.2 Dissemination activities in compliance with Open Science Practices. WIP (M1-M48): The project foresees a wide range of dissemination activities to interact directly with the identified target groups. In addition, NEXTSTEEL will contribute to common information and dissemination activities to increase the visibility and synergies between Horizon Europe supported actions. Specific activities include: Participation in international meetings and events presenting NEXTSTEEL results, Production of an animated introductory video by M9 presenting the innovative NEXTSTEEL concept, in person and online annual symposia on CO2-neutral steel production, a final dissemination conference in Brussels in M46 (organised in collaboration with the European Partnership on Clean Steel), dedicated policy brief providing an overview of recent developments and innovations on CO2-neutral steel production, and Peer reviewed publications (Open Access) of results from the project in scientific articles, targeting international journals with high impact factors. This subtask will also manage adherence of our project to the principles of 'open science', whereby we will ensure: 1) Early and open sharing of research; 2) Promote open access to research data and other related research outputs; 3) effective research output management; 4) implementation of measures to ensure reproducibility of research outputs; 5) meaningful engagement with all relevant knowledge actors including citizens, civil society and end users (in collaboration with Task 6.3,  6.4, 6.5).
 This subtask establishes a cohesive, strategy to maximise the exploitation, impact, and sustainability of the project’s results by identifying and refining exploitation pathways for all partners, monitoring the adoption of the project’s results, and capturing the industrial and societal impacts achieved. It focuses on clearly defining the value generated by each project result, formulating realistic and actionable plans for exploitation, articulating the specific benefits to the project’s partners, and tracking the implementation of exploitation pathways to ensure tangible outcomes, and a dynamic and iterative approach ensures continual evaluation and refinement of exploitation strategies. The exploitation methodology to be employed and the planned activities will be set out as part of D7.1 (in M6). A full Exploitation Report detailing the partners’ exploitation actions, pathways and sustainable impacts will be delivered (D7.4 at M24, D7.9 at M48). Enabling conditions for deployment and exploitation of project results will also be identified (e.g. policy frameworks, financing mechanisms, standardisation pathways and regulatory adjustments). In cooperation with T7.5 (Standardisation) and T7.2 (Clustering Activities) the project will engage relevant EU institutions, industry associations, and other initiatives (e.g., Clean Steel Partnership) to align with sectoral goals and propose actionable recommendations. The outputs will be reported in D7.8. Thought Leadership Paper outlining how NextSteel solutions and innovations can contribute to achieving the climate-neutral, circular steel production objectives and how systemic barriers can be addressed.
Task 7.2 Clustering Activities and Ecosystem Engagement for impact (Lead: WIP, Partners: All; M1-M48)
In cooperation with T5.4 and T8.4, and as part of the communication and dissemination strategy (T7.1), we will actively prepare for the clustering activities with other projects funded under this topic, as well as with HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61, whereby we envisage consultations, joint activities on cross-cutting issues, sharing of non-confidential results, participation in joint meetings and communication events. This task will also seek collaborations and establish a dialogue with a wider network of relevant EU/international projects & initiatives, and R&I projects implemented in the framework the European Partnership on Clean Steel.
Task 7.3 IPR Management and Technology watch (Lead: ICP. Partners: All; M1-M48)
Subtask 7.3.1 IP Protection. ICP (M1-M48). This subtask handles the filing of 3 commercially strategic patents from NextSteel. As such, the outputs/results generated by the project will be analysed as they emerge. Up-to-date reviews of the SOTA and patents will be performed periodically to continually confirm FTO and the novelty of the KERs. This ST includes: a) providing basic, intermediate and advanced IP and patent training sessions across the project’s duration to enhance the partners understanding of IP and patenting fundamentals and processes; b) analysing project workstreams and assisting partners in 1:1 sessions to identify and refine innovations from their work suitable for IP applications (Patenting, Trademark, Copyright, Trade Secrets, etc); c) ensuring that European Patent Office fundamentals are met in partners’ innovations including novelty, inventive step, technicity, industrial applicability and non-obviousness; d) prior art assessments to identify pre-existing IP and relevant prior patent art; e) scoring patents to determine suitability for formal filings using ICP’s commercial IP assessment framework; f) defining filing strategies for national and regional patent offices; g) selecting outside counsel in line with EC PP processes and engaging patent attorney support for patent application legal drafting; h) formal filing at regional patent office; i) patent office engagement for office actions, amendments and prosecution; j) guiding partners on paths to achieving EU-wide unitary patent protection which has the potential to significantly raise the commercial, asset and reputational value from their IP investment. 
Subtask 7.3.2 Technology Watch. IRIS (M1-M48): A ‘Technology Watch’ repository will be populated and actively updated with new literature, articles, publications, scientific journals, conference papers and media articles relevant to the research areas of the KERS. Relevant results regarding ongoing research and industry activity (identified using parameters defined with the consortium) will be summarised in periodic updates to keep partners informed on the evolving SOTA as the project progresses. These subtasks will output a consolidated report (D7.6- a first version at M24, and a final version at M48) on IP protection measures and patent activities, documenting implementation of IP Tools (Trademark, Copyright, Trade Secrets, etc.), patent landscape activity, external attorney tendering process, IP assessment framework and selection methodology, filing strategies undertaken, as well as reporting on the technology, KER, periodic updates and dedicated repository.
Task 7.4 Standardisation Strategy for Technical, Digital, and Sustainability Aspects [Lead: UNE. Participants: ALL. M1-M48]
Subtask 7.4.1: Analysis of the applicable standardisation landscape. UNE (M1-M6). The relevant standardization landscape together with applicable standards will be identified and reported. This work is led by UNE and performed in collaboration with all partners and will output a detailed overview on EU and international standardization committees and standards relevant for the project, and an explanation of the standardization system. Based on this report, the contribution to standardization will be planned and implemented in the next subtask. 
Subtask 7.4.2: Contribution to standardisation. UNE (M7-M48). The possibility & extent to which a contribution to standardisation can be made will be investigated through interacting with the relevant standardisation technical committees (ISO/TC 197 and CEN/CLC/JTC 6 on Hydrogen Technologies, CEN/TC 335 and ISO/TC 238 on Solid Biofuels, CEN/TC 308 and ISO/TC 275 on Sludge Recovery, etc.). Interaction can include monitoring their information, attending meetings, establishing formal liaisons, organising joint events, etc., to disseminate the project & get feedback from TC members. The main outcome will be NEXTSTEEL’s contribution to the development of new standards in related topics (e.g. product requirements, process indicators, test methods, etc., to be decided according to the external and internal constraints). Depending on the ongoing works of the TCs, at ⁓project interim, this may involve providing information, participating in ongoing works, submitting proposals for the modification of existing standards or promoting the elaboration of new standards like technical specifications. | Task 7.1 Dissemination, exploitation and communication activities [Lead: WIP, Participants: ALL. M1-M48]
Subtask 7.1.1 Communication activities WIP. (M1-M48): Project communication will focus on the promotion of NEXTSTEEL actions and results to industry, citizens, the media, and relevant stakeholders and target groups. Communicating the drivers, objectives and results of the project to a wider public is essential to boost the impact of the project and foster public understanding and acceptance. The NEXTSTEEL website will be launched by M4 and will include all relevant information about the project and its targets and will be regularly updated thereafter with news and public results (downloadable). Regular podcasts and short videoclips will be published to generate awareness and disseminate accurate information to the public. WIP will manage an effective social media content and engagement campaign in professional social networks (LinkedIn) as well as leveraging the channels of the partners, by providing regular content for posts. At the beginning of the project (by M4), “branding” material will be consolidated in a package (project logo/brand book), project flyer and poster/roll-ups in English, and presentation templates for systematic use by all partners. This task will also support in outputting of fit-for-purpose communication formats depending on the target groups (e.g. concise and informative Data Sheets, Application Notes for industry, Whitepapers for policy makers, etc.). Project activities and results will be continuously shared via newsletters (bi-annual), publications, and presentations/posters at relevant events.
Subtask 7.1.2 Dissemination activities in compliance with Open Science Practices. WIP (M1-M48): The project foresees a wide range of dissemination activities to interact directly with the identified target groups. In addition, NEXTSTEEL will contribute to common information and dissemination activities to increase the visibility and synergies between Horizon Europe supported actions. Specific activities include: Participation in international meetings and events presenting NEXTSTEEL results, Production of an animated introductory video by M9 presenting the innovative NEXTSTEEL concept, in person and online annual symposia on CO2-neutral steel production, a final dissemination conference in Brussels in M46 (organised in collaboration with the European Partnership on Clean Steel), dedicated policy brief providing an overview of recent developments and innovations on CO2-neutral steel production, and Peer reviewed publications (Open Access) of results from the project in scientific articles, targeting international journals with high impact factors. This subtask will also manage adherence of our project to the principles of 'open science', whereby we will ensure: 1) Early and open sharing of research; 2) Promote open access to research data and other related research outputs; 3) effective research output management; 4) implementation of measures to ensure reproducibility of research outputs; 5) meaningful engagement with all relevant knowledge actors including citizens, civil society and end users (in collaboration with Task 6.3,  6.4, 6.5).
 This subtask establishes a cohesive, strategy to maximise the exploitation, impact, and sustainability of the project’s results by identifying and refining exploitation pathways for all partners, monitoring the adoption of the project’s results, and capturing the industrial and societal impacts achieved. It focuses on clearly defining the value generated by each project result, formulating realistic and actionable plans for exploitation, articulating the specific benefits to the project’s partners, and tracking the implementation of exploitation pathways to ensure tangible outcomes, and a dynamic and iterative approach ensures continual evaluation and refinement of exploitation strategies. The exploitation methodology to be employed and the planned activities will be set out as part of D7.1 (in M6). A full Exploitation Report detailing the partners’ exploitation actions, pathways and sustainable impacts will be delivered (D7.4 at M24, D7.9 at M48). Enabling conditions for deployment and exploitation of project results will also be identified (e.g. policy frameworks, financing mechanisms, standardisation pathways and regulatory adjustments). In cooperation with T7.5 (Standardisation) and T7.2 (Clustering Activities) the project will engage relevant EU institutions, industry associations, and other initiatives (e.g., Clean Steel Partnership) to align with sectoral goals and propose actionable recommendations. The outputs will be reported in D7.8. Thought Leadership Paper outlining how NextSteel solutions and innovations can contribute to achieving the climate-neutral, circular steel production objectives and how systemic barriers can be addressed.
Task 7.2 Clustering Activities and Ecosystem Engagement for impact (Lead: WIP, Partners: All; M1-M48)
In cooperation with T5.4 and T8.4, and as part of the communication and dissemination strategy (T7.1), we will actively prepare for the clustering activities with other projects funded under this topic, as well as with HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61, whereby we envisage consultations, joint activities on cross-cutting issues, sharing of non-confidential results, participation in joint meetings and communication events. This task will also seek collaborations and establish a dialogue with a wider network of relevant EU/international projects & initiatives, and R&I projects implemented in the framework the European Partnership on Clean Steel.
Task 7.3 IPR Management and Technology watch (Lead: ICP. Partners: All; M1-M48)
Subtask 7.3.1 IP Protection. ICP (M1-M48). This subtask handles the filing of 3 commercially strategic patents from NextSteel. As such, the outputs/results generated by the project will be analysed as they emerge. Up-to-date reviews of the SOTA and patents will be performed periodically to continually confirm FTO and the novelty of the KERs. This ST includes: a) providing basic, intermediate and advanced IP and patent training sessions across the project’s duration to enhance the partners understanding of IP and patenting fundamentals and processes; b) analysing project workstreams and assisting partners in 1:1 sessions to identify and refine innovations from their work suitable for IP applications (Patenting, Trademark, Copyright, Trade Secrets, etc); c) ensuring that European Patent Office fundamentals are met in partners’ innovations including novelty, inventive step, technicity, industrial applicability and non-obviousness; d) prior art assessments to identify pre-existing IP and relevant prior patent art; e) scoring patents to determine suitability for formal filings using ICP’s commercial IP assessment framework; f) defining filing strategies for national and regional patent offices; g) selecting outside counsel in line with EC PP processes and engaging patent attorney support for patent application legal drafting; h) formal filing at regional patent office; i) patent office engagement for office actions, amendments and prosecution; j) guiding partners on paths to achieving EU-wide unitary patent protection which has the potential to significantly raise the commercial, asset and reputational value from their IP investment. 
Subtask 7.3.2 Technology Watch. IRIS (M1-M48): A ‘Technology Watch’ repository will be populated and actively updated with new literature, articles, publications, scientific journals, conference papers and media articles relevant to the research areas of the KERS. Relevant results regarding ongoing research and industry activity (identified using parameters defined with the consortium) will be summarised in periodic updates to keep partners informed on the evolving SOTA as the project progresses. These subtasks will output a consolidated report (D7.6- a first version at M24, and a final version at M48) on IP protection measures and patent activities, documenting implementation of IP Tools (Trademark, Copyright, Trade Secrets, etc.), patent landscape activity, external attorney tendering process, IP assessment framework and selection methodology, filing strategies undertaken, as well as reporting on the technology, KER, periodic updates and dedicated repository.
Task 7.4 Standardisation Strategy for Technical, Digital, and Sustainability Aspects [Lead: UNE. Participants: ALL. M1-M48]
Subtask 7.4.1: Analysis of the applicable standardisation landscape. UNE (M1-M6). The relevant standardization landscape together with applicable standards will be identified and reported. This work is led by UNE and performed in collaboration with all partners and will output a detailed overview on EU and international standardization committees and standards relevant for the project, and an explanation of the standardization system. Based on this report, the contribution to standardization will be planned and implemented in the next subtask. 
Subtask 7.4.2: Contribution to standardisation. UNE (M7-M48). The possibility & extent to which a contribution to standardisation can be made will be investigated through interacting with the relevant standardisation technical committees (ISO/TC 197 and CEN/CLC/JTC 6 on Hydrogen Technologies, CEN/TC 335 and ISO/TC 238 on Solid Biofuels, CEN/TC 308 and ISO/TC 275 on Sludge Recovery, etc.). Interaction can include monitoring their information, attending meetings, establishing formal liaisons, organising joint events, etc., to disseminate the project & get feedback from TC members. The main outcome will be NEXTSTEEL’s contribution to the development of new standards in related topics (e.g. product requirements, process indicators, test methods, etc., to be decided according to the external and internal constraints). Depending on the ongoing works of the TCs, at ⁓project interim, this may involve providing information, participating in ongoing works, submitting proposals for the modification of existing standards or promoting the elaboration of new standards like technical specifications. | Task 7.1 Dissemination, exploitation and communication activities [Lead: WIP, Participants: ALL. M1-M48]
Subtask 7.1.1 Communication activities WIP. (M1-M48): Project communication will focus on the promotion of NEXTSTEEL actions and results to industry, citizens, the media, and relevant stakeholders and target groups. Communicating the drivers, objectives and results of the project to a wider public is essential to boost the impact of the project and foster public understanding and acceptance. The NEXTSTEEL website will be launched by M4 and will include all relevant information about the project and its targets and will be regularly updated thereafter with news and public results (downloadable). Regular podcasts and short videoclips will be published to generate awareness and disseminate accurate information to the public. WIP will manage an effective social media content and engagement campaign in professional social networks (LinkedIn) as well as leveraging the channels of the partners, by providing regular content for posts. At the beginning of the project (by M4), “branding” material will be consolidated in a package (project logo/brand book), project flyer and poster/roll-ups in English, and presentation templates for systematic use by all partners. This task will also support in outputting of fit-for-purpose communication formats depending on the target groups (e.g. concise and informative Data Sheets, Application Notes for industry, Whitepapers for policy makers, etc.). Project activities and results will be continuously shared via newsletters (bi-annual), publications, and presentations/posters at relevant events.
Subtask 7.1.2 Dissemination activities in compliance with Open Science Practices. WIP (M1-M48): The project foresees a wide range of dissemination activities to interact directly with the identified target groups. In addition, NEXTSTEEL will contribute to common information and dissemination activities to increase the visibility and synergies between Horizon Europe supported actions. Specific activities include: Participation in international meetings and events presenting NEXTSTEEL results, Production of an animated introductory video by M9 presenting the innovative NEXTSTEEL concept, in person and online annual symposia on CO2-neutral steel production, a final dissemination conference in Brussels in M46 (organised in collaboration with the European Partnership on Clean Steel), dedicated policy brief providing an overview of recent developments and innovations on CO2-neutral steel production, and Peer reviewed publications (Open Access) of results from the project in scientific articles, targeting international journals with high impact factors. This subtask will also manage adherence of our project to the principles of 'open science', whereby we will ensure: 1) Early and open sharing of research; 2) Promote open access to research data and other related research outputs; 3) effective research output management; 4) implementation of measures to ensure reproducibility of research outputs; 5) meaningful engagement with all relevant knowledge actors including citizens, civil society and end users (in collaboration with Task 6.3,  6.4, 6.5).
 This subtask establishes a cohesive, strategy to maximise the exploitation, impact, and sustainability of the project’s results by identifying and refining exploitation pathways for all partners, monitoring the adoption of the project’s results, and capturing the industrial and societal impacts achieved. It focuses on clearly defining the value generated by each project result, formulating realistic and actionable plans for exploitation, articulating the specific benefits to the project’s partners, and tracking the implementation of exploitation pathways to ensure tangible outcomes, and a dynamic and iterative approach ensures continual evaluation and refinement of exploitation strategies. The exploitation methodology to be employed and the planned activities will be set out as part of D7.1 (in M6). A full Exploitation Report detailing the partners’ exploitation actions, pathways and sustainable impacts will be delivered (D7.4 at M24, D7.9 at M48). Enabling conditions for deployment and exploitation of project results will also be identified (e.g. policy frameworks, financing mechanisms, standardisation pathways and regulatory adjustments). In cooperation with T7.5 (Standardisation) and T7.2 (Clustering Activities) the project will engage relevant EU institutions, industry associations, and other initiatives (e.g., Clean Steel Partnership) to align with sectoral goals and propose actionable recommendations. The outputs will be reported in D7.8. Thought Leadership Paper outlining how NextSteel solutions and innovations can contribute to achieving the climate-neutral, circular steel production objectives and how systemic barriers can be addressed.
Task 7.2 Clustering Activities and Ecosystem Engagement for impact (Lead: WIP, Partners: All; M1-M48)
In cooperation with T5.4 and T8.4, and as part of the communication and dissemination strategy (T7.1), we will actively prepare for the clustering activities with other projects funded under this topic, as well as with HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61, whereby we envisage consultations, joint activities on cross-cutting issues, sharing of non-confidential results, participation in joint meetings and communication events. This task will also seek collaborations and establish a dialogue with a wider network of relevant EU/international projects & initiatives, and R&I projects implemented in the framework the European Partnership on Clean Steel.
Task 7.3 IPR Management and Technology watch (Lead: ICP. Partners: All; M1-M48)
Subtask 7.3.1 IP Protection. ICP (M1-M48). This subtask handles the filing of 3 commercially strategic patents from NextSteel. As such, the outputs/results generated by the project will be analysed as they emerge. Up-to-date reviews of the SOTA and patents will be performed periodically to continually confirm FTO and the novelty of the KERs. This ST includes: a) providing basic, intermediate and advanced IP and patent training sessions across the project’s duration to enhance the partners understanding of IP and patenting fundamentals and processes; b) analysing project workstreams and assisting partners in 1:1 sessions to identify and refine innovations from their work suitable for IP applications (Patenting, Trademark, Copyright, Trade Secrets, etc); c) ensuring that European Patent Office fundamentals are met in partners’ innovations including novelty, inventive step, technicity, industrial applicability and non-obviousness; d) prior art assessments to identify pre-existing IP and relevant prior patent art; e) scoring patents to determine suitability for formal filings using ICP’s commercial IP assessment framework; f) defining filing strategies for national and regional patent offices; g) selecting outside counsel in line with EC PP processes and engaging patent attorney support for patent application legal drafting; h) formal filing at regional patent office; i) patent office engagement for office actions, amendments and prosecution; j) guiding partners on paths to achieving EU-wide unitary patent protection which has the potential to significantly raise the commercial, asset and reputational value from their IP investment. 
Subtask 7.3.2 Technology Watch. IRIS (M1-M48): A ‘Technology Watch’ repository will be populated and actively updated with new literature, articles, publications, scientific journals, conference papers and media articles relevant to the research areas of the KERS. Relevant results regarding ongoing research and industry activity (identified using parameters defined with the consortium) will be summarised in periodic updates to keep partners informed on the evolving SOTA as the project progresses. These subtasks will output a consolidated report (D7.6- a first version at M24, and a final version at M48) on IP protection measures and patent activities, documenting implementation of IP Tools (Trademark, Copyright, Trade Secrets, etc.), patent landscape activity, external attorney tendering process, IP assessment framework and selection methodology, filing strategies undertaken, as well as reporting on the technology, KER, periodic updates and dedicated repository.
Task 7.4 Standardisation Strategy for Technical, Digital, and Sustainability Aspects [Lead: UNE. Participants: ALL. M1-M48]
Subtask 7.4.1: Analysis of the applicable standardisation landscape. UNE (M1-M6). The relevant standardization landscape together with applicable standards will be identified and reported. This work is led by UNE and performed in collaboration with all partners and will output a detailed overview on EU and international standardization committees and standards relevant for the project, and an explanation of the standardization system. Based on this report, the contribution to standardization will be planned and implemented in the next subtask. 
Subtask 7.4.2: Contribution to standardisation. UNE (M7-M48). The possibility & extent to which a contribution to standardisation can be made will be investigated through interacting with the relevant standardisation technical committees (ISO/TC 197 and CEN/CLC/JTC 6 on Hydrogen Technologies, CEN/TC 335 and ISO/TC 238 on Solid Biofuels, CEN/TC 308 and ISO/TC 275 on Sludge Recovery, etc.). Interaction can include monitoring their information, attending meetings, establishing formal liaisons, organising joint events, etc., to disseminate the project & get feedback from TC members. The main outcome will be NEXTSTEEL’s contribution to the development of new standards in related topics (e.g. product requirements, process indicators, test methods, etc., to be decided according to the external and internal constraints). Depending on the ongoing works of the TCs, at ⁓project interim, this may involve providing information, participating in ongoing works, submitting proposals for the modification of existing standards or promoting the elaboration of new standards like technical specifications.
Work Package No. | Work Package No. | 8 | Lead: RE-CORD (REC)
Work Package Title | Work Package Title | Project Management, Coordination and External Governance | Project Management, Coordination and External Governance
Start Month | 1 | End Month | 48
Objectives: ■ Manage project resources, risk & contingency planning, and ensure the work is delivered to scope in fulfilment with the project objectives within planned budget and schedule; ■ Implement robust Quality Assurance and Risk Management procedures to contribute to excellence & maximum delivery of project results and outcomes; ■ Effectively manage the interdisciplinary convergence, relationships and dependencies to heighten knowledge generation and innovation, promoting fluid cross-team, interdisciplinary collaboration and internal communication; ■ Effective governance for formalising cooperation with third party projects, networks, initiatives | Objectives: ■ Manage project resources, risk & contingency planning, and ensure the work is delivered to scope in fulfilment with the project objectives within planned budget and schedule; ■ Implement robust Quality Assurance and Risk Management procedures to contribute to excellence & maximum delivery of project results and outcomes; ■ Effectively manage the interdisciplinary convergence, relationships and dependencies to heighten knowledge generation and innovation, promoting fluid cross-team, interdisciplinary collaboration and internal communication; ■ Effective governance for formalising cooperation with third party projects, networks, initiatives | Objectives: ■ Manage project resources, risk & contingency planning, and ensure the work is delivered to scope in fulfilment with the project objectives within planned budget and schedule; ■ Implement robust Quality Assurance and Risk Management procedures to contribute to excellence & maximum delivery of project results and outcomes; ■ Effectively manage the interdisciplinary convergence, relationships and dependencies to heighten knowledge generation and innovation, promoting fluid cross-team, interdisciplinary collaboration and internal communication; ■ Effective governance for formalising cooperation with third party projects, networks, initiatives | Objectives: ■ Manage project resources, risk & contingency planning, and ensure the work is delivered to scope in fulfilment with the project objectives within planned budget and schedule; ■ Implement robust Quality Assurance and Risk Management procedures to contribute to excellence & maximum delivery of project results and outcomes; ■ Effectively manage the interdisciplinary convergence, relationships and dependencies to heighten knowledge generation and innovation, promoting fluid cross-team, interdisciplinary collaboration and internal communication; ■ Effective governance for formalising cooperation with third party projects, networks, initiatives
Task 8.1 Project Management & Coordination [Lead: REC. Participants: ALL. M1-M48]: REC will lead the partners in project monitoring and control, ensuring results are delivered on time, to budget and to expected quality, and in fulfilment of the contractual EC requirements. To ensure sound governance of the project, a Project Management Board/General Assembly (PMB) will be appointed (with 1 senior representative of each partner). The PMB will meet every 6 months under the chair of the Project Coordinator, Andrea Salimbeni from REC, to manage project oversight, review and planning. The PMB is the decision-making body of the consortium, and each partner representative will be assigned a vote; decisions will be taken by simple majority. Collaboration will be facilitated by a digital collaboration tool (D8.1) for effective project management, quality management, risk management, communication, collaboration & internal engagement among the consortium. 
Task 8.2 Quality Assurance and Risk Management [Lead: REC. Participants: ALL. M1-M48] Implement robust Quality Assurance and Risk Management procedures to ensure the project delivers excellent scientific knowledge and technological innovations, and that there is a proactive approach to risk monitoring, mitigation strategies and contingency management. 
Task 8.3 Interdisciplinarity Management across the consortium [Lead: REC. Part.: ALL. M1-M48] As described in Section 1.2, a Technical Steering Group (consisting of the WP Leaders and prominent thematic experts from the consortium) will be established and Chaired by the Technical Manager for assisting the Project Coordinator in managing the interdisciplinary of the workplan. The Group will meet quarterly to assess progress, manage risks, and guide strategic decisions. Regular WP meetings, milestone-aligned workshops, and shared digital collaboration tools will foster continuous knowledge exchange, facilitating cohesion and interdisciplinary cross- collaboration in line with the fulfilment of the overall project objectives. 
Task 8.4 Governance of cooperation with EU-funded peer projects & initiatives [Lead: REC. M1-M48] REC will formalise the cooperation with the projects and initiatives that the project will be clustering and collaborating with at different levels in the workplan, and particularly the other projects funded under this topic, whereby consultations and joint activities on the identified cross-cutting issues will be organised, and formalised in this task, and in synchronization with the dissemination and exploitation planning and activities performed in WP7. In addition, this task will support the formal coordination of cooperation activities with the projects with the project funded under topic HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61, in conjunction with the digital team from T5.4. A further activity of this task will be to manage engagement with the European Partnership on Clean Steel and to identify mutually valuable opportunities for concrete synergies in relation to the dissemination, community building and preparing for the future exploitation of the NEXTSTEEL outputs. Meetings will be organised with the coordinators of the relevant cross-projects, as well as with the team at Clean Steel EP in the early phase of the project (by M6) to prepare a roadmap (by M8, Milestone 2) for cooperation in each case, which will be implemented and updated over the course of the project and reported on in a public report (D8.3). | Task 8.1 Project Management & Coordination [Lead: REC. Participants: ALL. M1-M48]: REC will lead the partners in project monitoring and control, ensuring results are delivered on time, to budget and to expected quality, and in fulfilment of the contractual EC requirements. To ensure sound governance of the project, a Project Management Board/General Assembly (PMB) will be appointed (with 1 senior representative of each partner). The PMB will meet every 6 months under the chair of the Project Coordinator, Andrea Salimbeni from REC, to manage project oversight, review and planning. The PMB is the decision-making body of the consortium, and each partner representative will be assigned a vote; decisions will be taken by simple majority. Collaboration will be facilitated by a digital collaboration tool (D8.1) for effective project management, quality management, risk management, communication, collaboration & internal engagement among the consortium. 
Task 8.2 Quality Assurance and Risk Management [Lead: REC. Participants: ALL. M1-M48] Implement robust Quality Assurance and Risk Management procedures to ensure the project delivers excellent scientific knowledge and technological innovations, and that there is a proactive approach to risk monitoring, mitigation strategies and contingency management. 
Task 8.3 Interdisciplinarity Management across the consortium [Lead: REC. Part.: ALL. M1-M48] As described in Section 1.2, a Technical Steering Group (consisting of the WP Leaders and prominent thematic experts from the consortium) will be established and Chaired by the Technical Manager for assisting the Project Coordinator in managing the interdisciplinary of the workplan. The Group will meet quarterly to assess progress, manage risks, and guide strategic decisions. Regular WP meetings, milestone-aligned workshops, and shared digital collaboration tools will foster continuous knowledge exchange, facilitating cohesion and interdisciplinary cross- collaboration in line with the fulfilment of the overall project objectives. 
Task 8.4 Governance of cooperation with EU-funded peer projects & initiatives [Lead: REC. M1-M48] REC will formalise the cooperation with the projects and initiatives that the project will be clustering and collaborating with at different levels in the workplan, and particularly the other projects funded under this topic, whereby consultations and joint activities on the identified cross-cutting issues will be organised, and formalised in this task, and in synchronization with the dissemination and exploitation planning and activities performed in WP7. In addition, this task will support the formal coordination of cooperation activities with the projects with the project funded under topic HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61, in conjunction with the digital team from T5.4. A further activity of this task will be to manage engagement with the European Partnership on Clean Steel and to identify mutually valuable opportunities for concrete synergies in relation to the dissemination, community building and preparing for the future exploitation of the NEXTSTEEL outputs. Meetings will be organised with the coordinators of the relevant cross-projects, as well as with the team at Clean Steel EP in the early phase of the project (by M6) to prepare a roadmap (by M8, Milestone 2) for cooperation in each case, which will be implemented and updated over the course of the project and reported on in a public report (D8.3). | Task 8.1 Project Management & Coordination [Lead: REC. Participants: ALL. M1-M48]: REC will lead the partners in project monitoring and control, ensuring results are delivered on time, to budget and to expected quality, and in fulfilment of the contractual EC requirements. To ensure sound governance of the project, a Project Management Board/General Assembly (PMB) will be appointed (with 1 senior representative of each partner). The PMB will meet every 6 months under the chair of the Project Coordinator, Andrea Salimbeni from REC, to manage project oversight, review and planning. The PMB is the decision-making body of the consortium, and each partner representative will be assigned a vote; decisions will be taken by simple majority. Collaboration will be facilitated by a digital collaboration tool (D8.1) for effective project management, quality management, risk management, communication, collaboration & internal engagement among the consortium. 
Task 8.2 Quality Assurance and Risk Management [Lead: REC. Participants: ALL. M1-M48] Implement robust Quality Assurance and Risk Management procedures to ensure the project delivers excellent scientific knowledge and technological innovations, and that there is a proactive approach to risk monitoring, mitigation strategies and contingency management. 
Task 8.3 Interdisciplinarity Management across the consortium [Lead: REC. Part.: ALL. M1-M48] As described in Section 1.2, a Technical Steering Group (consisting of the WP Leaders and prominent thematic experts from the consortium) will be established and Chaired by the Technical Manager for assisting the Project Coordinator in managing the interdisciplinary of the workplan. The Group will meet quarterly to assess progress, manage risks, and guide strategic decisions. Regular WP meetings, milestone-aligned workshops, and shared digital collaboration tools will foster continuous knowledge exchange, facilitating cohesion and interdisciplinary cross- collaboration in line with the fulfilment of the overall project objectives. 
Task 8.4 Governance of cooperation with EU-funded peer projects & initiatives [Lead: REC. M1-M48] REC will formalise the cooperation with the projects and initiatives that the project will be clustering and collaborating with at different levels in the workplan, and particularly the other projects funded under this topic, whereby consultations and joint activities on the identified cross-cutting issues will be organised, and formalised in this task, and in synchronization with the dissemination and exploitation planning and activities performed in WP7. In addition, this task will support the formal coordination of cooperation activities with the projects with the project funded under topic HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61, in conjunction with the digital team from T5.4. A further activity of this task will be to manage engagement with the European Partnership on Clean Steel and to identify mutually valuable opportunities for concrete synergies in relation to the dissemination, community building and preparing for the future exploitation of the NEXTSTEEL outputs. Meetings will be organised with the coordinators of the relevant cross-projects, as well as with the team at Clean Steel EP in the early phase of the project (by M6) to prepare a roadmap (by M8, Milestone 2) for cooperation in each case, which will be implemented and updated over the course of the project and reported on in a public report (D8.3). | Task 8.1 Project Management & Coordination [Lead: REC. Participants: ALL. M1-M48]: REC will lead the partners in project monitoring and control, ensuring results are delivered on time, to budget and to expected quality, and in fulfilment of the contractual EC requirements. To ensure sound governance of the project, a Project Management Board/General Assembly (PMB) will be appointed (with 1 senior representative of each partner). The PMB will meet every 6 months under the chair of the Project Coordinator, Andrea Salimbeni from REC, to manage project oversight, review and planning. The PMB is the decision-making body of the consortium, and each partner representative will be assigned a vote; decisions will be taken by simple majority. Collaboration will be facilitated by a digital collaboration tool (D8.1) for effective project management, quality management, risk management, communication, collaboration & internal engagement among the consortium. 
Task 8.2 Quality Assurance and Risk Management [Lead: REC. Participants: ALL. M1-M48] Implement robust Quality Assurance and Risk Management procedures to ensure the project delivers excellent scientific knowledge and technological innovations, and that there is a proactive approach to risk monitoring, mitigation strategies and contingency management. 
Task 8.3 Interdisciplinarity Management across the consortium [Lead: REC. Part.: ALL. M1-M48] As described in Section 1.2, a Technical Steering Group (consisting of the WP Leaders and prominent thematic experts from the consortium) will be established and Chaired by the Technical Manager for assisting the Project Coordinator in managing the interdisciplinary of the workplan. The Group will meet quarterly to assess progress, manage risks, and guide strategic decisions. Regular WP meetings, milestone-aligned workshops, and shared digital collaboration tools will foster continuous knowledge exchange, facilitating cohesion and interdisciplinary cross- collaboration in line with the fulfilment of the overall project objectives. 
Task 8.4 Governance of cooperation with EU-funded peer projects & initiatives [Lead: REC. M1-M48] REC will formalise the cooperation with the projects and initiatives that the project will be clustering and collaborating with at different levels in the workplan, and particularly the other projects funded under this topic, whereby consultations and joint activities on the identified cross-cutting issues will be organised, and formalised in this task, and in synchronization with the dissemination and exploitation planning and activities performed in WP7. In addition, this task will support the formal coordination of cooperation activities with the projects with the project funded under topic HORIZON-CL4-INDUSTRY-2025-01-DIGITAL-61, in conjunction with the digital team from T5.4. A further activity of this task will be to manage engagement with the European Partnership on Clean Steel and to identify mutually valuable opportunities for concrete synergies in relation to the dissemination, community building and preparing for the future exploitation of the NEXTSTEEL outputs. Meetings will be organised with the coordinators of the relevant cross-projects, as well as with the team at Clean Steel EP in the early phase of the project (by M6) to prepare a roadmap (by M8, Milestone 2) for cooperation in each case, which will be implemented and updated over the course of the project and reported on in a public report (D8.3).
Del
# | Deliverable Name | Deliverable Description | WP # | Lead | Type | Diss.
Level | Due 
Date
D1.1 | Fast hydrothermal treatment of biowaste | Report on HTT experiments and optimal conditions identified | 1 | REC | R | PU | M12
D1.2 | HYdrothermal CArbon SEparation unit (HYCASE) | Continuous fast HTT unit installation and commissioning report | 1 | REC | DEM | CO | M18
D1.3 | Hydrochar to bioanthracite & P-rich fertilizer | Results of hydrochar leaching and bioanthracite production | 1 | REC | R | CO | M24
D1.4 | Bioanthracite production at demo-scale | Results of bioanthracite production and compaction tests at pilot scale | 1 | AMMR | R | CO | M40
D2.1 | SCWG experimental campaign on HTT liquid | Report on SCWG experiments & optimal conditions for H₂ production | 2 | CEA | R | PU | M24
D2.2 | Demonstration of pilot scale catalytic hydrothermal gasification | Report on testing to validate SCWG of HTT-derived APs in a 6-10 kg/h pilot scale unit | 2 | CEA | R | CO | M40
D2.3 | Catalytic CH₄ cracking using bioanthracite | Pilot tests using bioanthracite as catalyst for CH₄ catalytic cracking for H₂ production | 2 | POLI | R | CO | M36
D2.4 | AD of HTT-derived aqueous phases | Report on AD experiments & optimal conditions for bio-methane production | 2 | REC | R | CO | M38
D2.5 | HTT water phase treatment and inorganic recovery | Results of HTT water phase treatment solution & inorganic recovery potential | 2 | REC | R | PU | M40
D3.1 | Bioanthracite yse validation in SiMn alloy production | Report on demo-scale tests performed using bioanthracite in SiMn production | 3 | ERA | R | CO | M44
D3.2 | C-deposition via CH₄ cracking in SiMn slag | Report lab & pilot-scale tests on C-deposition on SiMn slag | 3 | SIN | R | CO | M44
D3.3 | Polymers use as bioanthracite source in EAF | Report on the use of bioanthracite and polymers mixtures in steel EAF | 3 | CELSA | R | CO | M36
D3.4 | Validation of bioanthracite use in EAF & BF | Report on results of experimental tests | 3 | AMMR | R | CO | M44
D3.5 | Validation of bioanthracite use in waste valorisation | Report on the performances of bioanthracite in slag and waste valorisation | 3 | TEC | R | CO | M44
D3.6 | Biowaste-derived Green Gas: substitute for Nat. Gas in Steelmaking processes | Results of assessment: Requirements, Combustion Studies, and Validation | 3 | TEC | R | CO | M44
D4.1 | Feedstock identification and supply chain assessment | Report on feedstock supply chain analysis and selection criteria | 4 | POL | R | PU | M12
D4.2 | Report on energy assessment & integration thermochemical processes | 4
D4.3 | Results of the life cycle assessment
Techno-economic assessment and socio-economic impact

Internal report

BRI
BRI | M24/
M46
BRI
D6.5 | Market Analysis & Roadmap for KERs | Report on market context for selected KERs & business roadmaps. | 6 | ICP | RES | M24/
M48
Strategy for ≥1 validated low-carbon steelmaking route. | M30/
M45
D7.1 | DEC plan (Initial/Interim/Final) | Dissemination, exploitation, and communication activities | M6/24
/48
Public document (and also for internal use)
Documented project inputs to standardisation bodies
Interim and Final public report
IP Protection and Technology Watch Report | Report on IPR and patent tracking + tech watch
Innovations & impacts in CO2-neutral steel production

Digital repository & collaboration
Internal Guidance document for consortium
Report on cross-project clustering
Date
1 | 5 biowastes for sustainable use as biobased reducing agents identified | WP4 | M4 | Material characterisation report comparing potential feedstocks.
2 | Roadmap for cooperation with projects & initiatives from R&I ecosystem | WP8, *5, 7 | M8 | Memorandums of Understanding established with ≥6 project and initiatives
3 | Initial stakeholder engagement launched and first co-creation findings | WP6 | M12 | White paper: Low-carbon steel transition: the industry perspective
4 | Identification optimal HTT conditions to valorise all biowaste streams | WP1 | M12 | Bench-scale experimental reports showing optimised Temp, Pressure, residence time for each.
5 | Construction of demo fast-HTT unit | WP1 | M16 | Internal Factory Acceptance Test
6 | Optimal conditions to turn HTT liquid into green gas by SCWG | WP2 | M18 | Experimental validation of conditions
7 | First version of Digital Twin and Data Platform operational | WP5, 
*ML3 | M30 | Confirmed by software deployment logs and demonstration with pilot inputs.
8 | Demo production of hydrochar for downstream use | WP1 | M36 | Production of 12 tons hydrochar
9 | Pilot-scale production of bioanthracite completed | WP1 | M40 | Production of 4 tons bioanthracite
10 | Validation of biomethane production in demo-AD unit | WP2 | M36 | 2m3 processed HTT liquid
11 | Validation of green gas production by operating continuous SCWG unit | WP2 | M40 | 200 l processed HTT liquid
12 | Digital Twin integrated with real-time pilot data (HoloSteel operational) | WP5, *ML3 | M42 | Verified by live connection to pilot sensors and visualised output of models.
13 | LCA assessment conclusion & results | WP4 | M44 | Balance of GHG (CO2eq) emissions
14 | ESG and Policy Briefs disseminated to guide industry-wide adoption | WP6,WP7 | M43 | Verified by submission of policy brief and ESG recommendation report.
15 | Bioanthracite use as reducing agent in diverse steelmaking and waste valorisation processes validated | WP3 | M44 | Pilot testing reports from BF/EAF/SiMn trials, with quantified process emissions and steel quality parameters under new input conditions.
16 | Green gas use as substitute of H2 and natural gas in diverse steelmaking processes validated | WP3 | M44 | Operational reports confirming energy content, flow control, and safety/performance benchmarks in pilot furnaces.
17 | Economic sustainability of the product demonstrated | WP4, WP6 | M46 | Technoeconomic model cost scenarios for scaleup; inc. CAPEX/OPEX, business case benchmarking.
18 | Business cases, market analysis and exploitation strategies finalised | WP6, WP7 | M48 | Confirmed via final delivery of exploitation package (KERs, roadmap, business plan).

HTT or SCWG equipment not available (M/M) | WP1 | Maintenance plan, spare parts in stock
Biowaste supply issues (L/M) | WP1 | Local alternatives (WWTPs, pulp/paper, industry)
HTT plant build delays (L/M) | WP2 | Early supplier selection, in-house construction capacity
Delays in biowaste supply/authorisations (L/M) | WP2 | REC already has authorisation; expansion started pre-project; supplier partners secured
Bioanthracite fails mechanical specs (M/M) | WP3 | Test binders, ratios, additives or fines to improve properties
Low bioanthracite output volume (M/H) | WP3 | Reduce test scale or duration; adjust proportions
Pellets underperform (M/M) | WP3 | Use lab-scale grate testing (AMMR) to optimise parameters
Underperformance of solution in terms of energy/environment/cost (M/H) | WP4 | Identify gaps, propose material/process improvements
Predictive models fail to satisfactorily predict process performance (M/M) | WP4 | Ensure strong coordination with experimental teams
Sensor failure at high temps (H/M) | WP3, WP5 | Use heat-resistant/remotely located sensors; fallback via model correction
Poor data limits Digital Twin (M/H) | WP5 | Monitor data early; prioritise critical data; use virtual/simulated data
Excess computing cost needed for DT (M/M) | WP5 | Shift to cloud for parallel computing if needed
No stakeholder consensus on low-carbon pathway (M/M) | WP6 | Use Britest's facilitation experts and methods
Low steel industry interest in results (L/H) | WP3, WP7 | 3 steelmakers in consortium + cocreation + strong business case
Incompatibility with standards (L/H) | WP7 | UNE ensures early standards alignment; share results with relevant bodies
Key person/partner departs the consortium affecting delivery (L/M) | WP8 | Redundancy via multiple experts; strong project management to reallocate tasks
Underestimated project resources (M/H) | WP8 | Monitor progress; reallocate, bring in new partners or replan tasks if needed
Timeline issues affect outcomes (L/H) | WP8 | Continuous tracking; adapt plan quickly; escalate to EC if needed
14/ HAE | Cost (€) | Justification
Subcontracting costs | 70,000 | Design work on Dosing and Drying Solution
1 / REC | Cost (€) | Justification
Travel and subsistence | 16,800 | WP8: 10 trips to Kick Off, General Assemblies and Project Meetings (€12k). WP7: 4 trips to dissemination events (Conferences, Tradeshows, Workshops) (€4.8k): ⁓1200€/trip/person
Other goods, works and services | 921,000 | WP1: Building a continuous, fast HTT pilot plant of >250 kg/h capacity, incl: Preating slurry tank (12k€), wet milling section (25k€), U-shape reactor with heating & cooling section (280k€); fast heating system (35k€), Pressure slurry pump (25k€), slurry mechanical separation (55k€), chiller for cooling (9k€); HTT gas extraction & cleaning incl. condensable compounds removal (45k€), control panel with PLC (40k€), hydrochar drying & compaction unit (60k€), slurry tank (5.5k€), 100 kW D.O. boiler for plant heating (15k€), Plant hosting skid (25k€). WP1: Adapt existing chemical leaching plant with centrifugation & evaporation system: Centrifuge of 500 lt/h: 35k€; Evaporator: 40k€. WP2: technical modific. of methane catalytic pyrolysis kiln, incl. new feeding system, new temperature control & catalyst bed & discharge system (€165k). WP1: Reagents & lab consumables (12k€); WP2: Reagents & components for pilot plants operation (16k€); WP3: Materials shipping and preparation (12k€); WP8: Audit costs (5k€); Open access publication (6k€)
Total | 937,800
2 / IRIS | Cost (€) | Justification
Travel and subsistence | 22,800 | WP8: 10 trips to Kick Off, General Assemblies & Project Meetings (€12k). WP7: 4 trips to dissemination events (Conferences, Tradeshows, Workshops) (€4.8k): ⁓1200€/trip/person. WP3: 3 trips for Holosteel deployments in Pilots (⁓2k/ engineer/trip) (€6k)
Equipment | 9,000 | WP5: Depreciation development computing prototypes (€9k); laptop x 2, smartphones (1x ioS and 1 x android) & tablets (1x ioS, 1x android) for use in project for HoloSteel developments, testing, bug fixing, performance testing and regression testing of Holosteel interfaces.
Other goods, works and services | 295,000 | WP5: Private Cloud Infrastructure (servers: 3k) & Public Cloud hosting fees (Google Cloud monthly hosting fees-500/month x 36m=20k) & Supercomputing access (12k); WP5: PAT analysers/sensors (€96k); opto-mechanical & electronic adaptations (€25k); Materials for building monitoring system prototypes (incl. casing materials & probes to withstand harsh environments), optical components and test rig (incl. light sources, camera, lenses, etc.),0 mechanical parts, electrical (Electronic PCBs and components, Cabinet; PLCs) (€87k). WP5: Certification fees & Data Management costs (€10k); WP7: IP protection (patent application fees, trademarking, copyright) (30k); Exhibition costs for 2 x tradeshows (€8k); WP8: CFS-Audit (€4k)
Total | 326,800
3 / CEA | Cost (€) | Justification
Travel and subsistence | 19,000 | WP8: 10 trips to Kick Off, General Assemblies and Project Meetings (€12k). WP7: ⁓6 trips to dissemination events (Conferences, Tradeshows, Workshops) (€7k): ⁓1200€/trip/person.
Other goods, works, services | 538,130 | WP3: modify experimental setups, reactor prototype provision, external analyses & specific catalyst provision (532,550€), WP7:Conf.registration fees (€3k); WP8: CFS-Audit (2,580€)
Total | 557,130
4 / POLITO | Cost (€) | Justification
Travel and subsistence | 24,000 | WP8: 8 trips to Kick Off, General Assemblies and Project Meetings (€16k). WP7: 4 trips to dissemination events (Conferences) (€8k): ⁓2k€/trip/person
Equipment | 40,000 | WP4: 12k€ (gas analyser-equipment cost 30k€, depreciation over 10 yrs for 4 yr project); WP4: 28k€ (lab methane pyrolysis furnace-equipment cost 70k€, 10yrs depr, 4 yr project)
Other goods… | 20,000 | WP4: PC& software licence (7€), WP4: Consumables (€10k); WP8: CFS-Audit (3k€)
Total | 84,000
5a / ERAMET | Cost (€) | Justification
Travel and subsistence | 21,000 | WP8: 8 trips to Kick Off, General Assemblies and Project Meetings (€16k). ⁓2k€/trip/person. WP3: Travel to pilot sites (5k€)
Equipment | 33,000 | WP3: Depreciation for a particle size analyzer
Other goods.. | 5,000 | WP3: Shipping of material (5k€)
Total | 59,000
5b / ERAMET IDE | Cost (€) | Justification
Travel and subsistence | 19,000 | WP8: 8 trips to KO, General Assemblies & Project Meetings (€16k).⁓2k€/trip/person. WP1: Trip to HAE during production (€1k). WP3: Trip to Norway to follow Pilot at SIN (€2k).
Equipment | 11,000 | WP3: Depreciation cost for lab equipment (CORED Furnace or Lab Shaft)
Other goods, works, services | 24,000 | WP1: Consumables for characterization and agglomeration campaign (3k€); WP3: Consumables for lab tests (€1k); WP3: Mn Calc and Thermocalc software (20k€)
Total | 54,000
6 / AMMR | Cost (€) | Justification
Travel and subsistence | 24,000 | WP8: 8 trips to Kick Off, General Assemblies and Project Meetings (€16k). ⁓2k€/trip/person. WP3: 4 meetings with relevant partners regarding WP1 Record; 2000€/travel (8k€)
Other goods, works and services | 1,174,000 | WP1: Electrical system regulation kiln revamping (€ 300k), combustion chamber (€ 150k) Mechanical equipment revamping and integration (300 k€), Gas detection and infrastructure (€ 15 k); WP3: Consumables (thermocouples, calibration, reagents, etc.) (19k€): WP1: Material Analysis (20k€); WP1: Materials shipping & preparation (12k€); WP8: Financial Statement (3k€); WP3: Internal AMMR tests via pilot facilities (EAF, sinter pot) (220k€)
Total | 1,198,000
8 / TEC | Cost (€) | Justification
Travel and subsistence | 21,000 | WP8: 8 trips to Kick Off, General Assemblies and Project Meetings (€12k). WP3: Technical Meetings (€6k); WP7: Workshops/Conferences (€3k).
Equipment | 40,000 | WP3: Depreciation 25k€ Forming machine + 15k€ Oxy-fuel and air combustion burner
Other goods, works and services | 128,100 | WP3: Elements for sample preparation & conditioning (crushing, milling & mixing tools, balls, containers), air filtering & dedusting system conditioning (€5k); Consumables for metallurgical trials, powders, metals, crucibles, ancillary & foundry tools, graphite parts, thermocouples, channels, sheaths, gases, injectors, heating elements, wirings & ducts, metallic parts, sensors, isolating & refractory materials (€8k); Characterisation consumables (fluxes, reagents, crucibles, laboratory tools (beakers, flasks…), cutting tools, lubricants, pastes & tools for metalographic analysis (€8k); Parts for refurb. & conditioning of melting, refining & reducing furnaces & auxiliary components (tubular heating system, ceramic treatment pipe, stainless steel cooled flanges, gas flow control & measuring system, fitting & joints, gas regulation board) (€22k); Mechanical, electrical, control parts & components (safety control parts for green gas use) (€20k); Manufacture combustion gases, gas skid modification, combustion chamber maintenance, sample preparation & analysis (55k€); WP7: Conference fees, OA pub.) (€8k); WP8: CFS-Audit (2.1k€)
Total | 189,100
8 / WIP | Cost (€) | Justification
Travel and subsistence | 16,000 | WP8: 8 trips to Kick Off, General Assemblies and Project Meetings (€16k). ⁓2k€/trip/person.
Other goods, works, services | 27,500 | WP7: Website development (4k€); Introductory video and video clips (5k€) Final conference (9k€) Annual symposia(5k€); Printing costs (500€); Conference fees (4k€)
Total | 43,500
10 / SINTEF | Cost (€) | Justification
Travel and subsistence | 31,000 | WP8: 10 trips to Kick Off, General Assemblies and Project Meetings ⁓1200€/trip/person (€12k). WP7: Conference participation (€15k)
Other goods, works and services | 167,000 | WP3: SiC crucibles (10k€); Kanthal crucibles (10k€); Thermoelements for pilots (12k€); Lining materials + electrode for pilot, Analysis ore (100k€); NTNU (17k€); Epoxy (8k€); Norlab (10k€)
Total | 198,000
14 / HAE | Cost (€) | Justification
Travel and subsistence | 16,000 | WP8: 8 trips to Kick Off, General Assemblies and Project Meetings (€16k). ⁓2k€/trip/person.
Equipment | 146,381 | WP1: 26,190.48€ (Eirich intensive mixer); 28,571.43€ (Dosing equipment to extruder); 33,333.33€ (High pressure lab extruder); 47,619.05€ (Belt dryer for lab size tests 100 kg/h capacity); 10,666.67€ (Dedusting unit)
Total | 162,381
3 /CEA | Cost (€) | Justification
Internally invoiced goods and services | 302,513 | SCWG pilot plant upgrading, engineering and installation services
10/ SINTEF | Cost (€) | Justification
Internally invoiced goods and services | 65,000 | Operation of the demo-scale furnace for MnSi alloy production
REC: Private-public nonprofit R&D centre. Specialised in renewable energies, biomass, bioenergy & bioeconomy. Its Raw Materials & Carbon Recycling Business Unit are Project Coordinators: Leader WP8. As experts in design & construction of pilot plants, they also Lead WP1 on upscaling the integrated plant. They own a 1000m3 experimental area equipped with: 2kg/h continuous auger type slow pyrolysis unit; 50lt chemical leaching unit; 50kg/h char leaching unit; 100kg/h continuous pyrolysis rotary kiln; 2lt/h continuous hydrothermal liquefaction unit. In ongoing projects, REC is building 20 kg/h auger type pyrolysis unit & continuous oils hydrocracking unit. Vast experience in biowaste & waste thermochemical treatment processes at real scale, working in EU & private projects with industry. Authorised to process all non-dangerous wastes, incl. sewage sludge, effluents, plastics.
IRIS: Advanced Engineering SME specialised in development and manufacture of real-time monitoring solutions based on photonics PAT systems and Industrial AI (Machine Learning and Deep Learning) for data-driven process efficiencies and quality standardization in Food, Process and Bio-based industries. Leader: WP5. Implementation of HoloSteel intelligent digital system based on real-time optical monitoring of key process parameters or product quality attributes. Data Fusion and Data Management software. Holonics-based Digital Twin development.
CEA: Leading R&D organisation in defence, low-carbon energy, industrial tech, fundamental science. WP2 leader: valorising aqueous waste from HTT via SCWG, converting carbon into H₂-rich gas for metallurgical use (e.g. DRI). SCWG serves dual purposes: wastewater treatment & high-calorific gas production. Catalysts will optimise kinetics & H₂ yield at mild temperatures. Feedstock & outputs (gas, solids, aqueous) characterised using µGC, elemental analysis, TOC, HPLC, etc. Tests begin in batch mode & scale to CEA’s continuous SCWG pilot (only one in France).
POLITO: Expertise in innovative processes; energy & sustainability assessment; product characterisation; overall concept design of innovative systems; system Modelling, Energy balance, LCA, carbon balance assessments. Leader WP4: Comprehensive analysis & assessment of mass & energy flows; provide quantified data on environmental performance of NextSteel process & options. Study carbon balance & its relation to generating allowances/credits. Vast experience doing this role at EU & International level- for DG MOVE, DG RTD & ICAO (leading Core LCA WG in ICAO FTG). Coordinator of 2 projects on Steel sector: H2STEEL & BIORECAST.
ERAMET +IDE: Global mining and metals group with operations in over 15 countries around the world, employing 10,400 in 16 mining and metallurgical processing sites. Core ERAMET+IDE participation in WP3: Leader T3.1: Characterisation of biocoal properties for the manganese ferroalloys industry. Agglomeration of biocoal; Pilot scale tests with submerged arc furnace for manganese ferroalloys production utilizing biocoal as reductant; Evaluate biocoal as reductant for Mn-ferroalloy production.
AMMR: With 600 employees, ArcelorMittal Maizières Research SA (France), is the main research centre of ArcelorMittal- world’s #1 international steel company, with an activity covering nearly all geographical & economic sectors (automotive, building, electronic). Role in WP3: Leading the studies on the use of biocarbon materials and green gas in iron and steelmaking processes (T3.3). Alternative processes for biochar integration in ironmaking.
TEC: Largest centre of applied research & technological development in Spain. Member of Basque Research & Technology Alliance. Leader WP3: coordinate the testing and validation of low-CO2 steelmaking practices at TRL6 in the participating steelmaking pilots, and they will lead the work in relation to requirements and quality optimization for the use of bioanthracite and gas as reducing agents, as well as performing the preliminary assessment of the use of the gas and bioanthracite as reducing agents in metallurgical processes. They possess the expertise to perform lab scale tests and products quality testing. Critical infrastructure: e.g. 50kW induction furnace.
WIP: Renewable energy consultancy with a long history organising leading conferences & events in the sector. Leader WP7. Dissemination & comms strategy. Equipment & logistics for large scale (real, hybrid and online) dissemination events (capacity for >5k participants). Knowledge & tools for diverse effective D&C activities.
UNE: Spain's only Standardisation Organisation, designated by the Spanish Ministry of Economy, Industry and Competitiveness to the EC and contributes to the development of the economy by developing technical standards and international cooperation activities, fostering the development of an infrastructure of quality by promoting knowledge transfer and raising business standards. Leading Standardisation activities and procedures (T7.4).
ICP: Experts in IP strategy; track record supporting 1,000+ granted patents. In-house IPR protection framework tailored to EC-funded multi-partner projects delivering high patent grant rates & strong commercial outcomes. Leader 6.5 (Exploitation Strategy & Business cases) & T7.1.3 & T7.3 IPR Management and Technology Watch.
CELSA: CELSA Barcelona has 2 EAF, each one with a capacity of 150t and a power of 70MW, for a total annual production capacity of 2.5Mt of long steel products for construction sector: merchants, sections and wire rod. Will work on use of polymers as bioanthracite source in EAF.
SINTEF: One of Europe's largest research institutes, with multidisciplinary expertise in technology, natural sciences and social sciences. Core role WP3: SiMn pilot scale production testing. Validation of biochar applicability in steel industry including classical route (BF-BOF) and future ironmaking in Europe (DRI-EAF).
BRITEST: Leader WP6. Not-for-profit, membership-led organisation with 20-year record as technical facilitators capturing members (& other clients) manufacturing process understanding to generate business value using own in-house process understanding tools. Active training provider. Expert at early-stage sustainability assessments covering environment, process safety, social, economic, technical & supply chain aspects. Currently leading 2 WPs in HE funded ETERNAL project & the only industrial partner in UK government funded project RESILIENCE delivering skills training for the pharmaceutical sector.
HAE: HÄNDLE is a leading German manufacturer of machinery and complete systems for the preparation and shaping of bulk materials, with deep expertise in compaction technologies used across ceramics, construction, and industrial processing sectors. Leader: T1.5, studying and applying different compaction solutions to turn the bioanthracite produced into granules, briquettes, and pellets for being used in different steelmaking furnaces.