2.2 Measures to maximise impact-Dissemination, exploitation & communication #@COM-DIS-VIS-CDV@#

First version of the ‘Plan for the dissemination and exploitation including communication activities: Our planned measures to maximise the impact of our project are outlined in this initial ‘Plan for the dissemination and exploitation, including communication activities’ (PDEC), which will be updated and implemented in WP7.
Key Exploitable Results and value proposition design: NextSteel’s systems-level approach will develop and integrate a set of Key Exploitable Results (KERs), shown in Table 10, which form the foundation of our PDEC. These will guide value propositions, communication, training, demonstration, and standardisation. The consortium will assess and refine KERs throughout the project, aligning them with stakeholder needs and defining clear exploitation routes (summarised in Table 7). Supported by pilot validations, LCA/LCC analyses, a strong business case, and input to standards, the KERs will be robust, investment-ready, and aligned with industrial, environmental, and societal goals.
Table 10- Key Exploitable Results, Target Groups and Exploitation Route
Communication Plan and Toolbox: We have defined a strategic and holistic communications approach built around the following clear communication goals and objectives:
■ To raise societal awareness of how NextSteel tackles the urgent challenge of decarbonising one of the most CO₂-intensive industries while preserving competitiveness, securing supply chains, and supporting a just transition. By enabling cleaner, more efficient steelmaking, the project contributes to climate goals, energy resilience, and sustainable growth. Key messages will be shared through engaging videos, infographics, articles, and other accessible formats.
■ To engage with industry (reached directly and via their Associations, Clusters, etc. such as Eurofer – European Steel Association, A. SPIRE, etc.) and to communicate NextSteel’s high industrial relevance in providing scalable, cost-effective pathways to decarbonise iron and steelmaking, enabling steelmakers to comply with tightening emissions regulations while maintaining product quality and operational efficiency.
■ To establish synergies with external bodies, such as standardisation organizations, contributing to improved science-based standards. UNE provides a very credible pathway to connect with relevant standardisation bodies and ensure that NextSteels’s outputs are aligned with and feed into ongoing standardisation efforts.
■ To achieve high visibility and recognition within the scientific community, fostering credibility, attracting collaboration opportunities, and ensuring that the project’s findings contribute to advancing the state of the art in sustainable steelmaking technologies and ≥8 joint activities with other relevant EU-funded projects.
We will design and build a Communication Toolbox for achieving our communication goals and objectives:
■Visual identity and brand: We have designed a logo during bid preparation, and in the project implementation phase we will invest effort in building brand identity (brand book and brand values).
■Project website and social media channels: The website will be a key channel for the project’s Communication (and dissemination) effort, hosting project public deliverables, blog content (e.g. >4 Thought Leadership articles, >2 whitepapers), ≥ 6 newsletters, and other content. The website will also serve as a hub for content shared via the established social media channels of the consortium partners (LinkedIn, X, Facebook, Instagram, among others), leveraging their existing loyal communities. We will complement this with dedicated NEXTSTEEL LinkedIn and YouTube channels and promote hashtags such as #NextSteel and #LowCarbonSteel to amplify reach.
■ Informative material: public materials in both printable and digital formats (banners, posters, flyers, Application Notes, Whitepapers, etc.) & multimedia formats (introductory video presenting the NextSteel concept, digital flyers).
■Engagement with industry: participation in ≥6 tradeshows/exhibitions (e.g. Green Steel World Expo & Conference), face2face meetings, targeted mailings, and direct outreach to relevant stakeholders.
■Commercial Publications: ≥ 6 articles in online/offline magazines, blogs, and other professional outlets to reach industrial and technical audiences.
■Public Relations (PR) strategy: Timely Press Releases aligned with key milestones and outputs, distributed       through appropriate press channels, including the European Commission News Section, and platforms, networks, and Associations, such as Clean Steel Partnership, A.Spire, Eurofer (European Steel Association), Green Steel World.
Dissemination of the Project Results: Aligned with our Open Science Strategy, we will proactively share all non-confidential outcomes through scientific publications and other channels. The dissemination strategy will: identify key results for effective transfer of knowledge to relevant stakeholders; identify suitable dissemination channels; maximise research impact by extending the value of our findings beyond the initial scope (i.e. additional uses of the process in other applications, as well as extending the use cases of the products in other steelmaking, non-ferrous or other process industries); continually assess outcomes of dissemination activities. Key dissemination tools include:
■Open Access (OA) Scientific publications (≥20) in relevant journals, e.g. Journal of Iron and Steel Research International, Steel Research International, Metals, Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, among others.
■Participation in ≥ 20 international conferences- oral/poster/papers, e.g., European Steel Forum (ESF), Global Steel Sustainability Summit, Nordic Steel, among others.
■Organisation of 4xAnnual symposia on CO2-neutral steel production (could be organised in existing conferences)
■Sharing non-confidential results on online media and data platforms (e.g. Zenodo, ResearchGate, project website, etc.) including research data, software, reports.
■Organisation of ≥4 training and workshop sessions, to coincide with the validation phase of the demo prototype training workers on the operation of the NextSteel pilots and on the use of the products in steelmaking. These sessions will also be accessible online, contributing to the development of skills and competencies to support exploitation.
■Final dissemination conference in Brussels (~M46) in collaboration with EU Partnership on Clean Steel to demonstrate results to potential users/customers and wider stakeholders.
Exploitation actions: Our exploitation strategy is to use the NextSteel KERs (see Table 10) for commercial/business, societal, scientific, contribution to standards and policy-relevant purposes. Envisaged exploitation actions are outlined below. Each partner’s exploitation intentions are linked to the KERs they (co)own (see Table 7):
■ Commercial/Industry adoption: NextSteel’s commercial/industry exploitation operates at two complementary levels: (i) system level, where a robust business case and exploitation strategy will be developed for at least one validated low-carbon steelmaking route, demonstrating technical, economic, and market viability, and (ii) component level, where individual KERs underpinning the route will have tailored exploitation strategies, enabling them to be deployed within the integrated route or as standalone assets. The route-level business case validates the combined value of the KERs, while the KER-level strategies provide flexibility and resilience in exploitation. A comprehensive NextSteel Business Case and Exploitation Strategy will be developed, identifying targeted markets (EU and global), analysing user needs, cost-effectiveness, and market positioning. A PESTLE analysis (Table 9) will guide regular updates on external factors, while post-project commitments of industrial partners will be formalised- including matching value chains, enhancing product robustness, securing industrial integrators, and user acceptance. This integrated approach (implemented via Task 6.5) ensures that NEXSTEEL route(s) and the KERs are aligned with market needs, industrial and commercialisation opportunities, supporting successful post-project uptake and scale-up.
■Training and skills development: Use of the project’s knowledge and expertise to train workers & professionals with new skillsets for the safe & correct use of NEXTSTEEL processes/technologies, supporting future uptake.
■Intellectual Property and patenting: Publication of ≥3 patents as discussed under 'Strategy for IP Management’.
■Scientific and academic exploitation: The project results will feed into further research activities, including scale up activities, development of new research lines, the transfer of the results to other Energy Intensive Industries, and academic use in post-doctoral research. We also anticipate further Scientific Publications in the post-project.
■Contribution to standards: Contribute to pre-standardisation documents and technical reports (target: ≥2) to support achieving innovative industrial applications of advanced clean steel grades. NEXTSTEEL will be linked with ongoing standardization work through regular contact with relevant committees in the field, e.g. ISO/TC 197 and CEN/CLC/JTC 6 on Hydrogen Technologies, CEN/TC 335 and ISO/TC 238 on Solid Biofuels, CEN/TC 308 and ISO/TC 275 on Sludge Recovery, etc. The inclusion of the produced bioanthracite as a thermally graded biofuel in the ISO 17225-8 will be evaluated. This will support the dissemination of the project and its results, getting feedback from the stakeholders organized in standardization committees and contribute to the development of new standards to support NextSteel exploitation according to the EU Knowledge Valorisation Principles.
ategy for IP Management: NextSteel will ensure protection and exploitation of commercially valuable innovations, strengthening IPR from EU funded R&I projects, as reflected in EC communications, annual IPR dashboards, IPR Enforcement Action Plan, Digital Single Market strategies & recently enacted tenders for boosting IPR and commercialisation from research results. Initial patentability studies using EPO & WIPO patent libraries have been conducted to confirm Freedom to Operate (FTO) and novelty. These studies and in-depth patent landscaping will continue throughout NextSteel to ensure FTO for project outcomes considered for IP application and patenting. Technology Watch will regularly inform the consortium on technology developments & advancements, highlighting emerging IP, relevant publications and articles. A complete IP strategy and associated IPR portfolio will be generated and maintained under Task 7.3 IP Protection and Patenting, led by ICP and using their proven IP assessment framework  (1,000+ successfully granted/issued patents from IAs and RIAs since 2017). The strategy is to file ≥ 3 new patents, alongside exploring other IPR tools (trademarks, copyright, Trade Secrets). E.g. REC foresees patent applications for chemical leaching for selected inorganics extraction from hydrochar and fertilizers production, & for catalytic pyrolysis followed by minerals washing & recovery for bioanthracite. Shared knowhow will also be generated by REC, CEA & POLI related to the integrated system for biowaste conversion into biogenic reducing agents. CEA will generate knowhow & patentable IP in relation to the catalytic SCWG. IPR protection of commercially sensitive innovations will be balanced with open science to allow other EU researchers to build on NextSteel outcomes, in line with Clean Steel Partnership. This commitment is reflected in our clustering & ecosystem engagement activities (T7.2), adherence to open science practices (ST7.1.2), including OA conferences and publishing, and adopting FAIR data principles (T5.5). Knowledge Management will follow the Consortium Agreement (CA), specifying ownership, access rights, and conditions for Background and Foreground knowledge. Access will be granted royalty-free where needed for project activities and on fair conditions for further use, ensuring secure and fair exploitation across partners. #§COM-DIS-VIS-CDV§#