3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables  
Brief presentation of the overall structure of the work plan: 
The brief overview of workplan and interconnection between different WPs is shown in PERT figure below. The 
project starts with WP1 establishing requirements of high yield manufacturing parameters, inspection needs and 
material challenges to achieve reliability of components and longer lifetimes promoting sustainability thus less waste 
and material to be recycled thus contributing to circular economy. Further, the sensors and automation of R2R and 
S2S lines will also be analysed in WP1. In WP2, innovative deposition, packaging and patterning techniques and 
process will be optimised for industrial scaled up implementation.WP3 will deal with inspection system, techniques 
and software development.WP4 will incorporate automation, sensor system, hardware and intelligent decision 
management software. WP5 will develop recycling and re-use strategies and technologies to promote sustainability. 
WP6 will include testing and trial at pilot scale as well as integration and validation activities in production lines of 
end user partners. WP7 will include dissemination and exploitation activities and WP8 will outline project 
management, coordination guidelines and implementation. 
Graphical presentation of the components showing how they inter-relate (Pert chart): 
 
Figure 55 Project PERT diagram

 
54 
[OLEDSOLAR]  
Timing of the different work packages and their components (Gantt chart): 
Leaders 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42
ASPF
INURU
ASPF
SMIT
Solibro M1
Advent
TNO
Coatema
VTT
TNO
VTT
VTT
FhG
VTT M2
TWI
IRIS
TWI
SAL
FhG
VTT
VTT
LEITAT
BUL
VTT M3
IRIS
ASPF
IRIS
IRIS
IRIS M4
LEITAT
LEITAT
LEITAT
LEITAT M5
SMIT
SMIT
VTT
ASPF
Coatema M6
LEITAT
TWI
VTT
VTT
VTT
VTT
SMIT
VTT
VTT
VTT
VTT
VTT
Large area printing quality measurement and comparison to design layout 
Development of in-line inspection and quality control system
Implementation and optimisation of NDT testing for zero-defect testing at device level for OLEDs and solar cells 
Development of intelligent decision management and control software for automation and monitoring 
Sensor system development for automation and monitoring of production processes
Identification of production automation requirements and process control system design 
Development of AI driven production process automation and quality control system
Machine vision based micro meter level register accuracy measurement for visible and highly transparent layers 
Development of in-line optical inspection system for component level testing at production scale 
Qualification of thin film barrier coatings for flexible  devices 
System level Testing and validation on production pilot lines 
Project reporting to EC and periodic progress meetings
Quality assurance, Innovation Management and Project Performance monitoring
Testing and trials of integrated finalised OLEDSOLAR solution on pilot lines of OLED and solar cells 
Integration of finalised manufacturing, inspection and automation processes on pilot line 
Project Management and Coordination
Project Management and Coordination
Risks, Deliverables, Milestones and IP management
Optimisation of scalable manufacturing processes for solar cells 
Development of inkjet-based deposition technique for pre-encapsulation of solar cells and flexible OLEDs
Optimisation of R2R and S2S atomic layer deposition techniques and processes in R2R and S2S production process
Quantification of the environmental and economic performance of the OLEDSOLAR solution 
Dissemination and Exploitation
Plan for Exploitation and Dissemination of results (PEDR)
Communication, advertising and conferences publications of technical outputs
Post Project Business Plan and Commercialisation roadmap
Identification of OLEDs  manufacturing requirements
WPs and Tasks
Identification of opto-electrical components manufacturing and inspection requirements at production scale
Developing adaptive material handling system including intra equipment automation
Development of innovative manufacturing processes for OLEDs and solar cells
Assessment of current production processes and process tools adaptability as per production requirements
Establishing requirements for inspection,quality and process control
Analysis of material challenges for manufacturing process reconfiguration and recyclability
Identification of  Solar cells manufacturing requirements
Standardisation, regulations, certification and safety codes 
Valorisation of results 
Development of reconfigurable and scalable lamination, joining and packaging process for OLEDs and solar cells 
Development of in-line Raman spectroscopy and luminescence testing processes and in-line prototype devices 
Systems level Testing and validation on production pilot lines 
Development of machine learning based inspection data processing and defects detection software 
Definition of existing and/or innovative recycling routes into the own manufacturing process 
Evaluation of potential existing pre-treatment technologies and recycling solutions for OLEDs and solar cells 
Scalability and performance validation of OLEDSOLAR processes and solution 
Development of materials recycling and re-use approaches for OLEDs and solar cells
Testing and trial of OLEDSOLAR on production lines 
Intergation, Testing, demonstration and performance validation
Testing and validating the feasibility of recycling technologies at pilot scale 
Testing and validation on production pilot lines
Testing and validation on production pilot line for roll-to-roll fabricated barrier films 
Implementation of functional testing processes including aging testing and optical performance 
 
61 
OLEDSOLAR
4.1 Participants (applicants) 
 
 
Participant 1 
Organisation Name: Teknologian tutkimuskeskus VTT Oy 
(VTT) 
Website: http://www.vttresearch.com/ 
Organisation Description:  
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd is a state owned and controlled non-profit limited 
liability company established by law and operating under the ownership steering of the Finnish 
Ministry of Employment and the Economy.  
VTT is an RTO whose activities are focused on three areas: Knowledge intensive products and 
services, Smart industry and energy systems, and Solutions for natural resources and environment. 
VTT is impact-driven and takes advantage from its wide multi-technological knowledge base to 
strengthen Finnish and European industrial competitiveness. VTT can combine different 
technologies, produce information, upgrade technology knowledge, and create business intelligence 
and value added for its stakeholders. 
VTT has a staff of 2128, net turnover in 2016 was 162,6M€ and other operational incomes were 
86,4M€. Over the years, VTT has gained vast experience from participation and coordination of 
numerous European projects including R&D Framework Programme projects and other thematic 
frameworks and programmes. VTT is ranked among the leading European RTOs. 
Relevant Publications:   
 Välimäki, M., Apilo, P., Po, R., Jansson, E., Bernardi, A., Ylikunnari, M., Vilkman, M., Corso, 
G., Puustinen, J., Tuominen, J., Hast, J., R2R-printed inverted OPV modules – towards 
arbitrary patterned designs, Nanoscale, 7 (2015) 9570-9580, DOI: 10.1039/c5nr00204d 
 Vilkman, M., Hassinen, T., Keränen, M., Pretot, R., van der Schaaf, P., Ruotsalainen, T., 
Sandberg, H.G.O, “Fully roll-to-roll processed organic top gate transistors using a printable 
etchant for bottom electrode patterning”, Organic Electronics, 20 (2015) 8-14. 
 Kopola, Pälvi; Tuomikoski, Markus; Suhonen, Riikka; Maaninen, Arto, “Gravure printed 
organic light emitting diodes for lighting applications”, Thin Solid Films. Vol. 517 (2009) No: 
19, 5757 – 5762 
 Vilkman, M., Apilo, P., Välimäki, M., Ylikunnari, M., Bernardi, A., Po, R., Corso, G., Hast. J., 
“Gravure-Printed ZnO in Fully Roll-to-Roll Printed Inverted Organic Solar Cells: Optimization 
of Adhesion and Performance”, Energy Technology (Printed Energy Technologies special 
issue), 3 (2015) 407-413 
 Apilo, P., Välimäki, M., Po, R., Väisänen, K.-L., Richter, H., Ylikunnari, M., Vilkman, M., 
Bernardi, A., Corso, G., Hoppe, H., Roesch, R., Meitzner, R., Schubert, U.S., Hast, J., “Fully 
Roll-to-Roll Printed P3HT/Indene-C60-Bisadduct Modules with High Open-Circuit Voltage 
and Efficiency”, Solar RRL, 2018, DOI: 10.1002/solr.201700160. 
 
Relevant Projects:  
 EU_THIME: Thinfilm measurements on organic photovoltaic layers (2012-2014) 
 EU_ArtESun: Efficient, large-area arbitrary shape solar energy (2013-2016) 
 EU_Monoscribe: Roll-to-Roll Monolithic Interconnection of Customizable Thin-film Solar 
Modules (2015-2018) 

 
62 
OLEDSOLAR  
 EU_IN-LIGHT: Development of printed transparent OLEDs integrated into window 
applications (2012-2015) 
 EU_Polaric: Printable, organic and large-area realisation of integrated circuits (2010-2014) 
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
 MAXI R2R Printing line 
 4 interchangeable printing unit slots 
 Available deposition units: forward and reverse 
gravure, rotary silk screen, flexography and slot die 
coating 
 Plasma substrate treatment unit 
 Lamination unit 
 R2R hot embossing unit 
 Die cutting unit 
 Drying units (air, UV) 
 Automatic registration system 
 Max. web width 300mm 
 Max. web velocity 30m/min 
 
 R2R Functional tester 
 192 measurement channels 
 Minimum test pad size 2mm x 2mm 
 Maximum test fixture size 408mm x 
290mm 
 Automated test fixture alignment 
 In-house test fixture design and assembly 
 Different measurement possibilities 
between test points 
 DELTA converting line 
 6 interchangeable converting unit slots 
 kiss cut (top and bottom) 
 lamination 
 slitting 
 CO2 laser 
 Automatic registration system for lamination 
 Max. web width 300mm 
 Max. web velocity 90m/min 
 S2S gravure (Labratester), flexo (RK Flexo), inkjet (PiXDRO LP50 & Fujifilm Dimatix DMP-
2800) & screen (EKRA) printers, gravure & flexo with 10 µm alignment accuracy 
(Superproofer 220) 
 PiXDRO inkjet has Fujifilm Dimatix S-Class and Konica Minolta KM512 industrial scale 
printheads 
 Encapsulation/lamination inside N2 glove box for sheets and short (1-2 m) rolls 
 Aging measurements (ISOS-L-3) for solar cells 
 Electrical characterization of solar cells/modules and OLEDs 
 
Figure 1: MAXI R2R printing line 
Figure 2: R2R Functional tester 
 
63 
OLEDSOLAR  
 
 
Key personnel 
Name: Marja Vilkman             Gender: Female  
Background:  
 
Marja Vilkman has worked with printed electronics since 2001 when she started as a research 
trainee at VTT. Her research has focused on functional materials and processing methods for 
flexible electronics - both in S2S and R2R scale. She has been steering several international R&D 
projects related to organic solar cells, transistors and scale-up of printing/patterning processes. 
Education: 
2017: Adjunct professor at Aalto University (Field: Printed Electronics) 
2010: D.Sc. in Physics (Field: Polymer physics) 
2002: M.Sc. in Chemistry (Field: Polymer chemistry) 
Work Experience: 
Senior Scientist at VTT 2012: Responsible for project planning & management, scientific 
coordination & supervision related to S2S and R2R printed solar cells and transistors, etching 
processes etc. 
 
Research Scientist at VTT 2003-2012: Responsible for ink formulation, printing processes and 
electrical and chemical characterisation of thin films. 
 
Product Development Experience: 
Working with industrial clients to increase the TRL of materials and processes. 
 
Intellectual Property Management: 
Two patents: 
1. Vilkman, M., Mäkelä, T., Lehtinen, K., “Time and humidity sensor and the use thereof” EP 
2009432 B1, filing date Jun 3, 2008. 
2. Calabrese, A., Carbonera, C., Vilkman, M. “Inverted polymer solar cells and process for 
producing the same” WO 2015068102, filing date Nov 2014 (priority: Nov 2013 IT 2013-
MI1831). 
Innovation Management: 
WP leader for Dissemination and Exploitation in two EU FP7 projects (EU_Polaric & EU_Rotrot). 
 
Name: Kim Eiroma             Gender: Male  
Background:  
 
Kim Eiroma has worked as an inkjet printing and materials deposition expert at VTT since 2006. 
He has contributed in publicly funded collaborative and privately commissioned research projects 
Figure 3: DELTA converting line 
 
64 
OLEDSOLAR  
in several application areas, ranging from graphic applications to diagnostic and sensor devices to 
electronic component fabrication and integration. 
Education: 
2005: M.Sc. (Tech.) Graphic Arts Technology (Printing) 
Work Experience: 
Research Scientist at VTT 2006 - present: Research and development in applications, materials 
and processes for printed functional devices and graphic applications, specializing in the inkjet 
deposition process. 
 
Product Development Experience: 
Working with industrial clients to increase the TRL of materials and processes. 
 
Name: Tuomas Happonen             Gender: Male  
Background:  
 
Tuomas Happonen has worked with printed and flexible electronics since 2010 at VTT and 
University of Oulu. He has solid expertise on functional and reliability testing on several 
application areas in printed and hybrid electronics. He has strongly contributed this field by 
developing new test equipment and test methods for project use. 
Education: 
2016: D.Sc. (Tech), University of Oulu, Electrical engineering 
2008: Lic.Sc. (Tech), University of Oulu, Applied electronics 
2005: M.Sc. (Tech), University of Oulu, Electronics 
Work Experience: 
Senior Scientist at VTT 2016 - present: Automated roll-to-roll functional testing of printed 
electronics, environmental reliability testing of printed and hybrid electronics, bending and 
stretching tests of printed and hybrid electronic structures 
 
Several positions in research and teaching staff at Optoelectronics and Measurement Techniques 
Unit, University of Oulu 2004 – 2016: Reliability testing of printed electronics under 
environmental stresses (especially cyclic bending tests), development of printed and flexible 
sensors, remote and embedded testing of electronics, planning and realization of study modules in 
the degree program of electrical engineering. 
 
Product Development Experience: 
Working with industrial clients to increase the TRL of system integration in printed and hybrid 
electronics. 
  
 
 
 
Participant 2 
Organisation Name: Fraunhofer Gesellschaft (FhG) 
Website: www.fraunhofer.de 
Organisation Description: 
The Fraunhofer Institute for Organic Electronics, Electron Beam and Plasma Technology (FEP) is 
one of 60 research institutes within the Fraunhofer Society, the largest society for applied research 
in Europe. In July 2014 Fraunhofer FEP was merged with the former Fraunhofer COMEDD. The 
core competences of the FEP are novel device technologies in the field of organic electronics 
based on vacuum coating technologies, like thermal evaporation, pulse-magnetron-sputtering, 
plasma activated evaporation and plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition. FEP concentrates 
 

 
65 
OLEDSOLAR  
on applied, industry-oriented research both in public-funded joint projects as well as in direct 
research contracts with industrial companies. One major field of FEP is the coating of flexible 
products like polymer webs, ultra-thin glass and metal foils. Both, high throughput plasma-
assisted evaporation as well as high quality magnetron-sputtering are used to coat polymer 
surfaces with transparent conductive oxides, permeation barrier layers and optical layer stacks as 
well as metal surfaces with scratch resistant, electrical insulation or chemical protection layers. 
Based on the existing infrastructure FEP can offer product developments starting with the system 
concept till pilot fabrication level. 
Together with CSEM, TNO and MBNT, Fraunhofer (FEP and IWS) will providing feedback for 
barrier film performance analysis an large areas for flexible organic devices with high barrier 
requirements down to 10-6 g/m²*d. The final goal is to implement an in-situ inspection system 
(hyperspectral imaging) for rapid in-line tests to reveal yield relevant issues under pilot production 
scale. The barrier performance will be validated and qualified in the existing roll-to-roll OLED 
line.    
FEP and IWS will contribute to WP2, WP3, and WP6 
Relevant Publications: 
 Stefan Mogck et. al., “Present status of Roll-to-Roll OLED fabrication and encapsulation”, J. 
Jpn. Soc. Colour Mater., 86 (12), 461–465 (2013) 
 Christian May, “Flexible OLED – new possibilities for automotive lighting”, Intelligent 
Automotive Lighting, Düsseldorf, Germany, 27 – 29 January 2015 
 Christian May, “Next generation flexible lighting by OLED technology “, LpS 2013 – 3rd 
LED Professional Symposium + Expo, Bregenz, Austria, 24 – 26 September 2013 
 Hoffmann, M.; Kristukat, C; Diekmann, K.: „OLED lifetime determination procedure and 
proposal for standardisation”, in: A Buckley (ed.): Organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs): 
materials, devices and applications, Woodhead Publishing, August 2013, ISBN: 978-0-85709-
425-4, p. 601-634 
 M. Fahland, T. Vogt, W. Schoenberger, J. Fahlteich, and N. Schiller, Transparent Conductive 
Electrodes for Flexible Solar Cells, 51st Annual Technical Conference Proceedings (2008), 
785-788 
 
Relevant Projects: 
 EU FP7 project TREASORES OLED device development on novel transparent electrodes for 
large area illumination (10x 10 cm², > 25 lm/W, lifetime > 10000 hrs.)  
 EU FP7 project SMARTONICS focusing on pilot lines for organic solar cells and OLED 
devices. In this project Frauhofer FEP  (together with the Fraunhofer-POLO® alliance) 
develops roll-to-roll manufacturing processes for ultra-high barriers 
 German funded project FLEX25 about pilot-scale manufacturing of outdoor stable 
encapsulation films for photovoltaic applications 
 German funded project FlexSOL focusing on transparent electrodes for flexible silicon solar 
cells. 
 German funded project R2flex for the development of roll-to-roll OLED process technology 
of small molecule OLED devices on flexible substrates. 
 German funded project R2D2 (Roll to device) is the focus on reliability and long term 
stability for roll-to-roll OLED fabrication. 
 H2020 project PI-SCALE Bringing flexible organic electronics to pilot innovation scale (> 
1m OLED lighting stripes with efficacy of 30 lm/W, lifetime > 15 years) 
 
 
66 
OLEDSOLAR  
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
The Fraunhofer FEP has the following main items of technical equipment for OLED lighting: 
 R&D and pilot line for rigid and flexible substrates in ISO class 4 clean room environment 
(200x200 mm² substrates, some processes up to 370x470 mm²) for lighting and organic solar 
cells applications  
 Coflex600 and novoflex600 for pilot production of TCO electrodes and ultra-high barriers on 
transparent polymer films with a maximum web width of 600 mm. 
 A roll-to-roll OLED line fabrication for flexible substrates (foil width of 300 mm for metal, 
ultra-thin glass and polymer films) including small molecule vacuum deposition, inspection 
system and lamination under protective nitrogen atmosphere for the barrier film 
encapsulation. 
 
         
Figure 1: Process flow of the R2R prototype line from substrate inspection up to the final 
electro-optical characterization of large area OLED devices. 
 
Figure 2: On the left hand side a schematic drawing of the R2R vacuum coater and the 
indication of the white p-i-n OLED stack processing which requires 14 organic linear 
evaporators is depicted. On the right hand side shows a photograph of the substrate winding 
unit and the deposition drum of the R2R vacuum coater with winders for substrate and 
protective liner foil to minimize substrate damage after the OLED deposition process. 
 
67 
OLEDSOLAR  
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Personnel 
Name: Dr. Stefan Mogck                                              
Gender: Male 
Background:  
Dr Stefan Mogck studied physics at the University of Tübingen, Germany in 2000. In 2004 he 
received his PhD at the Institute of Applied Physics (Materials science and engineering) of the 
University of Groningen (NL). Afterwards, he joined to Advanced Micro Devices in Dresden as a 
defect engineer. In 2007 he was engaged at MicroEmissive Displays (MED) in Dresden as process 
engineer for the sputtering and the PLED spin coat process. Since 2008, he changed to Fraunhofer 
Institute for Photonic Microsystems. He is now leading the department “Roll-to-Roll Organic 
Technology”. 
Name: Dr. Wulf Grählert                          Gender: Male 
Dr Wulf Grählert obtained a degree in chemistry from the Institute of Technology (Leuna 
Merseburg) and doctorate in the field of spectroscopy of solids and layered systems in 2002. He 
has been staff member at the Fraunhofer Society since 1995 and leads the group “Optical 
Inspection  Technology” since 2004 at FhG-IWS, Dresden. His current research interests include 
gas analysis, particle sensing, multi-spectral sensing for industrial applications. Dr. Grählert has 
been involved in several European projects and has coordinated the Large-scale integrating project 
“nanoMOF” from 2009 – 2013. 
 
Participant 3 
Organisation Name: Nederlandse Organisatie voor Toegepast 
Narrturwetenschappelijk Onderzoek (TNO) 
Website: www.tno.nl 
Organisation Description: 
 
Figure 3: Photograph of R2R lamination system (left) which is encased in an inert box at 
Fraunhofer FEP (right).     
Figure 4: Roll-to-Roll inspection system encased in a clean room carbine ISO6. 

 
68 
OLEDSOLAR  
TNO (Nederlandse Organisatie voor toegepast-natuurwetenschappelijk Onderzoek TNO) is one of 
the major contract research organisations in Europe with a staff of circa 3500 and an annual 
turnover of 580 million Euros. TNO carries out research in order to achieve impact in themes: 
Healthy Living, Industrial Innovation, Transport and Mobility, Energy, Built Environment, 
Information Society, and Defence, Safety and Security. TNO acts as an intermediary between 
basic research and industry. By translating scientific knowledge into practical applications, TNO 
contributes to the innovation capacity of businesses and government. 
TNO has extensive experience in EC research and project management through involvement in 
coordinating and participation in hundreds of EU projects. In the theme of Industrial Innovation 
the focus is on innovation in the areas of high-tech systems and materials, manufacturing, the 
sustainable chemical industry and space applications. The Thin Film Technology research group 
will contribute to this project. It has as main activities development, modelling and control of 
deposition, patterning and interconnect processes for economical and durable thin film PV cells. 
The group is on the forefront of process and equipment development of spatial (including R2R 
and S2S) ALD of  barrier, buffer and electrode layers, and front electrode grid applications, and of 
advanced tests development for cell and module stability testing. TNO has expertise and facilities 
concerning the growth and the physical/electrical characterisation of CIGS-based solar cells.  
TNO’s main involvement will be in WP2 (which will be coordinated by TNO) and WP6, but TNO 
will also participate in WP1, WP3 and WP7. TNO’s technical role is to contribute to 
specifications and validation of the metrology systems for quality control of (optionally Plasma 
Enhanced or PE) spatial ALD barriers and optimization of the barrier coating process itself tools. 
Relevant Publications: 
 A. Illiberi, P. Poodt, P. Bolt, F. Roozeboom, Recent Advances in Atmospheric Vapor-Phase 
Deposition of Transparent and Conductive Zinc Oxide, Chemical Vapor Deposition 20 (2014) 
 A. Illiberi, R. Scherpenborg, Y. Wu, F. Roozeboom, P. Poodt, “Spatial Atmospheric Atomic 
Layer Deposition of AlxZn1–xO”, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5 (24), pp 13124–
13128 
 S. Sneck, R. Knaapen, H. Heezen, A. Smith, “Rolling out the sunshine: advanced solar cell 
production via continuous coating systems”, Surface Coating International, 96(3):137-139, 
June 2013  
 C. Frijters, P.J. Bolt, P. Poodt, R. Knaapen, J. van den Brink, M. Ruth, D. Bremaud, A. 
Illiberi, “Atmospheric spatial atomic-layer-deposition of Zn(O, S) buffer layer for flexible 
Cu(In, Ga)Se2 solar cells: From lab-scale to large area roll to roll processing”,  Conference 
Record of the IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, Volume 2016, 18 November 2016, 
Article number 7749856, pp 1449-1451 
 V. Zardetto, B.L. Williams, A. Perrotta, F. Di Giacomo, M.A. Verheijen, R. Andriessen, 
W.M.M. Kessels, M.Creatore, “Atomic layer deposition for perovskite solar cells: research 
status, opportunities and challenges”, Sustainable Energy and Fuel, 2017, 1, 30   
 
 
Relevant Projects: 
 Clean4yield - Contamination and defect control for increased yield for large scale R2R 
production of OPV and OLED; FP7 program, grant agreement 281027 (ended 30-04-2016) 
 INREP – Towards Indium free TCOs; H2020 program, grant agreement 283974 (ended 31-
01-2018) 
 R2R-CIGS - Roll-to-roll manufacturing of high efficiency and low cost flexible CIGS solar 
modules; FP7 program, grant agreement 283974 (ended 30-09-2015).  
 
69 
OLEDSOLAR  
 Mujulima – Innovative materials for high performing OPV; FP7 program, grant agreement  
604148 (ended 31-12-2016)  
 PI-SCALE - Bringing flexible organic electronics to pilot innovation scale; H2020 program, 
grant agreement 688093 (ends 31-12-2018) 
 
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
 Atmospheric spatial atomic-layer-deposition (S-ALD) tools: two rotary (lab scale, with/without 
remote or direct plasma), sheet-to-sheet (32.5cm x 40cm, with/without remote plasma) and 
roll-to-roll (30 cm wide) tools.  
 
 
 
 
 
Rotary spatial ALD tool                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll-to-roll spatial ALD tool     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sheet-to-sheet spatial ALD tool   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Test line for manufacturing of (10 cm x 10cm) CIGS modules on rigid (glass) substrate using 
co-evaporation and (30 cm x 30 cm) using 2 step process route (with sputter and CBD tools for 
precursor coating) to support in-house the development and validation of  passivation, front 
window and barrier deposition processes and techniques for CIGS modules. 

 
70 
OLEDSOLAR  
 R2R multi-layer slot-die coating facility for 30 cm wide foil. 
 S2S slot-die (1-10 m/min,  15x15 cm2 and 30x30 cm2) tool.  
 Techniques to characterize the optical, electrical and morphological properties of thin films; 
spectroscopic ellipsometry, spectrophotometer, photoluminescence, X-ray diffraction, Hall 
measurements, four points probe, high resolution scanning electron microscope (SEM), high 
resolution transmission electron microscope (TEM), energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy 
(EDX), X-ray fluorescence (XRF).   
 Climate chambers, partly with in-situ illumination and real time monitoring of cell and module 
performance. 
 
Key Personnel 
Name: Dr Pieter Bolt                                              Gender: Male 
Background:  
MSc. Applied Physics, Groningen University and PhD Technical Sciences, Eindhoven University 
of Technology. He worked for 2 years in Japan at AIST and at Hitachi Ltd. Since 1991 employed 
by TNO in field of materials processing and application research and knowledge transfer, in 
projects with automotive, steel & aluminium, building, electronics, medical, lighting and PV 
industries. Since 2008 his research is focused on thin-film photo-voltaics. He has been and is 
involved in a large number of national and European collaboration projects, as partner and as 
coordinator (of the FP7 R2R-CIGS and FP7 SSL-erate / Lighting for People projects).  
Name: Dr. Fieke van den Bruele                           Gender: Female 
Joined TNO after receiving in 2012 a PhD in Chenistry from the Radboud University Nijmegen in 
the Netherlands. Research scientist responsible for spatial ALD high performance barriers for solar 
and battery applications. 
 
Name: Dr. Valerio Zardetto                                  Gender: Male 
MsC and PhD degrees in Electronic Engineering at Università degli Studi di Roma.  After a post-
doc position at Eindhoven University of Technology since 2016 working as research scientist at 
TNO specialized in spatial ALD for photovoltaic solar cell technology. 
Name: Dr. Paul Poodt                                           Gender: Male 
M.Sc. degree in chemistry in 2003 and Ph.D. degree in physics in 2008 from Radboud University 
Nijmegen. In 2008 he joined TNO, working on thin film deposition for solar cell applications, and 
since 2009 as lead process scientist spatial ALD and since 2013 as manager of the spatial ALD 
research program for large area electronics (solar, battery, lighting) applications. 
 
 
Participant 4 
Organisation Name: INNOVACIO I RECERCA 
INDUSTRIAL I SOSTENIBLE SL (IRIS) 
Website: www.iris.cat 
Organisation Description: 
IRIS (www.iris-eng.com) is a technology SME that was established in Barcelona in 2007 and 
specialises in the manufacture and integration of Process Analytical Technology (PAT)-based 
real-time quality monitoring solutions for the process industries and IoT systems for smart 
manufacturing, predominantly targeted at the food, pharmaceutical and chemical industries. In 
particular, our product line comprises proprietary state-of-the-art IR analysers for at-line and in-
line process monitoring. 
On the one hand our solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics-in the fields of 
MEMs Near Infrared Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral Imaging, and Raman. On the other hand, we 
 
71 
OLEDSOLAR  
leverage ICTs, whereby we apply Machine learning, Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining 
techniques for predictive and active control, as well as for decision support systems. In addition to 
photonics-based analysers, we also work with IoT sensors for enabling equipment and machinery 
for smart manufacturing and transitioning industry to the Industry4.0 paradigm. Our solutions are 
cloud-based for mobility, remote monitoring and multi-site applications.  
Our Innovation Division has 3 core strategic lines, for shaping the Factory of the Future: 
1. New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process 
optimisation 
2. ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms) 
3. Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorisation 
Our Innovation Dvision is experienced in working in collaborative R&D projects in H2020 (both 
as coordinators and partners) and principally in the SPIRE, FoF, and BBI programmes. The 
company was established in 2007 and currently employs 56 staff with a turnover of €3.8 M. It is 
equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs 
(2), and an electronics & telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified and also is 
certified under UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i. We are also certified by the 
local (Catalonian) government as a provider of technological R&D services (Tecnio Certification).  
 
Relevant Publications: 
 A. Rosales, O. Mc Nerney. Sensing Technology. Chapter 6. Resource Efficiency of 
Processing Plants. Monitoring and Improvement.  Edited by Stefan Krämer and Sebastian 
Engell. Wiley-Vch. Print 
ISBN: 978-3-527-34074-3  
in press 
 Commercial Data Mining, 
Processing, Analysis and 
Modeling for Predictive 
Analytics Projects, David 
Nettleton, Elsiever book, 
ISBN9780124166028, 
304p 
 Conference ICIEMPM 
2016: Towards Automatic 
Calibration of In-Line 
Machine Processes, 18th 
International Conference 
on Industrial Engineering 
and Manufacturing Process Modeling, D.F.Nettleton, E.Bugnicourt, C. Wasiak, A. Rosales, 
London, UK, July 28-29, 2016.  
 Recent Prospects in the Inline Monitoring of Nanocomposites and Nanocoatings by Optical 
Technologies, E. Bugnicourt, T. Kehoe, M. Latorre, C. Serrano, S. Philippe and M. Schmid, 
Nanomaterials 2016, Review, 6(8), 150; doi:10.3390/nano6080150 
 Injection moulding process optimization by online material monitoring. E. Bugnicourt et al., 
October 2012. Technical article in Packaging connections.    
Relevant Projects: 

 
72 
OLEDSOLAR  
 OptiNanoPro - Processing and control of novel nanomaterials in packaging, automotive and 
solar panel processing lines (H2020- NMP-PILOTS, Grant Agreement no: 686116, 2015-
2018).  
 ProPAT - Robust and affordable process control technologies for improving standards and 
optimising industrial operations (H2020- SPIRE, Grant Agreement no: 637232, 2014-2018).  
 Visum® Inline - cloud-enabled IR spectroscopy platform for the rapid integration and 
customisation of affordable, real-time chemical monitoring solutions for food and 
pharmaceutical industries.  
 Hypera® -Hyperspectral Imaging (HSI) System for on-line foreign body detection and 
chemical composition analysis (H2020- SMEInst, Grant Agreement no: 726572, 2016-2018).  
 Thime - Thinfilm measurements on organic photovoltaic (OPV) layers (FP7, Grant 
Agreement no: 315665). 
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
 Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, a FTIR-ATR 
(Interspectrum), 2 UV-VIS (PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), an Extended-SWIR (StellarNet) 
and a NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as well as a SWIR Hyperspectral imager (Specim-
Xenics). The associated staff are properly trained and skilled in chemometrics modelling by 
using a commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non-commercial 
chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes). 
 Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up-to-date 
hardware and tools: signal generators, wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and 
building tools, development kits for programming microcontrollers, CNC-milling machines for 
electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD software [SolidWorks], among others. 
 IRIS’ optical engineers work with ZEEMAX software for optimally designing of optical 
systems and to setup the designs by means of advanced optical components and facilities 
(optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and related “opticalware”). 
 
Key Personnel 
Name: JOAN PUIG LAGO                           Gender: Male 
Background:  
Engineering Degree in Electronics from Universitat Politecnica de Mataró and in Industrial 
Organization from Escola Universitat Politécnica d’Enginyers Industrials de Terrassa. Executive 
Education in Program for Management Development from ESADE. Joan comes from an 
operations background and he is an expert in the design of efficient process and the implantation of 
continuous improvement programmes. Since joining IRIS in 2012, he has implemented new 
operational procedures based on lean and agile methodologies and he has successfully led the 
company in securing ISO 9001:2008 certification, in addition to UNE-EN-ISO 166002: 
Management Systems R&D&i certification. Prior to IRIS, he has 12 years industry experience in 
automation of industrial processes for the main automotive & aeronautics companies: Mercedes, 
VW, SEAT, EADS, BOEING, etc. Joan is a master in the definition of strategies and targets, and 
in aligning systems and workflows according to operations schedules and within agreed costs and 
high quality levels. He has extensive experience in managing Technical Departments and 
Operations such as organization and monitoring of production and processes, development of 
operational plans, and in providing guidance to design and implementation teams.  
Name: EDUARD BOSCH COCH                           Gender: Male 
BSc in Industrial Engineering (2010) from University of Girona (UdG), M.Sc. in Astrophysics, 
particle physics and cosmology from the University of Barcelona (UB) and M.Sc. in Mechanics of 
Materials and Structures. Prior to joining the Production Processes group at IRIS as Mechanical 
Team Leader, he gained wide experience in structural design, as a project engineer (stress analyst) 
developing projects including design, testing, manufacturing, calculations and finite element 
 
73 
OLEDSOLAR  
simulations for the aeronautical sector. He also was the simulation manager of the department, 
which provides him with the appropriate skills to leader a team. He has also held a position as 
façade engineer and as an assistant teacher in the University of Girona (UdG) teaching material 
science. He is expert in design for manufacturing, he is proficient in SolidWorks (Computer Aided 
Design program) and has a wide experience with Abaqus (Finite Element Method program) among 
many others. He also have experience as a researcher on advanced materials science. He is 
currently working as the Team Leader of the Mechanical Engineering department in IRIS, where 
he has also developed some private R&D projects for the food industry that have successfully 
become products. 
Name: DIANA GALILEA                           Gender: Female 
Holds a Bachelor’s degree in Industrial Engineering with specialty in Industrial electronics from 
the Universidad of La Rioja. Her professional background comprises technical experience in the 
areas of embedded microcontrollers programming for wireless communications working with 
different range of sensors. Her software expertise includes Matlab, Visual Studio, Autocad, Protel 
DXP. Her programming skills include C++, C#, .NET among others. She is working currently as 
software engineer in IRIS, developing software for chemo-metric analysis, translating chemo-
metric algorithms from researchers source code as could be R or Matlab to c++ or C# in order to 
integrate it with a user interface that carries out the analysis, as well as controls the system. She 
also has been working in monitoring systems where information about sensors and actuators are 
displayed on the user interface. 
Name: DAVID NETTLETON                           Gender: Male 
Data mining analyst at IRIS. Has a Ph.D in Artificial Intelligence from the Universitat Politécnica 
de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, M.Sc. In Computer Software and Systems Design from the 
University of Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K., and B.Sc. (Hons) Computer Science from the 
University of Wolverhampton, U.K. Has over 20 years experience of applying data mining 
algorithms (including neural networks, rule induction) and statistical techniques (including 
ANOVA, regression, principal components) in a diversity of data analysis and modeling projects, 
such as medical diagnosis/prognosis, fraud detection, customer loyalty and segmentation, online 
user web search behaviour and data privacy. As well as commercial projects, he has conducted 
research and lectured at two universities. He has published a diversity of articles in specialized 
data analysis journals/congresses and three books. He has participated in several competitive 
multi-partner research projects and has a European patent application for a graph matching 
algorithm. His IT Industrial experience includes project management, consultancy, programming 
and analysis, database development and business startups. He has developed software with a 
diversity of programming languages, (including Java, C++ and COBOL/CICS/DB2), database 
systems (such as Oracle, Ingres, MySQL) and data mining systems (IBM Intelligent Miner, 
Clementine, Weka). In IRIS he is currently involved in two major European projects (OpenMind 
and Sharebox), as a data mining specialist. The work in OpenMind involves modeling a complex 
industrial production process for producing high precision medical instruments. The work in 
Sharebox involves building a symbiosis system for industrial collaborations between companies 
for the recycling of waste products using case based reasoning and agent modeling. 
Name: MANEL SANCHEZ VELANDO                           Gender: Male 
Software developer at IRIS. Degree in Informatics Engineering and Diploma in Computer Systems 
from "Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya". English conversation level (B2). Having worked over 
20 years in the field of information technology in different companies he has reported both 
organizational and management experience. He has great experience in analysis of customer needs 
and project management. Unix and Windows system administrator for 10 years. As a software 
engineer, he has done many projects using several languages: C, C++, C#, ASP, ASP.NET, PHP, 
Java, Javascript, SQL. Starting MEAN stack. He uses design patterns like: MVC, subject-observer, 
status, representative, factory, facade, etc. GUI design experience in both desktop and 
web(responsive) and in conformance to web content accessibility levels. UML design. Great 
experience in MS SQL Server and Mysql databases. He has experience in CAD/CAM and 
artificial vision control quality systems too. He enjoys analyzing projects with both customers and 
 
74 
OLEDSOLAR  
team members in order to get the best solution. He likes to listen and learn from everyone around 
him and share his knowledge with them. Team results are the most important for him. 
 
Name: Dr. MARIANO PERALVAREZ                           Gender: Male 
PhD in Physics from the University of Barcelona (2009). Currently Project Technical Responsible 
and Optical Engineer at IRIS, Mariano is specialised in the fields of LED technology, Lighting, 
Optoelectronics and Photonics. He has been responsible of Photometric, Photonics and 
Optoelectronics labs, focusing, among many other activities (Spectroscopy, Materials Science…), 
on the design (3D-CAD, ray-tracing and CFD), development, prototyping and performance 
assessment of luminaires and light-engines (photometric, thermal and electric), collaborating 
closely with manufacturers in the Lighting field. He also has a deep knowledge of Concentration 
Photovoltaics especially in terms of raytracing simulations of optical concentrators and 
indoor/outdoor tests of optoelectronic performance. Mariano also participated in 18 R&D projects, 
funded through both public competitive calls (at National and EU level) and private institutions 
such as the Project LED4ART, devoted to the refurbishment of the Sistine Chapel Lighting 
system. 
 
 
Participant 5 
Organisation Name: OPVIUS GmbH (OPVIUS) 
Website: www.opvius.com 
Organisation Description: 
OPVIUS GmbH, founded in 2012 and located in Nuremberg and Kitzingen (INNOPARK 
Kitzingen), is among the world-leaders in the field of organic photovoltaics. OPVIUS develops 
and manufactures organic solar cells with a focus on client-specific OPV solutions. In addition, the 
company is also active in the field of research and development, in order to continue to provide its 
clients with creative and innovative solutions. With a team of scientists, engineers and 
manufacturing experts, OPVIUS creates customized OPV solutions. In this regard, OPVIUS uses a 
unique production process, combining printing, lamination, and laser structuring techniques. This 
advanced technology is easily scalable and allows the production of the utmost individual, 
customer-specific designs. OPVIUS also helps clients with system solutions in order to integrate 
OPVs into already existing or new products. 
Relevant Publications: 
1. Press release, 12.12.2017, OPVIUS develops new production process for freedom OPV 
modules  
2. S. Berny et al., Adv. Sci. 2016, 3, 1500342, Solar Trees: First Large-Scale Demonstration of 
Fully Solution Coated, Semitransparent Flexible Organic Photovoltaic Modules  
 
Relevant Projects: 
1. OptiNanoPro: Processing and control of novel nanomaterials in packaging, automotive and 
solar panel processing lines, Grant Agreement no: 686116, H2020- NMP-PILOTS-2015 
2. Infinity: Indium-Free Transparent Conductive Oxides for Glass and Plastic Substrates, Grant 
Agreement no: 641927; H2020-SC5-2014 
3. ETFE-MFM: finished FP7 project on the development and demonstration of a flexible 
multifunctional ETFE module for architectural façade lighting, Grant agreement no: 322459, 
FP7-ENERGY-2012-2 
 

 
75 
OLEDSOLAR  
4. Sunflower: finished FP7 project on the development of highly efficient, long-lasting, cheap 
and environmentally friendly printed organic photovoltaics, Grant agreement no: 287594, 
FP7-ICT-2011-7 
5. BMBF (German Federal Ministry for Education and Research) project "POPUP" (finished 
German national project on building integration of organic photovoltaics) 
Infrastructure/Equipment: 
 R2R slot-die coating line for OPV manufacturing.   
 Screen-printers (flat bed and rotary).  
 Lasers.  
 Laminator.  
 Characterization equipment.  
 
 
Figure 1: OPVIUS R2R OPV manufacturing process 
Key Personnel involved  
Name: Dr. Sebastian Meier                             Gender: Male 
Background:  
Dr. Sebastian Meier is Director of R&D at OPVIUS GmbH. He holds a Diploma degree in 
Materials Science and a Ph.D. in Engineering from the Friedrich-Alexander University of 
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany. Sebastian has 8 years of industrial experience in the field of 
organic electronics and is author and co-author of 10 scientific publications in recognized 
international journals and 5 patents in the field of organic light-emitting devices and solar cells. 
Currently he is involved in several European and German projects in the field of organic and 
printable photovoltaics as well as building integrated photovoltaics. 

 
76 
OLEDSOLAR  
Education: 
 2009: Diploma degree in materials science (Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-
Nuremberg, Germany) 
 2014: PhD in Engineering (Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, 
Germany) 
Work Experience: 
 Oct 2009 – Dec 2012: Industrial PhD at Siemens Corporate Technology, Erlangen, Germany 
 Jan 2013 – June 2013: Postdoctoral Researcher, University of Valencia, Spain 
 July 2013 – April 2014: Research Scientist, BELECTRIC OPV GmbH, Nuremberg, Germany 
 May 2014 – May 2016: Senior Research Scientist and Project manager R&D, BELECTRIC 
OPV GmbH, Nuremberg, Germany 
 June 2016 - present: Director R&D, OPVIUS GmbH (formerly BELECTRIC OPV GmbH), 
Nuremberg, Germany 
Product Development Experience: 
Dr. Sebastian Meier was involved in the successful realization of several lighthouse projects 
within OPVIUS GmbH demonstrating the market readiness of organic photovoltaics (OPV). 
Examples include among others, the German Pavilion at the EXPO Milan (2015), the Security and 
Peace Building of the African Union in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia (2015), External Lift Shaft at a 
pharmacy building in Marburg, Germany (2016), Climate Pavilion of the State Horticultural 
Show, Apolda, Germany (2017) (see press releases at www.opvius.com). 
Intellectual Property Management: 
 WO 2012/172025 A1 (also published as DE 10 2011 104 169 A1) 
 WO 2014/013030 A1 (also published as EP 2 688 119 A1 and US20150208482) 
 WO 2014/076278 A2 (also published as WO 2014/076278 A3, EP 2 733 188 A1, EP 2 733 
188 B1, US20150303394 A1 and DE 10 2013 202 250 A1) 
 WO 2014/124804 A1 (also published as DE 10 2013 202 250 A1) 
 WO 2016/009019 A2 (also published as WO 2016/009019 A2, EP 3 170 210 A2 and DE 10 
2014 213 978 A1). 
Innovation Management: 
 Regular participation as an invited speaker at recognized international conferences 
 Author and co-author of 10 scientific publications in recognized international journals 
 
Name: Dr. Pavel Schilinsky                       Gender: Male 
Background:  
Dr. Pavel Schilinsky is Senior Project Manager at OPVIUS GmbH. He holds a PhD degree in 
physics from the University of Oldenburg. In August 2004, he joined Konarka Technologies. Since 
October 2012 he leads the activities at OPVIUS (formerly BELECTRIC OPV) related to all 
aspects of module architecture and system layout. He is the author and co-author of more than 30 
scientific publications and of more than 10 patents and patent applications. 
Education: 
 2001: Diploma in Physics from the University of Oldenburg 
 2004: PhD in Natural Sciences from the University of Oldenburg  
Work Experience: 
 2001 - 2004: Industrial PhD at Siemens Corporate Technology, Erlangen, Germany 
 2004 - 2012: Scientist at Konarka Technologies, Nuremberg, Germany 
 2012 - present: various positions at OPVIUS GmbH (formerly BELECTRIC OPV GmbH) 
Product Development Experience: 
 
77 
OLEDSOLAR  
Dr. Pavel Schilinsky was involved in the successful realization of several lighthouse projects 
within OPVIUS GmbH demonstrating the market readiness of organic photovoltaics (OPV). 
Examples include among others, the German Pavilion at the EXPO Milan (2015), The Security 
and Peace Building of the African Union in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia (2015), External Lift Shaft at a 
pharmacy building in Marburg, Germany (2016), Climate Pavilion of the State Horticultural Show, 
Apolda, Germany (2017) (see press releases at www.opvius.com). His main responsibility has 
been the interface between the OPV-modules and the outer world, e.g. inverters, batteries, etc. 
Intellectual Property Management: 
 WO2009137141A3 (US20090211633) 
 WO2010102116A2 (EP2404333A2 or US20100224252) 
 WO2007104039A2 
 WO2004025746A3 (US7306968) 
 US7413997 
 US7781254 
 US7304361 
 US7868405 
 EP1997219A4 
 DE102004036734A1 
 US20070193621 
 
Innovation Management: 
Dr. Pavel Schilinsky is the author and co-author of more than 30 scientific publications and of 
more than 10 patents and patent applications. 
Name: Tobias Sauermann                    Gender: Male 
Background:  
Tobias Sauermann is Director of Production at OPVIUS GmbH. In his position he leads the 
production of customized OPV modules, development of new module layouts and is also involved 
in project management. He obtained his Diploma degree in Materials Science from the Friedrich-
Alexander University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany in the end of 2010. He is author and co-
author of 10 scientific publications and has industrial experience in OPV for 6 years. 
Education: 
 2010: Diploma degree in Materials Science (Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-
Nuremberg, Germany) 
 
Work Experience: 
 2011 - 2012: Industrial PhD at Konarka Technologies GmbH, Nuremberg 
 2012 - 2014: Continuing Industrial PhD at Belectric OPV GmbH, Nuremberg 
 2014 - 2016: Project management at Belectric OPV GmbH, Nuremberg 
 2017 - present: Director of Production at OPVIUS GmbH, Kitzingen 
 
Product Development Experience: 
Tobias Sauermann was involved as a project manager in the successful realization of several 
lighthouse projects within OPVIUS GmbH demonstrating the market readiness of organic 
photovoltaics (OPV). Examples include among others, the German Pavilion at the EXPO Milan 
(2015), the Security and Peace Building of the African Union in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia (2015), 
External Lift Shaft at a pharmacy building in Marburg, Germany (2016), Climate Pavilion of the 
State Horticultural Show, Apolda, Germany (2017) (see press releases at www.opvius.com). 
Innovation Management: 
 
78 
OLEDSOLAR  
 Regular participation as an invited speaker at recognized international conferences 
 Author and co-author of 10 scientific publications in recognized international journals  
 
Participant 6 
Organisation Name: TWI Limited (TWI) 
Website: www.twi-global.com 
Organisation Description: 
Established in Cambridge, UK in 1946 and with several facilities across the globe, TWI Ltd 
(www.twi-global.com) is one of the world-leading not-for-profit research and technology 
organisations with a turnover in 2016 of £60m (€69million). From bases in the UK, South East 
Asia, India, the Middle East, Central Asia and the USA, nearly 800 staff provide expertise in 
joining and fabrication, material science and structural integrity. Services include generic research; 
contract R&D; technical information; engineering services and advice; standards development; and 
training and qualification services. With over sixty years of service to industry, TWI has worked in 
almost every conceivable sector, adding value to such disparate areas as offshore wind turbines and 
oil-platforms; motorsports; bridges; microchips; nuclear power plants; advanced aircraft, both 
civilian and military; medical implants; solar-panels and many more. TWI’s business is built 
around the development and exploitation of advanced technologies. It is a company on the cutting 
edge of technological advancement and is recognised as one of the world’s leading research and 
technology organisations. TWI’s technologies fall into the following areas:  
  
 Structural Integrity and Corrosion Management cover a wide range of area, focused around 
reliability assurance and failure resistance  
 Non-destructive testing and condition monitoring cover all methods of testing and inspection 
which are performed without damaging the test subject.  
 Welding and joining technologies range from the familiar, such as laser and arc welding, to the 
more specialised, like ultrasonic and diffusion bonding.  
 Materials processing includes cutting, surfacing and surface engineering, and use of specialist 
materials.  
 Manufacturing support provides an integrated approach to consultancy on all aspects of 
manufacturing, advising on both business and technical aspect. 
TWI is internationally renowned for its ability to employ multidisciplinary, impartial teams to 
implement both established and advanced joining technologies, or to solve problems arising at any 
stage of the product life cycle – from initial design, materials selection, production and quality 
assurance, through to in-service performance, repair and life extension. TWI also has representation 
on over 100 standards committees. 
TWI therefore has the ideal credentials to deliver a successful project, on time and within budget 
with a higher than normal chance of product exploitation at the end of the project and particularly 
where the project developments are highly relevant to their industrial membership that currently 
consists of 1800 organisations in 70 countries.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
79 
OLEDSOLAR  
 
Summary of R&D Investment: 
A large proportion of TWI’s activities (65%) are contract research, funded by a combination of 
TWI Industrial Members or UK and EU public funding bodies, and built around the development 
of advanced technologies. TWI is an experienced participant in collaborative research projects in 
Europe and the UK. TWI has successful coordinated a large number of these government funded 
projects (~50%) and has gained extensive expertise in being project or technical project leader.  
TWI’s Industrial Members:  
TWI is a membership-based organisation with 1,800 Industrial Member companies from 70 
countries, representing every sector of the manufacturing industry. Many of the largest engineering 
companies in the world are amongst its diverse Industrial Membership base, including: 
 Rolls-Royce, Boeing, Airbus, BAE SYSTEMS, GKN, Lockheed Martin and Honeywell from 
the aerospace sector 
 BP, Exxon Mobil, Shell, Chevron, Petrobras, Lloyd’s Register, Kawasaki Shipbuilding and 
Samsung Heavy Industries from the oil and gas and marine sector 
 Areva, EDF, E·ON, Alstom, Scottish Power, SunPower and ITER from the power sector 
 Honda, Jaguar Land Rover, Yamaha, London Underground, Network Rail, Tata Steel and 
Hitachi from the automotive and rail sectors 
 JCB, Caterpillar, Laing O’Rourke, 
Tata Steel, ESAB, Linde Group 
and BOC from the construction 
and fabrication sectors 
 DePuy, Smith & Nephew, 
Siemens, Danfoss and Emerson 
from the Medical, electronics and 
sensors sectors, 
Added to this, TWI’s dedicated team 
of industry specialists add value to 
almost every conceivable industry 
sector – from offshore oil and gas, 
civil engineering and nuclear power, 
to electronics, advanced aircraft (both 
civilian and military), medical 
equipment and solar power. Because it serves such a broad client base TWI understand and 
appreciate that different industries have different needs. Therefore, TWI’s research programme is 
market driven. 
Innovation: 
TWI has a rich and well-publicised history of innovation and invention dating back to the time of 
the British Welding Research Association in the 1940s. Memorable highlights from the past 
include the CTOD method for measuring fracture toughness, the Wells wide plate test, types of 
high powered CO2 laser, and many innovations in the use of laser, friction, arc, adhesive bonding 
and other technologies related to welding, joining, coating and testing. In particular, TWI’s NDT 
activities focus on bespoke and technically challenging inspection solutions. 
As well as undertaking research and project work on behalf of its Members, TWI also produces a 
number of products and software packages: 
 PolyTest system for plastic pipe inspection 
 Railect phased array inspection system for rail welds 
 RiskWISE 5 – RBI code-compliant plant inspection and maintenance software 
 CrackWISE – fatigue and fracture assessment software in accordance with BS 7910 
 IntegriWISE – fitness for service software compliant with industry standards 

 
80 
OLEDSOLAR  
TWI is actively exploiting 5 distinct inventions and has over 180 granted patents in its portfolio. 
TWI has granted over 250 licences world-wide. Income from licensing exceeded £2.3m in 2014. 
Inspired by a need for highly skilled next generation engineers, TWI is supporting PhD students 
with national and European Universities, who will deliver research that has academic merit and 
industrial and societal impact. Our students will be working with our experienced Project Leaders 
and their PhD Supervisors to broaden their research and technical knowledge and will have the 
opportunity to get exposure to transnational collaboration with other academics, SMEs and other 
organisations. 
 
Relevant Publications: 
1. Development of a comprehensive in-line quality control system for printed circuit board 
assemblies, P. Ian Nicholson et al. Circuit World (2007), Volume 33, Issue 4, pp. 31-42 
2. Theories and industrial applications of optical interferometric NDT techniques: A Review. HX 
Shang and JX Gao, Insight, 51(5): 240-251, (2009) 
3. Deformation analysis of MEMS structures using modified digital moiré methods. ZW Liu, XH 
Lou, JX Gao, Optics and Lasers in Engineering, 48(11), p1067-1075, (2010)  
4. NDT capability of digital shearography for different materials. ZW Liu, JX Gao, et al, Optics 
and Lasers in Engineering. 49(12): 1462-1469, (2011) 
5. Inspection of thin steel gauge welds for the shipping industry using laser guided inspection 
robot’ G. Asfis, C. Carpentier, D. Panggabean, C. Nageswaran, V. Papadimitriou, I. Roditis, P. 
Chatzakos, A. Chong, J. Ferrando Chacon, Z. Qu, V. Kappatos ‘, ECNDT 2014, October 6-10, 
2014, Prague, Czech Republic. 
 
Relevant projects: 
1. CITCOM – (H2020/2017, grant agreement no 768883) - A Complimentary Inspection 
Technique based on Computer Tomography and Plenoptic Camera for MEMS Components 
2. ChipCheck– (FP7/2007-2013, grant agreement no 262212) – Development of novel X-ray 
system for fast automated detection of counterfeit plastic board components. TWI was 
responsible for the digital radiography development and hardware and software integration. 
www.chipcheck.eu 
3. Plastronicsspec - (FP7/2007-2013, grant agreement no 286531) - Development of an 
automated digital radiography system for the inspection of plastic electronics. TWI was 
responsible for the digital radiography work package and systems 
integration.www.plastronicsspec.eu 
4. AutoInspect– (FP7/2007-2013, grant agreement no 283288) - Automated inspection for 
sintered parts by non-destructive techniques for improved quality in production. TWI was 
responsible for the digital radiography work package and systems integration. 
5. Microscan (FP6 Coop-ct-2003-508613) – Development of Comprehensive In-line Quality 
Control System for PCB Assemblies. TWI was responsible for the digital radiography work 
package and systems integration and automated defect detection software 
 
Infrastructure/Equipment: 
In 2015, TWI opened three new laboratories at its Cambridge headquarters, including state-of-the 
art facilities for the National Structural Integrity Research Centre, a dedicated postgraduate centre 
for industry-led engineering research (see images below) TWI also houses a professional 
institution, The Welding Institute, with a separate membership of 6000 individuals. TWI has 
offices in Europe, North and South America, India and Far East, and thus offers global connections 
to its customers. 
 
 
81 
OLEDSOLAR  
TWI currently operates from 54,000 square metres (581,000 square feet) of manufacturing, testing 
and training space; five UK and 13 overseas facilities serve both its Industrial Membership and its 
training and examination needs. A successful international Training and Examinations programme 
sees 25,000 students trained each year in welding and inspection technologies. 
 
TWI possess NDT equipment and knowledge across a wide range of techniques for Digital 
Radiography development, testing and validation and packaging. This includes, but is not limited 
to:  
 Digital radiography laboratory,  
 Computed tomography (CT),  
 Radiography simulation software and work station,  
 General purpose walk in radiography bay for development of prototype X-ray systems 
 Automated/robotic inspection 
 A wide range of digital X-ray detectors (linear and flat panel) and different X-ray sources 
 Electronic assembly workshop 
 3D PLA printer 
 A wide range of digital X-ray detectors (linear and flat panel) and different X-ray sources 
(material characterization, failure analysis, process optimization) 
 Precise non-contact laser-ultrasonic system for testing, measuring, flaw detection and material 
characterisation (process monitoring, post-process evaluation, in-service inspection, internal 
flaws and surface defects, detection of foreign particles) 
 Seven-axis ultrasonic immersion tank (inspection of critical components, in-situ inspection of 
large components) 
 3D laser scanning vibrometer (material fatigue and defects, acoustic optimization, dynamic 
testing and vibration analyses) 
 Radiography simulation software and work station (computed radiography digital imaging) 
 3D non-contact profilometer (3D roughness parameters, physical surface characterization) 
 Permeation testing facility (electronic encapsulation) 
 X-Ray diffractometer (analyse and characterization of crystalline and semi-crystalline organic, 
inorganic and metallic materials) 
 Non-destructive characterization methods: Dark and illuminated lock-in thermography (LIT) 
and respective data analysis and processing/post-processing software; 
 Non-destructive testing and optical quality control technique: Laser shearography (flaws 
detection - voids, disbands, delaminations; quantitative measurement of strains, stresses, 
vibrations); 
 

 
82 
OLEDSOLAR  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key personnel  
Name: Giorgos Asfis                Gender: Male 
Background:  
Giorgos Asfis is a principal project leader in TWI’s Non-destructive-testing section.  In this role, 
Giorgos has developed extensive experience integrating complex electronics with multiple data 
streams and control equipment, including for the development of robotics and drone projects 
focusing on industrial inspection activities. He is currently working on automating NDT methods, 
manufacturing of ultrasonic instrumentation, optical equipment design and wave propagation 
simulation. Giorgos has a Diploma in Mechanical Engineer from National Technical University 
Athens focusing on structural and machine dynamics, vibration analysis, predictive maintenance 
and modal analysis. He is currently carrying out research in the field of Non Destructive testing 
and condition monitoring. His work in public and private R&D institutes has provided significant 
experience in ultrasonics, guided waves, radiography, finite element modelling and high 
performance computing. He is also certified as a Level III inspector in Ultrasonic Testing, Phased 
Array Ultrasonic Testing and Radiography. 
Education: 
Jun. 2007 Diploma in Mechanical Engineering (MSc & BSc) School of Mechanical Engineering, 
National Technical University Athens (NTUA), Grade: 7,04/10 (Upper second class)  
 
Dissertation Title: “Study and Construction of a PC - Accelerometer Interconnection for use in 
Vibration Analysis Based Maintenance”  
Work Experience: 
April 2014 – Present  TWI Ltd (The Welding Institute), Cambridge, NDT Principal Project 
Leader 
Sep 2012 – April 2014  TWI Ltd (The Welding Institute), Cambridge, NDT Senior Project 
Leader  
Jul 2011 – Aug 2012 Brunel University (BIC), Cambridge, Research Assistant  
Nov 2009–Jun 2011 Center for Research and Technology of Thessaly, Research Assistant  
Nov 2009–Jun 2011 Innora Ltd, Athens, Structural Dynamics Engineer - Project Leader  
Figure 1: Shearography system 
Figure 2: Shearography fringe pattern showing substrate defect. 

 
83 
OLEDSOLAR  
Nov 2008–Oct 2009 MVS & Associates, Rendsburg, Germany, Assistant Project Manager  
Product Development Experience: 
 Mechanical design, Electrical & electronics design and programming skills 
 Designed new optical module prototypes for medical dermatoscope 
 Developed a fully functional 8ch prototype phased array ultrasonics prototype  
 Developed probe holder for various applications 
  
Name: Dr Jianxin Gao            Gender: Male  
Background:  
Dr Gao obtained his PhD at Tsinghua University, China in 1989 on Experimental Mechanics and 
have since led numerous research projects. He has supervised or co-supervised over 20 MSc and 
PhD students in universities in China and the UK. Prior to joining in TWI, Jianxin worked on 
biomechanics and biomedical engineering at Imperial College London (2001-2004) and the 
University of Surrey (2004-2005). Since joining TWI in 2005, he have been involved in a number 
of FP6, FP7 and Horizon2020 collaborative projects, acted as the coordinator of two FP7 projects 
which involved developing optical and image processing techniques. Jianxin is also the Scientist in 
Charge of four Marie Curie International Incoming Fellowship projects. Currently, he is the 
coordinator of a Horizon2020 project SocketMaster (2015-2018), and the scientific manager of 
another two H2020 project WInspector (2016-2018) and SheaRIOS (2018-2020). So far he has 
published over 70 technical papers in journals and at conferences. 
Education: 
PhD in Engineering Mechanics, Tsinghua University, China. 
Msc in Engineering Mechanics, Tsinghua University, China. 
BSc in Solid Mechanics, Zhejiang University, China. 
Work Experience: 
2005 – Present: Principal Project Leader, TWI Ltd, UK. 
2004 – 2005: Research Fellow in Center for Biomedical Engineering, Surrey University, UK. 
2004 – 2004: Professor, in Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Life Science and 
Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.  
2001 - 2004:  Research associate in Computing Department, Imperial College London.  
1999 - 2000: Associate professor in Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Tongji University, 
Shanghai, China. 
Name: Lu Zhao             Gender: Female  
Background:  
 
Lu joined TWI in November 2009 as a Project Leader in NDT Validation Centre in Wales where 
she has been managing and technically delivering projects involving inspection via laser generated 
ultrasound as well as assisting colleagues in projects on digital radiography. After relocating to the 
NDT Technology Group in Cambridge in August 2011, she has been working on modelling, 
condition monitoring, and phased array inspection projects and is experienced in data and 
electronics integration. She obtained her certificate as Associate LabVIEW Developer in 2012. She 
performed the structural health monitoring field trial of a crane and designed the software for 
machine condition monitoring of wind turbine. She has also been working on phased array 
inspections projects in railways and wind turbines. They including site inspection, design 
inspection procedures, developing inspection system, and modelling. She has substantial 
experience with simulations software PZFlex and CIVA. She has been working on research project 
for thick austenitic weld inspection using phased array since 2013 and using AU techniques on 
WTB since 2014. Since 2011, she has been working with Dr Charles Schneider on various 
statistical analysis projects and has been to the external training course for statistics and 
experiment design. 
 
 
84 
OLEDSOLAR  
Education: 
BA(Hon)\MEng in Chemical Engineering from University of Cambridge 
Charted Engineer and Member of The Welding Institute 
Associate LabVIEW developer (2012-2014) 
Acoustic Emission Level 2 
CSWIP Level 2 in Manual ultrasonic inspection of plates 
CSWIP Level 2 in phased array ultrasonic inspection of welds 
CSWIP Level 2 in Radiographic Interpretation 
Cambridge Overseas Trust Scholarship 2005 - 2009  
Singapore Ministry of Education Scholar 2001 - 2004  
Work Experience: 
2009-now TWI Ltd Cambridge, NDT Project Leader 
 
Name: Dorothee Panggabean            Gender: Female  
Background:  
Dorothee is an engineer working within the NDT department of TWI where she has had experience 
of working in a variety of different industries including railway, wind energy and oil and gas. She 
is involved in projects where several NDT techniques are applied. However the work is not mainly 
technical; time/resource management is required and working in collaboration with many project 
partners is key for the success of the project. Dorothee has worked on various collaborative and 
single client projects, with some industrial experience from performing site inspection works. 
Education: 
MSc in Mechanical Engineering obtained in the University of Bordeaux. The degree has a 
specialization in NDT. 
CSWIP Visual Weld Inspector  
CSWIP Eddy Current (welds) Level 2  
CSWIP ACFM Level 2 
CSWIP Fitness for Service Level 2  
Work Experience: 
Previous to working in TWI, I was completing my degree in universities. In order to obtain the 
degree, several internships were carried out: an internship in the IMS laboratories focussed on the 
optimization of coatings in solar cells. Also an internship in the I2M in Bordeaux where the topics 
of thermography and ultrasonic were use jointly in order to characterise material properties. 
 
Participant 7 
Organisation Name: Centre Suisse D’Electronique Et De 
Microtechnique SA (CSEM) 
Website: www.csem.ch 
Organisation Description: 
The CSEM is a privately held, R&D center established in 1984 in Neuchâtel, Switzerland. From 
the beginning, CSEM has been committed to both applied and order-related R&D. This bridge 
function between economics and science is still a core aspect of the company, and CSEM has 
continuously adapted its research areas to the needs of industry. In addition to its initial proximity 
to the watchmaking industry, CSEM has expanded its fields of activity and now offers a wide 
range of technologies for various markets. 
The CSEM has currently more than 400 employees and is mainly active in the fields of 
micro/nanotechnology, microelectronics, systems engineering, and information and 
communication technologies carrying out applied research, development, prototyping and small 
series production. The CSEM has the competencies required to support its clients at each stage of 
development and provide the following services according to their needs: 
 

 
85 
OLEDSOLAR  
- Feasibility studies 
- Concept design 
- Prototype or full product developments 
- IP licensing and any combination of the above 
The department “Center Muttenz” involved in this project is located in Muttenz (Basel-Landschaft 
canton) and provides expertise in the fields of photovoltaic, thin film optics, micro and 
nanostructures, printable electronics. During the past years, CSEM has developed their printing 
and device fabrication capability from lab-scale single cells made by spin-coating in an inert gas 
on small 2.5x2.5cm glass substrates, through doctor blade coating in the ambient environment on 
increasingly larger substrates, to complete modules printed on flexible substrates. Fully printed, 
semi-transparent, flexible, encapsulated modules were demonstrated at LOPE-C.  Organic tandem 
solar cells with 10% efficiency were developed in project Sunflower, as well as a thin, robust, 
nanostructured films for enhanced light incoupling in thin film solar cells. Tandem module 
demonstrators were realized in collaboration with the end-user in the project. In other 
collaborative projects, CSEM has validated novel materials and substrates and integrated these in 
prototype technology demonstrators. Current research activities include the integration of organic 
and hybrid devices on flexible film, and the design and process development of free-form organic 
devices and printed optics. 
Relevant Publications: 
 G. Basset, T. Offermans, M. Chrapa, G. Nisato, Combinatorial Studies of Organic Solar Cells 
Based on Robotic High Throughput Fabrication and Characterization, October 2010 ISOS 3 
 T. Offermans, J. Schleuniger, G. Nisato, Inkjet Printing of Polymer Solar Cells, June 2010 
LOPE-C 
 T. Offermans, M. Chrapa, J. Schleuniger, M. Zinggeler, W. H. Hughes, R. Ferrini, G. Nisato, 
Printing polymer tandem solar  
 modules, June 2013 LOPEC 2013 
 M. Pfannmöller, H. Heidari, L. Nanson, O. R. Lozman, M. Chrapa, T. Offermans, G. Nisato, 
S. Bals, Quantitative tomography of organic photovoltaic blends at the nanoscale, September 
2015  Nano letters 
 P. Chabrecek, M. Aubert, U. Sonderegger, O. Fernandez, M. Chrapa, G. Nisato and R. 
Ferrini, New Fabric-Based Electrodes for Low-Cost, Large-Area Flexible Organic Light-
Emitting Diodes (OLED), 2013 LOPEC2013 
 
Relevant Projects: 
 FP7 European collaborative project SUNFLOWER (FP7-ICT-2011-7 number 287594), 
www.sunflower-fp7.eu 
 INTERREG project Rh(e)in-Solar, www.rhinsolar.eu 
 DURSOL, http://www.ccem.ch/dursol 
 CTI project with SEFAR, https://www.csem.ch/Page.aspx?pid=43814 
 EU project INGRESS, http://www.ingress-project.eu/ 
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
 Clean room environment with gloveboxes 
 Coating and printing platforms (S2S): slot-die, inkjet, gravure, screen, spin coating 
 Simulation, origination, replication, and upscaling (step & repeat replication) of micro and nano 
structures 
 S2S hot embossing, S2S nano-imprinting, S2S UV casting,S2S and R2R hot embossing 
 
86 
OLEDSOLAR  
 Optical characterization (angular and wavelength resolved reflection/transmission, 
photoluminescence, phosphorescence lifetime, UVVIS, optical coherence tomography, infrared 
imaging) 
 AFM, SEM, profilometer 
 Photonic sintering (S2S, R2R compatible) 
 Accelerated lifetime testing (damp/heat, light soaking, mechanical stress tests) 
 
                                
 
 
 
 
    
Fig 1: Mask Aligner 
MA6 –Karl Suss 
(>1µm) 
Fig 2: Essemtec Exhibit 
SP900 In-Line Screen 
printer 
Fig 3: MICRODROP 
single nozzle inkjet 
printer 
 
87 
OLEDSOLAR  
 
 
 
Key Personnel 
Name: Ton Offermans                           Gender: Male 
Background:  
Ton Offermans is a senior R&D engineer in the Polymer Optoelectronics Section of CSEM. He 
studied applied physics at the University of Technology Eindhoven and received his PhD degree 
in the field of organic photovoltaics. Before joining CSEM he has worked as researcher on light 
emitting tile at the Materia 
Nova research center. At CSEM he is leading the research on OPV. Current research activities 
include light management solutions for incoupling, and the upscaling of the fabrication of nano 
and micro structures on large area films. 
Education: 
PhD, physics. University of Technology Eindhoven 
Work Experience: 
R&D Center, Materia Nova, Belgium, 2005-2007  
R&D Center, CSEM, Switzerland, 2007-2018. 
Product Development Experience: 
Development of solar cells/modules, starting at TRL3, arriving at TRL6 within the Sunflower 
project. Near yearly fabrication of  technology demonstrators (LOPEC) 
Intellectual Property Management: 
WO/2015/022424 
Innovation Management: 
 Various dissemination events at conferences such as LOPEC, Swiss e-print 
 FSRM course tutor Organic Photovoltaics 
 
Name: Oscar Fernandez                           Gender: Male 
Background:  
Oscar Fernandez received his MSc and PhD degrees in Physics from the University of Valladolid 
(Spain) in 2000, and the University of North Wales, Bangor (UK) in 2004, respectively. After 
finishing his PhD he started his postdoctoral research in the Molecular Electronics Group in 
Bangor where he investigated the interfacial origins of threshold voltage instabilities in organic 
thin-film transistors (OTFT). In 2006 he joined 
Cambridge Display Technology (CDT) where he led the device physics activities in the lighting 
program. In 2011 he joined Polymer Vision BV in Eindhoven (Netherlands) where he worked on 
the development of OLED processing and characterization for oxide TFT-based rollable OLED 
displays. Since May 2012 Oscar is part of the MicroNano Integrated Optics and Photonics group 
at CSEM in Muttenz (Switzerland). 
 
Education: 
PhD, Physics. University of Valladolid (Spain) 
Work Experience: 
CDT, UK 
Polymer Vision, Eindhoven, Netherlands 
R&D Center, CSEM, Switzerland 
Product Development Experience: 
Prototyping of printed OLEDs, light management for (O)LEDs in industrial and publicly funded 
projects LASSIE, DELIGHT 
Innovation Management: 
Fig 4: Hot embossing 
R2R pilot line 
Fig 5: Hot embossing 
S2S pilot line 
Fig 6: Gloveboxes dedicated to 
OPV, OLED, and OTFT 
fabrication and 
characterization 
 
88 
OLEDSOLAR  
 Various dissemination events at conferences  
 FSRM course tutor Organic Light-Emitting Diodes 
 
Name: Sören Fricke                           Gender: Male 
Background:  
Sören Fricke received his Diploma degree in Physics from the Swiss Federal Institute of 
Technology (ETHZ), Zurich, Switzerland in 2004. He joined Sonys Fusion Domain Laboratory in 
Tokyo, Japan, where he prepared his Diploma Thesis. In 2005, he continued his research on 
micro-sensors at the Corporate Research Centre of EADS in Ottobrunn, Germany and received his 
PhD degree from Saarland University, Germany in 2010. In 2008 he joined Robert Bosch GmbH 
and worked in the field of semiconductor and MEMS packaging in the business unit Automotive 
Electronics. From 2012 to 2013, he was team manager of an international engineering team 
responsible for the volume production of automotive pressure sensors. Since November 2013, he 
is working at CSEM Center Muttenz, where he is heading the section on Large Area & Flexible 
Systems since 2015. 
Education: 
PhD, Physics. Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETHZ) 
Work Experience: 
2013 – Present: CSEM Center Muttenz                       
2008-2013: Robert Bosch GmbH, Germany         
2005-2008: EADS Innovation Works, Germany   
Product Development Experience: 
Harsh environment pressure sensors starting from TRL2 to TRL4. Automotive ASIC and Sensor 
Packages TRL8 to TRL9. Immersed gratings for space-borne spectrometer TRL2 to TRL3.  
Intellectual Property Management: 
WO 2008/003374 
WO 2007/101426 
DE 102005047535 
Innovation Management: 
Various dissemination events at conferences, Member of program committee and session chair of 
the SPIE conference on Smart Sensors, Actuators and MEMS. 
 
 
Participant 8 
Organisation Name: Solibro Hi-Tech GmbH (Solibro) 
Website: http://solibro-hitech.com/en/home/ 
Organisation Description: 
The Solibro Hi-Tech GmbH located in Solar Valley is a pioneer in the field of CIGS thin-film 
technology. Its focus is on the continuous improvement of all products and production systems, as 
well as the expansion of the existing production capacities in the context of international turnkey 
projects. In cooperation with the Solibro Research AB in Sweden and the Solibro GmbH at the 
same location in Germany, joint work is carried out aimed at the advancement of our products and 
processes, in order to always be able to offer our customers state-of-the-art modules and 
production facilities.  
 

 
89 
OLEDSOLAR  
The improvement of inline measurement and control capabilities elaborated in the project will 
contribute to more efficient production systems (higher production yield) and better products 
(increased conversion efficiency). 
Relevant Publications: 
 Solibro Hi-Tech press release, February 2018: “Solibro Hi-Tech sets new world record of 
18.72 % for CIGS PV modules” (http://solibro-hitech.com/en/news/news/) 
 P. Kratzert: “17% Total Area Efficiency at Commercial Size CIGS Module”, Plenary Talk at 
the 33rd EU PV Solar Energy Conference, Amsterdam, September 25th 2017 
 D. Herrmann, P. Kratzert, S. Weeke, M. Zimmer, J. Djordjevic-Reiss, R. Hunger, P. 
Lindberg, E. Wallin, O. Lundberg, L. Stolt, “CIGS Module Manufacturing with High 
Deposition Rates and Efficiencies”, Proc. 40th IEEE PV Specialists’ Conference (2014). 
 P. Kratzert, S. Jander, P. Leyendecker, H. Schenk, V. Naumann, K. Kaufmann, C. Hagendorf, 
J. Djordjevic-Reiss, S. Weeke, E. Wallin, O. Lundberg, D. Herrmann, L. Stolt, Improved 
Performance by Mo-CIGS Interface Control, 29th EU PV Solar Energy Conference (2014)  
 R. Hunger, U. Malm, J. Djordjevic-Reiss, T. Jarmar, E. Wallin, O. Lundberg, S. Jander, M. 
Zimmer, S. Weeke, P. Kratzert, D. Herrmann, L. Stolt, “Homogeneity of Ga Grading in CIGS 
Solar Modules”, 27th EU PV Solar Energy Conference (2012).    
Relevant Projects: 
 EFFCIS: German BMWi-funded collaborative project, focussing on efficiency improvements   
 Pliant: Process Line Implementation for Applied Surface Nanotechnologies. Project ID: 
309530 funded under: FP7-NMP 
 LL-CIGS : German collaborative project in the cluster “Sollarvalley Mitteldeutschland” 
funded by the country Saxony-Anhalt focussing on lifetime & efficiency improvement (2009-
2012) 
 
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
 Existing inline (intermediate) product characterization tools: CIGS thickness + composition 
measurement 
 PV module flasher, electrical I-V characterization + PV module light soak stabilisation 
chamber 
 Low Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition (LPCVD) Tool for Industrial Size PV module 
manufacturing, 
Substrate size 119 x 158 cm (prototype tool) 
 
 

 
90 
OLEDSOLAR  
 Industrial CIGS coating line for PV module manufacturing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Personnel 
Name: Dr. Philipp Kratzert                           Gender: Male 
Background:  
Philipp Kratzert received his doctoral degree in physics at the Humboldt University Berlin in 
2002, focusing on the MBE of II-VI quantum dots. After a period of basic research he changed 
into semiconductor industry and worked several years as a manager in the development and 
production ramp of different NAND & DRAM memory technology nodes. In 2009 Mr. Kratzert 
changed into the photovoltaics and took over the responsibility for the efficiency optimization at 
the Solibro manufacturing site. Since then he is engaged as a driving motor for the efficiency 
roadmap and Technology development at the Solibro manufacturing site in Thalheim Germany. 
Currently he is supporting Solibro as a Vice President for Technology and Process Development. 
Education: 
Diploma in physics from Technische Universität Berlin 
PhD in physics from Humboldt University of Berlin 
Lean six sigma Black belt 
Work Experience: 
2014 – present:  Vice President Solibro 
2011 – 2014:  Director Solibro 
2009 – 2011:  Team leader Solibro 
2005 – 2009: Lead engineer semiconductor Quimonda. 
2004 – 2005:  Project leader semiconductor Infineon Technologies 
2002 – 2004:  Device Engineer semiconductor, Infineon Technologies  
1998 –2002: Research Scientist, Humboldt University Berlin. 
Product Development Experience: 
 Lead R&D department (4 Teams, ca. 50 engineers)   
 Plan and execute all R&D projects within the R&D department  
 Organize and lead the cross functional supports on the efficiency, yield, product performance 
& reliability improvements   
Innovation Management: 
 Integration and successful transfer the R&D technology, process, equipment, CIGS sources to 
domestic overseas Production sites 

 
91 
OLEDSOLAR  
 Definition the Turn Key Line efficiency roadmap, lead the development of the technology, 
process, and CIGS tool to meet the annual Turn Key Line sales business targets  
 
Name: Dr. Ralf Hunger                           Gender: Male 
Background:  
Dr. Ralf Hunger had studied Physics at the Berlin University of Technology, where he had also 
acquired his PhD. For 12 years, he had conducted research on chalcopyrite thin films at the 
Helmholtz-Zentrum-Berlin (Germany), the Advanced Institutes of Industrial Science and 
Technology Tsukuba (Japan), and the Darmstadt University of Technology (Germany). Thin film 
growth and characterization, deposition and vacuum technology, semiconductor surfaces and 
interfaces are his fields of expertise. 10 years ago, Dr. Hunger had joined the Solibro GmbH and 
had transferred the Cu(InGa)Se2 deposition processes to industrial scale, in the beginning as 
senior process engineer CIGS, later as team leader CIGS development, now as team leader process 
integration. 
Education: 
Diploma in physics from Technische Universität Berlin 
PhD in physics from Technische Universität Berlin 
Work Experience: 
2014 - present Team Leader Process Integration, Solibro Hitech GmbH 
2007 - 2014 Senior Process Engineer, Solibro GmbH, Bitterfeld/Wolfen, Germany. 
2001 - 2007 Darmstadt University of Technology, Department of Materials Science, Surface 
Science Division, Germany. 
1999 - 2001 Advanced Institutes of Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Japan 
1995-1999 Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin (formerly: Hahn-Meitner-Insitute), Germany 
Product Development Experience: 
Project management of development projects, e.g. prototyping of advanced, alternative PV 
module encapsulation concepts. 
Innovation Management: 
Ralf Hunger et al., Method for producing sub-solar modules using electrically insulating insulation 
trenches in a thin-layer solar module, and method for producing a thin-layer solar module with 
such insulation trenches, WO2015027996A1, applied 2015-03-05  
 
 
 
Participant 9 
Organisation Name: Meyer Burger (Netherlands) B.V. 
(MBNL) 
Website: https://www.meyerburger.com/nl/en/  
Organisation Description: 
Meyer Burger (Netherlands) B.V. (MBNL) is a member of the Swiss Meyer Burger Group and is 
located in Eindhoven. The main activities of MBNL are the development, manufacture and sale of 
industrial production equipment for applications in various markets such as photovoltaics, organic 
electronics and batteries. The current equipment portfolio consists of industrial inkjet printers and 
thin film deposition equipment (plasma deposition and atmospheric atomic layer deposition). 
Meyer Burger’s systems and production equipment provide sustainable added value to our 
customers in the photovoltaic (solar), semiconductor and optoelectronic industries as well as other 
selected high-end markets based on semiconductor materials. 
The strategy of MBNL is to develop and commercialize state of the art industrial equipment that 
can serve a wide variety of applications. In particular, within this project, the aim of MBNL is to 

 
92 
OLEDSOLAR  
develop and test plasma enhanced (PE) spatial atomic layer deposition (sALD) compatible with an 
R2R system.   
Our plan is to use the know-how developed within this project to offer added value to existing 
systems and as a building stone for next generation systems (R2R). A successful development will 
help market penetration of high quality flexible devices (OLED, OPV, CIGS) and will generate 
sales of R2R sALD systems and business expansion for MBNL and help create additional 
employment opportunities in the region.   
Additionally, there are many other applications and markets that can as well benefit from this 
technology development to improve product quality and increase throughput.  This will also 
contribute to increased revenue and can create additional expansion opportunities. 
Relevant Publications: 
1. FLEx ALD R2R and S2S. https://www.meyerburger.com/nl/en/technologies/specialized-
technologies/spatial-atomic-layer-deposition/ 
2. TFE CONx (in particular JETx). 
https://www.meyerburger.com/nl/en/technologies/specialized-technologies/product-
detail/product/conx-tfe/ 
3. Presentation for ALD (example). http://www.semi.org/en/dana-borsa-flexible-functional-
devices-mass-production-level-flex-r2r-sald-platform 
4. Presentation for barriers (example - Industrial scale manufacturing of transparent and flexible 
moisture barriers).  
https://www.fep.fraunhofer.de/en/events/rueckblick_2017/sidme17.html#tabpanel-2 
 
Relevant Projects: 
1. OPZuid. https://www.stimulus.nl/op-zuid/project/industriele-productie-dunne-film-barriers/ 
2. Enso. http://enso-ecsel.eu/ 
3. Collaboration with Holst: Development of a roll-to-roll PECVD deposition tool to be used for 
flexible OLED lighting and organic solar cells. https://www.oled-info.com/roth-rau-joins-
holst-centre-research-barriers-flexible-electronics 
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
 Spectral ellipsometry 
 Profilometer 
 Low resolution SEM (>1µm)  
 Climate chamber / ovens 
                        

 
93 
OLEDSOLAR  
 
                                                    
                                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Personnel 
Name: Luca Gautero                            Gender: 
Male 
Background:  
Dr. Luca Gautero is presently a senior process engineer 
at Meyer Burger (Netherlands) B.V. During his career 
he has focussed on micro and nano-technology in fields as semiconductors, photovoltaic, 
functional thin films and recently (moisture) encapsulation. His innovation maker approach, both 
in academics and professional domain, resulted in several patents, publications and conference 
presentations. His European academic path features university titles from Italian, French and 
Swiss institutions, a PhD degree in renewable energy in 2010 developed in a German research 
centre and later, in 2015, an Executive Master in Energy Management from a leading business 
school in UK. 
Education: 
MSc Nanotech – Institut polytechnique de Grenoble 
PhD micro and nanotechnology – École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne 
MSc in Energy Management. - ESCP Europe London Campus 
Work Experience: 
2010 – present : Meyer Burger (Netherlands) B.V. – senior process development engineer 
2007 – 2010: Fraunhofer ISE GmBH - Ph.D. student. 
Product Development Experience: 
 Coordination in the development of solutions for PV, OPVs and OLEDs 
 Definition and translation of requirements from market level to equipment level. 
 Engineering and development of functionality in integrated production equipment. 
 Optimization of solar power management, also as consultancy to customers. 
 Active contribution to sales team communication to customers. 
 Product management enabler (accomplished 1st sale of new production equipment – 2014) 
 Engaged in the processing of moisture barriers (WVTR below 10E-6 g/(m2*day)) 
 Manage customer expectation with regular reporting on present and planned activities. 
Intervention on supply chain to guarantee prompt and adequate performance of components. 
Definition, execution and reporting of acceptance tests in collaboration with the customer and a 
board of scientific experts (Holst Centre).  
 
Name: Dana Borsa                            Gender: Female 
Background:  
Dr. Dana Borsa is Manager Research of the Thin Film Coating and Projects Business Unit at 
Meyer Burger (Netherlands) B.V. She is responsible for all process and application developments. 
Her PhD in physics from the Rijks Universiteit Groningen was focused on the growth and 
characterization of nitride-based thin films and multilayers. After some years of research on 
switchable mirrors and hydrogen storage materials at the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam she moved 
Figure 1: Spectral 
ellipsometry 
Figure 2: 
Profilometer 
Figure 3: Low resolution 
SEM (>1µm) 
Figure 4: Climate chamber / 
ovens 

 
94 
OLEDSOLAR  
to ECN and worked on high efficiency solar cell concepts before joining OTB Solar (currently 
Meyer Burger (Netherlands) B.V.) in 2009. 
Education: 
PhD  – Centro de Microanalisis de Materiales, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Spain & 
Nuclear Solid State Physics Group, University of Groningen, NL 
Work Experience: 
2012 – present: Meyer Burger (Netherlands) B.V., Eindhoven, NL – Manager Research 
2009 – 2012: Meyer Burger (Netherlands) B.V., Eindhoven, NL – Project Leader 
2007 – 2009: Energy Research Centre Nederland, Petten NL – Researcher Silicon PV 
2004 – 2007:Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, NL – Researcher   
Product Development Experience: 
 Project manager customer project for the fabrication of a prototype system for battery 
applications; responsible for all phases  
 Project leader for INREP H2020 project for the design, fabrication and commissioning of an 
injector head for sALD S2S tool  
 Project leader ‘SiOx for market implementation’: budget and resource planning; technology 
scouting, process development and platform upgrade for 24/7 production  
 Coordination CIP-SiNx program: definition and continuous topic update, resource planning 
(FTEs, tool time and consumables); progress monitoring and supervision of process 
development (>40 WP); field implementation and customer support    
 Coordination customer sampling program: communication with customers and local sales 
team; define test program; realization and after care 
 Sales support at HQ and on-site; regular customer visits and process and product marketing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Participant 10 
Organisation Name: Brunel University London (BUL) 
Website: http://www.brunel.ac.uk/ 
Organisation Description:  

 
95 
OLEDSOLAR  
Brunel University has been highly successful in creating an industrial innovation research 
resources, named Brunel Innovation Centre (BIC), which sits between the knowledge base and 
industry, supporting partners in industry to transfer academic research into industrial application. 
Brunel has a wide range of knowledge and expertise in the following research areas: (i) Power 
ultrasonics; detection, cleaning of fouling and fouling prevention techniques non-invasively 
software, anti- or de-icing application (ii) Smart Non Destructive Testing (NDT); autonomous 
devices, miniaturised multifunction systems for NDE in bespoke environments; marine, high 
temperature, aerospace, pattern recognition hardware  / software, (iii) Active Structural Health 
Monitoring (SHM) and Condition Monitoring (iv) Design of associated hardware and software (v) 
Signal and image processing and numerical modelling - Noise reduction, signal condition and 
control (including active vibration control), data interpretation and analysis, (vi) Automation and 
robotics of inspection system, (vii) Improved or new and robust sensors (Piezoelectric, 
Electromagnetic) e.g. high temperature inspection, transduction (viii) Electronics - Low power 
consumption for multiple channels, wireless, high speed, wideband, fast bps, energy harvesting, 
(ix) Structure integrity assessment of offshore facilities, (x) Fatigue & fracture analysis. BIC have 
coordinated as well as delivered 
over 60 projects since 2011 across 
both the UK and EC platforms. In 
year 2015, BIC has received the 
Highly Commended Innovation 
Awards from The Institution of 
Engineering and Technology (IET) 
for two award categories: (i) 
Measurement in Action and (ii) 
Manufacturing Technology. The 
collaborative European project 
(FP7) was put forward to the 
competition and was chosen from 
over 300 entries from 28 countries 
(globally). 
Relevant Publications:   
 J.T. Sun, I. Szabo, M. Livadas, V. Kappatos, C. Selcuk and T-H. Gan, “Automatic defect 
detection of powder metallurgy (PM) parts using three dimensional X-ray computed 
tomography imaging”, Proc. Euro PM2015 Congress & Exhibition, 4–7 October, Reims, 
France   
 I. Szabo, J. Sun, V. Kappatos, C. Selcuk, A New Automated in Line Quality Control System 
based on Non-Destructive Evaluation for Additive Manufacturing of Net-Shape Parts from 
Particulates, Additive Manufactured Metallic Materials Properties & Structures Conference, 
IOM3 Institute, Coventry, UK, 14th May 2015 
 J. Sun, A.Y.B. Chong, O. Gilmour, G. Foulds, M. Thorton, V. Kappatos, C. Selcuk, T.H.Gan, 
“Automated defect characterization on composite materials using enhanced image processing 
technique for ultrasonic test”, BINDT Aerospace Event 2016, Bristol, United Kingdom 
 I. Szabo, G. Logeswaran, V. Kappatos, C. Selcuk and T.H., Gan, X-ray enclosure design and 
prototype for non-destructive testing of net shape parts from particulate materials, Euro 
PM2015 Congress & Exhibition, 4 – 7 October 2015, Reims, France 
 
Relevant Projects:  
 CITCOM: A Complimentary Inspection Technique based on Computer Tomography and 
Plenoptic Camera for MEMS Components funded by H2020. Project ID: 768883. 

 
96 
OLEDSOLAR  
 AutoDISC: Automated Ultrasonic Inspection of Aerospace Composites with Enhanced Defect 
Detection Probabilities Aided by Gantry Deployed, CAD Controlled Robotics, funded by 
Innovate UK. Project website: www.autodisc-project.com/ 
 Qualinet: Automated In- Line Inspection And Quality Control Of Net Shape Powder 
Metallurgy Components Using Microfocus Three Dimensional X Ray Computed Tomography 
Imaging, funded by Innovate UK. Project website: www.qualinet-project.com/ 
 AutoInspect: Automated inspection for sintered parts by non-destructive techniques for 
improved quality in production (AutoInspect) funded by FP7. Project website: 
www.autoinspectproject.eu/project    
 AssureNet: Automated 100% Production Quality Assurance Of Net Shape Manufactured 
Components Using In Line Micron Resolution X-Ray Stereographic Imaging 
(Assurenet),Funded by Birmingham Council: Advance Manufacturing Supply Chain Initiative 
(AMSCI) www.assurenetproject.co.uk/ 
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
Brunel’s vast equipment and test areas include, but are not limited to: 
 
 Several powerful work-stations including signal and image processing software (Matlab, 
Labview, C++, C#), finite element (Ansys, Abaqus, COMSOL), computing power for 
algorithm derivations and ability to set up guided user interfaces. 
 Power amplifier, oscilloscope and impedance analyser 
 Optical tracking device and high resolution cameras 
 State of the art 3D Laser scanning vibrometer for: vibration measurement (wave propagation 
and transducer analysis); condition monitoring purposes as well as for sensor, materials, 
behaviour & characterisations 
 NDT and Structural Health Monitoring hardware i.e. Acoustic Emission, Fibre Bragg 
Grating(temp, strain, vibrations), strain gauge equipment 
 PCB design and manufacturing facilities. 
 Experimental industry specific set-up rigs for detection and cleaning of fouling, rotating 
machinery; mock-ups; inspection, monitoring systems demonstrated in full scale. 
Key personnel 
Name: Jamil Kanfoud                     Gender: Male 
Jamil Kanfoud (MEng, MPhil) is the Technical Manager at BIC. Jamil has worked on the 
development of novel passive noise cancelling solution for the special industry. He has had a 3-
year experience in the academic world as a faculty member including 2 years heading the 
electromechanical department at an engineering college. As head of a department, he managed 40 
permanent faculty staff and 850 students. Under his leadership, the electromechanical and civil 
engineering departments developed collaboration with the industry. He also worked on the 
implementation of innovative pedagogies (problem based learning and project based learning). 
Jamil joined TWI Ltd in 2014 where he worked mainly on collaborative projects delivering 
technical work (numerical modelling, analytical modelling, sensor selection, data processing, 
prototype design and assembly) and managing the collaborative projects. He continued working in 
the aerospace field working on the de-icing of aerodynamic surfaces using transient vibrations and 
electro-thermal heaters. He also worked on passive and active control solutions using spring-
dampers, piezoelectric actuators and PID Control. Most of his efforts were dedicated to the 
development of condition and structural health monitoring technologies for pipes and wind turbines 
machinery and structures. During his twenty-month experience, Jamil developed experience in 
collaborative projects (H2020, FP7 and InnovateUK). He also led technically 12 proposals, among 
which he secured an H2020 thematic and 2 H2020 FTI.  
 
97 
OLEDSOLAR  
Jamil joined Brunel Innovation Centre in 2016 as technical manager of the innovation centre. His 
responsibilities include looking after the successful delivery of the portfolio of projects BIC is 
involved in as well as the development of research strategy for the innovation centre and the 
identification of funding opportunities for business development. 
Name: Wenbo Duan                     Gender: Male 
Wenbo (BSc (Distinguished), MSc, PhD, CEng, MIMechE) has been working on the mathematical 
modelling of sound wave propagation in pipeline systems with the aim of detecting blockages or 
defects since 2006. He was responsible for developing analytic models to study coupling between 
acoustics and structures when he was a PhD student in the University of Manchester. After that, he 
moved to Brunel University, and developed new stand-alone finite element software to implement 
fast and accurate mathematical models. A hybrid finite element method was proposed which 
combines modal expansion solutions with the conventional finite element solutions. He is 
currently working on the development of advanced numerical models to investigate wave 
propagation and scattering in complicated conditions, such as coated, buried and/or immersed 
pipes etc. He also has experience in product development and innovation management. He has 
published 10 referred journal papers in top ranking journals, including the Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America, Journal of Sound and Vibration etc. He received the ‘Outstanding 
Reviewer’ award from Journal of Sound and Vibration in 2016, and he is a reviewer for a number 
of acoustic related top journals.  
Name: Istvan Szabo                     Gender: Male 
Istvan (BSc, BEng, MSc, CEng, MWeldI) has over 10 years of mechanical and design engineering 
experience across the Defense, Renewables, Building Services and R&D Industry. Prior to his 
current position he led and been involved in thermal energy recycling, energy efficient heating 
system and industrial air conditioning system design projects.Through his career he obtained in 
depth knowledge of materials and manufacturing processes, Powder Metallurgy, 3D printing and 
rapid prototyping in particular, and also significant experience in product design from concept to 
final product including designing for manufacturing He is an expert user of multiple CAD 
packages and has in depth knowledge of Finite Element Analysis, Computed Fluid Dynamics and 
Thermal analysis methods. He is an expert user of multiple CAD packages including SolidWorks, 
Catia V5, Autodesk Inventor and Revit, Pro E. He is Research Assistant at BIC, leader of two X-
ray image processing device enclosure design projects, actively involved in activities varying from 
research and development in the areas of novel technique development, sensor applications. 
 
 
 
Participant 11 
Organisation Name: Acondicionamiento Tarrasense 
Associacion (LEITAT) 
Website: projects.leitat.org 
Organisation Description:  
LEITAT Technological Center, founded in 1906, is a private non-profit RTO with more than 110 
years of deep knowledge and valuable experience in industrial innovation. We transform 
technological solutions and scientific results into economic and competitive values for our clients 
and collaborating entities. LEITAT is strongly committed to over 1500 customers that benefit from 
our creative and innovative solutions. LEITAT provides added value to customers by delivering 
technological innovations through applied research and development activities in areas including 
advanced materials, advanced manufacturing, renewable energies, storage system, circular 
economy, sustainability and biotechnology. LEITAT rely upon over 240 highly skilled team 
members who deliver flexible and innovative solutions in the face of any industrial challenge. 

 
98 
OLEDSOLAR  
LEITAT has a strong presence and valuable experiences in carrying out research under different 
international and national funding schemes including FP7 and Horizon 2020. Participation in 43 
FP7 projects and 55 H2020 projects are proof of LEITAT capabilities in coordinating, managing 
and executing of international projects. LEITAT is recognized by the Spanish Government as a CIT 
(Centre of Technological Innovation) and is one the 5 Technology Centers that is accredited by the 
Regional Government of Catalonia. Finally, it is member of FEDIT (Federation of Technological 
Centers in Spain) and the IT Network of the Catalan Regional Government.  
The Circular Economy Business Unit offers innovative technologies and strategies for the efficient 
management of natural resources, a sustainable production, and the optimal treatment and 
valorization of residual streams. Main research areas are: 
 Waste management and valorization: biomass, industrial & municipal wastes/byproducts.  
 Water treatment & reuse: industrial & municipal waters.  
 Air treatment & control: indoor & outdoor environments.  
 Biotechnologies: Greener products & processes. 
 Sustainability: Life Cycle Assessment, communication & responsibility, sustainable 
production. 
 
Relevant Publications: 
1. Torrentellé, M., Energy Efficiency, a Sustainable strategy for the improvement of 
competitivenesss. Revista de Química e Industria Textil 2012 (Article)  
2. C. Hidalgo. Environmental and Economic assessment of innovative medical devices with a 
Life Cycle Approach. (Restoration project). SETAC LCA Case Study Symposium. Nova Sabi 
(Serbia) November 2014 (Oral Presentation). 
3. G. Ferrer, C. Hidalgo, M. Escamilla. Life Cycle Assessment as a methodology to develop an 
easy tool, Bookdaper, to improve the environmental performance of printed products 
produced by SMEs. SETAC Europe 19th LCA Case Study Symposium.Rome (Italy) 11-13 
November 2013 (Poster).  
4. M. Della Pirriera. Stability of Dye Sensitized Solar Cells for indoor applications: A 
comparison with Amorphous Silicon under Low Irradiation, European PV Conference and 
Exhibition, 3 October 2013, Paris, France  (Oral presentation) 
5. M. Della Pirriera New PV technologies: What about their recyclability?, Workshop on 
Ecoinnovative challengue for PV sector, 29 September 2016, Terrassa, Spain (Oral 
presentation) 
Relevant Projects: 
1. CITCOM: A Complementary Inspection Technique based on Computer Tomography and 
Plenoptic Camera for MEMS Components H2020/768883, 2017-2020. 
2. MatHero - Developing Environmentally Compatible Organic Solar Cells, FP7/604603, 2014-
2016. 
3. REMANENCE - Rare Earth Magnet Recovery for Environmental and Resource Protection 
FP7/310240, 2013-2016. 
4. EPHOCELL: New materials for thin film solar cells, development, integration and testing, 
FP7/227127, 2009-2013. 
5. ERG. New materials for hybrid thin film solar cells, development and testing. JTI-
ENIAC/270722-2 , 2011-2014. 
6. URWASTECH: Innovative Urban Waste Treatment: A Sustainable Approach Using 
Hydrodynamic and Biological Technologies, LIFE+/LIFE10ENV/ES/530, 2011-2014 
Infrastructure/Equipment: 
LEITAT holds licenses of the two most recognised LCA software:  
 
99 
OLEDSOLAR  
 SIMAPRO (Pré Consultants), professional LCA software tool to collect, analyze and monitor 
the sustainability performance of products and services. 
 GaBi Professional (PE International), combines modelling and reporting software with data 
content and expertise. 
LEITAT holds license of the main LCA Databases such as Ecoinvent and Gabi Professional 
databases, and the rest of commercial Databases included in the softwares. LEITAT works with 
different impact methods according to European guidelines: ILCD method, CML, ReCiPe, among 
others. LEITAT has chemical and physical laboratories, testing and development equipment in the 
industrial workshop.  
LEITAT has dedicated equipment for standard and innovative tests: 
 Test following current standards. More critical test are available, using a portfolio of climatic 
chambers. 
 Sun simulator AM1.5G (2x2 cm2) and UV and metal halide light sources, full monitoring 
during tests. 
 UV-Vis-NIR spectrometer 
 Pyranometer and calibrated c-Si solar cells 
 Battery of different ageing chambers (metal halide lamp- climatic, UV-climatic, Xenotest, 
saline fog, etc.) up to 2.2 x 3.4 x 2.3 m (width x length x height) and a flat empty space of 
3x2 m to host big prototypes  
 AutoLAB and multichannel VMP3 potentiostat / galvanostat 
 Set of optical components: lenses, beam splitters, filters, spectrometer of wide range, white 
laser from 400 to 1200 nm, thermo graphic camera, etc. 
 Outdoor platforms, one with suntracker and others static, for natural aging with weather 
station sensors, full monitoring during tests. 
 Physic-chemical characterization: IC, TGA, DSC, ATR-FTIR, BET, GC, ICP-MS, SEM... 
  Mechanical tests equipment (bending, stretching, dynamometer, etc.) 
Key personnel  
Name: Marta Escamilla Monell                   Gender: Female 
Marta Escamilla is a graduate of Environmental Science from University of Girona. Has a 
widespread experience in environmental management, especially on the implementation of 
Environmental Management Systems in SMEs and large companies, audits, life cycle assessment 
and ecodesign, Ecolabel, environmental awareness and training workshops among others. As the 
Sustainability Division Manager of LEITAT Technological Center, is in charge of coordinating 
projects and managing initiatives, at regional, national and European level, promoting sustainable 
development, making a special effort on energy efficient, rational natural resources consumption, 
waste management, to preserve and improve the environmental performance as well as contributing 
to substantial economic savings of the industrial sector. 
Name: Sergio Martínez Lozano                   Gender: Male 
Sergio Martínez hold a PhD in Environmental Science (University of Girona) and his career has 
been mainly focused on the evaluation of biomass as a renewable resource, covering aspects like 
biomass quantification, studying biomass conversion technologies, the economic feasibility of 
power generation using biomass, Life Cycle Analysis, physico-chemical and thermal analysis of 
biomass and the evaluation of atmospheric emissions. He has directly and indirectly participated in 
several national and international R+D projects. He has also participated in numerous conferences 
and he published articles in national and international scientific journals. His scientific experience 
during his PhD has been combined with teaching experience in the University of Girona, where he 
punctually participated in some lectures in Environmental Science Degree. After finishing his 
studies, he worked as plant manager in a biomass composting plant (treating organic fraction of 
urban solid wastes and sewage sludge). He works as a researcher in R+D+I projects for the 
development of new technologies for solid waste and wastewater treatment and valorisation using 
 
100 
OLEDSOLAR  
advanced technologies such as anaerobic digestion, pyrolysis and pre-treatment technologies. He 
enjoyed a post-doctoral fellowship (Torres Quevedo, 2011-2013), and today, he works as a Senior 
Researcher in LEITAT in the preparation, negotiation, execution, dissemination and management 
of European, national and industrial projects. He is responsible of the Energy Valorisation and 
Waste recycling Unit in LEITAT. 
Name: Monica Della Pirriera                   Gender: Female 
Monica Della has a PhD in Electronic Engineering from the Polytechnic University of Catalonia 
and a degree in Physics from the University of Buenos Aires. Her research career has focused on 
the study of organic semiconductors for printed electronics mainly organic photovoltaics. She has 
participated in various conferences and has publications in international journals in the field of 
materials science for energy. Also noteworthy is her teaching experience as an assistant professor 
in the Department of Physics, Faculty of Natural Sciences at the University of Buenos Aires. She is 
developing their professional career at LEITAT Technological Center involved in R + D + I 
projects since 2010, specializing in the development of new technologies in the field of 
Photovoltaic. Currently she leads the team of Renewable Energies, and participates in European 
and Spanish platforms such as EU PV cluster, EMIRI, Photonics 21, Fotoplat, among others. 
Name: Julia García-Montaño                   Gender: Female 
Julia García-Montaño holds a PhD in Chemistry (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona) and is the 
Group Leader of the Environmental & BIO Technologies Division in LEITAT. Her professional 
career has been mainly centred in the study of alternative water and waste treatment & valorisation 
technologies: Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs), advanced electrochemical treatments, 
biotechnologies, nanotechnologies, membrane processes, high added value products recovery, 
water/waste-Energy nexus, among others. She has developed two research stays at the Plataforma 
Solar de Almería, has developed and coordinated several innovative national and international 
projects, has participated in various congresses and has numerous scientific publications in the 
water/wastes decontamination area. It is also noteworthy her educational experience as she 
combined her scientific career with her career as an assistant teacher in several Universities. 
 
 
Participant 12 
Organisation Name: Coatema Coating Machinery GmbH 
(Coatema) 
Website: www.coatema.de 
Organisation Description: 
COATEMA stands for high quality coating, laminating and printing plants and has been 
successful in the field for more than 40 years. It offers equipment solution for laboratory R&D, for 
pilot plants and custom made production equipment. The company is a leading supplier of 
variable multifunction coating plants with many economic advantages (e.g. the modular 
Click&Coat® system), do their own R&D in important application fields, hold patents for 
pioneering solutions, and have been awarded with innovation prizes.  
 Coatema has Europe’s largest lab for R&D in coating technology and is able to offer Know-how, 
full service solutions and to control whole production processes. The unique combination of 
know-how and facilities makes them first choice to successfully work on the project tasks with 
respect to inline coating and pilot line production. Within the R&D Centre the demonstration and 
realisation of production processes are possible using existing pilot lines. 
Relevant Projects: 
 PI-SCALE - Bringing flexible organic electronics to pilot innovation scale, (Grant Agreement 
No. 688093). 

 
101 
OLEDSOLAR  
 PhotonFlex: Photonische Prozesskette zur Fertigung flexibler organischer Solarzellen im 
Rolle zu Rolle Verfahren – PhotonFlex, (EFRE-0800069). 
 HEA2D: Herstellung, Eigenschaften und Anwendungen von 2D-Nanomaterialien, (EFRE-
0800148). 
 InTres: Innovative Trägermaterialien zur Optimierung der Stromableiter von elektrischen 
Speichern, (EFRE-0800645). 
 GreenSense: Sustainable, Wireless, Autonomous Nanocellulose-based Quantitative DoA 
Biosensing Platform, (Grant Agreement No. 761000). 
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
 Coating and equipment solutions 
 Large R&D centre for the experimental verification and demonstration of pilot line processes – 
9 pilot lines, 1 production line, 1 click & coat line 
 Coating, printing and lamination technologies for upscaling and production 
 Coatema pilot line, which is used for the pilot line production of electrochromic devices. This 
was realized in the EU FP7 Project EELICON! (www.eelicon.eu) 
 
       
Key Personnel 
Name: Thomas Kolbusch                           Gender: Male 
Background:  
Thomas Kolbusch, Vice President of Coatema Coating Machinery, has a degree as business 
economist in 1997. Worked for 3M, Germany, alpi GmbH, and from 2006 till 2009, as Managing 
Director for Solarcoating Machinery GmbH, a company specialised on R2R equipment for gen3 
PV. Since 2009, member of the board of the OE-A, leading the working group Upscaled 
production and is chair of the advisory board of the OPE journal. He has been speaker on over 100 
conferences and is chairman of an international coating conference. 
Name: Dr. Klaus Peter Crone                           Gender: Male 
Background:  
Figure 2: Coatema pilot line for the 
production of electrochromic devices 
Figure 1: Coatema´s Engineering solution for inert slot-die coating (left), lamination, LED-
curing (center) and its final cutting (right), which was realized in the EELICON-project for the 
electrochromic film R2R-Pilot line 
 
102 
OLEDSOLAR  
Dr. Klaus Peter Crone, R&D Manager worked as project manager and later as head of the division 
"Process Analysis 2" of Bayer AG in Leverkusen. He was the head of the division "Measurement 
and Analysis" of Agfa Photo GmbH. In 2009 he became head of the technical centre at Coatema. 
Since 2016 he is Consultant for Coating Technology at Coatema. 
Name: Dr. Nico Meyer                           Gender: Male 
Background:  
Nico Meyer received his Ph.D. in chemistry from RWTH Aachen in 2000. He joined AIXTRON 
as Process Engineer for Organic Electronics, e.g. OLED and OPV. He became Project Manager 
for R&D projects in 2003 and was responsible for the coordination and execution of funded 
Projects. In 2013 he joined Coatema to manage and coordinate EU and national funded Research 
Projects. He is author and co-author of many publications in international journals and 
conferences. 
 
Name: M. Sc. Thomas Exlager                           Gender: Male 
Background:  
Thomas Exlager, R&D Project Manager received his Master of Science in Nano-Opto-Electronics 
in 2017 from the University Duisburg-Essen. In 2017 he joined Coatema as a Project Manager. He 
is interested in upscaling of opto-electronic processes for production. 
 
Participant 13 
Organisation Name: DuPont Teijin Films UK Ltd (DTF) 
Website: http://www.dupontteijinfilms.com/ 
Organisation Description: 
DuPont Teijin Films is a leading global producer of PET and PEN polyester films, specialising in 
film products and related services for the Healthcare, Photovoltaics, Durable Labels, Imaging 
Media, Flexible Electronics, Packaging, Electrical Insulation, Capacitors Industries and many 
more. We have dedicated marketing, technical and manufacturing operations worldwide. 
One of the market areas we focus on is the Flexible Electronics market and have spent significant 
efforts in developing specialised substrates to meet the  needs for dimensional stability at elevated 
temperatures, UV absorbtion, low haze high transmittance, light outcoupling, thermoformability 
and last but not least clean and smooth surfaces. 
Relevant Publications: 
1. See Sunflower website publicity: http://www.sunflower-fp7.eu  
2. See Clean4Yield www.clean4yield.eu  
3. See Flex-o-Fab website publicity:  http://www.flexofab.eu/  
 
Relevant Projects: 
1. HiQSurf – Development of clean processes for film handling in flex electronic applications  
2. Clean4Yield  - Contamination and defect control for increased yield for large scale R2R 
production of OPV and OLED 
3. Sunflower - Printed OPV with high efficiency 
4. Flex-o-Fab - Flexible OLEDs from Lab to Fab   
5. Pi Scale – development of a foundry based on a distributed pilot line for providing the market 
with OLED solutions 
 
Infrastructure/Equipment:  

 
103 
OLEDSOLAR  
 A strong R&D centre with head count of 80 engineers, scientists and labs.   
 Metrology lab equipment (Wyko WLI, AFM, XPS tools) for characterising surfaces.  
 Patented large area metrology technology for assessment of A4’s at nano scale for defects.  
 A Polyester film pilot manufacturing line for product and process development.  
 A manufacturing line in Scotland equipped with an ISRA laser scanner for in line defect 
detection.  
 
Key Personnel 
Name: Valentijn von Morgen                            Gender: Male 
Background:  
Valentijn started as a Process Engineer in manufacturing of PET films with ICI in Holland. Since 
then he worked in the same business in a wide range of technical roles spanning Continuous 
Improvement, process, product, manufacturing and business development. Recently involved with 
some high profile EU projects developing a new product platform with substrates for the flexible 
electronic markets. 
Education: 
Master in Physics from Eindhoven Technical University 
Work Experience: 
He has experience with developing process technology for manufacturing of PET films and new 
products having worked at both manufacturing plants and in the central R&T department. Further 
he has had extensive exposure to Continous Improvement of  product development, manufacturing 
and  business processes. Managed many projects and most recently involved with EU project 
initiatives for the Flexible Electronics industry. 
Product Development Experience: 
He has a broad experience with product developments from a manufacturing perspective  and 
developed  scale and product  transfer methodology  for the business. Recently developed a new 
product platform with grades for the Flexible Electronics market from concept to commercial 
viability. Sofar sold 000’s of m2 and expected sales are in the region of 50:000 m2 this year.  
Intellectual Property Management: 
In process of filing a patent related to grades developed for Flexible Electronic applications. 
Innovation Management: 
As a qualified 6 Sigma MBB developed methodologies and tools for product development,  
transfers (between manufacturing assets) and scale up from pilot production.  
Name: Julian Robinson                            Gender: Male 
Background:  
Julian has been working for ICI / DuPont / DuPont Teijin Films in their Technology group based 
at their R+D centre in the UK. A physical chemist by training, he has developed and applied his 
knowledge of colloid and surface science, particularly towards coatings on polyester film. He is 
now a Business Research Associate and team leader, developing new products and the technology 
platforms for next generation films, including those for future flexible electronics markets. 
Education: 
PhD in Chemistry from St. Andrews University 
Work Experience: 
New product and technology platform development in the Technology group at DTF 
Product Development Experience: 
He has a broad experience of new product development, from concept, through laboratory and 
pilot scale prototyping, through to full manufacturing scale up and commercialisation. Product 
developed over the last 28 years will equate to many thousands of tonnes of film. 
Intellectual Property Management: 
Many patents filed over the years. 
Innovation Management: 
 
104 
OLEDSOLAR  
He is involved with idea generation and selection, as well as developing the product technology 
strategy for DTF 
Name: Thane Gough                            Gender: Male 
Background:  
Thane started career in ICI Plastics & Petrochemicals division as a Research Technician working 
in the Polyester Films business.  Roles included development of novel polymer systems, and 
surface treatments.  Since then, worked in the same business in a range of roles including 
Technical Support and Market Management .  Current role is Business Development Manager 
looking for opportunities in the flexible electronics market. 
Work Experience: 
After working in the Melinex PET business for two years, spent the following two years in the 
Propafilm PE business, developing new polymer blends.  Moving back to the Melinex business,  
was then involved in the development of white polyester films, high metal adhesion films, and 
non-slip packaging films.  In a Technical Service role in the Packaging business,  provided 
product support, and  identified new product opportunities, with both existing and new customers.  
More recently  had Market Management responsibility for the Flexible Electronics sector, and  
now Business Development Manager looking at opportunities for novel Polyester films in this 
market. 
Product Development Experience: 
Extensive experience in New Product Development, from laboratory scale, through manufacturing 
scale-up, to commercialisation and customer support.   Was part of the development team that 
invented and commercialised white polyester films, which over 30 years has grown from nothing 
to a global  annual volume of 12,000 with a sales revenue in excess of 50 million euro. 
Whilst working in the packaging market  was instrumental in developing and launching both high 
metal adhesion films and non-slip films.  These films were widely sold in Europe and US, at 
volumes in excess of 600tpa, with sales revenue of more than 5 million euro per annum. 
In the current role, provides  commercial guidance and market input to several Product 
Development  Teams involved in innovation of new substrates for electronics applications 
Intellectual Property Management: 
Patent publication : CA2005598 A1 – Polymeric film 
Patent publication : CA2206240 A1 - Polymeric film coated with a polyester composition 
 
 
Participant 14 
Organisation Name: CTR Carinthian Tech Research AG 
(CTR) 
Website: www.ctr.at 
Organisation Description: 
CTR Carinthian Tech Research AG is an Austrian non-university research centre focusing 
primarily on targeted research into Advanced Sensor Systems and Smart System Integration. 
Located in Villach, and with a permanent staff of currently more than 50 researchers, CTR covers 
the entire R&D chain from proof of concept to prototype development. Conducting R&D projects 
both on the national and the international level since 1997, CTR has achieved a number of 
internationally acclaimed innovations and an extensive, dependable network of partners. The 
research interests of the involved departments Photonic Systems and Smart Systems include the 
development and system integration of advanced photonic metrology systems and emerging 
energy systems, from fundamental concepts to the realization and characterization of fully 
operational, application-specifically integrated functional prototypes. CTR holds comprehensive 
competence in the R&D of sensors and sensor equipment for in-line quality control in different 
processing steps, even under harsh environments, covering a broad range of sensor technologies 

 
105 
OLEDSOLAR  
(magnetic, thermal, optical, electric) . With a focus on (spatially resolved) spectroscopic methods 
for industrial quality control, CTR has significant experience in bringing lab established 
technologies in an industrial environment, which addresses one of the main requirements of this 
H2020 call.   
CTR owns the appropriate R&D infrastructure to carry out various fault detection strategies in the 
field of destructive and non-destructive testing, as well as the characterisation of final products 
within this project (e.g. spatially resolved industrial micro Raman spectrometer, FTIR/NIR 
spectrometers, IR microscopes, THz spectroscopy and imaging, state of the art PV metrology and 
characterisation equipment, including electro-luminescence analysis, climate-controlled test 
chambers etc.). 
Within several projects involving partners from science and industry alike, CTR gained significant 
experience in the material and quality analysis of photovoltaic cells, modules and electrical 
subsystems. Besides expertise in design and implementation of metrology systems, CTR thus has 
significant experience in the qualification and quantification of PV quality defects, understanding 
the interactions and relationships between material components and environmental conditions by 
using intelligent measurement and detection approaches, including numerical simulation and 
statistical data analysis tools. For instance, the project “EVAnetz” the successfully designed, 
implemented validated a non-destructive, inline-capable analysis method for determining the 
degree of crosslinking of the elastomeric ethylene/vinyl acetate encapsulants in PV modules, thus 
increasing manufacturing efficiency and reducing costs in PV module production while 
warranting optimal product quality. 
Relevant Publications: 
 Ch. Hirschl, L. Neumaier, W. Mühleisen, M. Zauner, G. Oreski, G. C. Eder, S. Seufzer, Ch. 
Berge, E. Rüland and M. Kraft,  “In-Line Determination of the Degree of Crosslinking of 
Ethylene Vinyl Acetate in PV Modules by Raman Spectroscopy”,  Solar Energy Materials and 
Solar Cells 152: 10-20 (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2016.03.019  
 W. Muehleisen, G. C. Eder, Y. Voronko, M. Spielberger, H. Sonnleitner, K. Knoebl, R. 
Ebner, G. Ujvari, C. Hirschl, “Outdoor detection and visualization of hailstorm damages of 
photovoltaic plants”, Renewable Energy 118: 138-145 (2018) 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2017.11.010      
 M. De Biasio, M. Kraft, M. Schultz, B. Goller, D. Sternig, R. Esteve, M. Roesner, “Micro-
Raman spectroscopy as a Tool for the Characterization of Silicon Carbide in Power 
Semiconductor Material Processing”, Proc. SPIE 10210: 1021014 (2017); 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.2259930   
 L. Neumaier, W. Mühleisen, C. Hirschl, G.C. Eder, M. Aichinger, L. Plessing, A. Martin, A. 
Zimmerman, “Monitoring of moisture ingress in PV module laminates during accelerated 
aging tests”, Proc. EU PVSEC (2017) 
 M. De Biasio, M. Kraft, E. Geier, B. Goller, Ch. Bergmann, R. Esteve, M. Cerezuela-Barreto, 
D. Lewke, M. Schellenberger, M. Roesner, “Raman micro-spectroscopy as a non-destructive 
key analysis tool in current power semiconductor manufacturing”, Proc. SPIE 10210: 
102100U (2017); http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.2259927   
Relevant Projects: 
 2015 – 2022: COMET Competence Center ASSIC – Austrian Smart Systems Integration 
research Center 
 2015 – 2018: Energy Research Flagship Project Infinity - Climate Sensitive Long-Time 
Reliability of Photovoltaics 
 
106 
OLEDSOLAR  
 2015 – 2017: Production of the Future project OPtima– Optimized Production for Polymer 
Parts in Semiconductor Machines 
 2014 – 2017: Energy Research project PV@Fassade – 
Façade-elements with integrated PV-active layers 
 2014 – 2016: SOLAR-ERA.NET project InnoModu - 
Leadfree modules with low silver content and innovative busless 
cell grid 
 2013 - 2015: Production of the Future project EVAnetz – In-
line analysis of the degree of crosslinking of ethylene/vinyl acetate encapsulants in PV 
modules 
 
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
 Renishaw inVia Qontor confocal Raman Microscope 
The Raman microscope facilitates the Raman spectroscopic 
investigations of both macroscopic and microscopic samples, 
down to sub-μm resolutions. Applications range from the 
investigation of the molecular composition of samples to e.g. 
contact-free direct optical measurement of stress and strain in semiconductor materials. 
Equipped with 4 separate excitation lasers from the blue to the beginning near-IR, polarisation 
optics etc. the instrument enables 2D and 3D maps as well as bulk analysis and – using an 
external arm or fibre optics - even of samples too large to fit into the sample compartment. 
 
 Bruker LUMOS FTIR Microscope  
The LUMOS is a fully automated stand-alone mid-IR microscope facilitating the measurement 
of both macroscopic and microscopic samples in transmission, reflection or attenuated total 
reflection (ATR). Applications include e.g. the identification of particles, contaminations and 
coatings as well as the determination of the chemical composition of complex samples. The 
instrument enables point analysis as well as highly resolved 2D maps. In addition, the 
instrument features a MACRO unit with various accessories for bulk analysis. 
 
 Polytec Micro System Analyser MSA-500-TPM 
The Micro System Analyzer is a premier measurement tool for 
the analysis and visualization of structural in-plane and out-of-
plane vibrations as well as surface topography in micro 
structures such as MEMS. Combining a microscope with 
scanning laser doppler vibrometry, stroboscopic video 
microscopy and scanning white light interferometry, the MSA is 
designed as an all-in-one combination of technologies that clarifies real microstructural response 
and topography. 
 
 UV/VIS Spectrometer Cary 60 
 
Laboratory UV/VIS spectrometer with wide spectral coverage 
from the atmospheric UV to the initial near-IR range at good 
spectral resolution and spectral dynamics. Applications include 
measuring colorimetric assays as well as the characterisation of 
optical components (filters, AR coatings, layers etc.). 
 
 
Dedicated PV Instrumentation (PL, EL, …) 
The defined high level goals of the project may furthermore benefit from CTR’s 

 
107 
OLEDSOLAR  
 State of the art photovoltaics in-lab and in-field testing infrastructure, including 
electroluminescence, thermal imaging, fluorescence imaging, twilight electroluminescence, 
outdoor power meter, cell flash tester etc.,  
 Optical measurement systems (laser profiling, microscopy, white light interferometer), and 
 Harsh environment characterisation equipment as well as a cryogenic chamber complete the 
ability of carrying out high performance industrial research in this project.  
 
Furthermore CTR is also equipped for smart sensor integration in devices and owns a research PV 
power plant to carry out field tests under real environmental conditions. 
 
Key Personnel 
Name: Dr. Martin Kraft                           Gender: Male 
Background:  
Dr Martin Kraft is CTR’s area managers for Photonic Systems, and the centre’s IPR manager. 
Holding a PhD in Technical Chemistry, his scientific expertise ranges from chemical process 
analytics to comprehensive computer-based multi-parameter system simulation and optimisation. 
Current key research interests include applied vibrational (IR, Raman) spectroscopy, process 
analytical technologies (PAT) and applied process control, photonic (nano-) particle sensors and 
multi-method simulation-based system & process elucidation and optimisation. Further key 
qualifications include extensive experience in the management of complex multi-partner R&D 
projects and in IP rights. 
Education: 
Engineering degree (“Ing.”) in Polymer Technology 
M.Sc. in Technical Chemistry, curriculum Analytical Chemistry and Physico-Chemistry (TU 
Wien; Univ. Cambridge) 
PhD in Technical Chemistry 
various courses in project management, IPR, legal contracting in R&D, research management 
Work Experience: 
2004 – present:  Carinthian University of Applied Sciences, Area Engineering & IT: 
Industry Lecturer (Chemistry, Physics and Chemistry of Semiconductor Manufacturing, IPR for 
Engineers) 
2001 – present:  CTR Carinthian Tech Research AG: Key Researcher Chemical Sensors & 
Applied Spectroscopy 
  Division Manager Photonic Systems & ASSIC Area Manager Smart Systems Integration (SYS) 
(2015 - ) 
1998 - 2001: Institute of Analytical Chemistry, TU Wien: Full-time research assistant. 
Product Development Experience: 
15+ years in applied research, with joint projects typically ranging from TRL 2-3 to TRL 6-8; 
latest example: “AVL CPC” condensation particle counter, https://www.avl.com/-/apcplus-avl-
particle-counter  
Intellectual Property Management: 
 Centre IP manager, covering the field from patent searches to patent filing coordination; IP 
portfolio management for the PHOS area, advisory function for decision making for both 
CTR and company partners 
 Inventor of several original inventions/patents, from MEMS-based FTIR spectrometry to 
high-temperature CPCs 
 Editorial author of 20+ original patent applications 
Innovation Management: 
Responsible area manager in charge of customer interactions and national and international 
networking, scientific as well as commercial dissemination. 
 
108 
OLEDSOLAR  
Name: Katja Presich                           Gender: Female 
Background:  
Katja Presich has a strong background in technical/medical physics with the focus on imaging 
technologies. She will support the CTR team in the field of signal processing and data analysis. 
Education: 
2014-2015: Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg – PhD programme Medical Sciences 
2011-2014: Technical University Vienna –Biomedical Engineering / Medical Physics and Imaging 
(M.Sc.) 
2007-2011: Technical University Vienna – Study of Technical Physics (B.Sc.) 
Work Experience: 
2017 - present CTR Carinthian Tech Research AG 
2015 - 2017 KTM AG, NVH Engineer 
2014 - 2015 radART Institute, PMU Salzburg, Medical Physicist - research assistant 
2013 - 2014 Physicist at the federal hospital in Salzburg, employed by EBG MedAustron 
GmbH 
Product Development Experience: 
 Accompanying the whole product development process at KTM AG, conducting 
measurements of structure-borne noise in different phases of prototypes 
 Input on the prototype design based on these measurements which required changes, in 
agreement with the project manager of specific model or component 
 Physical characterisation and input on the design of a new in-room CT for ionizing radio 
therapy application 
Innovation Management: 
 In-room CT for ionizing radio therapy: prepare necessary documentation and quality 
assurance protocols to comply with official regulative 
 Conduct acceptance tests at the customer side 
 
Name: Lukas Neumaier                           Gender: Male 
Background:  
Lukas has an extended knowledge in electrical engineering and biomimetics/bionics (university 
education). He is also an experienced researcher in the field of renewable energy systems, 
especially photovoltaics focusing in the area of: (a) quality control and characterisation of PV-
modules and components and (b) PV plant monitoring. He has carried out several research 
projects in the area of smart systems specifically (a) data acquisition, analysis and evaluation and 
(b) sensor integration. Lukas is also a certified project manager Level D (IPMA/pma) - Project 
management for national (FFG) and international (Interreg) funded projects as well as Project 
management of contract research projects. 
Education: 
2013-2015: Carinthian University of Applied Sciences, Villach - Study of Bionik/Biomimetics in 
Energy Systems 
2007-2012: Technical University Graz - Study of Electrical Engineering and Power Engineering 
1998-2006: Secondary School Feldkirchen – Focus: Natural Science 
Work Experience: 
2012-present: CTR Carinthian Tech Research AG – Researcher & Project Manager Smart Systems 
and Photovoltaics  
Product Development Experience: 
 Development of an Raman-based inspection tool for non-destructive, inline quality control to 
enable smart production in photovoltaic industry 
 
109 
OLEDSOLAR  
 Development, analysis and verification of various sensor-based prototypes for industry based 
applications (environmental sensing, identification, energy harvesting) 
Intellectual Property Management: 
 Knowledge in professional Patent Literature Research (DEPATISnet) 
 Invention disclosure concerning the avoidance of potential induced degradation for 
photovoltaic modules 
Innovation Management: 
Extensive publication activities on  national and international conferences (more than 50 
publications as author and co-author) 
 
 
Participant 15 
Organisation Name: ADVANCED ENERGY 
TECHNOLOGIES S.A. (Advent) 
Website: http://www.advent-energy.com/ 
Organisation Description: 
ADVENT TECHNOLOGIES S.A. (AT) develops new materials and systems for renewable 
energy technologies, such as plastic photovoltaics and high temperature PEM fuel cells. The 
Company, founded by researchers from the Foundation for Research & Technology-Hellas 
(FORTH-ICEHT) and the University of Patras, is a spin-off operation from these two academic 
institutions and is funded by financial institutional investors (Connecticut Innovations, Piraeus 
Capital Management, Dolphin Capital PLC), industrial partners (Systems Sunlight S.A., Velti 
PLC, ILPRA S.A) as well as angel investors. The activity in plastic photovoltaics and related 
materials goes back to 2001 where the cofounders of Advent were engaged in an R&D contract 
activity from University of Patras and FORTH/ICEHT with the world industry leader Konarka 
Technologies of Lowell, MA. Regarding the R&D activity in relationship to government grants 
and contracts, the Company is the recipient of 11 competitive R&D grants during the last few 
years, a testament to the excellent level of the cofounders and the scientific personnel of the 
Company. The competitive R&D grants are in the area of plastic photovoltaics, fuel cells and 
catalysts. 
Relevant Publications: 
 Chochos, C. L.; Singh, R. et al. “Enhancement of the power conversion efficiency in organic 
photovoltaics by unveiling the appropriate polymer backbone enlargement approach” Adv. 
Funct. Mater. 2016, 26, 1840 
 Chochos, C. L.; Ameri, T. et al. “An Alternative Strategy to Adjust the Recombination 
Mechanism of Organic Photovoltaics by Implementing Ternary Compounds“ Adv. Energy 
Mater. 2015, 5, 1501527. 
 Chochos, C. L.; Scherf, U. et al. “Ultra Low Band Gap α,β-unsubstituted BODIPY-based 
Copolymer Synthesized by Palladium Catalyzed Cross-Coupling Polymerization for Near 
Infrared Organic photovoltaics” J. Mater. Chem. A 2015, 3, 16279.  
 Chochos, C. L.; Brabec, C. J. et al. ““Photophysics of molecular weight induced losses in 
indacenodithienothiophene-based solar cells” Adv. Funct. Mater. 2015, 25, 4898.  
 Chochos, C. L.; Heeney, M. et al. “Influence of the Electron Deficient Co-monomer on the 
Optoelectronic Properties and Photovoltaic Performance of Dithienogermole-based Co-
polymers” Adv. Funct. Mater. 2014, 24, 678.  
Relevant Projects: 
 

 
110 
OLEDSOLAR  
 “Development of smart machines, tools and processes for the precision synthesis of 
nanomaterials with tailored properties for Organic Electronics (Smartonics)” EU FP7-NMP 
large at ADVENT Technologies SA (2013-2016 Budget 125.000 Euro); Grant agreement no.: 
310229.  
 “New materials for highly efficient and reliable organic solar cells (MatHero)” FP7-PEOPLE-
2013-NMP small at ADVENT Technologies SA (2013-2016 Budget 220.000 Euro); Grant 
agreement no.: 604603.  
 “Development of New Low Band Gap Conjugated Polymers for Organic Photovoltaic 
Applications (ADVEPOL)” “Support for businesses employing highly scientific training" 
through the "Human Resources Development" of General Secretariat for Research and 
Technology in Greece (GSRT) at ADVENT Technologies SA (2012 – 2014 Budget 45.000 
Euro) 
 “Organic Semiconductors for NIR Optoelectronics (OSNIRO)” Marie Curie Initial Training 
Networks (ITN) Call: FP7-PEOPLE-2013-ITN at ADVENT Technologies SA (2013-2017 
Budget 330.000 Euro); Grant agreement no.: 607585.  
        ITN-ETN OSNIRO is the development of optoelectronic materials and devices (organic solar 
cells, photodetectors and image sensors as well as organic light-emitting diodes) 
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
The infrastructure capabilities at Advent Technologies facilities, includes pilot production space at 
the Patras Science Park. The Patras Science Park location is an ideal place for Advent Technologies 
due to the proximity to both FORTH/ICEHT and University of Patras where major instrumentation 
available to Advent Technologies exists (NMR, MS, XPS, Raman etc.) As far as the 
instrumentation at Advent Technologies itself is concerned, the Company is very well equipped to 
perform the work described in the project. Specifically, a series of chemical synthesis stations exist 
where synthesis in small quantities is possible in addition to the presence of 50 L chemical reactors 
(2 Buchi reactors connected to 2 Huber units; models Huber Unistat 815W and 385W) that is 
capable of Kg level synthesis. Regarding characterization, size exclusion chromatography (GPC), 
UV-Vis spectrometry and Photoluminescence spectroscopy (PL) are some of the techniques 
available in house. 
          
Key Personnel 
Name: Dr Christos Chochos                          Gender: Male 
Background:  
Christos L. Chochos holds a degree in Chemistry (2001), a M.Sc (2004) and a PhD (2006) in 
Polymer Science and Technology from the Chemistry Department of University of Patras. His 
research interests include the design, synthesis and commercialization activities of organic 
semiconducting materials for organic electronic applications. Recently, he received a Marie Curie 
(2013-2015) Intra European Fellowship (FP7-PEOPLE-2012) with an excellent mark of 98,4/100 
for the development of new high performance conjugated polymers with environmentally friendly 
methodologies for application in organic photovoltaics. At the same time, as manager of organic 
electronic materials in Advent Technologies SA, he is the scientific supervisor in two European 
projects on the development of organic materials for applications in the near infrared and organic 
Figure 1: 50L Chemical 
reactor (>1µm) 
Figure 2: Coating machinery Figure 3: Analytical facility 
 
111 
OLEDSOLAR  
photovoltaics. He is the author of 32 scientific publications [h-index=15; Web of Science (March 
2015)] and 3 US patents. All related to the development of conjugated polymers for various 
optoelectronic applications. In the past, Dr Chochos was postdoctoral researcher at the Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) in Strasbourg, Department of Mechanical 
Engineering and Materials Science and Engineering of the Cyprus University of Technology and 
the Institute of Chemical Engineering Sciences (ICE-HT) in Patras. 
 
Education: 
PhD: 2006, Interdepartmental (Chemistry, Physics, Chemical Engineering, Materials Science and 
Engineering), University of Patras, Greece, Prof. Joannis Kallitsis, Synthesis and Characterization 
of New Conjugated Polymers for Optoelectronic Applications. Co-supervisor: Dr. Vasilis 
Gregoriou 
M.Sc.: 2004, Interdepartmental (Chemistry, Physics, Chemical Engineering, Materials Science 
and Engineering), University of Patras, Greece, Prof. Joannis Kallitsis, Synthesis and 
Characterization of Rod-Coil Diblock Copolymers with Oligofluorenes as Initiators. Co-
supervisor: Dr. Vasilis Gregoriou 
B.Sc.: 2001, Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, Greece, Prof. Dionyssios 
Papaioannou, Total synthesis of prototype cyclic polyamine derivatives with biological interest 
Work Experience: 
2015 – Present:  ADVENT Technologies SA, Patras, Greece, Manager of Organic 
Electronic Materials 
Previous Positions:  
2013 – 2015:    Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Ioannina, Greece, 
Marie Curie Intra European Research Fellow at the Polymeric Materials' Laboratory 
2011 – 2012:  Institute of Chemical Engineering Sciences (ICE-HT), Foundation for Research 
and Technology Hellas (FORTH) Patras, Greece, PostDoc Fellow.  
2008 – 2011:  Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science and Engineering of 
the Cyprus University and Technology, Limassol, Cyprus, PostDoc Fellow.  
2008 Institute of Physical Chemistry of the National Research Centre Demokritos Athens, 
Greece, PostDoc Research Fellow. 
2007 – 2008:  Laboratoire d'Ingénierie des Polymères pour les Hautes Technologies (LIPHT), 
Université Louis Pasteur, Ecole Européenne de Chimie, Polymères et Matériaux (E-ECPM), and 
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) Strasbourg, France, PostDoc Fellow.  
2007  Research and development department of ADVENT Technologies SA, Patras, Greece, 
Research Scientist. 
2007 Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, PostDoc Fellow. 
Product Development Experience: 
Scale up in multigram quantities organic polymeric semiconductors as active layer components 
for various optoelectronic applications by traditional organic synthesis in chemical reactors. 
Intellectual Property Management: 
 “Acid-doped polyelectrolyte modified carbon nanotubes and their use in high temperature 
PEM fuel cell electrodes” US Patent (US 2009/0081487 A1) 26 March 2009 and WO Patent 
(WO 2009/087484 A2) 
Christos Chochos, Nora Gourdoupi, Nikos Triantafyllopoulos, Joannis Kallitsis  
 
 “Novel polymer networks based on benzimidazole moiety for high performance polymer 
electrolyte membrane fuel cells” US Provisional Patent (US 61/812,368) 16 April 2013 
Christos Chochos, Vasilis Gregoriou  
 
  “Novel zwitterionic polyelectrolytes as efficient interface materials for application in 
optoelectronic devices” US Provisional Patent (US 61/815,788) 25 April 2013 
Christos Chochos, Vasilis Gregoriou 
 
112 
OLEDSOLAR  
 
 “Conjugated polymers containing fused electron rich and electron poor units, preparation 
method and uses thereof” US Provisional Patent (US 61/817,386) 30 April 2013 
Christos Chochos, Vasilis Gregoriou  
Innovation Management: 
Key exploitable product: Efficient donor polymers will be synthesized and characterized, which 
can be applied as component for the active layer as well as in the electrodes of OPV devices and 
as semi-conducting material for other organic electronic applications. 
 Some joint IPR on the synthesis of semi-conducting polymers and interlayer materials 
 Public website to inform about the objectives, consortium, events, open position, and 
publishable achievements. The public project reports and events will be available on this 
website and updated on a regular basis. 
 Publications in Scientific Journals.  
 Communication and interaction with other EC Projects (e.g. MatHero, SunFlower, RoleMak, 
ROTROT, FlexNet (NoE), COLAE (CA), e-LIFT, FLEXIBILITY, TDK4PE, HIFLEX, 
POLARIC, COMBOLED, Chip2Foil, PLACE-it, Smartonics) and exchange non-confidential 
information with them to assure coherence of the EC research and avoid useless replication of 
work.  
 Educational programmes: To ensure a long term impact, several training materials based on 
the newest and most advanced e-learning technologies will be produced and be freely 
distributed that can be integrated in educational programmes at university level. The project 
will also contribute to capacity building through supporting scholarships and exchanges 
programmes of students at PhD and post-doctoral level. 
 Close collaboration will be established with associations, such as the OE-A and in ETPs 
(NANOfutures, Photovoltaics, Photonics21, EuMaT, ENIAC, MANUFUTURE). 
 Newsletters, press releases, flyers, for the public  
 Dissemination Kit, which will contain suitable material (e.g. text and pictures including 
copyright clearance), which the EC may use for its own dissemination  
 Participation and presentations in Conferences, Workshops and Summer schools. 
Participations of partners are scheduled in Scientific and Technical Conferences, as the E-
MRS and mainly the possibility to organize a Symposium on “Organic Materials, Processes 
& Applications”, in relation with Conferences: Global Plastic Electronics, LOPE-C, Printed 
Electronics, Organic Semiconductors Conference, E-MRS, MRS, Drupa in Europe and USA. 
 Participations in technical, commercial Fairs and Exhibitions. Dissemination of the results 
towards other industrial partners & potential target user groups will also be made by the 
consortium via participation in major technical exhibitions (ACHEMA, SolarExpo, 
International Converting Exhibition Trade Show, Intersolar etc).  
 Actively participation in the EC activities organized at programme level relating to NMP in 
ICT or in Horizon2020, with the objective of providing input towards common activities and 
receiving feedback (e.g. from clusters), offering advice and guidance and receiving 
information relating to NMP and ICT programmes implementation, standards, policy and 
regulatory activities, national or international initiatives, etc. 
 Participations in exhibitions, platforms, thematic networks. The partners have been 
participating for several years in such events for the promotion of their activities.  
 
 
 
113 
OLEDSOLAR  
 
Participant 16 
Organisation Name: INURU GmbH. (INURU) 
Website: http://www.inuru.de/ 
Organisation Description: 
Inuru Gmbh is a German-based printed light & displays and printed electronics company, 
positioned as an innovative R&D&I player in ultra-thin, low cost electronic devices industry. 
Inuru is the world leader of OLED containing paper products for advertisement purposes. Inuru 
has its own inks, printing process, battery and OLED production, which is done by ink-jet 
printing. The core of INURU’s technology is a low cost OLED solution, based on paper-thin & 
bright organic light source, printed with standard printing equipment in ambient conditions. This 
cutting-edge eco-friendly technology finds use in a wide range of low-cost and flexible 
applications, in particular, full displays for smartphones and TVs. INURU builds on the expertise 
and strong research track-record of a team composed by high-calibre professionals in the field of 
organic and printed electronics. INURU run its own facility and printed flexible OLED 
manufacturing production line in Berlin. 
Vision: 
INURU is sumerian and means "in-light". It is composed out of the words "INA" (engl. in, into) 
and "NURU" (light). Sumerian thereby is the world's first written language. The word INURU 
fully reflects the vision of our company:  FIRST we want to use light to make things visible and 
THEN we want to use the same light to enlighten people by bringing smart content through our 
printed display solutions. 
Relevant Publications: 
 Winner of industrial prize “german packaging award 2017” in collaboration with Coca Cola 
and Karl Knauer 
Relevant Projects: 
 Project leader of BMBF project “ORIGAMI/IonT” 
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
 4-point-probe, 3 Ink-jet-printers, blade-coater, atomic force microscope, fluorescence 
spectrometer, OTFT measurement set-up (Ossila), OLED characterization set-up (Ossila), 
evaporation chamber, spin-coater, flowbox systems, screen printer, R2R paper assembly, 
OLED ink-jet pilot line 
 Printed flexible OLED manufacturing production line; 
 Licensed software (process control and quality assurance); 
 Characterization equipment;       
 
 
 
 
OLED Sheet Flex: 

 
114 
OLEDSOLAR  
  
Green OLED: 
 
Key Personnel 
Name: Marcin Ratajczak                          Gender: Male 
Background:  
During the last 10 years of being entrepreneur, Marcin has provided high quality customer 
solutions in many industries. Since 2012, he has been responsible for the overall development of 
INURU, as CEO and co-founder.  
Education: 
MSc degree from in Electronics Engineering from Freie Universität Berlin  
Work Experience: 
2012 – Present:  CEO and Co-founder, Inuru Gmbh, Berlin, Germany  
Product Development Experience: 
• Go-to-market and technology development strategy; 
• Business development & requirement analysis in advertising, packaging;  
• Product development: supply chain; production process; customer experience. 
 
Innovation Management: 
 
Vice Chair Board of Directors, INAM – Innovation Network for Advanced Materials 
  
Name: Patrick Barkowski                          Gender: Male 

 
115 
OLEDSOLAR  
Background:  
Patrick has been working with and for many different leading institutes in the field of organic and 
printed electronics (AG Koch - HU Berlin; Fraunhofer IAP; TU Chemnitz), and has collected a 
vast knowhow in physics, chemistry and processing. He has also done research on solution 
processed organic doping of organic semiconductors. At INURU, in his role as CTO & Co-
founder, he leverages his background and previous professional experiences to develop printed 
light inks, which are unique in the industry. 
Education: 
MSc degree in Physics from Humboldt University of Berlin 
Work Experience: 
2014 – Present:  CTO and Co-founder, Inuru Gmbh, Berlin, Germany  
 
Product Development Experience: 
• Developed full printed OLED stack 
• Developed inks for printed OLEDs and OPVs 
• Developed new low cost printed HTL material 
• Developed barrier films for organic devices 
• Developed printed circuits on paper 
• Developed flexible paper based OLED 
 
Intellectual Property Management: 
• PCT/EP2017/073753  
• PCT/EP2017/076172  
• PCT/EP2017/074512 
• PCT/EP2017/074514 
 
 
 
 
Participant 17 
Organisation Name: SMIT Thermal Solutions B.V. (SMIT) 
Website:  www.smitthermalsolutions.com 
Organisation Description: 
SMIT Thermal Solutions BV is a leading supplier of customized, innovative thermal and coatings 
equipment and processes, founded in 1936 in Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Currently the 
headquarters are located in Eindhoven, in an important hub of research and innovation in the south 
of Netherland and the company employs around 75 highly skilled engineers with competences 
covering all aspects required for equipment manufacturing, installation and commissioning.  
Besides design and manufacture of thermal process solutions for high-volume manufacturing, the 
core competences of SMIT include deposition processes using thermal evaporation, (PE)CVD and 
ALD for both rigid and flexible substrates.  
Current focus of SMIT is on thin film applications, acting as an expert partner to manufacturers 
aiming for cost-effective mass production. 

 
116 
OLEDSOLAR  
The strategy of SMIT is to develop and commercialize state of the art industrial equipment that 
can serve a wide variety of applications. In particular, within this project, the aim of SMIT is to 
develop and test plasma enhanced (PE) spatial atomic layer deposition (sALD) compatible with an 
R2R system.   
Our plan is to use the know-how developed within this project to offer added value to existing 
systems and as a building stone for next generation systems (R2R). A successful development will 
help market penetration of high quality flexible devices (OLED, OPV, CIGS) and will generate 
sales of R2R sALD systems and business expansion for SMIT and help create additional 
employment opportunities in the region.   
Additionally, there are many other applications and markets that can as well benefit from this 
technology development to improve product quality and increase throughput.  This will also 
contribute to increased revenue and can create additional expansion opportunities. 
Relevant Publications: 
5. FLEx ALD R2R and S2S. https://www.meyerburger.com/nl/en/technologies/specialized-
technologies/spatial-atomic-layer-deposition/ 
6. TFE CONx (in particular JETx). 
https://www.meyerburger.com/nl/en/technologies/specialized-technologies/product-
detail/product/conx-tfe/ 
7. Presentation for ALD (example). http://www.semi.org/en/dana-borsa-flexible-functional-
devices-mass-production-level-flex-r2r-sald-platform 
8. Presentation for barriers (example - Industrial scale manufacturing of transparent and flexible 
moisture barriers).  
https://www.fep.fraunhofer.de/en/events/rueckblick_2017/sidme17.html#tabpanel-2 
 
Relevant Projects: 
4. OPZuid. https://www.stimulus.nl/op-zuid/project/industriele-productie-dunne-film-barriers/ 
5. Enso. http://enso-ecsel.eu/ 
6. Collaboration with Holst: Development of a roll-to-roll PECVD deposition tool to be used for 
flexible OLED lighting and organic solar cells. https://www.oled-info.com/roth-rau-joins-
holst-centre-research-barriers-flexible-electronics 
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
 Spectral ellipsometry 
 Profilometer 
 Low resolution SEM (>1µm)  
 Climate chamber / ovens 
 
117 
OLEDSOLAR  
                       
 
 
 
 
                                                    
                                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Spectral ellipsometry 
Figure 2: Profilometer 
Figure 3: Low resolution SEM (>1µm) 

 
118 
OLEDSOLAR  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Personnel 
 
Name: Dana Borsa                            Gender: Female 
Background:  
Dr. Dana Borsa, is Business Development Manager at SMIT Thermal Solutions BV. Previously,  
as BU Manager Thin Film Coating and Projects at Meyer Burger (Netherlands) B.V, she was 
responsible for all business aspects including equipment, process and application developments. 
She has a PhD in physics from the Rijksuniversiteit Groningen focused on thin film coatings and 
later worked on switchable mirrors and hydrogen storage materials at the Vrije Universiteit 
Amsterdam and on high efficiency solar cell concepts at ECN before moving into a management 
role.  
 
Education: 
PhD  – Centro de Microanalisis de Materiales, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Spain & 
Nuclear Solid State Physics Group, University of Groningen, NL 
 
Work Experience: 
2019 – present: SMIT Thermal Solutions B.V., Eindhoven, NL – Business Development Manager  
2009 – 2019: Meyer Burger (Netherlands) B.V., Eindhoven, NL – BU Manager TFC and Projects, 
Manager Research, Project Leader 
2007 – 2009: Energy Research Centre Nederland, Petten NL – Researcher Silicon PV 
2004 – 2007: Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, NL – Researcher   
 
Product Development Experience: 
 Project manager customer project for the fabrication of a prototype system for battery 
applications; responsible for all phases  
 Project leader for INREP H2020 project for the design, fabrication and commissioning of an 
injector head for sALD S2S tool  
 Project leader ‘SiOx for market implementation’: budget and resource planning; technology 
scouting, process development and platform upgrade for 24/7 production  
 Coordination CIP-SiNx program: definition and continuous topic update, resource planning 
(FTEs, tool time and consumables); progress monitoring and supervision of process 
development (>40 WP); field implementation and customer support    
 Coordination customer sampling program: communication with customers and local sales 
team; define test program; realization and after care 
 Sales support at HQ and on-site; regular customer visits and process and product marketing.  
 
Figure 4: Climate chamber / ovens 

 
119 
OLEDSOLAR  
Name: Jos Bakema                            Gender: Male 
Background:  
Jos Bakema is Product Manager at SMIT Thermal Solutions BV and involved in various aspects 
of product development of thermal equipment. With a strong technical background from 
Rijksuniversiteit Groningen and Technical University Eindhoven, and many years of industry 
experience, he is an experienced manager who combines hands-on feel with sharp technological 
and business thinking.  
 
Work Experience: 
2016 – present: SMIT Thermal Solutions B.V., Eindhoven, NL – Product Manager  
2015 – 2016: Solaytec., Eindhoven, NL – Program Manager 
2006 – 2015: Smit Ovens, Son, NL – Manager Engineering 
1997 – 2006: Gemco, NL – Project Manager, Process Engineer 
 
 
 
4.2. Third parties involved in the project (third party resources) 
15. Advent 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted) 
No 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked 
third parties 
No 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by 
third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
No 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by 
International Partners (Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
No 
  
Section 5: Ethics and Security
5.1 Ethics 
 
There any no ethical issues related to this proposal.
5.2 Security 
 
Please indicate if your project will involve: 
 
 activities or results raising security issues: NO 
 
 'EU-classified information' as background or results: NO