1.4 Ambition 
The alternative approaches and limitations vs. OLEDSOLAR competitive advantage is detailed in table below: 
Table 3: Competitive comparison of OLEDSOLAR with other techniques for targeted devices 
Devices issues Limitations of alternate devices and processes  
OLED: OLED suppliers claim the technology 
offers far more colours, brightness and contrast 
with less motion blur than LCD, especially 
against cheaper LCD models 
LCD/Plasma: Limits in brilliance, resolution and colour 
ranges due to their inherent structures and physical 
processes of displaying images. 
OLED: Power and luminescent efficiency are 
higher as OLEDs do not use light from a 
backplane backlight (the transmissive mode) but 
from the polymer (emissive mode).  
LCD/Plasma: Power requirements that are difficult to 
reduce further, owing to the need for a backlight for LCD, 
despite the move to large LEDs, or physical discharge for 
plasma 
OLED: Inherent physical properties of polymers 
enable flexib le displays to be made and this 
widens the applications base enormously. 
LCD/Plasma: The mainstream technologies in LCD and 
plasma do not produce flexible types of displays. 
OLED: The display’s weight can be lower as 
there is no backlight and the whole unit can also 
be made thinner, of the order of a few millimetres 
thick. 
LCD/Plasma: Weights that are difficult to reduce further 
because of the need for complex substrates 
and backlighting planes. 
OPV: Emerging photovoltaic cells are made 
from an assortme nt of inexpensive materials, 
including organic polymers, small molecules, 
and various types of inorganic compounds, 
which can be fabricated on flexible supports via 
inexpensive solution -phase techniques such as 
high-speed roll-to-roll printing. 
Silicon solar cell: Because silicon does not absorb sunlight 
strongly, silicon cells contain a relatively thick layer of 
silicon, which is brittle and therefore must be supported on 
a rigid, heavy piece of glass, adding cost and limiting 
applications. 
OPV: Low-temperature manufacture enables 
plastic or virtually any smooth support layer to 
be used 
Silicon solar cell: High temperature during fabrication 
requires metal or glass support layer. 
                                                 
22 COM(2010) 491 final. 

 
33 
OLEDSOLAR  
OPV: Solar cells are lightweight, flexible and 
rugged 
Silicon solar cell: Solar cells are heavy, rigid and fragile  
OPV: Solar cells can be any color and semi -
transparent 
Silicon solar cell: Solar cells are black or blue 
Thin-film encapsulation (CVD):  We will be 
looking at integrate Atomic Layer Deposition 
process into R2R CIGS photovoltaics production 
sequence for complete protection of cells against 
humidity; 
 
 
-CVD has no inherent control of the film thickness using 
surface chemistry 
-CVD can reach a limited degree of control only by 
extremely careful control of reaction time, reactant 
exposure and reaction temperature 
-CVD does not deposit conformally; rather deposition is 
determined by reactant flux 
-Reactants may react in the gas phase during CVD; 
consequently, particles may deposit on the surface resulting 
in a granular, nonconformal film 
OLESOLAR Solution 
benefits 
 
For roll -to-roll production of these components, the correlation between all 
parameters (materials, production, inspection) and the final device performance needs 
to be determined as early as possible. For instance, the performance of organic solar 
cells and organic LEDs is highly dependent on the thicknesses of the constituent layer 
materials composing the device. The lack of accurate information about the thickness 
of the thin films would prevent the detection of components that not perform well 
against design specifications. Without real-time thin film thickness measurements, or 
continuous yield monitoring directly integrated in the production line, the capacity of 
optimizing the production process becomes very limited and costly. 
Benefits to industry  
 
OLED – Industrial application (automotive) (opto-electrical part): 
Energy savings/Fuel efficiency: As OLED light uses less power compared to LEDs 
and other lighting solutions, the low-power usage will be the most attractive feature 
to car-makers and owners. Moreover, the low-weight OLED light panels will bring 
energy savings and increase fuel efficiency. 
Design flexibility: OLED light panels are also non-glaring, which means reflectors, 
light guides or similar optical components are not required. A thin (0.8mm - 1.5mm) 
OLED lighting strip stretched across any of the aerodynamically optimised surfaces 
could open a number of exciting new options. This will expand the design 
possibilities of car lights and provide design freedom to designers.  
Luminance quality: The uniformity of light output from an OLED panel is also 
advantageous as it will reduce the need for reflectors, which are necessary with 
other lighting techniques. Ultimately, automotive OLED lights printed on 
transparent plastics could also be fitted to the windows of cars too. On the other 
side, OLED light offers totally uniform, smooth and visually comfortable light with 
low-glare and low-shadow features. These characteristics of OLED light reduce eye 
fatigue and let people comfortably enjoy the light; 
OPV (opto-electrical part):  
Thin film photovoltaic cells based on solution processable organic semiconductors 
have attracted remarkable interest as a possible alternative to conventional, 
inorganic photovoltaic technologies. The following key advantages of organic 
photovoltaic (OPV) devices have been identified: Low weight and flexibility of the 
PV modules; Semitransparency; easy integration into other products; new market 
opportunities, e.g. wearable PV; significantly lower manufacturing costs compared 
to conventional inorganic technologies; Manufacturing of OPV in a continuous 
process using state of the art printing tools; Short energy payback times and low 
environmental impact during manufacturing and operations23. 
State of the art spatial ALD 
                                                 
23 Efficiency of bulk-heterojunction organic solar cells 
 
34 
OLEDSOLAR  
The first example of application of spatial ALD process has been the adoption of an Al 2O3 layer as backside 
passivation film in crystalline silicon solar cell.  Two companies, Levitech and SoLayTec  focus on this technology 
to meet the industrial requirement of processing 3000 wafers/h, are currently selling commercial spatial ALD tools.1–
3 Flexible electronics such as light emitting diodes (OLED) as well as thin film photovoltaics are moving from the 
lab scale towards the production, and several challenges are still to be tackled. Most of the materials used in these  
devices are sensitive to O2 and H2O, and therefore encapsulation strategies which are economically viable, compatible 
with high-throughput and low cost deposition methods on large area are strictly required. For OLEDs, water vapor 
transmission rates (WVTRs) as low as 10-6 g·m-2·day-1are typically needed. For thin film photo-voltaic modules the 
WVTR  is expected to be less stringent (depending on type of by one or two orders of magnitude) but still far beyond 
the simple polymer encapsulation foils (1 g·m-2·day-1). Conventional solutions such as glass-glass encapsulation are 
not compatible with flexible PV applications, and suffer from relative 
high weight. ALD layers such as Al2O3, multilayer stacks of Al2O3/TiO2, 
combination of inorganic/organic layers have been already proven in lab 
scale as valid solution with excellent WVTR values. 4–10 Spatial ALD 
approach combined with a roll to roll (R2R) line can potentially meet the 
requirement of high throughput low cost barrier/encapsulation.  
Spatial ALD Al 2O3 50 nm thick film has been deposited on glass 
substrates of an industrially relevant size (370 × 470 mm 2). The film 
exhibits a WVTR below the detection limit of the MOCON test (3 x 10-3 
g·m-2·day-1 at 20°C/50 %RH).11 Spatial ALD Al2O3 and SnO2 have been 
demonstrated on a lab scale test as valid gas permeation barrier using 
oxygen plasma (PE -s-ALD) as oxidative source instead of  the 
conventional water vapour. A 100nm thick Al 2O3 layer deposited at 150 
°C exhibits  a WVTR of  5 x 10-5 g·m-2·day-1 (at 60°C/60 %RH, and of 
2 x 10-4 g·m-2·day-1 (at 60°C/60 %RH) when the deposited at 100C.12 In 
the case of 110 nm SnO 2 a value of 7 x 10 -4 g·m-2·day-1 (at 60°C/60 
%RH) has been measured for the SnO2 deposited at 150 °C, but one order of magnitude in WVTR has been achieved 
using a lower temperature (100 °C).13 
TNO already tested  spatia l ALD layers on the own R2R pilot line. Depositing only 20 nm of Al 2O3 by roll to roll 
atmospheric pressure spatial ALD on PET foil ( 30cm x 2m ) without any pretreatment and/or planarization layer, 
drastically improves the WVTR value up to 2 x 10 -5 g·m-2·day-1 (at 20°C/50 %RH) and 4 x 10 -4 g·m-2·day-1 (at 
60°C/90 %RH). Still improvements can be achieved developing “ad hoc” solutions/strategies.  
Al2O3 layer has been successfully deposited also in the large area S2S-ALD tool, with an impressive uniformity (less 
than 0.5% relative thickness) over the entire glass plate (deposition area of 300 x 300 mm). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, the same Al 2O3 layer has been adopted as inorganic layer in the thin film encapsulation approach on 
flexible PET foil. This strategy, has been developed using plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposited (PECVD) 
SiNx layer in combination with organic printed layers. The th in film encapsulation which include large area Al 2O3 
spatial ALD layer in alternative to the PECVD SiNx, exhibited no visible degradation after more than 1100 hrs 
of test at 60 oC / 90 % RH, which corresponds to an equivalent time of 2.5 years at ambient conditions. 
Next to the barrier layers required for the OLED and solar cells, in the field of thin film photovoltaics, spatial ALD 
technique can be adopted to deposit functional layers in the device architectures. TNO developed a low temperature 
zinc oxysulfide (Zn (O,S)) process which has been used to fabricate an efficient buffer layer in cadmium-free CIGS 
device. By co-injecting the vaporized H 2O and H 2S gas in the same deposition zone a low temperature (120 °C) 
buffer layer has been implemented on the CIGS stack, exhibiting similar performance with respect to CIGS device 
Figure 48 Example of Al2O3 deposited on large area S2S s-ALD reactor tool (on the left) 
and the thickness uniformity over the glass plate (on the right). 
Figure 47 Water vapour transmission rate 
(WVTR) as a function of Al2O3 film 
deposited via roll to roll atmospheric pressure 
spatial ALD on PET foil. 
 
35 
OLEDSOLAR  
including the traditional chemical bath deposited CdS. The result proves the viability of spatial ALD as a new 
manufacturing technique to deposit and engineer functional layers in thin fi lm solar cells. The low temperature 
enabled  the application of the Zn(O,S) buffer layer on the roll-to-roll spatial ALD tool for flexible CIGS solar cells. 
Progress beyond the state of the art 
The results with lab-scale tools and large area deposition prototypes demonstrate that atmospheric spatial ALD layer 
is a promising technique to deposit barrier layers, as well as functional films for PV devices. However, several aspects 
in the parameters processing requires further investigations, improvements and o ther solutions can be explored. At 
the same time, it is necessary to evaluate the deposition yield, potentially in situ diagnostic, control of the coating, 
and the particle number which is detrimental to obtain pinhole free films. 
It is necessary to identify the lowest requirements in terms of temperature and speed deposition in correlation with 
the barrier properties in order to upscale the process for mass production.  While reducing the thermal budget of the 
s-ALD processes generally lower the quality barrier properties, alternative approaches to the single Al2O3 film such 
as nanolaminate, precursor mixing, introduction of organic layer (MLD), as well as use of atmospheric plasma 
technology might be a viable route to provide even better performance in terms of WVTR barrier properties. Being 
the barrier applied for flexible and potentially even rolled applications, the barrier needs to withstand mechanical 
stress without failures.   
On the R2R -ALD prototype tool at TNO, barrier deposition is without p lasma enhancement. Potential steps in 
OLEDSOLAR to enlarge capabilities for this or the envisaged bench (at Smit Thermal Solutions) are, to achieve in 
cooperation with metrology partners: 
 Enlarge range of coating options beyond current one of Al2O3 and TiO2 
 Development of R2R-ALD test bench with plasma enhanced deposition  
 Particle controls 
 Integration with pre/post processing (e.g. application of planarization/protection polymer coatings)  
 In-line inspection of coatings such as ellipsometry, Raman, PL for automatic adjustment of process settings (for 
enhanced process control) 
 Re-cycling of gasses, exhausts, excess of precursors “ 
 In-line inspection process state of the art and progress beyond state of the art: 
State of the art:  
A number of monitoring techniques exist when it comes to characterizing structures during the inspection and quality 
control in R2R environment for organic solar cells & OLED displays; in the nano - and micro-metre ranges, which 
have been utilised in the de velopment of the LIPSS fabrication technique, including SEM (scanning electron 
microscopy) and AFM (atomic force microscopy) 24,25. Fourier transform analysis of the SEM images have been used 
to quantify the periodicity of the structures.  This approach enab les a global value of spatial period to be quickly 
calculated, rather than estimating line thickness and spacings line by line, and generating a mean value, which is a 
more laborious process. 
However, most commonly used techniques at this dimensional scale  are in fact implemented off line and require 
sample preparation, Optical techniques offer the best opportunity for inline process monitoring, as they are non -
contact, non-destructive and can be applied to samples as they are without pre -treatment.  Accord ing to a recent 
review paper by IRIS 26, selected combined optical technologies, such as diffractometry, but also ellipsometry and 
spectral reflectance provide the opportunity for inline measurement of the thicknesses of nanostructured layers. 
White light Interferometry: An inline spectral reflectance system was developed in the THIME project27 to measure 
Organic PV films.  White light interferometry has been developed into an inline system by Dr Schwab28 for measuring 
the thickness of spacer and cover layers of Blu-Ray discs, but can also be applied to measure the surface topography 
of reflective materials.  However, while this system measures topography with a high level of accuracy (<100nm), 
it’s lateral resolution is limited to 10s of micrometres.  An inline  system has been developed by Nanometrics 29 
employing spectral reflectometry in single point scanning arrangement, which enables lateral critical dimension 
measurement with greater accuracy, but still diffraction limited to the spot size of around 1 micrometre. 
                                                 
24 A. Rodriguez, M.C. Morant.Minana, A. Dias-Ponte, A. Martinez-Calderon, M. Gomez-Aranzadi, S.M. Olaizola, Femtosecond laser-induced periodic surface 
nanostructuring of sputtered platinum thin films, Applied Surface Science 351 (2015) 135-139 
25 A. Martinez-Calderon, A. Rodriguez, A. Dias -Ponte, M.C. Morant.Minana, M. Gomez -Aranzadi, S.M. Olaizola, Femtosecond laser fabrication of highly 
hydrophobic tainless steel surface with hierarchical structures fabricated by combining ordred microstructures and LIPSS, Applied Surface Science 374 (2016) 
81-89 
26 E. Bugnicourt, T. Kehoe , M. Latorre, C. Serrano, S. Philippe and M. Schmid, Recent Prospects in the Inline Monitoring of Nanocomposites and Nanocoatings 
by Optical Technologies, Nanomaterials 2016, Review, 6(8), 150; doi:10.3390/nano6080150 
27 THIME, Thinfilm measurements on organic photovoltaic (OPV) layers; FP7Grant Agreement no: 315665; 2012 -2014 
28 dr. schwab GmbH, IQPC – Integrated Quality and Process Control. http://www.schwabinspection.com/index.php?puid=1&pageid=39  
29 Nanometrics Impulse, http://www.nanometrics.com/products/IMPULSE.html  
 
36 
OLEDSOLAR  
Scatterometry: It is possible to obtain higher resolution in lateral dimension measurements using optical techniques 
based on scatterometery and diffractometry, which can be applied to periodic structures of the type being developed 
in OLEDSOLAR.  Sca tterometry uses the instrumentation of a spectroscopic ellipsometer, along with complex 
mathematical modelling30 and is widely used in the microelectronics industry, for example the Nanometrics Atlas31, 
and the Nova T60032. However, the complex instrumentation and high-power data processing required mean that the 
technique has not been applied inline. Coherent Fourier Scatterometry, has been developed to exploit the smaller spot 
size that is possible using laser light, but is currently not deployed inline33. 
Diffractometry: Diffractometry using multiple diffraction orders imaged in the far-field is a versatile technique that 
has potential to provide comprehensive information regarding the 3 dimensional features of textured samples. 
Furthermore, when combined wit h different light source, it covers a broad resolution range: UV light can detect 
structures with period in the few hundreds nm range, whereas cost competitive blue laser can be used for structures 
with period between 500 and 700 nm. It has been effectively implemented in several versions for characterising the 
quality of the grooves in DVD and Blu-Ray discs, for example dr. schwab DOMS34, and Singulus Mastering B.V.35 
However the optical system is quite complex and so it hasn’t been employed in an inline configuration. 
Confocal Microscopy: may be used to obtain spatial resolution below the diffraction limit with resolution of 0.09um 
reported36, however once again it is not implemented inline. 
Another salient feature of this technique is that it provides an image of the surface structure, from which specific, 
local dimensions can be calculated, whereas for the current technology under development, it is desirable to obtain a 
general overview of the shape and common dimensions repeated in the periodic pattern,  especially where the sizes 
of individual lines can very over a range.  For this reason, it is more effective to employ a metrology that makes use 
of the structure periodicity, such as diffractometry or scatterometery, and provides a description of key fea tures, 
including height, width, sidewall slope and symmetry.  Diffractometry is the more attractive option of these two for 
inline process monitoring since it can provide simple information quickly with less data processing. 
Inline inspection of a huge variety sample parameter of interest ends their spatial distribution. Common technologies 
for the evaluation of barrier performance are extremely time consuming. Reliable measurements of the WVTR of 
ultra-barrier webs using diode laser spectroscopy (HiBarSens®) need days or some weeks (10-6 g m-2 d-1). Totally new 
concepts based on HSI are just demonstrated for a fast prediction of the performance of barrier webs (in the range of 
10-2 g m-2 d-1) with sufficient accuracy.37 
Progress beyond the State of the art: 
The challenge to progress beyond the state of the art will be to effectively implement diffractometry for inline process 
monitoring.  This will require the design of compact, high numerical aperture optics to capture the maximum number 
of orders possible.  Similar optical systems have been used to apply sub-wavelength optical diffraction metrology38,39 
to charactrise structures as small as 50nm in periodic patterns. 
As such, IRIS will start by calibrating the system on parts of known geometries with several p atterns required for 
obtaining the effects for each application. Variations of the basic system may be developed, having adjusted light 
sources and optics to the resolution and spot size needed, and for compatibility with flat surfaces, used in OLED and 
OPV industries.  These will be integrated in the related production lines to provide dimensional information on the 
structures in real time. Resulting data can be used to feed the processing models where appropriate.  
The transfer of the lab -scale approach of HSI based barrier evaluation to a continuous inline evaluation of barrier 
webs is highly ambition. Beside the hardware implementation (camera, lighting) the development of reliable robust 
prediction models (based on combination of deep learning algorithm s and imaging processing) are extremely 
challenging. It should also be noted that the approach has to be developed and tested for ultra-barrier webs (10-4 g m-2 
d-1 and better) with corresponding ground truth measurements. The inline HSI implementation will be accompanied 
with large area calcium mirror tests and large area OLED coatings on to be evaluated barrier films in roll -to-roll 
fabrication. The direct correlation of the device degradation behaviour and OLED lifetime performance from classical 
storage climate chamber will be applied as an input for the inline HSI algorithm. Yield and device reliability relevant 
                                                 
30 http://www.dfm.dtu.dk/index.php?id=309&L=-1%27 
31 Nanometrics Atlas, http://www.nanometrics.com/products/atlas-II.html 
32 Nova T600, http://www.novameasuring.com/t600.html 
33 S.Roy, A.C. Assafrao, S.F. Pereira, H.P. Urbach, Coherent Fourier Scatterometry for detection of nanometer -sized particles on a planar substrate surface, Optics Express 22 (2014) 
13251 
34 Dr. schwab DOMS XE-blu, http://www.schwabinspection.com/index/dr.schwab+Inspection+Technology/DOMS+Optical+Disc+V2.html 
35 http://www.singulus.com/en/innovative-technology/surface-engineering/crystalline.html 
36 Sensofar S Line, http://www.sensofar.com/metrology/sneox/ 
37 P. Wollmann, F. Gruber, W. Grählert; „Anordnung zur Bestimmung der Permeationsrate einer Probe“, 2015, Patent, erteilt; 
DE 10 2015 213 974; CT/EP2016/067019 
38 Kehoe, Microelectronic Engineering, 86, 1036 (2009) 
39 Silver, Appl. Opt., 46 (20), 4248 (2015).  - Kreuzer, Proc. SPIE 9424, 942426 (2015); Kreuzer, Proc. SPIE 9628, 96281Q (2015)-957 (2005) 
 
37 
OLEDSOLAR  
issues caused by the barrier films substrate and top encapsulation will be carefully validated and in close r elation 
with the HSI inspection system. 
 
Progress beyond state of art in automation and control:  
The challenge to progress beyond the state of the art will be to effectively implement smart sensors for inline 
process monitoring and control them in closed loop. 
 
These will be integrated in the related production lines to provide critical parameters information on the 
components in real time. Resulting data can be used to feed the processing models where appropriate. 
 
Thanks to the application of the novel inline monitoring system, OLEDSOLAR project will reduce the current 
processing cost and time to achieve a cost-effective process, up scalable 
to mass production.  
State of the art and Progress beyond state of the art: (for recycling and re-use) 
Optimisation and understanding of advanced products such as OLED and organic solar cell recycling requires deep 
systemic knowledge and understanding of the physics -based link between product design, material applications, 
potential reuse of components and combinations with the final treatment process technologies in the entire recycling 
system or chain. Rapidly changing product design and product replacement poses challenges to physical recyclers to 
have recycling technology keeping pace with rapidly changing product p roperties and material usage, which poses 
different demands on sorting technology development and plant configuration in order to most optimally recover 
materials40.Today, limited information is available on the internal reuse and recycling of components al ong the 
manufacturing process of commercial photovoltaic panels already installed at European scale. However, all 
photovoltaic modules available on the European market can be disposed of, notwithstanding the type of technology 
used. Most parts of a solar module can be recycled, including glass, semiconductor materials, ferrous and non-ferrous 
metals. The modules present on today’s market belong to two different categories, silicon and non -silicon based, 
which determine the recycling process to be used41. 
 For silicon-based modules, aluminium frames and junction boxes are dismantled manually at the beginning of 
the process. The module is subsequently crushed, and its several components are separated, allowing recovering 
up to 80% of the panel. 
 Non-silicon-based panels require the use of diverse recycling technologies. Cadmium telluride (CdTe) panels 
e.g. – a particularly common type – are first crushed into different fractions, much like non-silicon modules. But 
they also use chemical baths to separate the various semiconductor materials, allowing for the recovery of 95% 
such components. Recycling technologies for this type of panels have been widely increasing in recent years. 
For copper indium selenide (CIS) and Copper indium gallium (di)selenide (CIGS) photovoltaic modules similar 
chemical bath treatments apply. 
Even different EU funded projects have been focused in the development of new OLED and flexible solar products 
at pilot and semi-industrial scale (such as FLEXOLIGHTING, IMOLA or PI-SCALE) by using techniques such as 
vacuum thermal evaporation and shadow masking, organic vapour phase deposition (OVPD), transfer - printing 
and/or inkjet printing, the recyclability and reusability potential of novel OLED and flexible solar products, materials 
and components will be tackled in OLEDSOLAR project by using an innovative approach aimed at (1) defining the 
optimal reusability route for valuable wastes along the manufacturing process as well as (2) the evaluation and 
selection of the most feasible recycling solution according to the industrial needs.   
Innovation Potential:As an alternative to the current attempts to identify opto -electronics devices faults through 
largely inefficient empirical and visual methods, OLEDSOLAR is based on the idea of mul ti-system reliability and 
control theory: model -based process approach; however, the project clearly advances the state of the art by 
introducing a series of new models, algorithms and technologies enabling the application to OLEDs and solar cells 
development processes with a degree of complexity never handled before. This return to ‘basics’ or ‘first principles’ 
approach, on regard to accurate measurement and control, coupled with the utmost knowledge and expertise of the 
consortium on latest manufacturing , inspection, machine learning and automation technologies will enable 
OLEDSOLAR to give a truly innovative response to a long, well established problem of our industry.In fact, 
OLEDSOLAR will introduce radically new methodologies in the design and set up of control systems for 
                                                 
40 E. Worrell and M. A. Reuter (2014) Handbook of recycling. State -of-the-art for practitioners, analysts and scie ntists. ISBN: 
978-0-12-396459-5. 
41 http://www.solarwaste.eu/collection-and-recycling/ 
 
38 
OLEDSOLAR  
manufacturing processes. If until now, control systems are specifically developed for each machine, by ad hoc trained 
personnel, OLEDSOLAR will leverage the expertise of multidisciplinary consortium from the start of the 
development. This will enable the introduction of new control concepts to target variables critical for production, 
concepts which will be efficiently implemented through advanced techniques of automation and control, including 
special optical measurements.Ultimately, this well enhance technological knowledge enabling a new framework of 
relationships between customers and manufacturers, since system will be able to accurately program and schedule 
the manufacturing operations to respond to the requirements, whereas the first will be able to rely that customer’s 
expectations are met in good quality and time. This benefit will be invaluable within the framework of markets of 
ever growing competitiveness (for instance, for automotive, healthcare, aerospace), in which normally, the handling 
of inefficiencies during set up and production represent the border between failure and success.Hence, the successful 
demonstration of the architecture in this multi -physics scenario will enable the OLEDSOLAR architecture to be 
applied to other processes in the future aiding its penetration in our manufacturing market even further. 
Relevant Projects Comparison: 
Table 4: Relevant projects comparison with OLEDSOLAR approaches 
Relevant Projects Differences vs. OLEDSOLAR 
PI-SCALE (H2020)-Bringing flexible organic electronics 
to pilot innovation scale -(PI-SCALE) is dedicated to 
integrating existing European infrastructures into a 
“European flexible OLED pilot line”, which will operate in 
an open access mode and serve customers from along th e 
value chain with individual product designs, validation of 
upscaling concepts, and system -level flexible OLED 
integration. 
OLED specific activities in PI -SCALE project and 
limited from inspection and metrology point of view, 
where OLEDSOLAR solution will  provide 
optimised processes, metrology and automation for 
OLEDs (both rigid and flexible) within R2R and S2S 
setup as well as for solar cells manufacturing. The 
development activities from PI-Scale project will be 
transferred and fed into OLEDSOLAR propos ed 
activities. 
CLEAN4YIELD (FP7)-Contamination and defect control 
for increased yield for large scale R2R production of OPV 
and OLED-The overall objective of Clean4Yield has been 
the development and demonstration of technologies and 
tools for nano -scale d etection, cleaning, prevention and 
repair of defects and contaminations in nano -scale layers 
within R2R production processes for OLED and OPV. 
Inspection specific project activities with surface 
defects detection, where OLEDSOLAR proposed 
inspection system  will cover the manufacturing 
chain considering interlayer inspection, correlations 
of measurements and device level NDT. A hybrid 
system will allow to monitor and inspect many 
parameters allowing end user to reduce waste and 
increase product yield. 
Flex-o-Fab (FP7) -Pilot-scale hybrid roll to roll/sheet to 
sheet manufacturing chain for flexible OLEDs-The overall 
objective of the Flex-o-Fab project is the demonstration of 
a reliable manufacturing process for OLED lighting foils 
based on the manufacturing of glass-based bottom emissive 
small molecule OLEDs and use these as a basis to develop 
a pilot series manufacturing process for flexible OLEDs.  
OLEDSOLAR is dedicated to OLED displays and 
solar cells high yield production. The processes 
proposed will also allow process reconfiguration 
time reduction as well as significant recycling. The 
project will b e built upon existing R2R and S2S 
process steps at TRL4 and will develop TRL6 
systems for final scale up and market transfer. 
LOMID (H2020) - Large cost -effective OLED micro 
displays and their applications -The project will define 
pathways for the manufact uring of flexible OLED micro -
displays with large area (16 mm x 20 mm, screen diagonal 
of 25.4 mm) at yields (>65%). This will be achieved by 
developing a robust silicon -based chip design allowing 
high pixel counts (1024x1280 (SXGA)) and high spatial 
resolution (pixel sizes of 10 µm x 10 µm corresponding to 
2000 ppi).  
Th proposed technologies in OLEDSOLAR will 
allow manufacturing of large display OLEDs with 
improved barrier performance, reduced permeation 
and high quality and devices lifetime. 
The proposed metrology systems proposed in project 
will allow high level of product reliability and 
quality as well. 
FLEXOLIGHTING (H2020) - The flexo -lighting 
programme is focussed on research and innovations on 
materials, processes and device technology for OLED 
lighting with the intention of building a supply chain within 
Europe. The aim is to realise OLED devices over a large 
area/surface with high brightness, high uniformity and 
long-life time. A demonstrator will be built and delivered 
at the end of the project.  
OLEDSOLAR project is focused on production and 
manufacturing processes and metrology systems that 
will ultimately allow development of long -life 
OLED devices and efficient solar cells. 
The most critical steps in production and metrology 
has been targeted i n the project with an impact on 
yield, process reconfiguration time and recyclability. 
 
39 
OLEDSOLAR  
Fast2Light (FP7)- High-throughput, large area and cost -
effective OLED production technologies -The overall 
objective of Fast2Light is to develop novel, cost-effective, 
high-throughput, roll -to-roll, large area deposition 
processes for fabricating light -emitting polymer -OLED 
foils for intelligent lighting applications. The scope of the 
project comprises all the layers that are part of an OLED 
lighting foil. 
OLEDSOLAR project offers a novel, cost-
effective, high-throughput, roll-to-roll as well as 
S2S, large area deposition processes for barrier 
films for OLEDs, beside doing performance 
analysis and qualification of barrier performance. 
The scope of the project involves metrology, 
inspection and quality assurance system for OLEDs 
fabrication process as well. 
Patent search: 
The patent search has been carried out showing some of the relevant patents below: 
 US20050172897A1-A method and apparatus is described using atomic layer deposition to form a barrier 
layer onto a substrate. The coated substrate exhibits reduced permeation to oxygen and water vapor. 
 US20110033957A1-nvention generally relate to systems, apparatuses, and methods used to form solar cell 
devices using processing modules adapted to perform one or more processes in the formation of the solar 
cell devices. 
 US20080264477A1-Methods for manufacturing three-dimensional thin-film solar cells 
 US20070227586A1-Detection and ablation of localized shunting defects in photovoltaics 
 US20100197051A1-Metrology and inspection suite for a solar production line 
 US20120103383A1-Photovoltaic Device and Method and System for Making Photovoltaic Device 
 US6063995A-Recycling silicon photovoltaic modules 
 US20050253142A1-Solar cell and its manufacturing method 
 US20080251120A1-Thin Film Solar Cell and Manufacturing Method 
 US5241482A-Monitoring system for automated assemblies 
The analysis shows OLEDSOLAR proposed solutions are not in conflict allowing the freedm to operate, and also 
innovative nature is proved considering not many integrated solutions are developed to achieve targeted performance 
set in OLEDSOLAR. 
 
2  Impact