2.1 Expected impacts  
Project contribution to the expected impacts:  
IMPACT 1: 15% yield improvement because of the introduction of new sensor equipment, related metrology 
and automatic non-destructive control:  
The proposed processes in OLEDSOLAR including (1) optimised, enhanced and scaled up manufacturing processes 
for OLEDs, OPVs and CIGs targeted at high yield, low cost produc tion, (2) Development of methodology for the 
automatization of the opto -electrical characterization of solar cells and OLEDs , (3) Optimisation of  inspection  
methods (hardware and software) for in -line monitoring, inspection and quality control in R2R envi ronment for 
(CIGS and organic) solar cells & OLED displays ,(4)Development of an hybrid measurement optical module 
(Photoluminescence, optical diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, Spectroscopic ellipsometry) and  (5) automated 
manufacturing process and enhanced  machine learning defect analysis being developed in project will not only 
increase the yield of production by efficient production process but also will increase product lifetime, efficiency and 
performance of opto-electronic devices. 
In summary Production yield improvement factors and relevant OLEDSOLAR proposed solutions are summarised 
below: Table 5: Impact on production yield and OLEDSOLAR relevance 
Production Yield Criteria of OLEDs, OPVs and 
CIGs (Process yield × Product yield) 
OLEDSOLAR proposed solution and Impact on Yield 
(>15%) 
Process Yield 
 Deposition quality (thickness, composition, 
uniformity)  
 Encapsulation quality 
 Thickness and linewidth 
 Manufacturing quality and uniformity of 
layers 
 Glass Cleanliness 
 Broken/Cracked panels 
 Advance high speed, cost effective SALD and 
PESALD deposition processes resulting in 
efficient barrier coatings and encapsulation. 
 Optical inspection for thickness measurement, 
manufacturing quality analysis and layers 
uniformity check, 
 NDT for cracks and mechanical defects testing 
 Photo-Luminescence testing for optical 
performance testing 
 
40 
OLEDSOLAR  
 Shorted Panels 
 Planarization quality  
 Optical performance 
Product Yield: 
 Mechanical defects 
 Back-End module assembly 
 Electrical connections quality  
 Efficacy 
 Lifetime 
 
 Functional testing and printing quality testing and 
measurements, 
 AI driven machine learning based defect analysis 
and processing software, 
 Sensors system for automation and control of 
manufacturing sequences. 
 Sensor based modules performance testing 
Automatic registration systems will reduce the number of 
misaligned components in the start-up phase and thus 
reduce the time when changing the component type. 
IMPACT 2: 15%-time reduction for reconfiguration of key process tools in a production line due to change of 
type of component : OLEDSOLAR proposed solution will involve intelligent decision management software 
enabled by AI that will fed devices requirements into production process in fast and effective way to allow adjustment 
of inspection and manufacturing steps sequence. Further, automated material handling and manufacturing equipment 
being optimised in OLEDSOLAR e.g. Click and Coat system being developed by Coatema for opto -electronic 
devices manufacturing has the po tential to allow process reconfiguration time reduction by 40%. This will allow 
industrial partners to customise their products and run different components batches in effective way without 
production downtime. 
Table 6: Impact relevance to OLEDSOLAR project 
Process Reconfiguration Requirements based on 
devices changing specification 
OLEDSOLAR proposed solution Impact (15% reduction 
potential in process reconfiguration) 
 Change of layers thickness 
 Requirements of customisation 
 Adaptability of process 
 Demand based processing tooling 
 Intelligent resource efficient production 
route 
 High speed processes and inspection 
 Low defect rates 
 Low tooling maintenance 
 High uptime of equipment 
 Less processing steps 
OLEDSOLAR proposed solution involve intelligent decision 
management software capable of planning production plan for 
set of b atches of opto -electronic components. Based on 
requirements tooling and setups can be devised and reduced 
depending upon need and process can be reconfigured quickly. 
Tooling for deposition, automation in production line and 
sensor enabled monitoring will allow faster and productive 
manufacturing. 
In-line inspection will reduce offline quality testing,  post 
treatment and pre-treatment setups. 
Automated Click and Coat system for OLEDs and solar cells 
manufacturing 
IMPACT 3: A tangible part (> 10%) of the production cost of the parts should originate from recycled 
products and materials: 
Development of green-solvent-processable OPVs in terms of design considerations, material application and solvent 
selection; Fabrication of efficient organic solar cell utilizing scalable deposition methods using halogen-free solvents. 
OLEDSOLAR project propose and compare recycling techniques for opto-electronic parts and will devise repair and 
re-use strategies allowing recycling of more than 98% of discarded devices and components resulting in more than 
10% of production cost covered through recycling into the production line . Material challenges will be addressed, 
and halogen free options will be considered to reduce waste material. 
ASPF, SOLIBRO AND INURU has strategic objective of reducing production waste and developing resource 
efficient product development strategy. 
Impact on Project End Users:  
The topic relevant impact on project end users and on their devices/ production lines is detailed below: 
Table 7: Impact of OLEDSOLAR on End users 
 End Users Relevant Impact on their production and devices manufacturing through OLEDSOLAR 
ASPF 
(for OPVs) 
IMPACT 1-Current production yield of ASPF for OPVs is 85-90% which result in 10% 
total production loss due to quality issues, absence of inline metrology and manual 
manufacturing processes. By implementing patterning, coating, automation of processes 
and encapsulation techniques developed in OLED SOLAR, it will result in yield 
improvements of more than 15% for OPVs production of ASPF achieving their targeted 
yield of >98%. 
IMPACT 2-Laser structuring allow ASPF customisation of devices but other process e.g. 
manual screen printing and semi -automated production line result in significant process 
reconfiguration. The desired automated manufacturing process and AI enabled decision 
 
41 
OLEDSOLAR  
management software being developed in OLEDSOLAR will allow process adjustments 
as per devices need thus reducing process reconfiguration time by more than 15%. 
IMPACT 3- ASPF losses 5-10% of total production cost due to faulty parts and devices 
manufacturing and requires printed silver in OPVs to be recycled. OLEDSOLAR 
proposed processes will allow to recycle and re -use more than 98% of parts into the 
production line resulting  in production cost being covered through recycled parts and 
materials by 10%. 
Solibro 
(for CIGs) 
IMPACT 1- Solibro is working into developing new materials-based CIGs as well beside 
traditional material layers, this requires inline metrology to achieve h igh yield and 
production efficiency of manufactured solar cells. OLEDSOLAR proposed photo -
luminescence, spectroscopic techniques and NDT techniques will help Solibro to achieve 
high yields improvement (>15%) 
IMPACT 2 - Automated system and intelligent sof tware will help Solibro’ s current 
production setup to adjust processes as per devices need and demand resulting in more 
than 15% reduction of process reconfiguration. 
IMPACT 3 - Solibro’ s target is to achieve 100% recycling or repair process in their 
production line, the developed processes in OLEDSOLAR will support CIGs defected 
devices recycling and generation of more than 10% of production cost through recycling 
and re-use saving resulting in production efficiency and operating cost. 
DTF  
(for thin films) 
IMPACT 1- Current production yield is 50% for their films, due to failure in meeting 
specification resulting production losses and complaints. By implementing inline 
metrology system as proposed in OLEDSOLAR this issue will increase yield by more 
than 15% for film manufacturing to achieve their targeted production yield of >65%. 
IMPACT 2- Average time for process reconfiguration for DTF is 1 day, the configuration 
can be done quickly depending upon quality aspects of films if monitored accurately, thus 
there is a potential of reducing it by more than 15% through inline metrology, automation, 
barrier film qualification and defect recognition software proposed in OLEDSOLAR. 
IMPACT 3- Due to waste DTF loss 4500 euros/10.000m2 on films, as currently, the film 
quality is compromised frequently due to lack of quality inspection system inline capable 
to analyse faults, OLEDSOLAR proposed inline metrology will enable DTF to achieve 
their targeted more than 90% recycling of films resulting in creating more than 10% of 
production cost through recycling and re-use. 
INURU 
(for OLEDs) 
IMPACT 1 -Current production yield is 90% with a need to achieve more than 95% 
production yield. OLEDSOLAR proposed solution will allow the to enhance their yield 
through improved inkjet process, improved barrier foils and inline metrology resulting in 
achieving their targeted production yield and reduction of cost per device. 
IMPACT 2 - Due to various application and type of OLED devices INURU is 
manufacturing in their production line, significant time is spent in process reconfiguration 
as per devices need and specification. The automated tool kit including intra equipment 
automation and Ai based decision management software reading devices requirement will 
select and run process automatically resulting in process adaption and reduction of process 
reconfiguration time by 15%.  
IMPACT 3- Due to high value devices, INURU wants to recycle and re -use 100% of 
faulty parts through improved recycling techniques and repair procedures. OLEDSOLAR 
proposed solution of recycling will enable OLED devices to achieve their target and 
generate more than 10% of production cost through recycling. 
Project outcome and contributing factors to achieve targeted impact figures: 
Impact factor on scale of 1-5 is considered for every outcome: 
Table 8: Impact Matrix with expected impact and project objectives 
OLEDSOLAR Project Outcome Impact 1 Impact 2 Impact 3 
Adaptive material handling system (Objective 1) 2 5  
Optimised printing process for solar cells (Objective 2) 4   
Deposition processes (Objective 3,4,5) 5   
Automated lamination and coating 
processes,(Objective 6) 
3 5  
 
42 
OLEDSOLAR  
Optimised manufacturing process and validation of 
barrier films (Objective 7,11) 
4   
Optimised inline hybrid inspection system (Objective 
8,10) 
5 3 3 
Optimised in-line NDT testing (Objective 9) 3 2 3 
Functional testing and measurements (Objective 12,13) 3 2 2 
Machine learning based inspection data processing and 
automated defect detection software(Objective 14)  
5 4  
Sensor-based network for automation and monitoring 
(Objective 15) 
4 5  
Intelligent AI based decision management and control 
software (Objective 16) 
4 5 3 
Scalable recycling solution including pre-treatment 
strategy, sorting and re-use strategies(Objective 17) 
2  5 
Repair and re-use strategies (Objective 18) 2  5 
Total Impact 
(Cumulatively the 
impact figures will be 
higher because of 
interlinked objectives 
and impacts) 
Minimum Improvements >15% Yield 
improvement 
>15% process 
reconfiguration 
time reduction 
>10% the 
production cost of 
the parts from 
recycled products 
and materials 
Cumulative improvements 
 
>40% Yield 
improvement 
>25% process 
reconfiguration 
time reduction 
>20% the 
production cost of 
the parts from 
recycled products 
and materials 
Enhancing Innovation Capacity: 
The main value proposition of the OLEDSOLAR is based on the possibility to manufacture personalized and 
customized, flexible, more functional materials opto -electrical products e.g. OLEDs,  CIGs and OPVs for different 
application using efficient, adaptive and cost -effective manufacturing processes and quality testing techniques. 
Improved manufacturing processes and 
inline of the manufacturing process 
will improve the yield and reduce the 
final cost of the products. The stake i s 
major for Europe: relocate some tech 
industries by decreasing the production 
cost of high-performance components.  
The OLEDSOLAR project will be 
focused on innovating critical 
manufacturing processes along with 
advanced inline quality control and 
NDT sys tems development for 
production of efficient optoelectronics 
parts, which will be a major 
opportunity for European SMEs and 
industries to acquire high yield and less 
costly production processes. Allowing 
the possibility for companies of all 
sizes to develo p and fabricate high -
performance opto-electronics products 
at low cost with a high reproducibility 
and reliability will lead to many 
innovations in Europe. 
The OLEDSOLAR technology will 
allow production of individual or small 
series opto -electronics parts with a 
simplified and shorter supply chain. This 
would be a major benefit for SMEs to slot into a value chain currently locked by big companies. By reducing the 
Figure 49 Project scope and application 
 
43 
OLEDSOLAR  
number of operations, simpl ifying manufacturing process and its control, and reducing the number of appliances 
required to manufacture and inspect opto -electronic product with the right features, we will be able to spread the 
technology at table-top level for the European companies. 
The methodologies developed in the OLEDSOLAR project in terms of manufacturing, quality assurance & control 
will strongly improve the quality, the reliability and the cost 
of the products which is essential for a successful 
implementation of the OLEDSOLAR technologies. 
Creation of market opportunities, strengthening of 
competitiveness and growth of companies: 
OLEDSOLAR solution will enable high quality 
manufacturing of OLED devices that have numerous existing 
and emerging applications as depicted in figure  . The 
outcome of this project will enable further, adaption and 
feasible cost effective production of rigid and flexible 
OLEDs for various application: 
Some of the market application of OLEDs with market share 
is depicted below. 
OLED market is expected to be valued at 40 Billion euros by 2023, growing at a CAGR of 15.2% between 2017 
and 2023 42. Commercialisation and exploitation of proposed production systems in OLEDSOLAR will allow 
involved partners to capture market share in potentially emerging market. Considering the fact that OLEDSOLAR is 
aligned to address market success factors for successful commercialisation as depicted in figure  below: 
 
 
Figure 51 OLEDs market success factors and how OLEDSOALR addressing those factors  
INURU being end user and manufacturer of 
OLEDs will be able to improve its processes 
and develop better OLED product enabling 
them to enhance their sales through 
reduction in cost of manufactured devices 
and extension in lifetime and efficiency. 
Solar Cell Technology:  Further, in solar 
cells technology including thin film and 
organic solar cells , the demand of such 
application is increasing due to need of 
creation of eletricity through renewable 
sources. The figure below shows the demand 
and supply situation and emerging 
efficiencies of potential solar cell 
technologies .e.g. CIGs. 
The development of inline metrology and optimized manufacturing processes of OLEDSOLAR will enable to 
achieve higher efficiencies in solar cell, Solibro (End user in OLEDSOLAR consortium) has broken efficiency 
records – double glass CIGS solar modules at 18.72 percent and sputtering CIGS solar modules on flexible substrate 
at 17.88 percent . Their issues related to metrology, absorber layers and induction of new material in their cell 
                                                 
42 https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/global-OLED-market.asp 
OLEDSOLAR addressing those factors: 
 OLEDSOLAR proposed activities will help 
to reduce cost of production resulting in 
highly efficient, durable and light weight 
devices. 
 Dedicated WP7 activities will disseminate 
the project thus raising awareness of 
developed technology and adoption, 
 Recycling and re-use activities proposed 
will result in environmental friendly 
product development, 
 
 
Figure 50 OLED applications 
Figure 52 Solar cells potential (Source: IEA solar PV roadmap) 
 
44 
OLEDSOLAR  
technology requires inline advanced metrology systems as proposed in OLED SOLAR to achieve even higher 
efficiencies in solar cells. Further, CIGS market share is expected to exceed 6 billion euros by 202443. Which presents 
an opportunity for exploitation of OLEDSOLAR solution to emerging industry where, EU can create a competitive 
position. 
Moreover, Organic Photovoltaics (OPV) market is expected to reach €350 million by 202144. The specific printing 
processes, automation , inspection and quality control and packaging techniques proposed in OLEDSOLAR will 
enable high efficiency pro duction of OPVs and will enable ASPF (end user in project and OPVs manufacturer) to 
improve their devices  by product diversification , production cost reduction and customisation. 
One of the most emerging application of solar cells is in the Building-integrated photovoltaics (BIPV). According to 
market report BIPV technologies will grow from $2.4 billion in 2016 to $4.3 billion by 2021 with a compound annual 
growth rate (CAGR) of 12.2% for the period of 2016-202145.  
This presents a potential opportunity allowing solar cell manufacturing partners in OLEDSOLAR  (ASPF, Solibro) 
and V industry in EU to diversify products and exploit benefits of OLEDSOLAR solution enabling high yield, high 
efficiency and low cost manufcaturing of solar cells.  The proposed solut ion will also enable commercialisation 
partner(SMIT TS,IRIS,COATEMA,ADVENT) to capture potential OPVs production and inspection systems market 
share. 
The market opportunity shows significant potential of OLEDSOLAR solution in manufacturing high value products 
and devices in cost effective and productive way resulting in increasing capacity, innovation potential and economic 
benefit for companies and partners involved in the value chain. 
Financial projection of sales of OLEDSOLAR systems: 
OLEDSOLAR systems will be further, scaled up post project and as forecasted below in 5 years of commercialisation 
will generate economical returns for the consortium. OLEDSOLAR commercialisation will generate 117 million 
euros in revenues, with 52 million euros in gross profits within 5 years considering profit margin of 45%. Return of 
investment (ROI) on EC investment will be 5:1. 
Table 9: Financial projection of OLEDSOLAR 
Years 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 Total 
Year 1 Year 2  Year 3 Year 4 Year 5   
OLEDSOLAR Systems Price (€) approx.  1,560,000  1,560,000  1,560,000   1,560,000  1,560,000    
Deposition Equipment (€) 1,000,000  1,000,000  1,000,000    1,000,000   1,000,000    
Inline hybrid Inspection System (€)  150,000   150,000   150,000  150,000   150,000    
Inline NDT systems (€)  100,000  100,000   100,000   100,000  100,000    
Automation hardware and sensor kit (€)  50,000   50,000   50,000   50,000   50,000    
Software license (€) 10,000  10,000   10,000   10,000   10,000    
Printing and coating equipment (€) 250,000  250,000   250,000    250,000   250,000    
Targeted Market Share 0.50% 1% 1.50% 2.00% 2.50%   
Targeted number of sales 5 10 15 20 25 75 
Sales (million €) 7 15 23 31 39 117 
Profit Margin 45% 45% 45% 45% 45%   
Gross Profit (million €) 3 7 10 14 17 52  
Jobs created in consortium (/100k profit) 35 70 105 140 176 527 
Forecast of Revenue, Profit and Jobs creation and growth post commercialisation of OLEDSOLAR 
                                                 
43 https://www.gminsights.com/industry-analysis/thin-film-solar-cells-market 
44 http://www.marketresearchstore.com/report/global-organic-photovoltaics-opv-market-rport-2017-154896 
45https://www.bccresearch.com/market-research/energy-and-resources/building-integrated-photovoltaics-markets-report-
egy072C.html 
 
45 
OLEDSOLAR  
 
Social Impact (Healthier work environment): OLEDSOLAR solution will enable less potential safety risks in the 
factory floor due to a reduced need for human interventions. Human interventions are risky, as injuries may occur 
when a machine stops. Less human involvement in the shop floor, means less e xposure to a harmful environment. 
Less creation and handling of waste also contributes to a safer and healthier workplace. 
EU Competitiveness and SMEs: 
Taking into consideration the global aspects and specificity of the companies. OLEDSOLAR project  aims to  
Strengthen the Competitiveness and Growth of Companies  through developed Innovative developments also 
addressing and meeting the needs of EU and global consumer Markets providing a competitive advantage to Europe. 
The impact on the competitiveness of all the manufacturing industry will be important since there are other sectors 
with similar circumstances and using similar manufacturing processes and inspection systems. So , at the end the 
impact will spread to the manufacturers of opto-electronic products. 
 Barriers/Obstacles and framework conditions: 
Table 10: Barriers to effect impact achievement 
Barriers/Obstacles, framework 
conditions 
Effect on achievement of the 
OLEDSOLAR Impacts 
OLEDSOLAR measures to address 
Negative Impact factors 
High costs of innovation activity, 
the lack of an appropriate source 
of finance and perceived excessive 
commercial risks are recognized 
barriers for every solution. 
OLEDSOLAR project market 
penetration will get effected in 
short term 
Overcoming these limits by developin g 
a more effective and efficient 
technological solution both in terms of 
quality, resource efficiency and energy 
consumption, with a high coefficient of 
market exportability and replicability. 
OLEDSOLAR solution can be 
characterised/ adapted according to 
industrial/market need and the price 
customers are willing to pay. 
OLEDSOLAR system is highly 
innovative and diverse and often 
production methods are based 
upon experience rather than 
technology. 
Initial inertia to adapt the system 
in production line. 
Low cost, high speed and high reliability 
manufacturing and inspection system 
will attract end users to adapt the 
OLEDSOLAR system in production 
operations. 
Certification, standards and safety 
regulations on factory floors and 
production facilities 
Can be exp ensive and time 
consuming and decrease the 
extent of industrial exploitation. 
OLEDSOLAR proposed system from 
design to scale up phase is being 
developed considering standards, 
regulations and any certification that 
maybe required. OLEDSOLAR project 
will feed standards of factory and 
workers safety as well as opto-electrical 
devices process architecture.