1.3 Concept and methodology 
 (a) Concept  : The overall project objective is twofold: (1) to design, build and scale roll -to-roll 
manufacturing process and technologies (e.g. atomic layer deposition) aimed at complete protection of solar cells 
and OLEDs against humidity, higher degree of automation, higher throughput and reduced cost, etc. Project results 
will be integrated and demonstrated in a pilot line for continuous and high-volume production of CIGS photovoltaics; 
(2) to design and implement, in two pilot lines, a real -time quality monitoring process based on hybrid optical 
measurement techniques, aimed at monitoring, controlling and improving the quality of the production of 
optoelectronic organic devices. The two pilot lines will reflect two wide industrial areas facing up-scaling challenges: 
OLED industrial market (organic lighting panels), building integrated organic solar cells and CIGs.  
The project is comprised on four main pillar technologies: 
1. Development of innovative manufacturing processes for OLEDs and solar cells (in R2R and S2S) 
2. In-line quality inspection and testing of OLEDs and solar cells 
3. Recycling and Re-use approaches 
4. Process Automation and control 
The baseline for overall concept and methodology of proposed OLEDSOLAR solution is comprised of following: 
 
Figure 4 Project concept layout 
OLEDSOLAR project proposes OLED and (CIGS and organic) solar cells manufacturing processes within R2R and 
S2S manufacturing environment including pattering, deposition, packaging, lamination handling techniques and 
systems. Most of the processes being developed ar e at TRL4 with few at TRL5 and project objective is to reach 
TRL6. The validation of these processes will be done for specific device in pilot lines and production lines. (Activities 
planned in WP1,2,6)  Further, a hybrid system of number of inspection and testing techniques and equipment 
(Activities planned in WP3,6)  will be optimised in OLEDSOLAR to detect, control, and otherwise eliminate 
potential quality issues within the production lines including; 
 Mechanical defects (e.g. Shearography): Inspection for mechanical defects such as pinholes and cracks; 
 Electrical-optical properties (e.g. Photoluminescence, Photo -CELIV, Modulated Electroluminescence 
Spectroscopy, Impedance Spectroscopy, Transient Electroluminescence): Monitoring of opto -electrical 
properties such as current, voltage, luminance, mobilities and the phosphorescence lifetime in an OLED, etc;  
 Interfacial behaviour (e.g. Spectroscopic ellipsometry): Thermo -mechanical inspection for evaluation of 
interfacial integrity in multi -layered structures ( interfacial delamination); monitor interface thickness in real -
time: film growth, adsorption; monitor real time changes at interfaces; 
 Surface measurement (e.g. Spectroscopic ellipsometry): Roughness thickness, native oxide thickness, 
depolarization coefficient;  
 Thickness measurement (e.g. Spectroscopic ellipsometry): Single and multi-layer thickness measurement; 

 
13 
OLEDSOLAR  
 Material properties (e.g. Spectroscopic ellipsometry): Film porosity, gradient, microstructure information 
 All inspection and data acquisition sy stems would be integrated into process control and feedback systems 
throughout the production line. These technologies will be used to correlate defects to performance (lifetime and 
efficiency); 
 Barrier film qualification and HSI 
 OCT technique for benchmarking and validation, 
 Measurement tools to monitor manufacturing parameters e.g. printing speed etc. 
Moreover, recycling and re-use strategies and processes will be developed to dismantle discarded devices and sort 
out parts to be re-used or recycled into materials and fed back into production processes. Repair strategies will also 
ve developed in OLEDSOLAR project. (Activities planned in WP5,6) 
The whole production process will be automatized using network of sensors and intelligent decision management 
software, (Activities planned in WP4,6) 
The overall project scope is shown in figure below: 
 
Figure 5 Project activities detailed scope and partners involvement 
Overall chain of project development: 
1. Development of innovative manufacturing processes for OLEDs and solar cells 
Several recent developments in material science and deposition methods for flexible organic light -emitting devices 
(OLEDs) are surveyed. The commonly used plastic substrates are compared, according to their mechanical, optical, 
thermal, and chemical proper ties. Multilayer electrode structures, used as transparent electrodes, replacing 
conventional indium tin oxide (ITO) are presented and data about their conductivity, transparency, and bending 
Development, optimisation and scale up activities 
Pilot line trial 
Production line validation at ASPF (OPVs),Solibro(CIGS),INURU(OLEDs),DTF(films) 
 
14 
OLEDSOLAR  
ability are provided. Attention is paid to some of the most popu lar industrial processes for flexible OLEDs 
manufacturing, such as roll-to-roll printing, inkjet printing, and screen printing. Main specifics and challenges, related 
to the foils reliability, mechanical stability of the transparent electrodes, and deposit ion and patterning of organic 
emissive films.  
Material handling:  Material handling embraces all of the basic operations involved in the movement of bulk, 
packaged, and individual products in a semisolid or solid state by means of machinery, and within the  limits of a 
place of factory and production line. The objectives of material handling are further defined as: 
 Increase efficiency of material flow 
 Improve facility utilization 
 Improve safety and working conditions 
 Facilitate the manufacturing process 
 And all the above at a reduced cost 
Material handling can account for 30 -75 percent of production costs and can reduce operational costs by 15 -30 
percent (Frost and Sullivan). In OLEDSOLAR project, pick and play, lamination tool and substrate handling system 
will be optimised up to TRL6 on the basis of development already achieved by Coatema (at TRL4). 
Coatema has developed and demonstrated the Click&Coat® Technology for R2R-pilot and production lines (Figure 
8). This means that individual modules, e.g. winder,  edge guiding, corona, coating, dryer or lamination for each 
process have been developed. Bespoken modules, e.g. inert coating, rinsing, registration and cutting have also been 
developed. With these modules any process can be configured, e.g. with minimum front-site contact. You only use 
the modules needed for the desired process. Within 1 h the configuration of the Click&Coat®-modules can be changed 
to enable a totally different production process.  As a consequence, several production steps (e.g. to addre ss niche 
markets) can be realized with only one pilot line. Therefore, the Click&Coat ®-Technology offers the highest 
equipment flexibility with a high utilization and low cost of ownership.  
 
Figure 6 The principle of Click&Coat®-Technology by Coatema 
Figure 9 shows a coating line, which has been developed in the EELICON-Project. This Click&Coat®-configuration 
consisted of 12 individual modules resulting in a total length of 23m. 
 
Figure 7 The Click & Coat®-Pilot Line at Coatema. 
 
Figure 8 Coatema´ s Engineering solution for inert slot-die coating (left), lamination, LED-curing (center) and its final cutting 
(right), which was realized in the EELICON-project for the electrochromic film R2R-Pilot line. 
Such adaptable click and coat system wi ll be optimised in the OLEDSOLAR project considering validated above 
system for electrochromic films are similar in its process requirements as OLEDs or OPV. The film thickness and 
thickness homogeneity are in the range of nm. The films are sensitive towards moisture and particle contamination. 
Within the OLEDSOLAR consortium it can be expected that similar cost saving predictions by novel engineering 

 
15 
OLEDSOLAR  
solutions can be anticipated in the engineering study from Coatema for the existing pilot lines.  This system will 
contribute to the impact of process reconfiguration time by achieving time reduction by more than 15%. 
Manufacturing processes at CSEM 
1) Semi-transparent OPV module A typical process flow consists of the following steps: 1) Design of the module. 
Using an advanced FEM solver both the number and the size of interconnected cells are optimized for maximum 
power output. To reduce resistive losses the ITO bottom electrode is metallized with a metal grid with geometry 
optimized for low resistivity. 2) Generation of the layouts of the layer in the module, including alignment marks, 
3) ITO patterning by chemical etching or laser ablation, 4) Thermal evaporation of the metal on the ITO, 5) blade 
or slot-die coating of the layer, 6) Patterning of the coatings into individual cells, 7) Deposition of the metal top 
electrode (by thermal evaporation, or screen printing). 
 
Figure 9 (a) Printed flexible OPV module. The top module includes a nanostructured foil with the CSEM logo. The foil is 
embedded between the OPV module and the outer barrier. The nanostructures were designed such that the logo becomes 
visible under a steep angle 
2) Diffractive nanostructure  
1) Design of the structures using rigorous coupled -wave analysis (RCWA), 2) Origination of the structures using 
laser interference lithography, 3) Fabrication of first or higher generations of Ni shims by galvanic growth. 4) 
Creation of a stamp by UV replication, 5) Upscaling to 20cm x 40cm using automated step & repeat UV replication, 
6) Fabrication of large area Ni shim, 7) Large area shim is mounted on hot embossing pilot line, 8) Hot embossing 
into thermoplastic polymer films. 
Material deposition: 
Spatial atomic layer deposition: 
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) technique is a well acknowledged thin film growth technique to generate high-quality 
materials such as oxides, nitrides, sulphides, and metals. ALD method is based on the sequential exposure of a 
substrate to self -limiting surface reactions, which enable a sub -nanometre scale thickness control of the deposited 
material. By the self-limited nature of these reaction, ALD allows the fabrication of continuous, dense and virtually 
pinhole-free layers with an excellent surface coverage and unrivalled conformality also on complex structures. Whilst 
ALD is already commercially adopted in the semiconductor industry (i.e. high -dielectric oxide for field effect 
transistors), the benefit of this technique has been successfully explored also in other applications such as flexib le 
displays, flexible organic light- emitting diodes and photovoltaics. ALD Al 2O3 layer works as an excellent surface 
passivation layer in crystalline silicon solar cells. Zn(O,S) based buffer layers in copper indium gallium selenide 
(CIGS) are alternative candidate to cadmium sulphide films towards cadmium free CIGS solar cells. Finally, several 
ALD layers have been proven as excellent moisture diffusion barrier films for OLEDs and thin film photovoltaics. 
Despite the superior quality of these functional A LD layers, the conventional ALD technique is not economically 
compatible with all the applications where high-throughput and low-cost in line production techniques are required. 
Indeed, conventional ALD processes exhibit very low deposition rate in the order of A-nm/min, requiring expensive 
vacuum systems which add complexity when upscaling to large substrate sizes. In order to meet the requirements of 
fast depositions and low-cost manufacturing processes, spatial ALD (s -ALD) approach has been developed. In  the 
conventional ALD, the precursors are dosed inside the reaction chamber in two different moments, separated in time 
by purging steps (Figure 1). Spatial ALD approach relies on the injection of the precursors in two separate zones of 
the reactor, using inert gas curtain to provide the physical barrier separation and to avoid any precursor mixing and 
thus parasitic chemical vapour deposition contribution in the film growth. Since purge times are no longer required, 
s-ALD enables to significantly increase the deposition rate, which become only dependent on how fast the sample 
can be moved, on the design of the reactor, and ultimately, on the kinetic of the surface reactions. Due to the presence 
of the gas curtain, the reactions zones are completely isolated  from the external environment, enabling operation 
under atmospheric pressure conditions. The last, is extremely appealing since make the spatial ALD technique 
compatible with other in line low cost deposition technique such as ink jet and slot die printing. 
a b c 
 
16 
OLEDSOLAR  
 
Figure 10 Schematics 
representation of a) 
conventional ALD process 
where the separation of the 
precursors in time is 
provided by the use of purge 
steps, b) spatial ALD process 
where the separation is ensured by the injection of precursors in two different zones of the reactor and by the presence of inert 
gas curtains 
TNO combined gas bearing technology with atmospheric pressure gas phase deposition technology. The use of gas 
bearing enables to minimize the distance between the reactor and substrate with an accurate control of several tens 
of micrometres. The first concept of spatial (S-)ALD lab scale tool was developed in 2009 (See Figure 2). A second 
one has been installed in 2016. Both tools can be run with the injector head w ith a plasma source, enabling 
atmospheric plasma enhanced (PE) (S-) ALD.   
TNO developed also a substrate contactless roll-to-roll spatial ALD reactor consisting of a central drum that contains 
one or more combinations of metal precursor and oxygen source (i.e. water vapour) half-reaction zones. These zones 
are separated and surrounded by nitrogen gas bearings. The foil to be coated is pulled over this drum, where the gas 
bearing ensures that the foil is kept at a fixed distance from the surface of the drum  (typically tens to hundreds of 
micrometres). The absence of mechanical contact between the deposition side of the foil and the reactor minimizes 
contamination of the foil with particles which would lead to detrimental pinholes in the deposited films. High  
deposition rate can be achieved moving the foil in one direction and rotating the spatial ALD injector drum to the 
other one.  A prototype has been installed at TNO with a web width of 30 cm.  
TNO developed also a sheet to sheet (S2S) Spatial ALD pilot line to process substrates size of maximum 325 x 400 
mm. This tool can also be run with an injector tool with plasma source. 
 
Figure 11 Schematic representation and image of lab scale, large area sheet to sheet (S2S) and roll to roll (R2R) s -ALD 
reactors. 
TNO is currently developing new tools, processes, based also on atmospheric plasma technology, with the aim of 
upscale these solutions on S2S and R2R tools for applications such as encapsulation, photovoltaics, and solid -state 
lighting. SMIT TS has engineered both R2R and S2S tools that perform Spatial ALD. For pilot production on flexible 
substrates, the FLEx R2R sALD system (Figure 11) is available for coating on foil up to a web width of 60 cm. 
Currently the ALD process uses TMA and water for deposition of AlOx functional barriers, whereby the H2O is 
thermally decomposed. These tools are presently at TRL 5(“ . The foreseeable challenges on the path to TRL6 are:  
 establishment of standard operating procedures and 
maintenance (WP2 & WP4) 
 meaningful characterization of several hundreds  of square 
meters (WP3) 
 stability of web height over several hours and its gas separation 
performance(WP2 & WP4) 
Figure 12 FLEx Roll to roll (R2R) s-ALD pilot production system for a web 
width of 60 cm made by SMIT TS. 
The Plasma e nhanced spatial atomic layer deposition has been 
developed and implemented on the S2S sALD tools. For the R2R systems, this is new and is desired for additional 

 
17 
OLEDSOLAR  
flexibility of precursors (e.g. water –free oxidant) and process window (e.g. low temperature de position) and 
compatibility with moisture sensitive devices. is an option on the R2R and S2S sALD tools. Its maturity is TRL4. 
The challenges for this specific technology are: 
 Development, integration and testing of PE sALD compatible with R2R pilot production  
 Understanding of the plasma interaction with the substrate (WP3) 
 Relation between quality of the layer and (plasma) process parameters (WP2) 
Process goal is a low temperature deposition on moisture sensitive devices on flexible web. 
The technology, now at its TRL4 (“ , Plasma Enhanced Spatial Atomic Layer Deposition (PEsALD), is applied in a 
Roll to Roll (R2R) equipment.10  
The foil is brought on a drum where, by means of a gas 
cushion, floats without touching it. In the clearance between 
the drum and the foil the deposition takes place. The 
deposition occurs when the substrate is e xposed to 
alternating precursor gases, usually two. This 
separation is achieved by an additional bearing gas. Each 
cycle creates a layer in the crystal structure. Hundreds of cycles are 
needed to achieve few tens of nanometre. 
For the case of an Aluminium Oxide deposition these are the three gases of choice: 
 material precursor gas 1:    Trimethylaluminium (TMA),  
 Material precursor gas 2:   Water damp (H2O), O2, O3  
 reaction confinement purging gas:   Nitrogen (N2) 
Due to the sensitivity to high temperature and moisture of the targeted surfaces, alternative low temperature 
processes are desired. This can be achieved by using a plasma to dissociate the oxidant and makes possible using 
alternative precursors for oxidation that avoids direct exposure to moisture, of important for moisture sensitive 
devices. (Langereis et al. 2006). A test bench (or loop-coater) will be developed to facilitate integration of a plasma 
enhanced (PE) unit compatible with an R2R sALD system. This needs to be developed as it is non-existent at this 
moment and adds a high degree of innovation to the project. Aside for allowing integration and testing, the test 
bench will make possible coating of foil with and without PE for analysis of layer functionality and product 
compatibility (half-fabricates from partners). The developed unit is meant to be compatible with an existing R2R 
sALD pilot production system to allow for end-users to select such a system for a (future) pilot line.  
Material deposition: A thin (5nm to 50nm, preferably 20nm) Aluminium Oxide layer is deposited conformally on 
the devices. This layer has excellent moisture barrier properties (<10 -4 g(water)/m2/day). Such deposition can be 
made more robust by using organic pre-coating and post -coating respectively for planarization and mechanical 
protection purposes. 
Production system: The functionality that the AlOx layer delivers is qualified by its long -lasting quality. Testing 
this function therefore means verify for a l ong time that the layer is performing. This is not in line with a quick 
feedback. For this reason, proxy measurements are used.  
 geometrical and composition changes of the layer (spectroscopic ellipsometry) 
 particle or irregularities on the substrate (electrical optical properties) 
 cracks initiation (shearography) 
 others 
These proxies are established by experience; however, their effectiveness is at TRL4 stage. 
Process adjustments have to be both rapid and accurate: 
Organic Pre and post coating could be digitally defined by using an inkjet printing platform. Furthermore, the plasma 
enhancement can open structuring freedom11. 
 
2. Inline In-line quality inspection and testing of OLEDs and solar cells 
Monitoring system for the organic thin film deposition process in OLEDSOLAR 
Several optical monitoring systems exist that have a suitability to different coating features (dry/wet, transparent or 
not, different thickness, etc). The project approach will be to combine and tailor commercially available technologies 
                                                 
10 (Kessels and Putkonen 2011; Poodt, Cameron, et al. 2011). 
 
11 (Poodt, Kniknie, et al. 2011) 
Figure 13 PESALD Process layout 

 
18 
OLEDSOLAR  
for the target application and some have already been implemented successfully by IRIS in previous projects for 
OPV lines. Specifically, two optical nanometrology monitoring systems, one based on spectral reflectance and 
another on ellipsometry will be designed  and built for measuring continuously and in real -time thin film thickness 
and/or yield. These sensors will be capable of measuring thin films on polymeric substrates either below a micron or 
in the tens of microns range offering a rapid response. Dispersion will be tested offline during process optimization 
and is not expected to vary once robust processes are established although their impact on the final properties such 
as barrier would be detected by the quality control tests of the products. Neverthele ss, some online thickness 
measurement down to the nanoscale will be integrated in the project as one of the most important acceptance criteria 
for the industry for the nano-enhanced processes to warranty constant barrier and effect of the surface modificat ion 
for the products resulting from the upgraded processes. The sensors will be integrated in a suitable test rig to enable 
their off -line calibration vs. standard measurements using relevant sample sets selected by the end users. The 
previously built monitoring systems will be integrated in the respective target production lines for in -line thickness 
measurement. 
Advances in thickness measurements of organic coatings and deposition processes in OLEDSOLAR 
Optical techniques are the preferred method for meas uring non-opaque thin films because they are accurate, non -
destructive, and require little or no sample preparation. The two most common optical measurement techniques are 
spectral reflectance and ellipsometry. Spectral reflectance measures the amount of l ight reflected from a thin film 
over a range of wavelengths, with the incident light perpendicular to the sample surface. Ellipsometry is similar, 
except that it measures reflectance at non -normal incidence and at different polarizations. In general, spect ral 
reflectance is much simpler and less expensive than ellipsometry, but it is restricted to measuring less complex 
structures. In view of the importance of nanometrology for obtaining fast product and process design, different optical 
systems based on sp ectral reflectance and spectroscopic imaging ellipsometry will be used for high speed inline 
monitoring of the coating application processes (range 1-50 microns dry) and, on the other hand, to assess the quality 
of the deposition process (range expected 50-200 nm dry) on a range of substrates. 
System based on spectral reflectance: Reflection occurs when light crosses the interface between different materials. 
The reflections from the different interfaces may add together either constructively or destructively depending on 
their phase relationship, which is determined by the difference in optical path lengths of the reflected beams, which 
in turn is determined by thickness of the film, its optica l constants, and the wavelength of the light. Therefore, the 
reflectance of a thin film will vary periodically with the inverse of the wavelength, and 
thicker films will exhibit a greater number of oscillations over a given wavelength range, 
while thinner films will exhibit fewer oscillations or only part of an oscillation, over the 
same range. Spectral reflectance can be used to measure the thickness, roughness, and 
optical constants of a broad range of thin films. However, if there is less than one 
reflectance oscillation (i.e. the film is very thin), there is less information available to 
determine the adjustable model parameters. While the number of film properties that may 
be determined decreases for very thin films, if only thickness is of interest the  minimum 
single-film thickness that can be measured using spectral reflectance is about 10 Å to 300 
Å. However, when solving for the optical properties of more than one film, the 
minimum thickness increases further12. 
Spectral reflectance can be used to measure a large number of technologically important films. For example, it is 
widely used in the semiconductor industry to measure the thickness, 
roughness, and optical constants of oxides, SiNx, pho toresist, and other 
semiconductor process films. It is also used to monitor thin films used for 
scratch resistant and antireflection coatings, automotive plastics, eyeglass 
lenses, and many plastics packaging applications. However, when films are 
too thin,  too numerous, or too complicated to be measured with spectral 
reflectance, they can often be measured with the generally more powerful 
technique of spectroscopic ellipsometry. 
System based on ellipsometry: Ellipsometry measures a change in polarization 
as light is reflected from a surface. When linearly polarized light is reflected 
from a surface, in general the amplitudes of its two perpendicular electric field components change and so does the 
phase between them. The light becomes elliptically polarized.  Various types of ellipsometry exist, but a common 
form is the rotating polarizer. In this design, linearly polarized light is incident on the sample surface, but the polarizer 
is rotated, so that the plane of polarization rotates about the axis of the inc ident light. On the detector side, the 
(generally) elliptically polarized light is passed through a fixed analyser. The intensity of light on the detector 
oscillates with rotation of the incident polarizer according to the amplitude and phase change. The polarization change 
                                                 
12 Filmetrics – Thin-film measurement technical note 
Figure 14 Opti nano Pro system 
Figure 15 Hyperspectral imager 
 
19 
OLEDSOLAR  
is represented as an amplitude ratio and a phase difference. The measured response depends on optical properties and 
thickness of individual materials and therefore ellipsometry is primarily used to determine film thickness and optical 
constants13. By measuring reflectance at non-normal incidence, ellipsometry is more sensitive to very thin layers, and 
the different polarization measurements provide more information for analysis. The trade-off here is a more complex 
and costly system as well as a slower speed of operation. Online monitoring module based on ellipsometry to control 
the deposited thickness of very thin graphene films was already reported14. 
 
Figure 16 Ellipsometry system 
Online spectroscopic ellipsometry has been implemented on roll to roll printed organic electronic layers15, and 
commercial prototypes have been developed by Horiba16 and Semilab17. 
There has been extensive work on metrology of nanoparticles using ellipsometry, making use of effective medium 
approximations to model the structured layer as a 
combination of its constituent parts. Thickness, optical 
and electronic properties have been measured for a 
variety of nanoparticle layers including SiO2 particles in 
ORMOCER barrier layers on PET 18, HgTe 
optoelectronic nanocrystal multilayers 19 and gold 
plasmonic nanostructures20. Part of the advancement of 
the state of the art in OLEDSOLAR will be to apply 
thickness measur ement using the above -mentioned 
technologies inline on organic thin film deposition 
processes. 
Raman & Luminescence In-Line Metrology 
The fundamental feasibility of investigating of organic LEDs and organic PV components and systems by means of 
Raman (micro-)spectroscopy (RS) and/or different luminescence 
techniques, in particular photo -luminescence (PL) and electro -
luminescence (EL), is well established. It has been shown that RS 
can be used to identify and quantify different components, like 
fullerenes in polymer matrices that constitute a vital of organic 
photovoltaics. 
             Figure 18 Typical Raman spectrum of a  cross linked ethylen 
vinyl acetate (EVA) sample. 
Equally, RS can distinguish between different crystal morphologies, 
both for organic and inorganic materials as well as measuring 
mechanical stresses and stress distributio ns. Exploiting phonon 
effects, it is even possible to non -destructively measure dopant 
concentrations and their electrical effects in materials, a capability that is of interest e.g. for studying CIGS layers 
and the like. The limitation with regard to the objectives of OLEDSOLAR is that almost all of this studies focus on 
the material science part, aiding the 
development of new (nano -)materials and 
studying light-material interaction. While 
RS is now being routinely used as a PAT 
tool in e.g. the pharma ind ustry, very few 
examples of true RS process analysers 
have been described for LED and/or PV 
manufacturing. It has, however, been 
shown that RS can be used as an in -line 
tool, for instance to measure the degree of 
                                                 
13 The complex refractive index and reflectometry versus ellipsometry. N J Elton. Surfoptic Reflectometry Technical Paper No. July 2007 
14 http://spie.org/documents/Newsroom/Imported/005227/005227_10.pdf 
15 S. Logothetidis et al. / Solar Energy Materials & Solar Cells 112 (2013) 144–15 
16 http://www.horiba.com/fileadmin/uploads/Scientific/Documents/TFilm/uvisel_inline.pdf 
17 P. Basa, Lope-C 2013, In-line thickness and composition monitoring of deposited coatings in a roll-to-roll process tool by spectroscopic ellipsometry 
18 A. Laskarakis et al. / Thin Solid Films 517 (2009) 6275–6279 
19 V. Rinnerbauer et al. / Physica E 32 (2006) 104–107 
20 M. Losurdo / Thin Solid Films 519 (2011) 2575–2583 
Figure 17 Inspection data measurement software 
Figure 19 Characterization of defective photovoltaic modules by using 
electroluminescence imaging (Source: CTR) 
 
20 
OLEDSOLAR  
crosslinking in assembled (classical, i.e. Si cell-based) PV modules. The situation is similar for PL and EL, which, 
however, have recently been shown to be applicable also for investigating modules in the field. 
EL measurements take advantage of the radiative inter-band recombination of excited charge carriers in solar cells. 
For EL investigations the module is operated as a light emitting diode and the emitted radiation due to recombination 
effects can be detected with a sensitive CCD camera. The solar cells are supplied with a defined external ex citation 
current (current applied=ISC) while the camera takes an image of the emitted photons. Damaged areas of a solar 
module appear dark or shine less than areas without defects.  
Electroluminescence imaging can be used to detect a number of defects in crystalline and thin film solar cells. The 
high resolution of the EL -images enables to resolve some defects more precisely than in IR -images. It was shown 
that electroluminescence is a good method to detect micro cracks, interrupted contacts or a number of process failures 
(e.g. shunts or defects in the antireflection layer) but it was not possible to 
determine the influence of these defects on the cell/module power output. 
The first challenge and expected advance of this task of OLEDSOLAR over 
the state of the art is hence to match the expectations by the component and 
systems manufacturers with inherent spectral and/or spatial features, to 
establish the basic feasibility of the required analysis by one or more of the 
aforementioned methods. The second step is then to select features that are 
sufficiently stable to have a chance to yield reliable results under process 
conditions; this involves, for instance, investigating approaches for self -
referencing models, both along the spectral scale (to eliminate e.g. thermally 
induced spectral drifts and minimise otherwise necessary efforts for 
extremely reliable temperature conditioning of the spectrometers) 
and the intensity information. The objective behind this is to create 
robust models that have a realistic po tential of conveying 
meaningful information on the process or product in real-time under 
process conditions. The third R&D phase then deals with a test 
implementation on an industrial scale, involving customised sample-
device interfaces, relying e.g. on fi bre optics, dedicated algorithms 
and spectral analysers customised to the spectral features of interest 
to maximise both reliability and analytical sensitivity. 
Figure 20 schematic sketch of a inline PV quality measurement setup with Raman inspection head  (Source: CTR) 
Hyperspectral imaging  
Hyperspectral imaging (HSI) combines spectroscopic analysis with and 
imaging technologies. Dedicated cameras enable the simultaneously 
acquisition of spectral data at many sample positions from the UV up to 
NIR. Different data analysis approaches enable the spatial resolved 
inspection of certain sample properties (e.g. optical properties, properties of 
the sample topology) or the evaluation of properties of a certain sample area 
(e.g. its quality). On one hand the theory of beam propagation in layered 
systems will be used on the other hand multivariate data analysis and deep 
learning methods are used. The latter are in p articular the basis for inline 
application of HSI technology in combination of data acquisition in the 
range of kHz 
Inline NDT techniques: 
Shearography has been used in industry for defect detection to supplement ultrasonic and other NDT techniques. 
Digital shearography is one of the most promising techniques, with the potential for rapid non-destructive evaluation 
as well as the quantitative  measurement of strains, stresses and vibrations. Compared with traditional NDT 
techniques, shearography reveals a defect within an object (e.g. organic solar cell device) by identifying defect -
induced deformation anomalies. The commonly used means of stressing are heating, vacuum-pumping (by a vacuum 
chamber or a vacuum hood) and vibration excitation. Digital shearography is effective in detecting a variety of flaws 
such as voids, disbonds, delamination etc. However, flaw characterisation in practice is a complex task, which 
depends on both the nature of the flaw (shape, size, location) and the status of the applied stress at the location of the 
flaw. The key to the success of shearography in defect detection is to impose an appropriate stress status on the object 
under investigation. If an appropriate means of stressing is adopted, shearography can inspect a relatively large area 
in a fraction of a second.  
Experimental procedure: 
Figure 21 Hyperspectral imager at a 
R2R-process 

 
21 
OLEDSOLAR  
 The laser shearography principle consists of interferometric comparison of a test object in two states, an initial 
and a loaded one, or at different loading conditions; 
 Use of thermal heating as the means of stressing the samples for defect detection (e.g. by using a heat gun to heat 
the samples for a short period of time, during w hich shearography fringe patterns are acquired in real time or 
through post processing of the recorded laser speckle images); 
 For thin panels or film components, vibration excitation may be a better stressing means. A PZT actuator may 
be used to produce vibration excitation. With time averaged shearography, it is expected to detect delamination 
and/or disbands between different layers of the OPV and other panels. 
 Advanced software algorithms to highlight the deformation anomalies, which in turn reveals surf ace or sub -
surface defects; 
 Comprehensive algorithms and AI -driven system will be developed for automatic defect recognition. These 
algorithms will build on fringe processing, edge detection, dimensional measurement, localisation of centroid of 
a target and pattern recognition methods based on statistical model and artificial neural network.  
 
Figure 22 (a) Shearography system at TWI (b,c) fringe pattern showing subsurface defects (representative example) 
OLED material screening using the robotic spin coating platform 
Design of the experiment: number of materials, material combinations, layers in the stack, concentrations, solvent 
class. 2) Preparation of stock solution at concentrations calculated in the design, preparation of substrates, preparation 
of the platform, 3) Automated generation of code from the experimental design file, 4) Automated run of 49 samples. 
All first layers are completed before the next. Completed layers are temporarily stored in N2. Processing in parallel 
using two spin coaters. 5) Thermal evaporation of the top electrodes on 49 samples, 6) Semi -automated J -V-L 
characterization. 
 
 
Figure 23 The robotic spin coating platform for combinatorial material testing. 
Inspection is a crucial part of all manufacturing workflows at CSEM Muttenz. Since its manufacturing infrastructure 
consists of stand-alone S2S equipment, rather than a single manufacturing line, it is well suited for the development 
of new processes or process flows. The qualit y of the manufacturing process is controlled by visual inspection 
between each process step. The thicknesses of thin layers are characterized using profilometry or AFM; the shape of 
fabricated nano/microstructures using AFM or SEM; the quality of optical c oatings by transmission spectroscopy. 
The topography over a larger area of micro structured surfaces is inspected by optical coherence tomography. 
 
Automated Defect Recognition (ADR) system implemented with image processing and machine learning. 
Technology development: An enhanced technique using image processing will be developed for determining the 
critical defects in the OLED/OPV component based on the acquired signal (i.e. images obtained by optical diffraction 
system), to ascertain the defect  size and type to a high degree of certainty (>95 accuracy). Different filtering and 
thresholding algorithms can be evaluated and compared in term of their effectiveness on defect identification. 
The machine learning technique will potentially use deep learning neural network to detect and classify defects.  

 
22 
OLEDSOLAR  
 
Figure 24 Data processing flow diagram 
(1) Image processing 
For part characterization based on X -ray, the required image processing steps have previously been investigated in 
image processing and computer vision 21. A flow diagram is shown in Figure 1 for the image processing procedure 
for automatic inspection. There are four key stages: image restoration and enhancement, image registration and 
subtraction, image segmentation, and morphological operation. Each stage is described below in details. 
 
Figure 25 Typical ADR flow 
The above workflow will be adopted for image processing in OLEDSOLAR. An example of the ADR process based 
on acquired x-ray images analysed and tested by BUL are illustrated in figures below. 
Besides applying a single method for thresholding, hybrid methods can also be used for improved performance. 
Subsequently, on the basis of set theory, simple mathematical operators are derived fo r morphology, which can be 
exploited in this project to remove noise, enhance image, and detect object edges in the binary images. An example 
of such ADR process is applied successfully in acoustic signal to produce image is shown in Figure below. A 
characterization of object (i.e. defect) could be represented in Figure below which shows the comparison of 
unprocessed and image-processed (via the ADR process) results, in which the latter clearly demonstrates a significant 
boost of confidence in the results. 
 
Figure 26 Original 2D image slices of 
the material under test with defects 
 
 
Figure 27 After denoising with Wiener 
filter 
 
 
Figure 28 Before and after image 
registration 
                                                 
21 A. Rosenfeld and A. C. Kak: ‘Digital picture processing’, 2nd edn, Vol. 2, 1982, New York, Academic., 
T. Y. Kong and A. Rosenfeld: ‘Digital topology: introduction and survey’, Comput. Vision Graph., 1989, 48, 357 –393.J. K. Udupa: ‘Multidimensional digital 
boundaries’, CVGIP: Graph. Model Im. Proc., 1994, 56, 311–323. 
 
Input x-ray 
images 
(reference and 
acquired)
Image 
enhancement 
and restoration
Image 
registration and 
subtraction
Image 
segmentation
Morphological 
operation
Defect 
characterisation

 
23 
OLEDSOLAR  
   
        Figure 29 Difference images after image subtraction         Figure 30 Thresholded images after morphological operation 
 
Figure 31 Example of ADR process applied to acoustic signal and (on elft) Comparison of unprocessed and processed image 
which the latter improves the confidence level of object identification in which the size can be estimated.  
 (a) Unprocessed image                                     (b) Processed image to identify objects 
(2) Machine Learning for defect detection and classification 
Machine Learning has been shown to deliver state of the art results in data science applications. One of the great 
achievement in the machine learning technology during recent years is the Deep Learning, which are being 
successfully applied in a wide range of applications in business, medicine, geology and physics to solve problem of 
prediction, classification and control. Deep Learning network require fewer training samples and generate higher 
accuracy than the conventional back-propagation algorithm. With proper pre-process and feature extraction, the deep 
learning network can classify more complicated raw data and very abstract data. I t can handle a variety of image 
classification tasks in industrial vision environments, such as fault detection, object recognition, operation prediction, 
engine controlling etc. 
Advantage of Machine Learning Method for OLED/OPV Inspection: 
 Feasible. Providing enough and well selected training strategy, the machine learning methods can be used 
to handle various complicated cases. 
 Robust: Machine Learning methods are applicable in almost every complicated situation where a 
relationship between input and output parameters exists, even if the relationship is very complex and cannot 
be expressed or handled by other modelling methods. 
 Controllable. By selecting proper training samples and network parameters, the machine learning method 
can be tailored to process various specific inspection task. 
 Self-Adaptive: Neural Network is an adaptive system that changes its structure based on information 
provided in the training process. The machine learning strategy and parameters can be further adjusted based 
on the onsite accuracy. 
 Natural. The basic principal of feature extraction, train sample selection, network training, and classifying 
is to simulate the human process, and results can be compared and reviewed by human inspection. 
Data Acquisition: The proper selection of training data can affect the speed of training process, the chance of stuck 
in local minima, overall accuracy of recognition results, and tolerance to image quality. The network is expected to 
not only detect defect, but also group different type of def ects, and must be able to process image under various 
quality. The training samples are selected from the data set of pre-processed x-ray images. A variety of faults will be 
simulated. The sample without any detected are collected as background images. The defected training samples are 
manually selected, classified and labelled. The training images are required to cover various type of defects, and 
various extent of noise and image quality. The defect training dataset consists of several subgroups, each hav ing its 
own central tendency towards a particular pattern. The defect samples are required to represent every group of 
patterns. All of these patterns must be well represented. Within each subgroup, statistical variation must be adequately 
represented. The range of defect must represent every range of data including various situation of noise. In certain 
cases, only lower and upper bound data with few scattered data samples will be adequate if the variation can be 
considered as linear. The images free of defected are used as background data. Experiment shows that training with 
background data could dramatically reduce false recognition and improve the precision, even if the background 
training data are not exhaustive. 

 
24 
OLEDSOLAR  
Data Augment and Normalization : As the O LED image could be any direction, the training data need to be 
transformed into various viewing positions, translations, reflections, and sizes. In the view of deep learning network, 
the effect of data augment is to avoid overfitting. Overfitting is a result that the training process failure to capture the 
genuine relationship between training samples and expected results. The overfitting network usually have large 
difference between the accuracy of classifying the training samples and accuracy of classifying the testing samples, 
especially when the network is in large scale.The common method of data augment is to extend the dataset using 
label-preserving transformation. One of the basic requirement of data transformation is to produce new data from the 
original image with very little computation, in order to avoid the transformed image to be swapped on disk which is 
very time consuming. For a large scale network and complicated dataset which require repeated experiments, the 
data swap on the disk should always been avoid as it could dramatically affect the progress of product development. 
The data augmentation will potentially be implemented in Python on the CPU, while the training on the previous 
batch of images will be processed on GPU. 
The Network structures: Deep learning network have multi-layers, in which numerous similar elementary processing 
units (neurons) connected together each other between layers and constructed into a network. The processed data of 
each layer passes through the network towards the output layer. 
The network for defect detecting is consist of multi -layers between input and output in the convolutional 
architectures, which called the Convolutional Neural Network. Such architecture allows richer intermediate 
representation to be created and trained. During the training process each layer is required to detect specific range of 
features at different level, a synthetic strategy which simulates the human brain learning process. Usually the front 
hidden layers are trained to detect lower level features like edges and lines, while later hidden layers are being trained 
to detect high level features. The multi -levels feature analysing method gives the deep learning network more 
powerful ability to extract useful intrinsic 
difference and relati on between each classes, 
which will be used to classify objects based on 
the attributes of each object. 
In general, large data set requires large scale 
network. However large network not always 
improve accuracy and sometimes it could result 
in overfitting. Large network also cost more 
training time. The size of network also depends 
on some other factors like the hardware, 
available memory, and batch size of training. 
Some parameters need to be fine -tuned by ex periments. The architecture of our network may contains 8 learned 
layers. Layer 1,2,3,4,5 are Convolutional layers. Layer 6,7,8 are fully connected layers. 
Convolutional layers compute the output of neurons that are connected to local regions in the input, each computing 
a dot product between their weights and a small region they are connected to in the input volume. The kernels of the 
convolutional layer 2,4,5 are connected to those kernel maps in the previous layer which reside on the same GPU. 
The kernels of the convolutional layer 3 are connected to all kernel maps in the layer 2. The neurons in the fully -
connected layers are connected to all neurons in the previous layer. Response -normalization layers follow the 
convolutional layers 1,2. Max -pooling lay ers follow both response -normalization layers as well as the fifth 
convolutional layer. 
The ReLU (Rectified Linear Units) non -linearity layer is applied to the output of every convolutional and fully -
connected layer. Experiment shows that the ReLU structur e can improve the training speed several times for the 
convolutional neural networks. The other types of neuron activation includes: Sigmoid, Tangent/Hyperbolic, 
Absolute value, Power of shift and scale, logarithm of exponent etc. Each convolutional layer is followed by a Pooling 
layer, which is used to progressively reduce the spatial size to reduce the amount of computation in the network and 
also control the overfitting. 
Layer 6,7,8 are implemented with ‘dropout’ parameter, which can roughly double the training speed. The basic idea 
of ‘dropout’ is to randomly set output of some hidden neuron to 0, usually with probability of 0.5. The dropout 
neurons do not contribute to the forward pass and do not participate in back -propagation. So every time an input i s 
presented, the neural network samples a different architecture, but all these architectures share weights. This 
technique reduces complex co-adaptations of neurons. When a neuron cannot rely on the presence of particular other 
neurons, it will be forced to learn more robust features that are useful in conjunction with many different random 
subsets of the other neurons. 
The output of the last fully -connected layer is fed to a multi -way Softmax sub-layer which produces a distribution 
over the all class labe ls. The network maximizes the multinomial logistic regression objective, which is equivalent 
Figure 32 AI models 
 
25 
OLEDSOLAR  
to maximizing the average across training cases of the log -probability of the correct label under the prediction 
distribution. 
During classification, the network t ransform the original image layer by layer from the original pixel array to the 
final classifying results with confidence score. In each layer all the neurons multiply their outputs by 0.5, which is a 
reasonable approximation to taking the geometric mean of the predictive distributions produced by the exponentially-
many dropout networks. 
Training and Testing Procedures 
During training cycles the network adapt the weights of neurons based on training sample which represents the 
desired outputs. After sufficient training, the network is able to relate the problem data to the appropriate solution 
data. The training image data will be manually labelled and cropped. 
There are two type of adaptive learning method in deep learning: 
a) Supervised where the netwo rk is provided with a large number of known inputs. Thereafter, the network 
produces the known outputs as closely as possible based on training. 
b) Unsupervised learning, the network is required to work out relationships between various inputs without 
being told. 
The first layer uses supervised learning method, while other hidden layers use unsupervised learning method. 
The training and testing scripts will be implemented in Matlab and Python on Linux system. 
The accuracy is measured by Recall Rate and Precis ion on the testing samples which are not presented during the 
training process. 
By analysing the testing results the training samples probably need to be re-selected or re-generated in order to further 
improve the accuracy. However it’s not necessary to re peat a new training from scratch. Experiment shows that a 
repeated new training can be dramatically accelerated by applying a previous trained model to the several front layers 
of network. That’s because the front layers detect low level features which are very similar between different dataset. 
Automation and Control in production line: 
By developing OLEDSOLAR project, a novel control and monitoring system using PAT technologies will be 
applied whereby the industry brings the lab to the production process obtaining relevant data, in real time through 
dedicated sensors. These sensors can range from simple temperature probes to complex optical analysers which 
perform on-line chemical analysis or deposition layers. With this information and after applying deep-learning and 
process control techniques we will be able to provide the operator with the essential information to efficiently 
improve their process in terms of detection of film thickness, yield and other coating features.  
IRIS has tested in previous projects a monitoring system called PATBox, PATBox its monitoring system that has 
the following implementation stages of PAT systems during the production processes for OLED and solar cells:  
1) Data collection is made by using analytical probes located at critical control points of different processes 
industries of the optoelectronic devices.  
2) To develop stochastic-data-based 
predictive models by applying data 
mining tools to the analytical data. 
3) To optimize the process according to the 
best model achieved by collecting and 
mining data. 4)To perform model 
maintenance along the life-cycle of the 
optimized production line. 
PATBox will become a versatile global control 
system for OLEDSOLAR that will acquire and 
processes the data for closed loop control of the process of for decision support. 
3. Recycling and Re-use Process development: 
IN OLEDSOLAR, an innovative approach will be used for the evaluation and selection of main techniques 
(procedures and technologies) for the optimal reuse and/or recycling of OLED and solar panels components (as 
wastes) both during manufacturing process as well as at the end of their life cycle. In detail, the approach will include 
the identification, quantification and analysis of wastes produced during the manufacturing process by using Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs), the analysis of their potential reu sability into the production line according to their 
related costs (raw material and/or production cost), definition of the potential handling and separation and finally, 
the feasibility evaluation of the following recycling routes: (a) Grinding/homogenisation for external recycling by 
using existing technologies (when needed), (b) manual sorting and pre-concentration of added value materials before 
external recycling, and (c) internal recycling by using novel solutions.  
Figure 33 Scheme of the system architecture 
 
26 
OLEDSOLAR  
Particularly for the reusability po tential, the reuse of the OLEDSOLAR manufacturing wastes will be evaluated in 
terms of potential loose of material properties. Regarding the validation of recycling technologies, mature and novel 
pre-treatment technologies will be tested and evaluated at laboratory and/or pilot scale, depending on laboratory 
results. Mechanical (i.e. grinding), thermal (i.e. heating) and chemical (i.e. leaching) technologies will be considered. 
The project conceptual approach is depicted in figure below: 
 
Figure 34 Recycling conceptual approach 
Pilot Line and Production facilities for testing and demonstration of OLEDSOLAR solution:  
VTT will offer pilot line facilities for testing the OLEDSOLAR concept.  
The most important OLEDSOLAR-related pilot lines are the 
following: 
- MAXI printing line 
 4 interchangeable printing unit slots 
 Available deposition units: forward and reverse gravure, 
rotary silk screen, 
flexography and slot die coating 
 Plasma substrate treatment unit 
 Lamination unit 
 R2R hot embossing unit 
 Die cutting unit 
 Drying units (air, UV) 
 Automatic registration system 
 Max. web width 300mm 
 Max. web velocity 30m/min 
 
DELTA converting line 
 6 interchangeable converting unit slots 
- kiss cut (top and bottom) 
- lamination 
- slitting 
Figure 35 VTT's Pilot Line (Printing Equipment) 
Figure 36 VTT's pilot line 
 
27 
OLEDSOLAR  
 CO2 laser 
 Automatic registration system for lamination 
 Max. web width 300mm 
 Max. web velocity 90m/min 
 
 
TESLA2 R2R testing machine 
 192 measurement channels 
 Minimum test pad size 2mm x 2mm 
 Maximum test fixture size 408mm x 290mm 
 Automated test fixture alignment 
 In-house test fixture design and assembly 
 Different measurement possibilities between test points 
- LCR measurements 
- DC Power supplies (0-60V, 0-8A) 
- Electrical load 
- OPV characterization (IV-curve) 
- OLED and LED functionality testing 
The pilot facilities will be used to develop automatic registration of transparent/non -transparent inks and high -
resolution imaging of printing quality. The precis ion requirements of traditional printing come from the resolution 
of the human eye. This accuracy is considerably worse than the precision requirements of the printed electronics, 
where desire is often to achieve 
micrometre precision. Therefore, 
the regist ration cameras used in 
traditional printing systems are not 
suitable for printed electronics. It's 
not just about the need for greater 
magnification because the fast -
moving line combined with the 
micrometric resolution needs also a 
camera with very short e xposure 
time. If, for example, the speed is 
relatively slow, i.e. only 10m / min 
(= 0.167m / s), and it is desired that 
the line movement does not exceed 
1μm during shooting, the maximum 
allowable exposure time is only 
1μm / 0.167 m / s = 6 μs. 
Traditionally, this has demanded 
costly special arrangements for 
both cameras and lighting. 
However, VTT has experience in 
camera systems with a low -cost 
illumination solution based on 
pulsed high power led. This 
illumination / camera solution will 
also be used in t he camera build in 
this project. Figure X shows examples of three different cameras that have been utilised at VTT to optimise the 
registration. The image below the cameras show how the registration accuracy has been improved from ±150 µm to 
± 50 µm. In th e OLEDSOLAR project, these methods will be 
developed further and finally transferred to the industrial 
production lines. 
In addition, the existing VTT’s TinyNode wireless sensor system 
(accelerometer/3D, pressure, inclinometer/3D, magnetometer/3D, 
humidity, temperature, particles, web tension etc.) at MAXI can 
be used to collect data during processing, and new sensors based 
on requirements from industrial partners can be added to the 
Figure 37 VTT's pilot line (testing equipment) 
Figure 38 Three different cameras, which have been developed at VTT (top) and the 
resulting improvement in the registration accuracy (bottom). 

 
28 
OLEDSOLAR  
system. Figure Y shows examples of the sensors and an image of the mobile phone app for following the temperature 
and humidity measurements. 
Figure 39 Pictures of VTT’s TinyNode sensors (left), their installation at the MAXI line (middle) and an example of the mobile 
phone-based application to follow humidity and temperature (right). 
Figure Y. Pictures of VTT’s TinyNode sensors (left), their installation at the MAXI line (middle) and an example of 
the mobile phone-based application to follow humidity and temperature (right). 
The data from the R2R functional tester, imaging and sensors will be used as material for developing software and 
algorithms for machine learning -based methods (by BUL) to correlate the production conditions, printing quality 
and electrical performance. 
 
 
 
Case Study: Testing CIGs product manufacturing in production line of Solibro Hi Tech: 
Solibro-Hi Tech Production facility:  The developed solution of OLEDSOLAR will be tested at production pilot 
line of Solibro Hi Tech in CIGs manufacturing.  
 
Figure 40 Solibro Production line and front end/back end process 
Problem and Metrology Testing requirements of Solibro 
 With the current metrology of the CIGS deposition there is limited inline access to the optical & electrical 
quality of the absorber layer. To improve the yield, process window and to get a faster feedback during the 
introduction of new processes & materials a new inline measurement system is envisaged.  The use of 
spectral and/or transient photoluminescence (PL) has shown promise on laboratory scale to supply valuable 
information about the recombination properties of the absorber and its interfaces enabling a forward 
calculation of the Voc. Therefore, in OLEDSOLAR it is proposed to develop an inline PL system in order to 
investigate the correlation of the absorber quality with its properties under field conditions. The aim is to 
evaluate and install a method to characterize the CIGS layer in line with high sampling rate and local 
resolution. The optimum PL characterization method and position within the process chain should be 
identified, which enables the best prediction of the field properties based on inline measurement.  
 The incorporation of a new Boron doped Zinc oxide (BZO) into the CIGS solar cell stack creates difficulties 
compared to the traditional Aluminum doped Zinc oxide (AZO). The transparent BZO layer grows with large 
grains that create a very rough surface. While single layers on glass can be characterized at reasonable 
expenses determining layer properties inline / on CIGS such as thic kness, sheet resistance, haze or 
crystallinity is very challenging. Due to the nature of the layer stack and the combination with the rough 
surface texture new concepts need to be evaluated in order to enable an inline process control for the LPCVD 
BZO process. The systems in question needs to access the material properties within a reasonable amount of 
time (ideally a few seconds; one minute at maximum), operate non -destructively and has to be flexible in 
terms of the substrate position as the glass typica lly exhibits a warp of a few millimetres. The proposed 
inspection system (detailed in WP3) and NDT techniques will enable fast and accurate inspection of 
proposed materials in CIGS manufacturing with high level of accuracy.  
Case Study: Testing OPVs product manufacturing in production line of ASPF: 
ASPF OPV manufacturing process 

 
29 
OLEDSOLAR  
The materials used for the fabrication of OPVs are predominantly carbon based with no rare or toxic elements 
included.  These organic compounds act as building blocks for the solar cells and can be easily and cost effectively 
synthesized in large quantities and high quality. The chemical and physical properties of the organic materials and 
therefore the OPV characteristics can be furthermore tailored t o the customer’s demands and expectations. This 
assures a wide range of application possibilities for the OPVs, due to their adjustable colour, shape, and viable power 
output. 
The organic materials used for the manufacturing processes of the OPVs are 
solubilized. Their deposition, therefore, can be accomplished by means of 
common printing techniques, avoiding expensive vacuum based techniques 
and high temperatures. Similar to the printing of newspap ers and 
magazines, OPVs can be fabricated on thin plastics at a high throughput on 
a continuously moving roll -to-roll web. The extremely  low energy 
consumption during the manufacturing process compared to their inorganic 
silicon counterparts, leads to a very low carbon footprint. At the end of their 
life, some of the materials within the OPV structure can be recycled and 
reused, while the OPV laminates can be disposed. These factors show that 
the OPV technology allows a material, energy, and carbon savings from 
“cradle to grave” and represents a truly green renewable energy solution. 
Process steps 
Since organic photovoltaics can be integrated into nearly every surface and product, due to their mechanical flexibly, 
low weight, and possible semi -transparency, the manufacturing process will be adapted to the customer’s 
requirements. Nevertheless, these steps are important: 
 
Figure 42 ASPF MANUFACTURING PROCESS 
As shown above, firstly the substrate carrier has to be prepared for the 
sequential deposition of the OPV layers. For this step, lasers are used to 
structure the bottom transparent electrode on top of the substrate, allowing 
the creation of OPV base with numb erless shapes, some of which are 
shown above. Then, the layers of the OPV are deposited using printing 
techniques, allowing easy scalability of the solar cell’ size. OPVs with 
different colours are also possible. The top electrode deposition follows 
and is required to complete the OPV device. The design of the top electrode 
can be chosen by the customer and can represent a particular figure or a 
logo. At the end, the OPV is encapsulated to assure long term operational 
stability. 
 
In OLEDSOLAR project deposition technique, patterning processes and packaging processes will be implemented 
and tested in ASPF production line. Inspection system and sensors will be installed for testing and performance 
validation as well. In summary following validations will be done in OPVs production of ASPF:  
 Automation of registration of screen-printing for free-form OPV modules including transparent inks; 
 Analysis of coated layers of OPVs in a way to predict a performance of an unstructured area. The following 
methods proposed in OLEDSOLAR will be implemented for analysing the coated layers could be: 
o Image analyse (VIS, evtl. IR) for dust, scratched, defects; 
o Thickness measurement; 
o Photoluminescence-scanning (x,y); 
o ILIT (illuminated lock-in thermography); 
 After testing the above methods, together with further processing data (temperature at the various coating 
and/or drying units, speed, …) such data will be further processed using Big -Data/Machine-Learning-
Algorithms developed in OLEDSOLAR by BUL. This could on one hand lead to a further reduction of waste 
and support on the other hand the development for the prediction of performance of unstructured coatings in 
OPVs production of ASPF. 
Case Study: Testing thin films enabling opto-electronic devices manufacturing (DuPont Teijin Film) 
Figure 41 OPVs layer structure 
Figure 43 OPVs processing steps at ASPF 
 
30 
OLEDSOLAR  
OLEDSOLAR solution will be implemented 
and tested in production line of DuPont Teijin 
film to validate and improve manufacturing of 
thin films one of the main component in 
OLEDs and solar cells efficiency, 
 Assessing suitability of existing 
equipment suitable for upgrade as per 
OLEDSOLAR inspection system 
adaptability 
 Qualification, testing and validation 
of barrier films performance 
 Implementing OLEDSOLAR 
inspection and testing systems to 
analyse thin film performance for 
surface quality, specification 
validation and performance 
verification 
 Automated defect detection and 
processing during thin film production, 
 Assessing recycling and re-use strategies being developed in OLEDSOLAR within production of thin films 
Project Positioning: 
The project positioning along with TRL is depicted in figure below: 
 
Figure 45 Project positioning and TRL 
Some of the linked international/national activities of partners feeding input into the project are listed in table below: 
Table 2- Interlinked national and international activities and feeding results into OLEDSOLAR 
National and 
International 
Research and 
Innovation Activities 
Partner Relevant Results feeding inputs to OLEDSOLAR 
Figure 44 Thin film for solar cells 
 
31 
OLEDSOLAR  
 OPTINANOPRO 
(H2020, GA Nr: 
686116) 
IRIS  Development to TRL5 of optical methods for inline real-time 
thickness monitoring of coatings and lamination, compounding, 
injection/co-injection and electrospray Nano deposition. 
FP7 THIME Results related to thin film measurements on organic 
photovoltaic layers, 
FLEXOLIGHTING 
BUL 
Results of the demonstrator being built in the project for OLED 
lightning application, 
AutoDISC  Image processing 
OLEDSOLAR Image processing 
Qualinet Image processing 
Assurenet Image processing 
iFROG Image processing 
FobFMS Image processing & machine learning 
Intelliscan Image processing & machine learning 
RobotX Image processing & machine learning 
Austrian COMET 
compentence centre 
programme – K1 centre 
ASSIC (www.assic.eu) 
CTR Material analysis & characterization of semiconductor and 
polymer materials using Raman spectroscopy (lab + process) 
Optima In-line contamination and quality control of high -performance 
polymers and polymer parts for semiconductor manufacturing 
equipment 
EVAnetz In-line quality control (degree of crosslinking) of embedding 
materials (E/VA) for industrial PV module manufacturing (incl. 
tools for process development, optimisation and validation) 
Infinity Development of climate -zone-sensitive high -performance PV 
systems along the full value chain: material – components – 
modules – module-integrated electronics – inverters – system 
integration – control & maintenance strategy – in-field inspection 
tools (EL, PL, lock-in thermography, electrical …) 
Pi-Scale (GA: 688093); 
PhotonFlex (EFRE: 
0800069); HEA2D 
(EFRE: 0800148); 
INTRES (EFRE: 
0800645); GreenSense 
(GA: 761000) 
Coatema Coating 
Machinery 
Intermittent slot-die coating for pilot lines; coating & process 
development for OPV; coating of transfer polymer & transfer of 
graphene; coating and process development for batteries; coating 
of foil substrates and free-standing Nanocellulose; 
Alabo FRAUNHOFER  Evaluation of ultra-barrier webs  
Printed electronics 
(OPV, OLED, OTFT), 
material validation, 
device design and 
integration, prototyping 
CSEM Knowhow on device fabrication, providing S2S fabrication 
infrastructure, environment for prototyping and testing, dedicated 
methods for testing such as optical Ca test 
THIME, Pi-Scale, 
ArtESun, Monoscribe, 
IN-LIGHT, Polaric etc. 
VTT R2R and S2S process and characterization knowhow for OPVs, 
CIGSs, OLEDs and OTFTs, sensor development for pilot lines, 
inline quality control. 
Detailed list of projects and partners involved is detailed in section 4 
Standards, Certifications, Safety codes: OLEDSOLAR project will address following standards. 
Standard in the series, IEC international standard 62341 -6-1:2017, which “specifies the standard measurement 
conditions and measuring methods for determining optical and electro-optical parameters of OLED display modules 
and, where specified, OLED display panels.LEITAT and TWI will work to make sure compliance with standards. 
(b) Methodology 
The project proposed methodology is depicted in flow diagram below: 
 
32 
OLEDSOLAR  
 
Figure 46 Project methodology 
Gender Analysis: OLEDSOLAR will develop and implement measuresto eradicate gender -based disparities and 
promote gender equality in accordance with the EU Strategy for equality between women and men22.