2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
a) Dissemination and exploitation of results  
Dissemination, Communication and Exploitation activities (will be reported in PEDR,activities in WP7)  are of 
paramount importance in OLEDSOLAR project, in order to maximize its impact and trigger effects across the 
project’s entire range of target audiences. In particular, the OLEDSOLAR consortium, by fully recognizing the 
above, will implement a dedicated dissemination and exploitation strategy, predominantly aiming at ensuring: 

 
46 
OLEDSOLAR  
 The effective and sustainable dissemination of the OLEDSOLAR project generated knowledge and technologies 
within the entire community, and through the imple mentation of suitable and specialized dissemination and 
communication activities for each of the project’s identified target groups and end users. 
 The exploitation of the project’s results by the European Manufacturing Industry so as to maintain and reinforce 
technological advantage over the competition from outside Europe. 
 The interconnection with other industrial sectors with the potential to exploit the findings and outcomes of the 
project. 
 The conveyance of new knowledge into the engineering education b ase provided by the University partners to 
meet the evolving skill needs of the sector. 
 The possible exploitation of the OLEDSOLAR project results and foregrounds in other sectors, e.g. nano -
electronics and nano-scale components development. 
Dissemination is a significant tool that will be used to connect people (i.e. consortium members, general public, 
specific target groups of stakeholders in the related industrial/scientific fields) to the achievements and activities 
performed within this project. Exploitation activities involve all actions related to the use of the knowledge generated 
within the project. Consequently, by effectively and strategically disseminating and exploiting the project’s 
results, greater public awareness is created as well as knowle dge sharing, transparency and education are 
promoted. According to Eurobarometer (December 2013 issue), close to two-thirds (64%) of Europeans believe that 
it is important “to increase the support for research and development policies and turn inventions i nto products”. 
Considering that EU -funded activities and projects distinctly contribute to the creation of new jobs, novel 
technologies and improve the citizens’ quality of life, public interest for their findings and achievements is 
increasingly growing over time. Moreover, since the largest and foremost financer of such projects is the European 
taxpayer, it is an imperative precondition to ensure: i) maximum return on the investment, and ii) full openness about 
the actions financed. 
In this context, a tailored dedicated plan for the dissemination and exploitation of the OLEDSOLAR project results 
has been prepared and is detailed below. This draft plan summarises the consortium’s strategy and concrete foreseen 
actions (to be performed during and beyond the end of the project) to disseminate, exploit and protect the new 
knowledge produced within OLEDSOLAR. 
Plan for the dissemination and exploitation of the project’s results  (PEDR) : The primary objective of the draft 
OLEDSOLAR Dissemination and Exploitation Plan is to prudently and timely identify and organize the activities to 
be performed (during and after the project), in order to maximize its influence and while taking into account the 
dissemination needs of the project at each stage of its lifecycle, as well as the specific technical, market, organisational 
issues and interests of each of the various pre -defined OLEDSOLAR target groups/end users. Consequently, the 
main aims of the planned dissemination and exploitation approach can be summarized as follows: 
 Inform about the OLEDSOLAR activities to stimulate the participation of SMEs, Academia, Industry, 
Research establishments, civil society and their networks. Organization  of (and participation to) events, 
workshops and seminars; 
 Raise Awareness -Present the project, its main objectives and expected impact (e.g. OLEDSOLAR public 
website, project leaflet, poster and newsletter, etc.) 
 Networking -Exchange experience with other projects related to OLEDSOLAR so as to join efforts, 
minimize duplication and maximize exploitation potential 
 Disseminate Knowledge -Regularly provide information about the OLEDSOLAR outputs through several 
channels (e.g. Horizon the EU Research and Innovation Magazine, research*eu results magazine, 
research*eu focus, etc.) 
 Support OLEDSOLAR Exploitation - Pave the way for a successful exploitation of the project results by 
addressing the full range of potential users and uses, including research, commercial, investment, social, 
environmental, policy making, setting standards, skills and educational training. 
The following table provides a list of the main dissemination activities in OLEDSOLAR. More details on 
communication activities can be found on section b. 
Planned Dissemination Events attendance to present OLEDSOLAR: (activities to be executed in WP7) 
 Printed Electronics Europe Conference, 2019 
 OLEDs World Summit, USA 2020 
 PVCELLTECH Event, 2021 
 Manufacturing and Technology Conference and Expo, 2021 
 Advance Manufacturing, UK 
 LOPEC 2019, 2020, 2021 conference and exhibition, Munich 
 Swiss e-print 2019/2021 , Basel (+booth) 
Exploitation Plan:Table 11: Exploitation plan by partners 
 
47 
OLEDSOLAR  
Partners Exploitable 
Results/Interest 
Routes to 
Exploitation 
Potential 
Uses/Applications 
Potential Users and 
Sectors 
Companies 
Smit 
Thermal 
Solutions 
SALD and 
PESALD 
equipment 
Product 
development 
Manufacturing of thin 
films and opto-
electronic components 
Lighting application, 
Energy devices sector, 
optical devices etc. 
IRIS Inspection System Services/Product Manufacturing sector Manufacturing sector 
Advent Recycling system Service creation Production sector Flexible electronics 
production sector 
Coatema Handling,printing 
and coating system 
Product Coatinga nd printing 
based manufacturing   
Semiconductors,opto-
electronics, etc. 
Academic and Research Organisations 
TNO SALD process Services/patent Manufacturing flexible 
and printed electronics 
-Opto-electronics 
components and devices 
manufacturing sector, 
 
-Semi-Conductors 
Manufacturing sector 
 
-Flexible and printed 
electronics 
manufacturing sector 
VTT Printing processes Services/patent Manufacturing optical 
devices 
LETAT Recycling/Re-use 
processes 
Services/patent Electronics/glass/metal 
production recycling 
application 
TWI NDT systems Services  Manufacturing and 
production of devices 
CSEM Encapsulation 
techniques/WVTR 
measurement 
technique 
Services/ 
publications 
Optical devices 
manufacturing 
BUL Data processing, AI 
and machine 
learning, software 
Services/ 
publications 
Optical devices 
manufacturing and 
production 
End users 
ASPF Advanced OPV 
manufacturing, 
inline quality 
control and machine 
learning/big data 
Implementation of 
novel processes and 
tools in OPV 
production 
landscape with a 
direct impact on 
production output 
and yield and hence 
cost reduction 
Energy generation, 
building certif ication 
(LEED) 
Building integrated 
photovoltaics (BIPV), 
Automotive and 
Transportation, 
Consumer Electronics, 
Wearables 
SOLIBRO CIGs manufacturing Product Energy Enhanced product 
development with high 
yield, efficiency and 
uptime. 
INURU OLEDs 
manufacturing 
Product Displays Ehanced products and 
yields. 
DTF Film manufacturing Product Opto-electronic 
devices 
Enhanced quality product 
Business Plan of Industrial commercial partners: 
Partner: Smit Thermal Solutions(SMIT TS) 
Planned key exploitable results and key areas of application: Planned exploitable results are spatial atomic 
layer deposition equipment, plasma enhanced atomic layer deposition equipment, inkjet printing equipment and 
test benches for pilot lines. In following areas of application: (1) Semiconductor & opto-Electronics, (2) Barrier 
Layers (3) Integrated Circuit (IC) Applications (4) Solar cells (5) OLED Display Panels (6) Sensors and 
Research & Development Facilities. 
Exploitation Team:  Sales Team and Business Development group of SMIT TS. 
 
48 
OLEDSOLAR  
Targeted Market: The global atomic layer deposition (ALD) market is expected to reach USD 3.01 billion by 
2025, according to a new report by Grand View Research, Inc.46 
Business Model:  Direct sales, Equipment renting, sales through distributors, sales through agents globally, 
Financial Projection: > 5 million worth of sales in first year of commercialisation. 
Commercialisation Roadmap: scale up systems at TRL9 and start commercialisation strategy to enter market 
in 3 years post project. 
 
Partner: IRIS 
Planned key exploitable results and key areas of application:  Planned exploitable results are inline optical 
inspection system and automation kit for factories, production companies, manufacturers of semiconductor, 
flexible electronics, organic devices, solar cells industry, sensors, MEMs industry, OLEDs industry etc. 
Exploitation Team:  Sales Team of IRIS. 
Targeted Market: The automated optical inspection (AOI) system market was valued at USD 346.4 Million in 
2015 and is expected to reach USD 1,008.8 Million by 2022, growing at a CAGR of 17.1% between 2016 and 
202247.  
Business Model:  Direct sales B2B and sales through distributors and agents globally, 
Financial Projection: > 2 million worth of sales in 2 years of commercialisation. 
Commercialisation Roadmap:  Commercial scale up and industrial operational system as per industrial 
specification to TRL9 using our internal resources, investment and product development before commercialisation. 
 
Partner: Coatema 
Planned key exploitable results and key areas of application: Planned exploitable results are material handling 
system, printing and coating equipment for manufacturing of semiconductor, flexible electronics, organic devices, 
solar cells industry, sensors, MEMs industry, OLEDs industry etc. 
Exploitation Team:  Sales Team of Coatema and worldwide branches and agents. 
Targeted Market: The material handling equipment market worth $48.31 Billion by 2023 48.The Printing 
Equipment Market forecasted to be worth $22.7 billion by 2017 49.The Coating Equipment Market worth 19.33 
Billion USD by 202150. 
Business Model:  Direct sales B2B and sales through distributors and agents globally, 
Financial Projection: > 4 million worth of sales in 2 years of commercialisation. 
Commercialisation Roadmap:  Commercial scale up and industrial operational system as per industrial 
specification to TRL9 using our internal resources, investment and product development before commercialisation. 
Business Model of OLEDSOLAR: 
Figure below shows business model (based on Board of Innovation business model)  of OLEDSOLAR system. 
Exploitation of developed components/systems in OLEDSOLAR project will be commercially exploited by SMEs 
and large companies. End users ASPF, SOLIBRO and INURU will be potential customers of the system and research 
and academic partners will be technology developer of OLEDSOLAR.The complete set of systems and equipment 
including software and hardware of OLEDSOLAR will be commercially scaled up to TRL 9 after the project by Smit 
Thermal Solutions in collaboration with other partners and will be finally commercialised for market uptake. IRIS 
will commercialise inspection system.  Other partners will be supply chain partners for OLEDSOLAR complete 
system for  Smit Thermal Solutions  and IRIS as well as they will commercialise standalone unit for various 
applications. 
                                                 
46 https://www.grandviewresearch.com/press-release/global-atomic-layer-deposition-market 
47 https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/automated-optical-inspection-system-market-179056156.html 
48 www.marketsandmarkets.com/Automated/MatrialHandling 
49 https://www.smitherspira.com/news/.../change-in-printing-equipment-leads-to-growth 
50 https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/coating-equipment.asp 
 
49 
OLEDSOLAR  
 
Figure 53 OLEDSOLAR Business Model 
Knowledge and data management:  OLEDSOLAR project will follow a proactive strategy for internal data and 
knowledge management. A data repository will be managed by the Coordinator to store common data, results, reports 
and deliverables. It is expected that OLEDSOLAR will generate some da ta mainly coming from industrial trials 
results, but also experimental activities related. Raw data is typically generated by the instruments is standard ASCII 
format or proprietary format, in former case can be parsed to standards (like ASCII or XML) for easy sharing and 
cross-platforms compatibility. Confidential data related with the industrial process and products will be kept 
restricted to the Consortium partners and not published. Not sensitive publishable data will be possibly shared and 
made accessible to the research community for verification and re -use (e.g. for publications) and cross -validation 
scientific purposes. Conferences, congresses, workshops exhibitions, and meetings will be included in OLEDSOLAR 
calendar of events. Based on this, articles will be submitted for publication as soon as some initial results are ready. 
Partners will preferably address journal articles as the dominant type of peer-reviewed scientific publication for their 
best results. Especially high impact factor journals. I n addition, however, the beneficiaries will encourage “open 
access” publications for all the other types of scientific publications (some of which may, in some cases, not be peer-
reviewed) including monographs, books, conference proceedings and grey litera ture (informally published written 
material not controlled by scientific publishers, e.g. reports). In order to comply with “open access” requirement, the 
beneficiaries will ensure that their publications, if any, can be read online, downloaded and printed . This will be 
implemented depositing publications into a repository (online archive) and providing open access to it. The right 
repository will be selected through the Open Access Infrastructure for Research in Europe (OpenAIRE) service or 
other useful listings such as Registry of Open Access Repositories (ROAR, http://roar.eprints.org/) or the Directory 
of Open Access Repositories (OpenDOAR, http://www.opendoar.org/).  
Intellectual property(IP) Management: 
Intellectual property (IP) generated within the project will be protected by patents, if appropriate, and its management 
will be regulated in compliance with the final consortium agreement and the intellectual property agreement among 
the partners. 
The consortium has identified three levels of Foreground (Results) IP which will be created in the course of the 
project: 
o Individual and joint IP, which belongs to individual partners or is jointly owned by partners working in a 
particular task and is restricted to those partners. 
o Generic IP, which can be used by all partners of the consortium. Some of the generic IP will be made more 
widely available to European academics, SME’s and other industrial organizations. 

 
50 
OLEDSOLAR  
o Publicly available IP which will be published at conferences, on the public web site and made available with no 
restrictions. 
To prepare for the deployment and exploitation of the project results, the IPR/Exploitation leader will constantly 
monitor the progress of the research, as well as the advances ou tside the Consortium with support of the Executive 
Board, for an early monitoring of resulting knowledge which should be protected, and for a continuous updating of 
the research/work programme to improve project effectiveness. 
 
Figure 54 Foreground IPs and commercialisation partners 
The IPR/Exploitation leader Smit Thermal Solutions with support of the Executive Board (comprising of one members 
of each partner in consortium) will be responsible for the delivery of the following tasks: 
o Creating and maintaining a register of background IP belonging to the consortium members and made available 
for the purposes of the project. 
o Creating and maintaining a register of foreground IP generated during the project, to include: ownership, 
restrictions on access, licensing arrangements. 
o Working with the consortium partners to extract generic knowledge from foreground IP to enable access by all 
consortium partners for exploitation and for dissemination and training purposes. 
o Moderating disputes arising between consortium partners on IP and knowledge management related issues. 
o Reporting to and advising the management team on issues related to IP and knowledge management. 
These activities will ensure a transparent and fair handling of IPR issues. 
 
The general principles for Intellectual Property Aspects set out by the EC for Horizon2020 projects will apply in 
OLEDSOLAR. Existing know how (background or pre -existing intellectual property) of a specific partner shall be 
made available on transfer conditions to the Partner(s) within the consortium. The use of such existing know-how is 
strictly limited for use to the achievement of the project goals and for the duration of the project. An overview of the 
existing know how will be included as an annex to th e consortium agreement. Foreground shall be owned by the 
partner(s) who developed these results. Each partner is responsible for taking the appropriate steps for securing 
intellectual property of the knowledge or results created during the project. 
Results: As a direct consequence from the project owned by one or more of the partners shall be licensed to other 
partners of the consortium on favourable conditions to the extent necessary to enable these partners to exploit their 
own results. 
Table 12: Foregorunds of project 
Description of expected Result and/or IPR Outcome Nature or Type  
Three pilot lines Demonstrators 
Development of new front-end manufacturing processes: 
Integration of Atomic Layer Deposition into a production 
process sequence for complete protection of cells against 
humidity 
Hardware/New techniques 

 
51 
OLEDSOLAR  
Development and integration of printing processes for 
OPVs Hardware/New techniques 
Development and integration of inkjet printing process 
for OLEDs Hardware/New techniques 
Material handling system Hardware/New techniques 
Coating system Hardware/New techniques 
Automation kit Hardware/New techniques 
In-line monitoring system (hybrid optical system) Methodology and hardware model 
Analytics software for production line  Software 
Methodology for the automatization of the opto-
electrical characterization of solar cells and OLEDs Methodology/Report 
Publication of results: 
The partners are entitled to publish the project results in the usual scientific form. However, all concept publications 
must be put on the website and submitted to all Partners together with a request for permission to publish. Requests 
for such permission to publish shall be responded to within one month of receipt thereof. An agreement is considered 
to have been granted if no objection is raised within a period of one month after submission of the manuscript to all 
partners. One of the pages of OLEDSOLAR website will contain an overview and archive of all published 
information: scientific articles, publications, press releases, conference papers, etc. Publications will be submitted to 
reputable journals (using peer-review) that can provide “gold” open access (immediate open access mode) to reach 
the broadest possible audience for the results within a short space of  time. More details on these issues will be 
described in the Consortium Agreement. 
b) Communication activities 
Activities to disseminate information and exploit research and innovation results as well as carry out communication 
activities will be an important and integral part of Horizon 2020. (European Commission Decision C (2013)8631 of 
10 December 2013). The following communication measures and strategies will be adopted for promoting the project 
at European level and to reach the largest possible audience, including groups beyond the project's own community. 
Communicating relevant knowledge about the project’s latest activities and achievements to the relevant identified 
OLEDSOLAR target audiences is certainly a way to keep all partners actively in volved in the project and the 
OLEDSOLAR consortium accordingly realizes that communication is not something that should be dealt as a side 
task; on the contrary, it is one of the topmost aspects, priorities and prerequisites of running a successful researc h 
project. In this context, the draft communication plan for promoting this project and its results, include an efficient 
and effective mix of both interpersonal and mass communication tools. Moreover, it shall be strongly emphasized, 
that for each targeted audience, a distinct strategy using targeted messages, means and language has been planned. 
Namely, specific audiences and communication methods have been defined for promoting OLEDSOLAR and its 
main results: 
 Direct proactive communications and physical demonstration: Attendance in seminars and conferences, 
one-to-one communication, e-mailing stakeholders, periodic newsletters, etc.; 
 Clustering activities: Contacting parallel related projects, cross-field events; 
 Mass and general communication: Project website, press releases, posters and leaflets; 
 Scientific excellence: Publications in highly-ranked journals, presentations in conferences; 
 Academic: Conveyance of the new knowledge into University curriculums, publications of MSc and PhD 
thesis. 
Below, some of the primary communication activities to be performed during the period of the grant are described, 
as well as the main target audiences to whom they will be addressed to: 
Electronic and printed dissemination  material: Appealing and accessible dissemination materials such as logos, 
posters, banners, leaflets and newsletters will be developed by coordinator VTT to structure the “visual identity” of 
OLEDSOLAR. Printable material with information for different ta rget groups will be provided to all partners to 
distribute at conference venues, while electronic copies will be used for online publications, articles and other 
references such as local and international press. Additionally, a dissemination pack for the p roject legacy will be 
created and used by all partners as an advertising tool for the work performed by each partner within the project in 
events performed after the end of the project.  
Project website: A dedicated OLEDSOLAR public website will be developed for providing information about the 
project’s objectives, progress and results for the different target groups (from consortium members – general public). 
Care will be taken to present information in a comprehensible and attractive manner, thus allowing  grand access to 
citizens. The project website will also serve as a gateway to a private (password protected) collaboration platform for 
 
52 
OLEDSOLAR  
the consortium partners. The website will be continuously updated during the project lifetime and will be maintained 
for a minimum of one additional year after the project ends. VTT will provide connection between the project website 
and will assist Project consortium in linking their web pages with the project and with other portals as CORDIS 
WIRE, Horizon the EU Research and Innovation Magazine, etc. 
Regular Press Releases, Newsletters and Other Publications: All partners will be responsible for publishing project 
results in local and international press. These publications could be in the form of papers in scientific jou rnals and 
conferences, press releases or newsletters in magazines and newspapers, etc. It is worth mentioning that special 
emphasis will be placed on publishing project -related information in Open Access journals which provide to the 
readers on-line access to scientific information free of charge. VTT will maintain an overview of all published   results 
and in cooperation with the project manager will intervene in case of results which have been classified as publishable 
do not receive the necessary dissemination. 
Organization and participation at workshops and relevant events:  The presence of the project, its main objectives, 
major results and offered services; shall be shown in numerous suitable events for dissemination. In addition, 
understanding the importance of face-to-face communication and physical trials, VTT will arrange at least one major 
International Workshop of relevance. Further to that, and if project timing permits, a joint broader International 
Manufacturing Conference shall also be organized, in order to exploit the already mass dissemination and outreach 
for amplifying the consortium’s performed work. 
Clustering activities: Contacting related and parallel projects will contribute in dissemination and exploitation 
opportunities, while at th e same time support exchanging technology novelty and ensure maximum 
complementarities. Such clustering activities may be linked to the above point regarding workshops and conferences, 
leading to the organization of a conference for maximizing synergies. 
OLEDSOLAR Target Groups/End users: As already stressed above, an extremely imperative precondition so as to 
ensure augmented exploitation, high impact and increased likelihood of uptake of the project’s results, is to prudently 
and effectually disseminate and communicate the appropriate information to the relevant and interested audience; in 
a concise, well -articulated, understandable and attractively packaged manner. Hence communicating the right 
information and messages to the right people, using the right language and suitable means is the key to a successful 
dissemination strategy. In this context, by clearly identifying and classifying the different OLEDSOLAR target 
groups, the messages and information to be consigned to each of them as well as the commu nication language, 
measures and channels with which they shall be sent to each tier of audience, the likelihood of uptake of the 
project’s findings is exceedingly increased. 
In this regard, the following table presents the main dissemination and communication tools to be used for 
effectively diffusing project related knowledge and information to each OLEDSOLAR target audience/end user: 
Table 13: Communication activities 
Communication Measures/Actions Target Audience Timescale 
Project Website,  Research, Scientific & Academic Community, 
Commercial & Industry, Investors, General 
Public, Policy Makers 
Month 3 
Conference, Seminar Research, Scientific & Academic Community, 
Commercial & Industry, and Policy Makers 
Periodically 
during the 
Project Timeline 
Wikipedia/Cordis/EU Webpages General Public and Research, Scientific & 
Academic Community 
Month 3 
Project Newsletter Research, Scientific & Academic Community, 
Commercial & Industry, Investors and Policy 
Makers 
Newsletter 
Annual Edition 
in Months 12, 
24, 36, 
Clustering Activities Research, Scientific & Academic Community, 
Commercial & Industry, Investors and Policy 
Makers 
Month 12,24,36 
Workshops Research, Scientific & Academic Community, 
Commercial & Industry, SMEs 
Relevant 
Workshops 
organised during 
project timeline 
Media, Press Releases Investors and General Public Periodically 
during the 
Project Timeline 
 
53 
OLEDSOLAR  
Poster, Leaflets, Presentations, 
Dissemination Support Material 
Research, Scientific & Academic Community, 
Commercial & Industry, Investors, General 
Public, Policy Makers 
Month 3 
 
3 Implementation