1.1 Objectives and ambitions 
1.1.1 Objectives 
The potato (Solanum tuberosum) is a key crop in Europe. In 2020, the EU's potato production was 55.3 million 
tonnes (worth 12.3 billion euros), with Germany (21.2%), Poland (16.4%), France (15.7%), and the Netherlands 
(12.7%) being the top EU producers. Potato is vulnerable to a variety of pests and soil-borne pathogen diseases, 
resulting in significant economic losses in the potato industry and food losses (in line with SDG 12.3)1,2. For example, 
in 2011, the United States recorded losses in potato yield of up to 75%,  and in other  cases, the damages are so 
severe that the entire crop is lost 3. The European regulatory framework for potato’s imports and production is very 
strict. For example, the European and Mediterranean Protection Organization (EPPO) standard for potato establishes 
recommendations for the international trade to prevent the spread of certain pests 4. Although there are strict controls, 
globalisation, climate change and economical drivers are threatening the entrance of emerging or new potato pests 
from imported potato to EU.  
Chemical pesticides, on the other hand, are commonly utilised in both preharvest and postharvest methods to manage 
pest threats and secure yields in plant production. For all that, the EU Green Deal aims to reduce pesticide use by 
50% through implementing more sustainable plant health solutions 5. Possible consequence s derived from the 
excessive use of chemical pesticides and the transition towards their substitution are 1) increases pesticide resistance 
in bacteria, insects , and soil-borne pathogens, and 2) reappearance of soil pathogens, potentially increasing the 
incidence of soil infections during postharvest storage. 
 
1 The EU potato sector – statistics on production, prices and trade. July 2021. Available here. 
2 SDG 12.3: By 2030, halve per capita global food waste at the retail and consumer levels and reduce food losses along production and 
supply chains, including post-harvest losses. 
3 Greenway G. (2014) Am. J. Potato Res. (2014) 91:714–719. DOI:10.1007/s12230-014-9404-x. 
4 PM 8/1 (2) Potato. (2017). Bulletin OEPP/EPPO, 47(3), 487–503. 
5 European Green Deal. Available here. 
Ref. Ares(2022)1398312 - 24/02/2022
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 2 of 10 
One of the most important pests in the potato plant is caused by bacteria Candidatus 
Liberibacter solanacearum  (CLso) and its disease is known as  zebra chip  (ZC). The 
introduction the CLso bacterium on potato is mainly linked to the presence of the vector psyllid 
Bactericera cockerelli (BC) causing severe damage both in terms of yield losses and quality. 
Plant symptoms are relate d to leaf  chlorosis, discoloration, curling and eventually premature 
plant death. Potato chip industry is also affected by this disease since the CLso -infected potato 
tubers are often deformed , of low  quality, with dark stripes , making chips bitter to tast e, and un acceptable for 
manufacturers to commercialise. CLso has been found throughout North and South America, Canada, New Zealand, 
and Australia and the disease is reported in other solanaceous crops such as tomato, eggplant, and pepper 6,7. Although 
there is currently little risk of the ZC vector entering the European potato seed supply chain, preventative measures 
are implemented to decrease the potential appearance of this disease in EU.  
For example, together with traditional application of chemical pesticide, EPPO classified ZC as 
an A1 quarantine pest (pest that is not found in the EPPO territory, but it is recommended to 
carry out a quarantine management strategy) 8. However, considering the potential threat of this 
emerging pest, the development of further management strategies for prevention, early detection 
and surveillance is required. 
In this context, the novel method of Molecular Breeding (MB) confers a new dimension to the traditional chemical 
control disease plan. MB is considered  an environmentally safe approach that is foc used on the study of the plant 
genome to detect potential resistance genes (RG) capable of recognising invading pathogen s and initiating active 
plant defence mechanisms. Furthermore, MB integrates the identification of diverse molecular DNA plant markers 
such as simple sequence repeats (SSR), and more commonly single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that are tightly 
linked t o phenotypic disease. Another relevant analysis in the MB  represents quantitative trait loc i (QTL) as  a 
statistical method that links bo th types of information, the phenotypic data and genotypic data derived from the 
molecular markers to explain the genetic basis of variation. Besides, the identification and characterization of the RG 
and the detection of functional genetic markers are considered a crucial way to recognize and characterize the disease-
resistance mechanisms to improve the selection of resistant varieties of potato at early stages of breeding.  
As mentioned above, emerging threats will also affect potato safety and quality during the 
postharvest activities, generating mainly blemish on the potato and make it unmarketable.  
Main potato postharvest diseases include dry rot caused by Fusarium sambucinum, black 
dot caused by Colletothricum coccodes, and silver scurf provoked by Helminthosporium 
solani.  These pathogens are soil-borne and have incidence in both field and storage stages 
with dramatic economic losses for the potato farmers and pre-pack potato industry since the 
postharvest development of such diseases will result in unmarketable product 9. Standard 
control for these diseases in warehouses includes elimination of infected tubers prior to 
storage and storage management using forced air ventilation, and controlled temperature and humidi ty feedback 
systems10. The use of chlorine-based disinfectants to treat  postharvest potato tuber s are also applied. However, 
chlorine may not completely prevent storage 
pathogens, and the presence of chlorinated 
residues (chlorates and perchlorates) may cause 
consumer worries, prompting them  to demand 
more environmentally friendly  and chemical-
free alternatives, particularly for organic 
farming. 
In view of the current scenario to preserve the 
health of potato plant and the quality of the final 
product against its emerging pests, the project 
PataFEST and its 15 complementary partners 
are conceived , including the international 
cooperation with Ecuador, a country affected 
by the same pests tack led in this projec t. 
PataFEST aim : 1) to research at molecular 
level the main resistance potato  varieties 
against CLso and postharvest pathogens, 2) to 
 
6 https://gd.eppo.int/taxon/PARZCO/distribution. Last updated 2021-10-05 
7 Mora, V. et al. (2021). Frontiers in Microbiol. 12: 700663. 
8 PM 1/1 (30) EPPO A1 and A2. Lists of pests recommended for regulation as quarantine pests. September 2021. 
9 Powelson, M.L., Rowe, R.C. (2008). In: Johnson D., ed. Potato Health Management, 2nd edn. St Paul, MN, USA: APS Press, 183-195. 
10 Knowles N.R., Plissey E.S. (2008). In: Johnson D., ed. Potato Health Management, 2nd edn. St Paul, MN, USA: APS Press, 79–99. 
Figure 1. Overall concept of PataFEST 
Zebra chip disease 
Vector psyllid (BC) 
Dry-rot infecting potato 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 3 of 10 
develop sustainable and effective  plant and soil  treatments against the CLso vector and soil -borne pathogens 
combined with other innovative technological solutions of image analysis digital tools that allow the early detection 
of pest threat and 3) to develop and valida te postharvest technologies (biocontrol coating solution , controlled 
atmosphere storage technologies and high-performance volatile organic compounds (VOCs) sensors) to control the 
incidence of soil pathogens and maintain the quality of potato tubers stored. All these strategies and technologies will 
be incorporated into an integrated pest management (IPM) approach to evaluate their performance in a relevant 
environment (TRL5). PataFEST will ensure a long-term strategy for tackling future potato pest threats (Fig. 1). 
PataFEST strategies are aligned with the topic “Horizon-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages: Emerging and 
future risks to plant health ” promoting th e transition to a fair, healthy and  resilient agriculture  and including 
alternative and sustainable technologies to reduce the use of chemicals both in field and in postharvest application. 
The project proposes 5 objectives (O) with their respective 5 outcomes (OC), articulated under 15 results (R). 
O1. To develop a unique approach to identified resistance genes in potato varieties against pest and pathogens 
selected. Including: 1/ to setup a comprehensive catalogue of mapped resistance genes against CLso pest disease and 
soil borne postharv est pathogens; 2/ to determine molecular characterization of the working collection of potato 
accessions; 3/ to validate the resistance genes in the working collection of potato accessions. 
O2. To develop innovative strategies to control potato pest spread and reduce potato postharvest disease . 
Including: 1/ to develop low-cost diagnostic solutions as VOCs  sensor devices and image analysis (e.g. smartphone) 
application for the early detection and surveillance of the plant pest disease and postharvest pathogens in potato 
warehouses; 2/ to provide natural and sustainable solutions to prevent pest spread by controlling the vector in potato 
plants and investigating biocontrol and controlled atmosphere strategies to reduce postharvest disease incidence and 
severity; 3/ to reduce the incidence of CLso and post-harvest pathogens in potato crop increasing plant health status 
thanks to the optimised nutrient availability and improved plant soil management. 
R4 Identification of phenotyping traits (biomarkers) in infected plants and tubers through Phenotype-based High-
throughput Screening (PHTS) which uses d ifferent non-invasive sensors as RGB, FluorCam, IR, and 
hyperspectral cameras. The best identified biomarkers will be selected and use as a model for the development 
of “low cost”, user-friendly and robust digital tool (smartphone app) and portable sensor devices for the early 
identification of the disease in both potato plants and tubers. Moreover, the PHTS will contribute to identifying 
solutions (compounds) that can help deal with the disease both in plant health and during postharvest. 
R5 Non-toxic and sustainable wax sprays will render potato leaves super hydrophobicity providing anti-adhesive 
performance against CLso bacteria vector (psyllid) and anti-pathogenic properties. 
R6 Enzyme and antagonistic yeasts-based biocontrol coatings will be tested on potato tubers stored under different 
graduated CO2 and O2 controlled atmosphere (CA) conditions to decrease at least 40-50% the incidence of 
some important postharvest pathogen diseases selected as dry rot (F. sambucinum), silver scurf and black dot 
(C. coccodes, and H. solani) and ensure consumer safety. 
R7 Chitin and calcium carbonate-based alternative biofertilizers obtained from the valorisation of aquaculture 
biomass residues will be formulated as carriers of nutrient elements reducing susceptibility of potato plant to 
pathogens incidence both at foliar and tuber level. Soil management task will also include field trials to evaluate 
pest pathway of entry and drivers of spread as future climate scenarios (flooding, coldness, drought, etc.) 
and ecological degradation processes (modification of soil organic matter, etc.).  
OC2 Use of early detection tools, sustainable solutions to improve plant and soil health and control postharvest 
pathogens will be helpful for meaningful reduction of pesticide and fungicide usage in potato crops. 
O2’s pertinence to the call requirements: “Develop and uptake rapid and effective tools for the prevention of entry, 
spread and establishment, early detection, surveillance, treatment and (bio) control of plant pests ; “influence of 
climate change and globalisation of pest(s)”. 
R1 Full identification, compilation, and mapping against the reference genome of all annotated potato RGs, QTLs 
and orthologous genes from the Plant Resistance Genes database (PRGdb). 
R2 A broad germplasm working collection will be analysed (40 wild species, 35 native varieties and 230 old 
and new European cultivars). In addition, 100 samples from Ecuador (advanced breeding materials, wild 
species, native varieties) which have been characterized for their tolerance level to both, CLso and its insect 
vector. 
R3 Identification of promisi ng resistance gene SNP for targeted  diseases and pests which can be applied in 
marker-assisted selection within molecular potato breeding. 
OC1 PataFEST project will provide relevant and free access information to better identify the most suitable potato 
varieties resistant to plant pest threat and soil-borne pathogens in postharvest storage. 
O1’s pertinence to the call requirements:  “Increase knowledge of the biology, pathways of entry, behaviour in 
the plant -soil system...”; “ Identify and introduce resis tance traits to support the long -term sustainability of  
agriculture and forestry in the EU and/or Associated Countries”. 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 4 of 10 
O3. To validate the Integrated Pest Management. Including:1/ to implement the technologies developed and carry 
out plant bioassays trials against CLso pest disease in an intended environments beyond Europe (e.g., Ecuador); 2/ 
to validate the postharvest technology and soil treatment solution at TRL5. 
O4. To engage citizen as a source to monitor pests’ disease. Including: 1/ to organize citizen science programmes 
to collect information database related to potato pest disease; 2/ to use digital tools and citizen science online platform. 
R12 Involving individuals (citizen scientists) in such program mes will provide a low-cost means of maximizing 
search efforts across regions. 
R13 Three types of citizen science activities : 1) Open source web activities in existing platforms such as 
SciStarter.org and/or eu-citizen.science; 2) smart-phone apps to collect ec ology of plant pests (e.g. pictures 
of potential threats); 3) Citizen and farmers surveys, training and testing programmes. 
OC4 The use of citizen science in the agriculture sector will be a fruitful opportunity to provide  
an effective supplement to pest management approaches. 
O4’s pertinence to the call requirements: “Integrate citizen science as a tool to monitor emerging pests”. 
O5. To create a multi-actor participatory platform. Including: 1/ to involve the scientific & technical community, 
companies, and citizens/consumers across the potato value chain; 2/ to create a public participatory platform ensuring 
the effective dissemination of project results and outcomes to appropriate target audiences. 
R14 Creation o f m ulti-actor participatory platform to s hare knowledge, exper tise, and background across the 
interdisciplinary consortium  to generate at least 40 “practice abstracts”  to contribute to EIP-AGRI 
repository. 
R15 Project dissemination results will be shared through relevant channels to support the impact and exploitation 
outcomes including websites, social media, training materials, social events, etc.  
OC5 Providing the foundations and drivers for future development and implementation of IPM strategies by 
farmers and other key players in the event that these emerging potato pests outbreak in EU. 
O5’s pertinence to the call requirements:  “Proposals must implement the “multi -actor approach” including a 
range of actors to ensure that knowledge and needs from various sectors such as research, plant health services and 
the farming/forestry sector are brought together”. 
1.1.2 Ambition and progress beyond the state of art 
1.1.2.1 Ambition and innovation potential 
PataFEST project aims to provide a powerful European initiative for a sustainable IPM strategies to treat and control 
the presence of CLso pest and its vector  in plant and the incidence of se veral soil-borne pathogens in the potato 
postharvest storage. Beyond the state of art, several innovative strategies will be implemented within the project: 
Molecular breeding: Large part of the information is available but scattered over different sources will be combined 
and connected in one singular approach. For the first time, an innovative experimental association mapping regarding 
the ZC disease will be carried out using novel enriched base  sequencing methods as Single Primer Enrichment 
(SPET) and sequence probe capture technologies. Furthermore, the generated combined information obtained in 
PataFEST will represent a universal and powerful tool for a nalysing any new emerging pest or disease in potato in 
the future, by simply applying additional validations of potential R-gene SNP. 
Early detection tools: PHTS technology will be adapted to identify potato phenotype treats according to changes of 
selected biomarkers provoked by stress-inducing factors in plant models. By this way, it will be possible to diagnose 
R8 Potato varieties identified and selected for their resistant traits against CLso and its vector will be tested in 
field bioassay trials under real condition (potato plants affected by the bacteria in Ecuadorian geographical 
areas). Digital tool  developed will be operated from a mobile hardware unit (smartphone or tablet)  and 
validated in field to diagnose the presence of CLso disease in potato crops. 
R9 Pesticide free natural solution performance will be formulated at preindustrial level and evaluated on potato 
plants (2 hectares) to study the repellent effectiveness against BC in Ecuadorian geographical areas. 
R10 Biocontrol naturals solution prototype will be formulated at pre-industrial level and tested on 2 tons of tubers 
stored under  optimized CO2 and O 2 controlled atmosphere to control postharvest pathogen disease as F. 
sambucinum, C. coccodes, and H. solani. Sensors developed will be tested in potato warehouses under real 
storage conditions. Trails will be carried out in warehouses located in Spain and Germany. 
R11 Soil treatment solution based on aquaculture by-product biomass residues will be evaluated in 1 hectare of 
potato crop fields under real cultivation conditions in Spain. 
OC3 Carry out trials both in potato plant and in tubers during postharvest storage of the technologies developed at 
TRL5 will validate the effectiveness of the integration pest management  to control emerging threats and 
disease for potato crops. 
O3’s pertinence to the call requirements: “Sustainable and integrated pest management”; “International 
cooperation”; “Economic implication for farmer and ecological impacts of plant pests”. 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 5 of 10 
with more accuracy and in real time the potato plant health and select the most suitable methodology and sensor for 
the developing of a prototype tool able to perform an early detection of a pest or a pathogen. 
Pests control solutions: The development of sustainable and innovative pre and postharvest solutions  based on 
environmental-friendly ingredients and biotechnological agents will be a valid alternative of the excessive chemical 
compounds use in potato crops. PataFEST solutions will mainly provide protection against pest and pathogens , 
however their application will contribute to reduce respiration rate and dehydration both in potato plant and tubers. 
Plant soil management: The innovation of the solution proposed in PataFEST will consist in the value improving 
of biomass residues by-products such chitin and calcium carbonate not used directly as fertiliser but as a carrier able 
to deliver and improve availability of essential elements to potato plants. Besides, in PataFEST testing different soil 
conditions will deliver understanding of how manage future climate scenarios on disease development to be tested at 
relevant scales, yet under replicable conditions. 
Integrated pest management : PataFEST project will promote the opportunity to evaluate the synergy of the 
technological solution s within IPM strateg ies both for potato plant and postharvest tubers at TRL5.  Field and 
postharvest trials will involve the participation of potato packers, cooperative, trader and farmer associations. 
1.1.2.2 Positioning and Technological Readiness Level (TRL) 
Innovation & 
Partners Involved 
TRL 
Initial → final Justify current and final TRL 
Potato germplasm 
collection (NEIK, 
INIAP) 
2→5 
The available published data will be converged in one complete collection data 
base and a singular validation will be performed using novel targeting sequencing 
methods (SPET and Capture).  
Developments of 
tools for the pest 
and pathogen disease 
early detection 
(UPOL, IRIS, CRUN). 
2→5 
PHTS as a non-invasive real-time analysis has been used in several plant models. 
PataFEST research activities will allow to correlate potato phenotype and stress-
inducing factors (e.g., study elicitors of biotic stress) like those provoked by pests 
and pathogens selected . The identification of specific potato health biomarkers 
(including volatiles)  will allow developing high-performance sensors able to 
provide a fast and early- stage detection of emerging diseases. 
Postharvest 
biocontrol solution 
(FUND) 
3→5  
Biocontrol solutions have been previously tested on surface of other fruits and 
vegetables against pathogens as Colletothricum spp. In PataFEST the solutions 
will be tested against soil-borne pathogens affecting potato crops. 
Plant protective wax 
solution (TECHN) 3→5 
Multi-functional pesticide -free treatment has been successfully tested on plant 
leaves controlling pathogens and bacteria disease . In PataFEST  wax-based 
formulation will be tested as foliar spray solution to repel CLso vector, inhibit of 
soil-borne pathogen and control plant dehydration. 
Plant soil sustainable 
solution (UNIBO) 3→5 
Seashells biomass residues have been already tested for the formulation of new 
advanced materials for other industrial applications. In PataF EST innovative 
formulations will be tested to improve the soil quality and plant health in potato 
crops.