2.1 Project’s pathways towards impact 
This section covers PataFEST’s impact path ways towards the Expected Outcomes (EOs) at medium-term (from 
project’s end + 4 years later)11 and on the Expected Impacts (EI) 12 at long-term. These pathways are defined by 
clear, measurable, quantified, and assessable impact indicators  that fall  under the f ollowing impact category: 
scientific (Scie-I), societal (Soc-I) and economic & technological impacts (Econ&Tech-I). The results of the project 
will be used or further up -take by direct target groups (Fig 3). PataFEST will generate credible and sustainable 
impact p athways mainly in 5 impact areas:  ‘Sustainable food systems from farm to fork on land , ‘ Enhancing 
ecosystems and biodiversity o n land’, ‘Clean Soil’, ‘A resilient EU prepared for emerging threats ’ and ‘ Inclusive 
growth and new job opportunities’ in line with some of the 9 Key Impact Pathways (KIPs) defined within the Key 
Strategic Orientation KSO B ‘Restoring Europe’s ecosystems and biodiversity, and managing sustainably natural 
resources to ensure food security and a clean and healthy environment’ of the HEU Strategic Plan. 
Pathway towards Impact 1: Increase the molecular and biological information of potato with a thorough mapping 
of its resistance genes in response of emerging pests under current climate change. Corresponding to project´s 
objective O1. 
Impact Indicator 1: Acquisition of data related to potato resistance genes → Impact category: Scie-I 
As explained in “Excellence”, ZC disease is both costly and difficult to manage. Application of chemical pesticides 
has been the primary method of combating ZC in numerous regions around the world. Unfortunately, ov eruse of 
pesticides has resulted in ZC-vector resistance. As a result, pesticide use is both economically and environmentally 
unsustainable, and goes against the 2030-EU Action Plan  target of lowering chemical pesticide use by 50% to 
achieve the “zero pollution" targets. PataFEST proposes a met hod for studying potato resistance genes to the ZC 
vector psyllid BC and/or CLso based on potato genetic resources. This will ensure a long -term sustainable and 
successful strategy for managing increasing ZC disease and cultivating more resistant potatoes. PataFEST will thus 
offer a strategy in line with the EU Biodiversity Strategy 2030's  primary action to enhance genetic variety on 
agricultural land, which would benefit EU health and economy. 
Scale and significance to Impact 1 Target Groups HEU KIPs 
Results-Short term: Identification and characterization of potato 
resistance genes against diseases caused by ZC and soil -borne 
pathogens (305 European samples and 100 samples from Ecuador 
amongst wild and native species and cultivars) (linked to R1-R3). 
EO-medium term: Complete map of potato genes resistance to 
emerging threats in EU.  
EI-long term:  Prevent similar losses in potato production in the EU as 
those seen in other countries where these pests already exist. 
Scientific/Technical 
Community 
Farmers 
Industry along the potato 
value chain 
Plant health policy makers 
KIP 1 
‘Creating 
high-
quality new 
knowledge’ 
Pathway towards Impact 2: Long-term sustainable potato pest and postharvest diseases integrated management , 
including prevention, early detection and surveillance strategies. Corresponding to project´s objectives O2 and O3. 
Impact Indicator 2 : Catalogue of innovative solutions to respond to new and emerging potato pests  → Impact 
category: Econ&Tech-I 
 
11The Expected Outcomes (EO) described in the topic HORIZON-CL6-2022-F2F-02-02: Emerging and future risks to plant health are:  
EO 1: Find adequate responses to new and/or emerging plant pests. 
EO 2: Improve the understanding of drivers of plant pest emergence including the influence of climate change, ecosystem degradation and 
globalisation. 
EO 3: Develop economic and environmentally sound solutions for effective pest management in farming and forestry in line with the 
principles of integrated pest management. 
EO 4: Support to relevant plant health policies in the EU and Associated Countries. 
12 PataFEST sets out the above pathways towards the following Expected Impacts (IA) specified in the destination ‘Fair, healthy and 
environment-friendly food systems from primary production to consumption’ of the Cluster 6 Work Programme:  
EI 1: sustainable, productive, climate-neutral and resilient farming systems […], while minimising pressure on ecosystems, restoring and 
enhancing biodiversity, […] generating fair economic returns for farmers. 
EI 3: sustainable, healthy and inclusive food systems delivering co-benefits for climate mitigation and adaptation, […], sustainable 
healthy nutrition, safe food consumption, food poverty reduction, the inclusion of marginalised people, the empowerment of communities, 
and flourishing businesses.  
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 9 of 10 
PataFEST's concept is structured around the EU's agricultural research and innovation strategy, notably the set 
of initiatives aimed at "Priority 2: healthier plants"13. As the EU strives to reduce the use of chemical pesticides14, 
biopesticides are being more widely used in agricultural practices (biopesticides CAGR 15.4% versus synthetic 
pesticides CAGR 1.2% for the period 2018 -2023), potentially introdu cing new pathogens  not occurring before15. 
PataFEST will develop sustainable and systemic IPM strategies to address the prevention, monitoring, control, and 
management of ZC during cultivation and soil -borne pathogens during postharvest storage, as an alternative to the 
use of pesticides or other contentious methods, in combination with other innovative agronomic and digital solutions. 
In this regard, the project is fully in accordance with the actions of the “Agriculture and the Green Deal ”, as it 
promotes the adoption of a long-term IPM by potato professionals to achieve a healthy and sustainable food system 
for people and the earth16. 
Scale and significance to Impact 2 Target 
Groups 
HEU KIPs 
Results-short term: integrate all the innovative solutions and validate the IPM 
strategies at TRL 5 in different geographical areas (Germany, Ecuador, Spain) 
(linked to R4-R11): a) bioassay field trials of selected potato varieties in Ecuador 
(R8). b) portable low -cost sensors and digit al platform ( R4); c ) bio-based 
plant/tuber/soil health solutions (R5-R7; R9-R11).  
EO-medium term: laying the foundations for future development (TRL 6→9) of 
novel potato disease -strategies (e.g., bio-based chemical products st imulating 
the expressing of resistance genes). 
EI-long term : In the event that potato diseases enter in Europe, a rigorous , 
sustainable and economic Integrated Pest Management stra tegy might be 
implemented. 
Farmers 
Bio-based 
industry of 
plant health 
solutions 
Industry along 
the potato 
value chain 
Citizens 
KIP 7 
‘Generating 
innovation-
based 
growth’ 
 
KIP 9 
‘Leveraging 
investment in 
research and 
innovation’ 
Pathway towards Impact 3: C itizens and farmers as key actors for prevention and early detection of potential 
potato threats (‘Citizen science’). Corresponding to project´s objectives O4. 
Impact Indicator 3: Involvement of citizens across regions → Impact category: Soc-I 
The potato IPM proposed in PataFEST will be  designed by and for individuals and farmers in the EU and 
Associated Countries. Citizens will contribute to the studies in a variety of ways (e.g. expert reviews, potato photo 
submissions, training and testing programs, smartphone-collected information in apps, etc.) through citizen science 
activities inspired by other EU initiatives such as eu-citizen.science or the international citizen hub 'Science we can 
do together', with the goal of preventing and detecting potential threats to potato crops around the world and long -
term adoption of the IPM. Everyone, regardless of age or professional background, will contribute to the project's 
research outcomes in order to have a significant impact not only during the project's implementation (2023-2026), 
but also in the medium and long term. The project will ensure low -cost and effective means of maximiz ing our 
outcomes across regions of the EU and internationally by involving citizens in the projec t from the beginnin g, 
throughout its duration, and beyond. Citizens will play a significant role in supplementing knowledge to technical 
pest management strategies. 
Scale and significance to Impact 3 Target Groups HEU KIPs 
Results-short term: Research data collected and supported by the citizens in 
the project’s research activities to monitor emerging potato pests → 3 types of 
citizen’s activities (linked to R12-R13). 
EO-medium term: Share best-practices of the citizen science approach to other 
related pests. 
EI-long term: Adoption of citizen science systems for the surveillance and 
control of disease-carrying vectors by governments and private sector. 
Citizens 
 
Farmers 
KIP 6 
‘Strengthening 
the uptake of 
research and 
innovation in 
society’ 
Pathway towards Impact 4: Creation of an interactive innovation model to help the implementation of potato IPM 
across different professional backgrounds at local, regional, na tional and international scale (‘Multi -Actor 
Approach’). Corresponding to project´s objectives O5. 
Impact Indicator 4: “practice abstracts’ of EIP-AGRI → Impact category: Soc-I 
The EIP-AGRI policy goal of “speeding up” innovation will be met from the start of the project and in the long run 
thanks to the active participation of farmers and agri-food businesses through the key associations and cooperatives 
engaged (ASAJA, UDAPA, EUPAT). The multi-actor participatory platform will include the scientific & 
technical community, companies (SMEs, large industries, agricultural/potato associations, and cooperatives), and 
 
13 A strategic approach to EU agricultural research & innavation. Available here. 
14 Directive 2009/128/EC. Sustainable use of pesticides. Available here. 
15 Frost & Sullivan (2019). Global Crop Protection Market, Forecast to 2023. 
16 Integrated Pest Management (IPM) in the EU Green Deal. Available here. 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 10 of 10 
citizens/consumers across the 
potato value chain (Fig. 2) to share 
knowledge and cooperate one with 
each other to maximize our results 
and outcomes.  
This platform will be critical for 
enhancing rural community 
engagement at all scales (local, 
national, and international) and for 
disseminating th e project's 
proposed solutions against 
emerging potato pests. PataFEST's 
impact will be amplified by close engagement with current EIP Operational Groups and other similar projects.  
Scale and significance to Impact 4 Target Groups HEU KIPs 
Results-short term: Share knowledge, experience, and background 
due to the complementary disciplines of the multiple actors → 
creation of ~40 “practice abstracts” (linked to R14-R15). 
EO-medium term: acceptance and adoption of the PataFEST  
solutions by farmers and other actors of the potato value chain 
production. 
EI-long term: Implementation of potato IPM across all the actors → 
ensure economic sustainability of potato production, increase farm 
competitiveness and improve key actor’s position in the value chain. 
All actors of the 
potato value 
chain shown in 
Fig. 2 
KIP 4 ‘Addressing EU 
policy priorities and 
global challenges 
through R&D’ 
KIP 5 ‘Delivering 
benefits and impact 
through research and 
innovation missions’ 
All in all, PataFEST is build up with a strong commitment towards the key policies objectives of the new Common 
Agricultural Policy (CAP), Farm-to-Fork strategy and SDG (2, 8, 13, 15, 17) for the period 2023-2027, briefly: 
1) “Fostering knowledge & Innovations” → involving farmers to our research activities and outcomes; 2) “Halting 
& reversing biodiversity loss” → preserving more resistance potato varieties, 3) “Effi cient natural resource 
management” → developing a sustainable, effective and long -term management strategies to tackle future potato 
pest; 4) “Contributing to climate change mitigation”  → boosting sustainable and bio -based circular solutions for 
plant health (biopesticides from biomass sources); 5) “Increasing competitiveness” → involving all relevant actors 
in the potato value chain. The project also will support the “Plant Health Law” and all the associated implementing 
acts related to pests, commodities, plant health requirements, etc17. 
Requirements and potential barriers 
Barrier/Requirement Description Strategies for overcoming 
Technology demand: low demand of the potato industry 
and/or bio-based industry of plant health solutions could 
undermine the  further development of the solution at 
higher TRLs. 
Scientific/Technical community of the project, in 
collaboration with other funded EU project s, 
initiatives and OPs of EIP-AGRI will create dedicated 
scientific forums to mitigate this potential barrier. 
Lack of citizen engagement  in the citizen science tool 
and poor adaption by farmers of IPM. 
PataFEST will provide well documented results, 
dissemination materials and engagements activities to 
all the actors that will form a sound base to support 
our results and outcomes. 
EPPO Standards associated to potato pests & 
guidelines18: PM1/002(30) EPPO A1 and A2 Lists of 
pests recommended for regulation as quarantine pests 
(2021); PM7/143(1) CLso; PM8/001(2) Potato; 
PM9/025(2) BC and CLso  and the guidelines in  good 
plant protection practice – Potato PP 2/2. 
The novel potato management strategies for both pre- 
and p ostharvest will be carefully follow ed these 
standards in order to avoid any potential confrontation 
with existing standards. 
EU Regulatory and Policy  requirements: EU 
regulatory framework may affect production and 
commercialisation of potato pest management solutions. 
The Plant Health Regulation and EU Directive  
2002/56/EC are key for the correct use of IPM to protect 
potato crops beyond project’s duration. 
The consortium, specifically our partners representing 
different actors across the potato value chain, will 
review the legislation applicable to protective 
measures against pests and other legislations 
applicable to PataFEST. Moreover, engagement wit h 
policy makers will be ensured. 
 
 
17 Plant Health Law (Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 and implementation acts are found here. 
18 All the documents related to EPPO standards for potato are available here. 
Figure 2. Multi-actor approach applied in PataFEST.