3.2 Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole......................................................................................... 42 
 
Ref. Ares(2022)6180378 - 07/09/2022
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 2 of 45 
1 EXCELLENCE 
The potato (Solanum tuberosum) is a key crop in Europe. In 2020, the EU's potato production was 55.3 million 
tonnes (worth 12.3 billion euros), with Germany (21.2%), Poland (16.4%), France (15.7%), and the Netherlands 
(12.7%) being the top EU producers. Spain had a production of 2.1 million tonnes (2020) and UK, according to FAO, 
was ranked in the 14th position of top countries in potato production (5.2 million tonnes, in 2019).1 In South America, 
cultivated potatoes are widely distributed  in the Ande an region with over 4,500 varieties and more than 100 wild 
species. In Ecuador, total potato production in 2017 was 400,000 tonnes  where the  cultivation is generally 
undertaken by small-scale farmers2. 
Potato is vulnerable to a variety of pests and soil-borne pathogens, resulting in significant economic losses in the 
potato industry, and consequently food losses (in line with SDG 12.3) 3,4. For example, in 2011, the United States 
recorded losses in potato yield of up to 75%,  and in other cases, the damages are so severe that the entire crop is 
lost5. In view of this scenario, t he European regulatory framework for potato’s imports and production sets strict 
requirements. For example, the European and Mediterranean Protection Organization (EPPO) establishes 
phytosanitary measures which should be required for seed and ware potatoes moving in international trade to prevent 
the introduction and spread of quarantine pests6. Although there are strict controls, globalisation, climate change and 
economical drivers are threatening the entrance of emerging or new potato pests from imported potato to EU.  The 
most important pest in the potato plant is caused by bacteria Candidatus Liberibacter solanacearum (CLso) and 
which disease is known as zebra chip (ZC). The introduction the CLso bacterium on potato is mainly linked to the 
presence of the vector psyllid Bactericera cockerelli  (BC)7. Additionally, other threats (such as Fusarium 
sambucinum, Colletothricum coccodes, Helminthosporium solani) also affect potato safety and quality during the 
postharvest activities, making the tubers unmarketable8. All the above evidence establishes the need to start the 
project PataFEST as currently there is not EU collaborative project tackling these potato diseases.9 
To preserve the health of potato plant against its emerging pests and the quality of the final product, the project 
PataFEST will (Fig 1.1): 1)  characterize at molecular level  the ecological pest spread pathway and identify potato 
disease resistance varieties against CLso and postharvest pathogens; 2) provide effective preharvest plant and soil 
treatments against CLso vector and soil -borne pathogens combined with other cutting-edge digital technologies 
such as image analysis tools (mobile app) and artificial intelligence predictive models; 3) develop postharvest 
technologies (biocontrol coating solution , controlled atmosphere storage  and volatile organic compounds 
(VOCs) sensors) to control the incidence of soil pathogens and maintain the quality of potato tubers stored. All these 
three strategies and technologies will be incorporated into an integrated pest management (IPM) to validate their 
performance in a country-specific relevant environments (TRL5) in Germany, France, Spain and UK as 
representatives of main potato producers. In addition, Ecuador will host field trials against CLso and its vector BC. 
PataFEST will ensure a long-term strategy for tackling future potato pest threats by carrying out strong dissemination, 
communication and exploitation plan, with an overarching multi-actor approach and citizen of science activities. 
 
 
 
1 Top Countries in Potatoes Production (2019). Available here. 
2 Rondon, S.I. (2022). In: Alyokhin, A. et al. ed. Insect Pests and Potato. 
317-330.  
3 The EU potato sector – statistics on production, prices, and trade. July 
2021. Available here. 
4 SDG 12.3: By 2030, halve per capita global food waste at the retail and 
consumer levels and reduce food losses along production and supply 
chains, including post-harvest losses. 
5 Greenway, G. (2014). Am. J. Potato Res.  91: 714–719.  
6 PM 8/1 (2) Potato. (2017). Bulletin OEPP/EPPO, 47(3): 487–503. 
7 Mora, V., et al. (2021). Frontiers in Microbiol. 12: 700663. 
8 Wood, et al. (2013). Biol. Control. 64: 152-159. 
9 Check in Cordis during the proposal preparation. 
Figure 1.1 PataFEST at a glance 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 3 of 45
1.1 Objectives and ambitions 
1.1.1 Objectives 
The goal of PataFEST is to reduce: 1) the risk of introducing and spreading emerging potato pests that could endanger 
EU agriculture and 2) the presence of soil -borne pathogens in the potato postharvest activities. The selected threats 
in this project  are: 1) Candidatus Liberibacter solanacearum and its vectors (BC, Fig. 1. 2) affecting potato and 
causing ZC disease (Fig 1.3) within the crop cycle (preharvest threat) and 2) soil-borne 
pathogens such as Fusarium sambucinum , Colletothricum coccodes , and 
Helminthosporium solani causing high incidence of rot and skin blemish on potato tubers 
during postharvest storage (postharvest threat). 
Zebra Chip disease causes plant symptoms such as leaf chlorosis, discoloration, curling 
and eventually premature plant death . The potato chip industry is also affected by this disease since the CLso  
infected potato tubers are often deformed, of low quality and, with dark stripes, making chips bitter to taste  and 
unacceptable for manufacturers to commercialise. CLso has been found throughout North and South America, 
Canada, New Zealand, and Australia and the disease is reported in other solanaceous crops such as tomato, eggplant, 
and pepper 7,10. In Ecuador, BC was first reported in 2019 11 and CLso in 2020 12, as a result, up to 100% potato 
yield losses were reported whilst the cultivated area was reduced by 56% compared with the 
previous years13. Preventative measures are implemented to decrease the potential appearance 
of ZC vector in European potato supply chain . For example, EPPO classified ZC as an A1 
quarantine pest (pest that is not found in the EPPO territory, but it is recommended to carry out 
a quarantine management strategy)14. However, considering the potential threat of this emerging 
pest, the development of further management strategies for prevention, early detection and 
surveillance is required. 
Chemical pesticides  are used to control pest and diseases  to secure yields in plant production  and reduce food 
wastage. The EU Green Deal aims to reduce fossil-based pesticides by 50% by implementing more sustainable 
and circular plant health solutions 15. Possible consequences derived from the excessive use of chemical pesticides 
and the transition towards their bio-based counterparts are 1) increases pesticide resistance in bacteria, insects, and 
soil-borne pathogens, and 2) reappearance of soil pathogens, potentially increasing the incidence of soil infections 
during postharvest storage. 
Main potato postharvest diseases include dry rot caused by Fusarium sambucinum (Fig. 
1.4), black dot caused by  Colletothricum coccodes , and silver scurf provoked by 
Helminthosporium solani. These pathogens are soil-borne and have incidence in both field 
and storage stages with dramatic economic losses for potato farmers and pre -pack potato 
industry since the postharvest development of such diseases will result in unmarketable 
product16. Standard control for these diseases in warehouses includes elimination of infected 
tubers prior to storage and storage management strategies such as forced air ventilation, and 
controlled temperature and humidity feedback systems 17. Chlorine-based disinfectants are 
also applied . H owever, chlorine may not completely prevent storage pathogens, and the 
presence of chlorinated residues (chlorates and perchlorates) may cause consumer worries, prompting them to 
demand more environmentally friendly and chemical-free alternatives, particularly for organic farming. 
The project PataFEST is aligned with the topic Horizon-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages: Emerging and 
future risks to plant health  promoting the transition to a fair, healthy, and resilient agriculture. To achieve this, the 
proposed strategies, in lined with the topic’s scope, are: 
Molecular characterisation of the t argets potato pests and diseases  by studying the spread pathways and 
determining potato resistance gene s by using innovative molecular biology methodologies (NGS sequencing), 
bioinformatics tools and biostatistical analyses. 
Early detection and surveillance of pest and pathogen diseases by applying real-time diagnosis to potato plants 
and tuber health using high performance and user -friendly portable sensors and smartphone apps. Artificial 
intelligence (AI) predictive algorithms will be developed as a tool for the classification of the pest diseases integrated 
in a mobile app and forecasting potential risk context of disease spread caused by climate change and globalisation. 
Prevention methodologies for potato plant, tubers and soil health  by developing chemical free bio -based 
sustainable solution to hinder the spread of pests and diseases. 
 
10 https://gd.eppo.int/taxon/PARZCO/distribution. Last updated 2021-10-
05. 
11 Castillo, C.I., et al. (2019) Bull. Insectol. 72: 85-91. 
12 Caicedo, J.D., et al. (2020) Australasian Plant Dis. Notes 15, 6.  
13 MAG-SIPA http://sipa.agricultura.gob.ec/index.php/papa. 
14 PM 1/1 (30) EPPO A1 and A2. (2021). Lists of pests recommended for 
regulation as quarantine pests. 
15 European Green Deal. Available here. 
16 Powelson, M.L., Rowe, R.C. (2008). In: Johnson D., ed. Potato Health  
Management. 183-195. 
17 Knowles N.R., Plissey E.S. (2008). In: Johnson D., ed. Potato Health  
Management. 79–99. 
Figure 1.2. Vector psyllid 
(BC) 
Figure 1.3. Zebra 
Chip infected potato 
disease 
Figure 1.4. Dry-rot 
infected potato 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 4 of 45 
Integrated pest management strategy by validating potato disease gene resistance varieties, surveillance and early 
detection tools, and environmentally sound treatments in plant, tubers and soil of both organic and conventional 
crops. The validatio ns will be done under  relevant environment ( TRL5), will be at European and international 
(Ecuador) scale  (Table 1.1 ). 
Table 1.1 Proposed validation trials in selected EU countries and Ecuador (TRL 5) . 
Pests and pathogens  Potato varieties Trials size Country Partner 
Plant pest and its vector 
Candidatus Liberibacter 
solanacearum (CLso) 
Bactericera cockerelli (BC) 
30 potato varieties  2 ha of plant 
potato field Ecuador INIAP 
Soil-borne pathogen: 
Fusarium sambucinum, 
Colletothricum coccodes 
Helminthosporium solani 
Common potato varieties: 
Vivaldi, La Vie. 
Other potato varieties: 
Monalisa (Spain); Maris 
Piper (UK); Gala/Wega 
(Germany); Melody (France). 
1 ha of plant 
and soil 
potato crop; 
1 ton potato 
storage 
Spain 
UK 
Germany 
France 
UDAPA 
AB 
BOHE (organic) 
TERREA (organic) 
PataFEST project will boost a multi-actor approach and transnational research collaborations among 18 partners 
with high expertise in molecular biology, potato plant protection, postharvest technologies, engineering for 
agriculture applications, soil health and pest and disease management. In addition, citizen science will be used as a 
tool to monitor emerging potato threats and collect scientific data by the general public. 
The project proposes 5 objectives (O) with their respective 5 outcomes (OC), articulated under 18 results (R). 
O1. To develop molecular approaches for the pest surveillance protocol and disease -RGs identification in 
potato varieties . Including: 1/ to develop of molecular monitoring protocol for the surveillance, detection, and 
control of CLso plant pest; 2/ to setup a comprehensive catalogue of mapped RGs against CLso pest disease and soil-
borne postharvest pathogens; 3/ to validate the RGs in the working collection of potato accessions by means of field 
trials, bio-assays and association mapping techniques using the detected SNP. 
O2. To develop innovative strategies to control potato pest spread and reduce potato postharvest disease.  
Including: 1/ to develop low -cost diagnostic solutions as VOC s sensor devices and digital tool application (e.g. 
smartphone) for the early detection and surveillance of the plant pest disease and postharvest pathogens in potato 
warehouses; 2/ to detect and classify diseased potatoes and predict risks of disease spread due to climate change using 
AI.; 3/to provide natural and sustainable solutions to prevent pest spread by controlling the vector in potato plants 
and investigating biocontrol and controlled atmosphere strategies to reduce postharvest disease incidence and 
severity; 4/ to reduce the incidence of CLso and post-harvest pathogens in potato crop increasing plant health status 
thanks to optimised nutrient availability and improved plant soil management. 
R5 Morphological and physiological phenotyping traits (biomarkers) will be identified in infected plants and 
tubers through Phenotype-based High -throughput Screening (PHTS) which uses differen t non -invasive 
sensors as RGB, FluorCam, IR, and hyperspectral cameras. Besides, VOCs biomarkers will be identified and 
quantified by chromatography techniques in infected tubers. The best identified biomarkers will be selected 
R1 150-200 high quality bacterial genomes, 500-1000 metagenomics 16S samples and 1500-2000 qPCR assays 
will be performed to carry out the whole monitoring and control protocol of CLso spreading and its vector. 
R2 Full identification, compilation, and mapping against the reference genome of all annotated potato RGs, 
QTLs and orthologous genes from the Plant Resistance Genes database (PRGdb). 
R3 A broad germplasm working collection of around 500 samples will be analysed. 40 wild species, 35 native 
varieties and around 280 old and new European cultivars will be characteri sed for postharvest disease 
resistance levels. In addition, 150 samples from Ecuador (advanced breeding materials, wild species, native 
varieties, European cultivars) which will be characterised for their tolerance level to  both, CLso and its 
vector. 
R4 Identification of promising RGs SNP for targeted diseases and pests  which can be applied in marker -
assisted selection within molecular potato breeding. Determination of breeding values for pest and disease 
resistance of the accessions. 
OC1 PataFEST project will provide relevant and free access information to better identify the most suitable potato 
varieties resistant to plant pest threat and soil-borne pathogens in postharvest storage. 
O1’s pertinence to the call requirements:  “Increase knowledge of the biology, pathways of entry, beh aviour in 
the plant -soil system...”; “Identify and introduce resistance traits to support the long -term sustainability of 
agriculture and forestry in the EU and/or Associated Countries”. 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 5 of 45 
and models for the development of “low cost”, user -friendly and robust digital tool (smartphone app) and 
portable sensor devices (VOCs sensor) will be developed. 
R6 A suite of algorithms and techniques based on artificial intelligence will be developed for the detection of 
pest and diseases in potato plants and potatoes using an app mobile device. Same technology will be also used 
to predict the potential risks context of pest spread due to climate change and globalisation. 
R7 Environmentally friendly wax sprays will render potato leaves super hydrophobicity providing anti-adhesive 
performance against CLso bacteria vector (psyllid) and anti-pathogenic properties.  
R8 Enzyme and antagonistic yeasts -based biocontrol coatings  will be tested on potato tubers stored under 
different graduated CO 2 and O 2 controlled atmosphere (CA) conditions to decrease at least 40-50% the 
incidence of some important postharvest pathogen diseases selected such as dry rot (F. sambucinum), black 
dot and silver scurf (C. coccodes, and H. solani, respectively) to ensure consumer safety and acceptance. 
R9 Chitin and calcium carbonate -based alternative biofertilizers obtained from the valorisation of aquaculture 
biomass residues will be formulated as carriers of nutrient elements reducing susceptibility of potato plant to 
pathogens incidence both at foliar and tuber level. Soil management task will also include field trials to 
evaluate pest pathway  of entry and drivers of spread  as future climate scenarios  (flooding, coldness, 
drought, etc.) and ecological degradation processes (modification of soil organic matter, etc.). Soil 
management strategies will reduce pathogens incidence by 30%.  
OC2 Use of early detection tools, sustainable solutions to improve plant and soil health and control postharvest 
pathogens will be helpful for meaningful reduction of pesticide and fungicide usage in potato crops. 
O2’s pertinence to the call requirements: “Develop and uptake rapid and effective tools for the prevention of entry, 
spread and establishment, early detection, surveillance, treatment and (bio) control of plant pests; “influence of 
climate change and globalisation of pest(s)”. 
O3. To validate the Integrated Pest Management. Including:1/ to implement the technologies developed and carry 
out plant bioassays trials against CLso  pest disease in an intended environments beyond Europe (e.g., Ecuador); 2/ 
to validate the postharvest technology and soil treatment solution for both organic and convention potato crops at 
TRL5. 
O4. To engage citizen as a source to collect scientific and technical data. Including: 1/ to organize citizen science 
campaigns and workshop to collect information  database related to potato pest diseases; 2/ to organize webinars to 
increase the engagement of citizen in the project activities. 
R14 Involving social groups (citizens as students, urban garden  owner, scientists, potato production farmers) in 
such events will provide a low-cost means of maximizing research efforts across EU and abroad regions. 
R15 Three types of citizen science activities: 1) 3 co-creative workshops to experience the sustainable solutions 
developed in the project by citizens with urban gardens and farmers; 2) 2 citizens campaign based on practical 
demonstration of molecular biology tools; 3) organise 8 webinars to disseminate th e social implication of 
farmers and citizens. 
OC4 The use of citizen science in the agriculture sector will be a fruitful opportunity to provide  
an effective supplement to pest management approaches. 
R10 At least 30 potato varieties identified and selected for their resistant traits against CLso and its vector will 
be tested in field bioassay trials under real condition (potato plants affected by the bacteria in Ecuadorian 
geographical areas). Digital tool developed will be operated from a mobile hardware unit  (smartphone or 
tablet) and validated in field performing 90% reliability on the diagnostic detection of CLso disease in potato 
crops. 
R11 Pesticide free natural solution performance will be formulated at pilot plant level and evaluated on potato 
plants (2 ha) to study the repellent effectiveness against BC in Ecuadorian geographical areas. The presence 
of BC will be reduced by at least 50% and the incidence of ZC by 25%. 
R12 Biocontrol natural solution prototype will be formulated at pre-industrial level and tested on 2 tons of tubers 
(organic and conventional) stored to control postharvest pathogen disease as F. sambucinum, C. coccodes, 
and H. solani. VOCs sensors developed will be tested in 3 different European potato warehouses under real 
storage conditions (at least 100Kg x warehouse). Trails will be carried out in warehouses located in France, 
Germany, and UK. 
R13 Soil treatment solution based on aquaculture by-product biomass residues will be evaluated in 1 ha of potato 
crop fields (organic and conventional) under real cultivation conditions in Spain, France, and Germany. 
OC3 Carry out trials both in potato plant and in tubers during postharvest storage of the technologies developed at 
TRL5 will validate the effectiveness of the integration pest management to control emerging threats and 
disease for potato crops. 
O3’s pertinence to the call requirements: “Sustainable and integrated pest management”; “International 
cooperation”; “Economic implication for farmer and ecological impacts of plant pests”. 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 6 of 45 
O4’s pertinence to the call requirements: “Integrate citizen science as a tool to monitor emerging pests”. 
O5. To disseminate, communicate and exploit the main achievements of PataFEST project:  Including: 1/ to 
involve the scientific & technical community, companies, and citizens/consumers across the potato value chain; 2/ 
to create a multi-actor participatory platform ensuring the effective dissemination of project results and outcomes to 
appropriate target audiences; 3/to develop a set of clustering activities with existing projects and relevant European 
initiatives and platforms. 
R16 Creation of multi-actor participatory platform (MAPP) to share knowledge, expertise, and background 
across the interdisciplinary consortium to generate at least 60 “practice abstracts” to contribute to EIP-
AGRI repository. 
R17 Project dissemination results will be shared through relevant channels  to support  the impact and 
exploitation outcomes including websites, social media, training materials, social events, etc.  
R18 2 workshops together with similar EU projects and clusters to increase the project’s visibility and reach. 
OC5 Providing the foundations and drivers for future development and implementation of IPM strategies by 
farmers and other key players in the event that these emerging potato pests outbreak in EU. 
O5’s pertinence to the call requirements:  “Proposals must implement the “multi -actor approach” including a 
range of actors to ensure that knowledge and needs from various sectors such as research, plant health services and 
the farming/forestry sector are brought together”. 
1.1.2 Ambition and progress beyond the state of art 
1.1.2.1 Ambition and innovation potential 
PataFEST project aims to provide a powerful European initiative for a sustainable IPM strategies to treat and control 
the presence of CLso pest and its vector in plant and the incid ence of several soil -borne pathogens in the potato 
postharvest storage. Beyond the state of art, several innovative strategies will be implemented within the project: 
Pest spread pathway and ecological analysis: The combination of different molecular novel  approaches of high-
throughput DNA Sequencing (HTS) technologies as whole -genome sequencing (WGS) and 16S metabarcoding 
techniques will provide a deeply knowledge of CLso and its vector (BC) spread pathway allowing to create a 
surveillance pest disease protocol. Furthermore, these findings will allow to optimize the sensitivity and accuracy of 
quantitative PCR (qPCR) assays ensuring the detection of novel, diverse, and uncommon CLso strains and 
consequently significantly improve the plant pest routine diagnostics. 
Potato disease-RGs analysis: All the molecular information available of disease-RGs will be combined under a 
singular complete collection database. For the first time, an innovative experimental association mapping regarding 
the ZC disease will be carried out using novel targeted sequencing methods (SPET or Capture) and hybridi sation 
technology with potato microchips. Furthermore, the generated combined information obtained in PataFEST will 
represent a universal and powerful tool for analysing an y new emerging pest or disease in potato in the future, by 
simply applying additional phenotypic evaluations of resistance levels, since the molecular data will be the same. 
Early detection tools: PHTS technology will be adapted to identify potato phenotype traits according to changes of 
selected biomarkers provoked by stress-inducing factors in plant models. By this way, it will be possible to diagnose 
with more accuracy and in real time the potato plant health and select the most suitable methodology for the 
developing of a prototype tool (mobile app) able to perform an early detection of a pest or a pathogen. 
Postharvest volatiles organic compounds sensors: A lab study of VOCs emissions during the infection of the 
potatoes will reveal the nature of biomarkers and their concentration values as function of the potato state. With this 
information, PataFEST project will develop a portable prototype of array of sensors able to monitor the concentration 
of these VOCs in real-time, allowing the potato packer to take in advance the right decision about when to open the 
chambers and release the product to the market. 
AI using algorithm prediction model: The usage of AI predictive algorithms allows the process of observation to 
be proactive rather than reactive, without necessarily human intervention. Automatically and periodic revisions of 
potato health will permit to w in anticipation time to fight efficiently against a pest or a pathogen spread in potato 
caused to climate change. For this purpose, AI predictive algorithm will fulfill two functions: classification of 
diseased cases and potential risk context of disease s pread. These predictive assessments will consider global 
warming as a cornerstone, considering variables which depend on the geographical situation and climate conditions.   
Pests control solutions : The development of sustainable and innovative pre and pos tharvest solutions based on 
environmental-friendly ingredients and biotechnological agents will be a bio-based alternative to the excessive fossil-
based compounds use in potato crops. PataFEST solutions will mainly provide protection against pest and pathogens, 
however their application will contribute to reduce respiration rate and dehydration both in potato plant and tubers. 
PHTS rapid method will be used to support the quantitative testing o f pre and postharvest formulation prototypes 
effects on pest and pathogen incidence. 
Plant soil management: The innovation of the solution proposed in PataFEST will consist in the value improving 
of biomass residues by-products such chitin and calcium carbonate not used directly as fertiliser but as a carrier able 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 7 of 45 
to deliver and improve availability of essential elements to potato plants. Besides, in PataFEST testing different soil 
conditions will deliver understanding of how manage future climate scenarios on disease development to be tested at 
relevant scales, yet under replicable conditions. 
Integrated pest management : PataFEST project will promote the opportunity to evaluate the synergy of the 
technological solutions within IPM strategies both for organic and conventional potato plant and postharvest tubers 
at TRL5. Field and postharvest trials will involve the participation of potato packers, cooperative, trader and farmer 
associations. 
1.1.2.2 Positioning and Technological Readiness Level (TRL) 
Innovation & 
Partners Involved 
TRL 
    Initial → final Justify current and final TRL 
Specific and sensitive 
molecular detection and 
mapping (UPOL, 
INIAP). 
3→5 
Molecular   technologies such as qPCR and 16S metabarcode  high-
throughput sequencing have been demonstrated to significantly improve 
detection. In PataFEST, the implementation of a pest monitoring system and 
the improvement of the qPCR assays will allow triggering the timely 
deployment of management measures. 
Potato germplasm 
collection (NEIK, 
INIAP). 
2→5 
The available published data will be converged in one complete collection 
data base and a singular validation will be performed using novel targeting 
sequencing methods (SPET or Capture).  
Phenotype-based High-
throughput Screening 
technology (UPOL, 
IRIS, CRUN). 
2→5 
PHTS as a non -invasive real-time analysis has been used in several plant 
models. PataFEST research activities will allow to correlate potato phenotype 
and stress-inducing factors (e.g., study elicitors of biotic stress) like those 
provoked by pests and pathogens selected. This will allow to develop robust 
digital tools for the pest and pathogen diseases early detection.  
VOCs sensors (CRUN, 
FUND) 3→5 
Electrochemical sensors technology has been successful developed to detect 
VOCs and prevent the spoilage of other agro -food products as meat and 
mushrooms. In PataFEST, the identification of specific potato health 
biomarkers (including volatiles) will allo w developing high -performance 
sensors able to provide a fast and early- stage detection of emerging diseases. 
Postharvest 
biocontrol solution 
(FUND) 
3→5  
Biocontrol solutions have been previously tested on surface of other fruits 
and vegetables against pa thogens as Colletothricum spp. In PataFEST the 
solutions will be tested against soil-borne pathogens affecting potato crops. 
Plant protective wax 
solution (TECHN) 3→5 
Multi-functional pesticide -free treatment has been successfully tested on 
plant leaves controlling pathogens and bacteria disease. In PataFEST wax -
based formulation will be tested as foliar spray solution to repel CLso vector, 
inhibit of soil-borne pathogen and control plant dehydration. 
Plant soil sustainable 
solution (UNIBO) 3→5 
Seashells biomass residues have been already tested for the formulation of 
new advanced materials for other industrial applications. In PataFEST 
innovative formulations will be t ested to improve the soil quality and plant 
health in potato crops.
1.2 Methodology 
1.2.1 Concept and overall methodology  
PataFEST is a 48-month RIA action project based on the following activities against the presence of CLso pest threat 
in potato plants and pathogens incidences in postharvest tubers (Fig. 1.5). 
Pest spread pathway and ecological analysis 
The first goal of PataFEST is developing molecular modeling approaches to surveillance, detection, and control 
of plant pests  (WP1) that will be decisive to aid in understanding the epidemiological spreading of CLso pest. 
Therefore, these findings will create an effective pest-disease surveillance protocol and an early and effective plant 
pest detection. In this way, identifying the precise  CLso strain type represents a key step as the haplotypes (A and 
B) express different  disease symptoms18. Initially, UPOL will summarize all available genetic (16S barcode) and 
genomic information of BC and CLso stored in the public databases as GenBank. Furthermore, to cover all possible 
sub-haplotypes, the whole genome of the CLso sampled across Ecuador will be sequenced using highly accurate 
long-read from PacBio's next -generation sequencing platform. This approach will comprehensively characterize 
different strains and enable the efficient variant detection of plant pest. Additionally, genome-wide association 
(GWAS) analysis among all target genomes will be used to identify the diversity and potential differences in sites or 
protein families connected with the pest virulence. This approach will allow to review widely used primers  
 
18Harrison, G.F., et al., (2019). Nat. Ecol. Evol. 3(8): 1253–1264. 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 8 of 45 
and mo dify them to be more strain -specific or target other parts of the genome (with higher mutation rate, i.e., 
prophage section) during pest screening.  Likewise, the reconstruction of the spread pathway  across the target 
regions and phylogeny of CLso strains will be inferred using the metabarcoding approach across all assembled 16S 
rRNA genes from the vegetation near the fields of BC sampled. Combining inferred relationships among samples 
with the location and the collection date will provide complex data that will be analysed with Bayesian inference-
based software (BioGeoBEARS). The spread pest pattern will also be tested using continuous trait reconstruction 
(BEAST and SPREAD3). This approach uses Google Earth to visualize the spread pathway. Besides all this, 
metabarcoding data will be used to identify the syn -positivity of BC for CLso and phytoplasmas. Using all our 
findings from previous steps, cost -effective diagnostic solutions based on qPCR will be developed to identify the 
samples positivity quickly. Finally, all generated data will be submitted to Genbank and available for open science. 
Potato disease-RGs analysis 
Taking into account that one of the main goals of PataFEST project is to access the most suitable potato varieties 
resistant to plant pest threat and soil -borne pathogens, several molecular approaches will be u sed for the 
identification and characterisation of the RGs and the detection of functional genetic markers  (WP1). These 
findings are considered a crucial way to recognize and characterize the disease -resistance mechanisms to improve 
the selection of resistant varieties of potato at early stages of breeding and enhance agricultural production . First, a 
singular and complete catalogue of mapped RGs against potato pest and diseases will be addressed by NEIK using 
different tools, starting with the compilation of all annotated and published RGs on the potato reference genome. 
This initial compilation will be completed by mapping recently published potato RGs to the Potato Reference 
Genome. Besides, this collection will be extended by the compilation of all relevant RGs from the PRGdb, searching 
the potato orthologues; mapping and validating these genes to the Reference Potato Genome. Furthermore, published 
Potato Resistance QTLs will be mapped to the reference. 
genome via projection, using collocated probes/primers with known sequences and identifying the potential 
collocated RG s that caused the QTL . Furthermore,  one of the driving forces of PataFEST project is to do a 
comprehensive molecular characterisation approach of a broad germplasm collection with the view of hav img 
deeply information about their resistance and tolerance profiles. Initially, a molecular characterisation of the working 
collection of potato accessions will be achieved by NEIK using SNP GGP V4 Potato array, which contains already 
many RGs. Additionally, in order to enrich these preliminary results a relevant  RGs will be analysed for SNP by 
using innovative and novel targeting sequencing strategies (SPET) with the Germplasm accessions. Moreover, field 
trails and bioassays will be performed with the aim to provide a global evaluation of resistance levels against CLso 
pest disease and soil-borne postharvest pathogens in the accessions. First the required in vitro plants and minitubers 
of local and introduced germplasm will be produce according to INIAP´s pro tocol using tissue culture or stem 
Figure 1.5. PataFEST general concept and participation of partners. 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 9 of 45 
cuttings, followed by hydroponic and aeroponics technologies 19,20. Choice (antibiosis) and non-choice (antixenosis) 
experiments for BC will be established following a defined protocol21,22. Procedure and adapted methodologies will 
be performed to assess CLso resistance/tolerance 23. Complementary field trails and bioassays of  the accessions of 
the germplasm collection will be performed in order to characterize with respect to their resistance level to important 
diseases (and pests) that include dry rot caused by F. sambucinum, black dot caused by C. coccodes, and silver scurf 
provoked by H. solani. For all these soil-borne, defined susceptibility evaluation methodologies will be used 24, 25, 26. 
Then, GWAS analysis between observed phenotypic resistance levels and molecular SNP data will be carried out for 
validating important RGs. The effects of each SNP on the resistance levels will be determined as well as the breeding 
values of each acces sion. These Association Studies will generate important and crucial information about the 
diversity existing in a germplasm collection, which allows for significant advances in the identification of accessions 
with potential for breeding programs. Finally,  a bioinformatic platform for friendly data ma nagement will be 
deployed by NEIK to integrate all the previous results, and thus, to facilitate and encourage the scientific divulgation 
to the community (WP1). 
Early detection and surveillance tools 
To develop low-cost diagnostic solutions  based on an image analysis 
application for the early detection and surveillance of the potato pest disease 
and postharvest pathogens in the warehouses, UPOL will perform correlation 
of induced plant stress conditions with data obtained by a photometric system 
used in PHTS approaches27,28 (WP2). The system based on RGB cameras, 
FluorCam, IR, and hyperspectral cameras will allow the study of the 
phenotyping changes of plant and tubers in non-invasive manner 29 (Fig. 1.6). 
The complex data obtained from the model situations will be used to monitor 
and correlate morphological and physiological changes with pest-induced plant 
stress conditions. Multivariate statistical approaches  will be employed to 
identify non-invasive morphological and physiological traits (biomarkers)  
of individual diseases and the relevant sensor(s) to obtain them.  
The biomarkers will be further validated (WP2) by CRUN in glasshouse 
experiments using the Plant Phenotyping and Soil Health Facility equipped by 
1 m 3 lysimeter, in which soil physical conditions can be created to simulate 
realistic soil physical properties reflecting field conditions using a purpose build 
soil processor (Fig. 1.7). Each lysimeter is on balance to monitor water use, 
equipped with moisture and temperature sensors at 4 depths, and equipped with 
a fully automated irrigation system. Belowground cameras are used to monitor 
root and tuber development. Treatments include op timal water content, and 
suboptimal due to a prolonged period of drought during the growth period to 
assess the impact on growth, plant stress signals, belowground development and 
disease progression. Pathogens introduced will include C. coccodes, H solani , and F. sambucinum. Plant growth 
health will be  assessed during growth at fortnightly intervals with sensors in the phenotyping platform. Sensors 
include 3D laser (monitoring growth), thermal (stress, transpiration), hyperspectral imaging (pest and disease) and 
RGB (development, pest, and disease). Upon harvest, potato tubers will be evaluated using the same platform, which 
can achieve very detailed scans of hundreds of potatoes within minutes. Tubers will be moved into postharvest storage 
facilities and at set intervals evaluated using the same scanner to determine evolution of disease signals over time 
and disease severity upon harvest and development during storage will be correlated with imposed stress conditions 
during growth.  
The huge series of the microtuber pictures obtained from the PHTS technology will serve as a training data for a 
proof-of-concept of prediction model development for hyperspectral and RGB-based early detection tool. 
For this, IRIS will be in charge to build up a multilayer digital tool (smartphone or tablet app) based on the pictures 
obtained from the PHTS technology which will act as a storage unit and data processing unit for the image analysis 
(WP2). 
The inserted data will be processed within the platform to generate an accurate response in terms of detection. The 
probabilistic machine learning models developed as part of the P hotonFood project will be used and extended in 
PataFEST (preliminary detection of mycotoxins and confirmatory software tool). In PataFEST, th ese methods will 
 
19 Buckseth, T., et al. (2016). Sci. Hort. 204: 79-87. 
20 Andrade-Piedra, J. L., et al. (2015). CIP, INIAP, CORPOICA. 
21 Rubio-Covarrubias, O. A., et al. (2017). Am. J. Potato Res. 94: 32-356. 
22 Rrashidi, M., et al. (2017). Plos One. 12(8): e0183283  
23 Prager, S.M, et al. (2022). Pest Manag. Sci. 78:3731-3745.  
24 Du, M., et al. (2012). Potato Res. 55:175–184. 
25 Carnegie, S., et al. (2003). Plant Pathology. 52(1):13-21. 
26 Munyaneza, J.E., et al. (2011). Am. J. Pot. Res. 88:435. 
27 De Diego, N., et al. (2017). Front. Plant Sci. 8: 1702. 
28 Ugena, L., et al. (2018). Front. Plant Sci. 9: 1327. 
29 Humplík, J.F., et al. (2015). Plant Methods. 11, 29.  
Figure 1.6. High-throughput  
phenotyping platform (UPOL facilities). 
Figure 1.7. Plant Phenotyping and  
Soil Health Facility Soil Health Facility 
(CRUN facilities). 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 10 of 45 
allow for predictions of key traits based on genomic, environmental, and soil information, and allow for time series 
and missing data structures. 
Complementary, an extra functionality will be generated embedded in the platform capable of performing early 
detections of the desired markers  (WP2). This functionality will be developed using artificial intelligence 
techniques by FUND, making use of the captured data. A priority will be to learn from data in image format, with 
the aim of providing the tool with a high level of usability using the smartphone or tablet camera. The necessary 
image pre-processing will be performed, and light computational cost algorithms based on deep learning techniques 
will be used, which can be applied from low-cost devices. 
Furthermore, due to the climate changes and globalisation scenarios forecasted, the use of AI has been reported 
as a key technology to helping save our environment  and significantly reduce the ecological impact  in the 
production sector (WP2). AI applies the power of machine learning to finding patterns in data that can help spot 
trends. One way to adopt a proactive attitude against the rise of temperatures in our continent is getting a profit of AI 
advantages to mitigate risks and adapt strategies as far as possible that offset the climate change. In this context , 
FUND will apply and evaluate different novel predictive models with the highest classification accuracy base on 
AI techniques  as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), Neural Network hyperspectral and Learning Vector 
Quantization (LVQ) algorithm-based method with the aim to detect and classify diseased potatoes and predict risks 
of pest disease spread due to climate change and globalisation. 
Complementarily, CRUN will isolate and further identify F. sambucinum  from the selected European  potato 
candidate varieties (Table 1.1), which will be further used to inoculate tubers 30. The VOCs related to potato dry rot 
will be identified using TD-GC-ToF-MS31. For this, the headspace of small potato microcosm experiment comparing 
diseased and non -diseased potatoes (specific pathogens will be inoculated for the different comparisons) will be 
analysed at different timepoints during the potato storage (monthly intervals for up to 6 months). This technique was 
chosen as it allows high concentration fold of the compounds produced (quantification) and hence identification of 
both, compounds with high concentration and those with very low concentration that are often missed /neglected 
when using solid phase micro extraction (SPME). A full metabolomic approach will be done using LC -MS/MS to 
identify non -volatile biomarkers, such as phenolic compounds, non -structural carbohydrates 32, and plant growth 
regulators33, linked to the  development (viz., incidence and severity) of the pathogens during potato postharvest 
storage. Spatial ( viz., cortex, parenchyma) and temporal changes (monthly sampling throughout storage) in the 
biochemical composition will be determined per each treatment combination (viz., cultivar x fungal specie x season) 
to provide a better resolution of the impact of the disease progression in potato tubers. By this way, defining an early 
VOCs threshold will allow warehouses owners to detect in time the presence of pathogens through sensor devices 
and anticipate potato spoilage during the postharvest stora ge. For this, FUND will develop a sensor array for 
measuring the concentration of those VOCs  by using electrochemical sensors based on MOFs 34, or on organic 
polymers, such as polythiophenes35 (WP2). These materials can be modified (doped) to improve their selectivity and 
provide accuracy of the electrochemical sensor. After that, several inks will be developed containing those modified 
materials, with other sensing compounds, organic solvents, surfactants, and binders and supported onto commercial 
electrodes by dip coating, spin coating, drop casting or inkjet printing . By this way, VOCs determination will be 
carried out electrochemically generating electrical signals enabling the monitori sation of its concentration. In case 
that individual sensors respond to a more than one selected biomarkers creating interferences, an e -nose could be 
developed36 using recognition algorithms in order to improve the selectivity and accuracy of the sensors against 
VOCs concentration. IRIS will integrate the sensors developed by FUND into a printed circuit board (PCB) that will 
be able to convert the electrical signal coming from the sensor array, generating a digital signal compatible with 
the user platform (mobile app, e.g.).  
 Pest and pathogen disease control solutions 
TECHN will develop a new family of non-toxic and sustainable sprayable wax coatings, in which bioactive natural 
compounds (e.g., essential oils) are embedded, to provide a multifaceted protection for potato plant leaves against 
BC, CLso, and other plant pathogens (WP3). Taking inspiration from plant cuticles that exhibit superhydrophobic 
and self-cleaning properties, the wax coatings will operate in both passive and active modes of protection. Coatings 
employ naturally derived fatty acids which self -assemble into crystalline structures with superhydrophobic proper-
ties, that reduce insect adhesion onto the treated leaves. TECHN has already demonstrated that the use of waxes can 
reduce the insect attachment forces on surfaces by up to 30-fold37. Many plant surfaces are known to be “slippery” 
(or anti-adhesive) to insects, in particular plants covered with nano- to micrometre-sized epicuticular wax crystals38,39. 
Thus, in PataFEST biomimetic coatings will form micro -rough surfaces (0.05 -1 μm asperity size) which in turn 
 
30 Samson, R. A., et al. (2019). Westerdijk Fungal Biodiversity Institute. 
31 Gutierrez-Pozo (2021). PhD thesis, Cranfield University. 
32 Tosetti, R., et al. (2021). Posth. Biol. Technol. 173: 111420. 
33 Alamar, M. C., et al. (2021). Posth. Biol. Technol. 168: 111267. 
34 Li, H. Y., et al. (2020). Chem. Society Rev.49(17): 6364-6401. 
35 Li, Z., et al. (2019). Food Chem., 276: 291-297. 
36 ACS Sens. (2022), 7, 6: 1666–1675 
37 Gorb, E., et al. (2014). Beilstein Journal of Nanotechnology. 5(1): 
1031-1041. 
38 Graf, C., et al. (2018). Bioinspiration & biomimetics. 13(5): 056010. 
39 Féat, A., et al. (2019). Progress in Organic Coatings 135: 331-344. 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 11 of 45 
reduce insect attachment by its effect on both claws and adhesive pads. Moreover, coatings consist of natural, non-
toxic waxes -fatty acids- which are known as natural antimicrobial agents40, exhibiting intrinsic antimicrobial activity 
against numerous pathogens, and therefore serve as a second tier defence line against CLso and other relevant plant 
pathogens. Finally, coatings will contain small amounts of encapsulated essential oils (e.g., geraniol, thymol and their 
mixtures) which are slowly released to actively repel the vector psyllids. Several essential oils were already demon-
strated repellence of adult BC and ability to reduce their nymphs in field experiments41. It should also be noted that 
the coating formulations combine abundant and non-toxic raw materials, being based on natural waxes and essential 
oils commonly occurring in nature, which together wit h the coating safe biodegradability, make them an environ-
mental sound solution. 
FUND will develop biocontrol formulation prototypes  with antifungal properties  based on  the action of 
biological catalysts (enzymes) and microorganisms (yeasts) as an alternative of the chemical solution use (chlorine) 
to ensure the soil-borne pathogen spoilage  control in postharvest tubers (WP3). Biological control for 
postharvested fruits and vegetables is still considered incipient; however, its effectiveness against moulds and 
bacteria is well documented 42,43. Most effective concentration of antagonist agents will be studied by in in vitro 
determinations. 
To guarantee the viability of the application, distribution, uniformity, and adhesion of the antagonist agents on the 
potato surface, several water -based ingredients as gums waxes, vegetal oils and proteins will be used as carrier to 
formulate film forming coatings, provide barrier properties to gases and therefore reduce potato metabolism process 
and dehydration. Properties characterisation of the coating solutions as physicochemical, mechanical, gases barriers, 
microbiological and antioxidant properties will be assessed to achieve the best performance composition. Antifungal 
coating solution developed in PataFEST will represent a new economic and easy to apply technology to extend the 
shelf life of the potato during postharvest storage. 
CRUN will work on controlled atmosphere conditions (CO2 and O2) during long-term postharvest storage. Tubers 
coated with biocontrol solution prototype will be subjected to different graduated CA environments with the aim to 
investigate the potential synergy of these technologies to reduce pathogen disease incidence and extend the 
postharvest shelf life of potato under commercial conditions. Along the storage period, metabolism of tubers, quality 
parameters, and presence of soil-borne pathogens will be evaluated.  
Besides, UPOL will carry out simultaneous and cross-testing bioassays by the application of PHTS technology to 
provide a selection of tolerance increasing formulations  against both plant pest and postharvest pathogens 
selected (WP3). PHTS will be optimised by UPOL for a quantitative assessment of the efficiency of the formulations 
of the biocontrol coatings for postharvest potato tubers  developed by FUND and testing their effect in the 
concentration/dose-dependent manner under various environmental scenarios simulating the possible postharvest 
conditions in the warehouses. Cross -testing using microtubers of different potato genotypes will allow defining 
potential genotype -dependent/specific response . The PHTS of UPOL will be further used for simultaneous 
evaluation of potential phytotoxicity of the wax sprays developed by TECHN. A variant of PHTS employing model 
plant Arabidopsis will be used throughout the development of the spraying wax formulation to exclude in the early 
stages of the formulation development such components that can cause phytotoxic effects on treated plants. The 
advantage of PHTS is the possibility of testing large numbers of components  in various combinations and 
concentration ranges in one run. This will help to significantly speed up the process of the spraying wax formulation 
development and allow precise estimation of the safety ranges for every experimental formulation. High -precision 
phenotyping using RGB cameras, FluorCam, IR, and hyperspectral cameras  will be further used to validate the 
phytotoxic safety of the final formulation(s) and for detailed description of the effects of the application on the 
physiological status, growth and development of targeting plants and organs. 
Soil pest management strategies  
Innovative and sustainable soil-applied solutions will be explored by UNIBO for enhancing the potato plant health 
status and therefore decreasing the crop susceptibility to f ield and post -harvest pathogens  (WP3). To do that, 
biomasses residues will be used to obtain carriers able to functionalise the plant availability of several nutrient 
elements such as boron (B), copper (Cu), iron (Fe), manganese (Mn) and zinc (Zn) which pl ay important 
physiological roles on potato plant health reducing susceptibility to pathogens of both foliar and tuber. The laboratory 
production of functionalised material is a crucial point of the action therefore the efficiency of the functionalisation 
needs to be well tested under lab conditions before performing in in vivo trials, to ensure on one hand the stability of 
nutritional elements on the carrier and, on the other hand, the efficiency of the carrier to release the same elements 
and ensure their availability for the plant. Moreover, the innovative fertilisation will be tested under CLso infection 
to assess the effect of the most performing fertilizers application protocol(s) on the potato plant health status derived 
from the optimised nutrient availability in the soil. The pathogen on its potato host will be introduced in a dedicated 
section of the greenhouse according to the EU plant health legislation and all experimental trials will be conducted 
 
40 Desbois, A. P., Smith, V. J. (2010). App. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 85(6): 
1629-1642. 
41 Yang, X.B., et al. (2010). Crop Prot. 29: 1320-1324. 
42 Cissé, M., et al. (2015). Posth. Biol. Technol. 101: 10-14. 
43 Aloui, H., et al. (2015). Int. J. Food Microl. 200: 22-30. 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 12 of 45 
under the surveillance of the national and local (Emilia-Romagna region) Plant Protection Service (Fig. 1.8). Trials 
involving CLSo will be exclusively planned under controlled conditions 
to ensure the pathogen confinement.  
To measure the effects of the new fertili sers application, the level of 
CLSo in potato tissues (leaves and tubers) will be also assessed by a 
precise molecular tool such as Droplet Digital PCR (ddPCR) coupled or 
not to Reverse-Transcriptase (RT) reaction in order to evaluate changes 
in the infection level (ddPCR) and in the biological activity (RT-ddPCR) 
of the pathogen.  The effect of the improved potato plant health on 
reducing the susceptibility to postharvest tuber pathogens will be also 
evaluated by specific experiments under standard storage conditions and 
artificial inoculation to ensure the adequate normalisation of trial 
conditions. This alternative and sustainable technology will allow the 
reduction of chemicals used to control CLso vector and fungal pathogens of storage, as well to improve the nutritional 
properties of the tuber enriched by microelements. 
Besides, soil disease incident trials under different climate scenarios (WP3) mimicking predicted drought periods 
will be conducted at CRUN in a phenotyping glasshouse facility designed to trial crop-soil systems at pilot scale 
under a multi -sensor gantry as described above  (Fig. 1. 7). Sensors on the phenotyping platform will be us ed to 
evaluate if signals can be identified to detect drought stress and how these interact with disease stress by comparing 
inoculated and no -inoculated lysimeters. The facility replicates all stages of the whole crop production cycle plus 
rotational context (multiple cropping seasons) with predefined soil physical conditions affecting fungal and bacterial 
movement, and recreates the dynamic interrelationships of soil health, water use, biotic stresses (pathogens, weeds, 
pests), environmental variables.  
Integrated plant management 
Several IPM strategies will be considered in PataFEST project  testing previously identified resistance potato 
varieties; early detection and surveillance tools (mobile app and VOCs sensor); and natural sustainable solutions for 
plant, tubers and soil manufactured by CHEM (WP4). 
In Ecuador, one IPM strategy will be carried out through field bioassay  trials in INIAP facilities under real 
conditions (presence of CLso and its vector in potato plant) evaluating the behaviour of selected potato varieties for 
their resistant traits against CLso and its vector.  Besides, INIAP will validate the capacity of the image analysis 
digital tool (mobile app) for early detection and surveillance of CLso disease in potato plants in fields and harvested 
tubers. Afterwards, digital tool will be also validated in potato plants and tubers infected with ZC  under field 
conditions 44,45 in representative places with high pressure of the disease in the Ecuadorian highlands.46,47 
Finally, pesticide-free natural solution  performance will be evaluated on potato plants  to study the repellent 
effectiveness against BC48. The natural solutions with better control of BC will be validated under field conditions 
using large plots (at least 2 ha) and the antifungal properties against soil-borne pathogen in harvested tubers. 
In Europe, one IPM strategy will be organised in potato warehouses of TERREA (France), BOEH (Germany) and 
AB (UK) to validate postharvest technological solutions. Biocontrol superficial coating solution, image analysis 
mobile app and VOCs sensor will be tested to early detect and prevent the pathogen spoilage in potato. At least 1 
ton of tubers  (two ware potato varieties selected including organic crops) will be coated by biocontrol coating 
prototype and 100Kg of tubers will be used to validate the imagen analysis tool and VOCs sensor. Periodically, the 
effectiveness of biocontrol coatings will be assessed by determining the incidence and severity of soil -borne 
pathogens during the storage period established. 
Besides, a second IPM strategy in Europe will be organised in UDAPA (Spain), BOEH (Germany) and TERREA 
(France) potato fields where innovative and sustainable soil solutions will be tested for enhancing the potato plant 
health and pesticide-free natural solution  performance will be evaluated on potato plants  to study the repellent 
effectiveness against aphids. Application will be implemented in 1 ha under real cultivation conditions and treatments 
effect will be assessed by determining the soil quality and presence of aphids in potato plant treated.Application will 
be implemented in 1 ha under real cultivation conditions and treatments effect will be assessed by determining the 
soil quality and presence of aphids in treated potato plant. 
 Citizen science 
ECSA, ANEC, KNEIA and FUND will be in charge of citizen science activities that will be organised along the 
PataFEST project execution. Results obtained will significantly contribute to boost the collaborative efforts to detect 
and control emerging pest threat and pathogens disease incidence. These activities consist of co-creative workshops 
 
44 Garhwal A.S., et al. (2020). Biosystems engineering. 197:306-317. 
45 Bienkowski D. et al. (2019).  Computers and Electronics in Agricul. 
167, 105056. 
46 Garhwal A.S., et al. (2020). Biosystems engineering. 197:306-317. 
47 Bienkowski D. et al. (2019).  Computers and Electronics in Agricul. 
167, 105056. 
48 Jorgensen, N. (2013). New Zealand Plant Prot.66:333-340.  
Figure 1.8. Plant Pathology Greenhouse 
(UNIBO facilities) 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 13 of 45 
(WP 1 and 4) in different geographical locations as 1) Berlin-Bradenburg, 2) experimental field station in Spain and 
3) potato fields  of small-scale farmers in Ecuador. The aim of these workshops will be to inform the partic ipants 
about the PataFEST project, promote scientific experiment demonstrations and discussion with PataFEST scientists, 
and share concerns and questions related the integration of strategies to overcome emerging crops pest and disease 
threats. The workshop activities will be addressed to a broad category of citizen. Workshops based on molecular 
biology experiments involving citizens of all backgrounds with a strong interest in science will be held in the “Long 
Night of Science in Berlin”, and another one in the “The Doctor’s Farm, Experimental Field Station” of ANEC  in 
Spain. The workshop activities will be addressed to a broad category of citizen. Workshops based on molecular 
biology experiments involving citizens of all backgrounds with a strong interest in science will be held in the “Long 
Night of Science in Berlin”, and another one in the “The Doctor’s Farm, Experimental Field Station” of ANEC in 
Spain. In Ecuador field trials activities will allow potato farmers to carry out free trials of a sele cted biorational 
insecticides solution on potato plants and evaluate the repellent effectiveness against BC.  In Europe, urban garden 
owners in Berlin-Bradenburg region and small horticulture crop farmers in Spain will have the opportunity to carry 
out free trails of natural solutions for plant and soil.  
As part of the communication and dissemination activities, ECSA will organize webinars addressed at different target 
groups and with different aims, ranging from introducing PataFEST project to the citizen science community, to 
share more technical information for  the agriculture community. ECSA’s working group on Citizen Science and 
Agrifood will be a supporter of this activity. 
 Joint Research Center involvement (WP 4) 
PataFEST project will envisage the involvement of the Joint Research Center (JRC) to develop reference materials 
in support of a harmonised IPM in the EU legislative acts and policy recommendations. Besides, JRC will be tasked 
to support AINIA in the elaboration of Life Cycle Analysis assessments. JRC activities will be more focused on the 
social life cycle assessment (S -LCA) evaluating the real and potential social and socio -economic impacts of 
PataFEST implementation strategies within main important potato stakeholder groups as farmers, producers, traders 
and consumers. 
1.2.2 Related research and innovation activities 
The activities developed in PataFEST linked with many previous and ongoing R&D initiatives described below: 
Project Main result/knowledge feeding into PataFEST 
PAPACLIMA (FAO, 2016 -2019). 
Partner: NEIK 
Detection of candidate genes against fungi. Knowledge and software for 
performing different association mapping techniques. Evaluation of 
fungal diseases. 
SPIRIT (ACP-EU Coop. 
Programme S&TII , 2012-2016). 
Partner: NEIK 
Analysis of the potato value chains in East African countries  (literature 
research, on-site visits and meetings with farmers, research institutions 
and stakeholders, information compilation, database establishment, 
Strategy Development). 
POISE (EIG concert Japan, 2016). 
Partner: UPOL 
Identification of biomarkers related to tolerance level to abiotic stress in 
tomato and rice plant. 
QCAP: (Interreg NWE, 2017-2019). 
Partner: CRUN 
Detection and identification of potato spoilage VOC biomarkers under 
postharvest cold storage conditions. 
PHOTONFOOD (H2020, 2021 -
2024). Partner: IRIS 
Development of the global system control, software and data 
management and processing platform.   
ANTISEPTIC-WAX (ERC H2020 -
PoC, 2018-2020). Partner: TECHN 
Environmentally friendly wax -spray green technology to eliminate 
attachment and development of pests on plant leaves surfaces. 
REPEAR (FP7, 2014-2017). Partner: 
FUND 
Development of superficial coatings based on natural additive to reduce 
respiration rate, control dehydration, and pathogens spoilage of 
postharvest pears. 
ADAPT (H2020, 2020 -2024). 
Partner: EUPAT 
Dissemination of the project objectives and results via internal and 
external communication channels. 
TOXDTECT (FP7, 2013-2016). 
Partner: FUND 
Development of array of sensors embedded within the meat package to 
determine the real state and properties of the meat. 
BIOMUSH (FP7, 2012 -2015). 
Partner: FUND Development of a tool for early detection of mushroom fungal diseases. 
FF-IPM (H2020, 2019 -2023). 
Partner: ANEC 
Pest prevention and off season focused IPM against new and emerging 
fruit flies 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 14 of 45 
1.2.3 Gender dimension 
PataFEST does not include the integration of the gender dimension (sex and gender analysis) in R&I as the topic 
2022-F2F-02-02 does not require it. Nevertheless, the project has a strong multi -actor participatory approach and 
involvement of citizen, thus it will commit to address the diverse needs of citizens regardless their gender and sex.  
1.2.4 Open science practices 
The project will follow an Open Science Strategy (OSS). The preliminary type of research data, exploitation route 
and IP strategy will be outlined in the Exploitation Plan (WP5). This plan will show that some results with commercial 
and/or industrial important value will be protected as IPR or trade secrets, and thus they will not be included in 
PataFEST’s OSS. The research results obtained by the work carried out by researchers will follow these Open Science 
practices: 1) Open Access (OA) to peer-reviewed scientific publications ensuring at least under upon publication, 
deposition of the author accepted manuscript (AAMs) or version of record (VOR) in a trusted repository and 
immediate open access via the repository under CC BY or equivalent. Alternati vely, some research results will be 
made available in the Open Research Europe; 2) Early and open sharing of research  through pre-registration, 
registered reports, pre-prints or crowd-sourcing; 3) Researchers will participate as much as possible in open peer-
review in related topic of PataFEST; 4) Multi-actor approach activities  in the co -creation of tasks from the 
beginning and across the project duration.  
1.2.5 Research data management and other research outputs 
The Data Management Plan (DMP) will consider all the data that the project will generate and use and will detail 
whether and how it will be used, exploited or made accessible for verification and re -use; how and under what 
conditions it will be curated; and how it will be interoperable with regard to specific quality standards. Data refers to 
any kind of result including statistics, results of experiments, measurements, observations resulting from trials and 
demonstration, survey results, interview recordin gs, images and bibliographic metadata used for the validation 
publications. According to EC recommendation, as part of making data findable, accessible, interoperable and re -
usable (FAIR), the DMP will include information on: 1) handling of data during & after  the end of PataFEST 
project; 2) what data will be collected, processed and/or generated; 3) which methodology and standards will be 
applied; 4) whether data will be shared/made in OA; 5) how data will be curated and preserved (including post-
project). DMP will not have impact on IPR, because the decision to publish OA documents come after a more general 
decision on whether to first seek protection for IPR. The data will be deposited via OA in a trusted repository under 
the latest available version of the Creative Commons Attribution International Public License (CCBY) or Creative 
Commons Public Domain Dedication (CC0) or a licence with equivalent rights. 
1.2.6 Compliance with the ´do no significant harm principle (DNSH)’ 
All the research activities of PataFEST will comply with DNSH principle under the Recovery and Resilience Facility 
Regulation of EU. PataFEST fulfils DNSH in different ways: 1) no activity is harming the climate change mitigation 
as the developed plant health products are fossi l-free; 2) no activity is harming the circular economy concept. All 
the contrary, the project will apply circularity principles in the plant health protection products leading to more 
resource efficiency, to zero -waste practices, and to sustainable and 4) no activity is harming biodiversity and 
ecosystems as the project enhances potato genetic variety on agricultural land. 
2 IMPACT
2.1 Project’s pathways towards impact 
This section covers PataFEST’s pathways towards the Expected Outcomes (EOs) defined in the topic at medium-
term (from project’s end to 4 years later) and these two Expected Impacts (EI) of the Destination ‘Fair, healthy and 
environment-friendly food systems from primary production to consumption’ of the Cluster 6 Work Programme:  
• EI 1: sustainable, productive, climate-neutral and resilient farming systems […], while minimising pressure on 
ecosystems, restoring and enhancing biodiversity, […] generating fair economic returns for farmers. 
• EI 3: sustainable, healthy and inclusive foo d systems delivering co-benefits for climate mitigation and adapta-
tion, […], sustainable healthy nutrition, safe food consumption, food poverty reduction, the inclusion of margin-
alised people, the empowerment of communities, and flourishing businesses. 
These pathways are defined by clear, measurable, quantified, and assessable impact indicators that fall under three 
impact categories: scientific, economic & technological and societal impacts. The results of the project will be 
used or further up-take by direct target groups. PataFEST will generate credible and sustainable impact pathways 
mainly in these 5 impact areas set by the European Commission:  1) Sustainable food systems from farm to fork on 
land, 2) Enhancing ecosystems and biodiversity on land, 3) Cl ean Soil, 4) A resilient EU prepared for emerging 
threats and 5) Inclusive growth and new job opportunities in line with some of the 9 Key Impact Pathways (KIPs) 
defined within the Key Strategic Orientation KSO B ‘Restoring Europe’s ecosystems and biodiversity, and man-
aging sustainably natural resources to ensure food security and a clean and healthy environment’ of the HEU Stra-
tegic Plan. 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 15 of 45 
SCIENTIFIC IMPACT  
Increase the information of the molecular and biological potato RGs and ecological analysis of its pest 
(CLso) and vector (BC). Corresponding to project´s objective O1. 
• Impact Indicator: Acquisition of data related to potato RGs. 
• Target groups: Scientific/Technical community, farmers, industry along the potato value chain, plant health 
policy makers. 
• Contributions to Key Impact Pathways: KIP 1 ‘Creating high-quality new knowledge’. 
Zebra chip disease is both costly and difficult to manage. Application of chemical pesticides has been the primary 
method of combating ZC in numerous regions around the world. Unfortunately, overuse of pesticides has resulted 
in ZC-vector resistance. As a result, pesticide use is both economically and environmentally unsustainable, and 
goes against the 2030-EU Action Plan  target of lowering chemical pesticide use by 50% to achieve the “zero 
pollution" targets. PataFEST proposes a method for studying potato resistance genes to the ZC vector psyllid BC 
and/or CLso based on potato genetic resources. This will ensure a long -term sustainable and successful strategy 
for managing increasing ZC disease and cultivating more resistant potatoes. PataFEST will thus offer a strategy in 
line with the EU Biodiversity Strategy 2030's  primary action to enhance genetic variety on agricultural land, 
which would benefit EU health and economy. To achieve this impact, the project proposed the following pathway: 
Expected Outcome in 
the topic 
Project Contribution Scale & Significance 
EO 1: Find adequate re-
sponses to new and/or 
emerging plant pests 
Short term: Collection of all the available ge-
netic information of BC and CLso, and identi-
fication and characterisation of potato RGs 
against diseases caused by ZC and soil -borne 
pathogens.   
Medium term: Complete map of potato genes 
resistance to emerging threats in EU. 
Linked to results R1-R4 
• Molecular monitoring protocol of pest 
spread (CLso and its vector) pathway 
across different Ecuadorian regions. 
• 500 potato samples analysed: 355 Eu-
ropean samples (40 wild species, 35 
native varieties, 280 old and new cul-
tivars) and 150 samples from Ecuador.  
Expected Impact in 
the Destination 
Project Contribution Scale & Significance 
EI 3: delivering co -bene-
fits for climate mitigation 
and adaptation 
Long term:  Prevent similar losses in potato 
production in the EU as those seen in other 
countries where these pests already exist. Sim-
ilar molecular characterisation strategies 
could be replicated to other type of crops (e.g. 
carrot, pepper, etc). 
At least 5% (of the above 500 samples 
of potato resistance varieties for tar-
geted diseases and pests will reach the 
market. 
 
ECONOMIC/TECHNOLOGICAL IMPACT  
Long-term sustainable potato pest and postharvest diseases integrated management, including prevention, 
early detection and surveillance strategies. Corresponding to project´s objectives O2 and O3 
• Impact Indicator: Catalogue of innovative solutions to respond to new and emerging potato pests. 
• Target groups: Farmers, Bio-based industry of plant health solutions, Industry along the potato value chain, 
Citizens. 
• Contributions to Key Impact Pathways: KIP 7 ‘Generating innovation-based growth’, KIP 9 ‘Leveraging in-
vestment in research and innovation’ 
PataFEST's concept is structured around the EU's agricultural research and innovation strategy , notably the 
set of initiatives aimed at "Priority 2: healthier plants"49. As the EU strives to reduce the use of chemical pesti-
cides50, biopesticides are being more widely used in agricultural practices (biopesticides CAGR 20.0% versus 
synthetic pesticides CAGR 4.7% for the period 2018 -2023; Fig. 2.1), potentially introducing new pathogens not 
occurring before 51. PataFEST will develop sustainable and systemic IPM strategies to address the prevention, 
monitoring, control, and management of ZC during cultivation and soil-borne pathogens during postharvest stor-
age, as an alternative to the use of pesticides or other c ontentious methods, in combination with other innovative 
agronomic and digital solutions. In this regard, the project is fully in accordance with the actions of the “Agricul-
ture and the Green Deal”, as it promotes the adoption of a long -term IPM by potato professionals to achieve a 
healthy and sustainable food system for people and the earth 52. To achieve this impact, the project proposed the 
following pathway: 
 
49 A strategic approach to EU agricultural research & innovation (2016). 
Final Paper  
50 Directive 2009/128/EC. Sustainable use of pesticides. Available here. 
51 Frost & Sullivan (2019). Global Crop Protection Market, Forecast to 
2023. 
52 Integrated Pest Management (IPM) in the EU Green Deal. Available 
here. 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 16 of 45 
Expected Outcome 
in the topic 
Project Contribution Means of Verification 
 
 
 
 
EO 2: Understanding of 
drivers of plant pest 
emergence, influence of 
climate change, ecosys-
tem degradation and 
globalisation 
 
EO 3: economic and en-
vironmentally sound 
solutions for effective 
pest management in 
farming 
Short term: integrate sustainable innovative solutions and 
validate them as an Integrated Pest Management strategy at 
TRL 5 in 5 different geographical areas ( Germany, 
France, Spain, UK and Ecuador) based on their respec-
tive climate conditions and globalisation factors. The tech-
nologies are: 
a)Low-cost, user friendly and robust portable sensors and 
digital tool (smartphone app) (R5). 
b)Prediction models based on AI algorithms (R6) 
c)Development of bio -based sustainable solutions applied 
to potato plant, tuber and soil  (R7-R9) and validation in 
field trials and warehouses (R11-R13). 
d)Bio-assay field trials of selected potato varieties affected 
by the bacteria in Ecuador (R10). 
Medium term: laying the foundations for future develop-
ment (TRL 5→8) of novel potato diseases  strategies (e.g., 
bio-based chemical products stimulating the expressing of 
RGs). 
Linked to results R5-R13 
• Reduction of the presence 
of the bacteria (BC) by 
50%. 
• Reduction of the inci-
dence of ZC by 25%. 
• Reduction of the inci-
dence of soil-borne patho-
gens by 40-50%. 
• VOCs sensors tested in 3 
potato warehouses (100 
Kg of potato/each). 
• User friendly mobile 
hardware to detect CLso 
with 90% of reliability in  
30 potato varieties of Ec-
uador. 
Expected Impact in 
the Destination 
Project Contribution Means of Verification 
EI 1: sustainable, pro-
ductive, climate-neutral 
and resilient farming 
systems […],minimis-
ing pressure on ecosys-
tems, restoring and en-
hancing biodiver-
sity,[…] fair economic 
returns for farmers. 
Exploitation and dissemination of a rigorous, sustainable 
and economic Integrated Pest Management to control 
emerging threats and diseases for potato crops and other 
crops in Europe. The project envisaged the collaboration 
with the Joint Research Center in order to develop refer-
ence materials in support of a harmonised IPM in the EU 
legislative acts and standards.53 
Publication of EU guide-
lines and/or action plans to 
prevent potato diseases 
based on PataFEST’s IPM 
strategy.  
EU countries primarily ben-
efited will be the main po-
tato producers (Fig 2.2). 
 
Figure 2.1. Growth opportunities of synthetic pesticides versus bio-based pesticides. Source: Frost & Sullivan (2019). Global 
Crop Protection Market, Forecast to 2023. 
SOCIETAL IMPACT - 1 
Citizens and farmers as key actors for prevention and early detection of potential potato threats. Corre-
sponding to project´s objectives O4. 
• Impact Indicator: Involvement of citizens across regions 
• Target groups: Citizens, Farmers, Producers. 
• Contributions to Key Impact Pathways: KIP 6 ‘Strengthening the uptake of research and innovation in soci-
ety’ 
The potato IPM proposed in PataFEST will be designed by and for citizen, farmers and potato producers in 
the EU and Associated Countries . Citizens will contribute to the studies in a variety of ways through citizen 
science activities (engagement campaigns, workshops to collect scientific and technical data, participation in sci-
entific webinars) inspired by other EU initiatives such as eu-citizen.science or the international citizen hub 'Science 
we can do together', with the goal of preventing and detecting potential threats to potato crops around the world 
and long-term adoption of the IPM. Everyone, regardless of age or professional background, will contribute to the 
 
53 JRC: Reference & Measurements. Available here. 

HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 17 of 45 
project's research outcomes in order to have a significant impact not only during the project's implementation 
(2023-2026), but also in the medium and long term. The project will ensure low-cost and effective means of max-
imizing our outcomes across regions of the EU and internationally by involving citizens in the project from the 
beginning, throughout its duration, and beyond. Citizens will play a significant role in supplementing knowledge 
to technical pest management strategies. To achieve this impact, the project proposed the following pathway: 
Expected Outcome in 
the topic 
Project Contribution Means of Verification 
EO 4: Support to relevant 
plant health policies in the 
EU and Associated Coun-
tries. 
Short term: Scientific and technical data 
are collected and supported by the citi-
zens across the project to monitor emerg-
ing pest. 
Medium term:  Share best -practices of 
the citizen science approach to other re-
lated pests. 
Linked to results R14-R15 
Three types of citizen’s activities will gen-
erate the necessary scientific data and dis-
semination through the webinars.  
• 2 molecular biology workshops (Spain 
& Germany): 30 persons/each (WP1). 
• 3 co -creative workshops (Spain, Ger-
many & Ecuador): 40 persons/each (WP 
4). 
• 8 citizen science webinars: 50 partici-
pants/each (WP 5). 
Expected Impact in the 
Destination 
Project Contribution Means of Verification 
EI 3:[…]the inclusion of 
marginalised people, the 
empowerment of communi-
ties, and flourishing busi-
nesses 
Adoption of citizen science as a tool for 
the surveillance and control of disease-
carrying vectors by governments and 
private sector. 
At EU level, citizen of science is incorpo-
rated into the main research agendas and 
policies to protect European plant diver-
sity and health. 
SOCIETAL IMPACT - 2 
Creation of an interactive innovation model to help the implementation of potato IPM across different profes-
sional backgrounds at local, regional, national and international scale (‘Multi-Actor Approach’). Corre-
sponding to project´s objectives O5. 
• Impact Indicator: Practice abstracts of EIP-AGRI 
• Target groups: All actors of the potato value chain shown in Fig. 2.1. 
• Contributions to Key Impact Pathways: KIP 4 ‘Addressing EU policy priorities and global challenges 
through R&D’ KIP 5 ‘Delivering benefits and impact through research and innovation missions’ 
The EIP-AGRI policy goal of “speeding up” innovation will be met from the start of the project and in the long 
run thanks to the active participation of farmers and agri -food businesses through the key associations and coop-
eratives engaged (ANEC, UDAPA, EUPAT). The multi-actor participatory platform will include the scientific & 
technical community, companies (SMEs, large industries, agricultural/potato associations, and cooperatives), and 
citizens/consumers across the potato value chain (Fig. 2.1) to share knowledge and cooperate one with each other 
to maximize our results and outcomes. This platform will be critical for enhancing rural community engagement 
at all scales (local, national, and international) a nd for disseminating the project's proposed solutions against 
emerging potato pests. PataFEST's impact will be amplified by close engagement with current EIP Operational 
Groups (via ANEC) and other similar projects.  
Expected Outcome in 
the topic 
Project Contribution Means of Verification 
EO 3: economic and envi-
ronmentally sound solu-
tions for effective pest 
management in farming 
 
EO 4: Support to relevant 
plant health policies in the 
EU and Associated Coun-
tries. 
Short term: Share knowledge, experi-
ence, and background due to the com-
plementary disciplines of the multiple 
actors  
Medium term: acceptance and adoption 
of the PataFEST solutions by farmers 
and other actors of the potato value 
chain production. 
Linked to results R16-R18 
• Multi-actor participatory platform (4 
years + 5 additional years after projects 
end). 
• 60 “practice abstracts” for EIP-AGRI 
• 2 intermediate workshops including pol-
icy discussions: 60 participants in each. 
• 1 Final Conference (M48): 120 partici-
pants. 
• 1 Policy Recommendation Report (M40) 
Expected Impact in the 
Destination 
Project Contribution Means of Verification 
EI 1: sustainable, produc-
tive, climate -neutral and 
resilient farming systems 
Implementation of potato IPM across all 
the actors and main EU potato producers 
Farmers, potato producers and traders are 
aware of the potential threats and they are 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 18 of 45 
[…]. EI 3: sustainable, 
healthy and inclusive food 
systems delivering co -ben-
efits for climate mitigation 
and adaptation […] 
→ ensure economic sustainability of po-
tato EU production (Fig 2.1) , increase 
farm competitiveness and improve key 
actor’s position in the value chain.  
also well informed and trained of the strat-
egies to carry in case of potential impact in 
their lands and production.  
 
All in all, PataFEST is built up with a strong commitment towards 
the key policies objectives of the new Common Agricultural Policy 
(CAP), Farm-to-Fork strategy and SDG (2, 8, 13, 15, 17) for the 
period 2023-2027, briefly: 1) “Fostering knowledge & Innovations” 
→ involving farmers to our research activities and outcomes ; 2) 
“Halting & reversing biodiversity loss” → preserving more re-
sistance potato varieties, 3) “Efficient natural resource management” 
→ developing a sustainable, effective and long -term management 
strategies to tackle future potato pest; 4) “Contributing to climate 
change mitigation”  → boosting sustainable and bio -based circular 
solutions for plant health (biopesticides from biomass sources); 5) 
“Increasing competitiveness” → involving all relevant actors in the 
potato value chain. The project also will support the “ Plant Health 
Law” and all the associated implementing acts related to pests, com-
modities, plant health requirements, etc54.  
 
Requirements and potential barriers 
Barrier/Requirement Description Strategies for overcoming 
Technology demand: low demand of the potato industry 
and/or bio-based industry of plant health solutions could 
undermine the further development of the solution at 
higher TRLs. 
Scientific/Technical community of the project, in col-
laboration with other funded EU projects, ini tiatives 
and OPs of EIP-AGRI will create dedicated scientific 
forums to mitigate this potential barrier. 
Lack of citizen engagement in the citizen science tool 
and poor adaption by farmers of IPM. 
PataFEST will provide well documented results, dis-
semination materials and engagements activities to all 
the actors that will form a sound base to support our 
results and outcomes. 
EPPO Standards associated to potato pests & guide-
lines55: PM1/002(30) EPPO A1 and A2 Lists of pests rec-
ommended for regulation as quarantine pests (2021); 
PM7/143(1) CLso; PM8/001(2) Potato; PM9/025(2) BC 
and CLso  and the guidelines in good plant protection 
practice – Potato PP 2/2. 
The novel potato management strategies for both pre- 
and postharvest will be carefully followed these stand-
ards in order to avoid any potential confrontation with 
existing standards. 
EU Regulatory and Policy requirements: EU regula-
tory framework may affect production and commerciali-
sation of potato pest management solutions. The Plant 
Health Regulation and EU Directive 2002/56/EC are key 
for the correct use of IPM to protect potato crops beyond 
project’s duration. 
The consortium, specifically our partners representing 
different actors across the potato value chain, will re-
view the legislation applicable to protective measures 
against pests and other legislations applicable to 
PataFEST. Moreover, engagement with policy makers 
will be ensured in the two policy events organi sed 
within the project’s workshops.
2.2 Measures to maximise impact - Dissemination, exploitation, and communication 
PDEC (Plan for the Dissemination, Exploitation and Communication activities): This section includes a first ver-
sion of the PDEC, including all the measures to maximize the expected outcomes and impacts of PataFEST. The 
purpose of our PDEC (M6) is to provide a formal planning document for using, communicating and disseminating 
knowledge throughout the project, and to ensure that as many stakeholders as possible have access to these results. 
This includes: the potential end -users and relevant industrial sectors, financial and market actors, environmental 
consultancies, policy makers, scientific community, mass media and multipliers for addressing the general public 
such as consumer associations, as well as other targeted stakeholders (EC and national R&D initiatives). The most 
appropriate communication and dissemination tools and channels will be selected for each target audiences identified. 
The plan will assure the dissemination does not interfere with the IPR management but serve it. To  protect the 
exploitation potential, a confidentiality policy will underpin our dissemination activities: all information is 
treated as confidential unless otherwise agreed. The PDEC  will be developed under the supervision of the DCE 
 
54 Plant Health Law (Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 and implementation 
acts are found here. 
55 All the documents related to EPPO standards for potato are available 
here. 
Figure 2.2. Production of potatoes, including seed 
potatos, by EU countries, 2020 (UK is excluded: 
its production was 5.2 mtonnes, 2019). 3 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 19 of 45 
Manager (KNEIA), to ensure a high visibility of the funded actions and to contribute to the expected o utcomes and 
impacts as described in 2.1, allowing also future exploitation of PataFEST results. The PDEC will define: the pur-
pose of the dissemination and communication actions; the message; the type of audience; the communication methods; 
the timing over the project execution. Performance indicators will be established as part of the plan, such as number 
of citations, number of hits on web, number of downloads, number of industry consultations (from tradeshows/exhi-
bitions), number of policy-maker engagements, etc. Here below the main PDEC’s elements are described in terms 
of Dissemination, Communication and Exploitation. 
 
Publication of research result : PataFEST expects to publish several research papers detailing our scientific ad-
vances. The dissemination activities will be carried out through open access publications in specialised journals 
(Journal of Plant Diseases and Protection, Journal of Plant Protection Research, Plant Health, Plant Health Pro-
gress, Potato Journal, American Journal of Potato Research, Potato Research, etc. ) and Open Research Europe. 
All these publications reach a wide spectrum both of the scientific , public administration and technical community. 
Other channels such as the Horizon Results Platform, the Innovation Radar, and other EC publications will be 
targeted. PATAFEST will develop 60 “practice abstracts” to contribute to EIP-AGRI repository. 
Target Audience: Research and academic stakeholders; Standardisation bodies and policy stakeholders, national 
authorities, EC, national governmental bodies, General public and Mass media 
Key Quantified targets: Scientific publications = ≥6/8 articles published in Q1 journals or magazines; EIP-AGRI 
practice abstracts= ≥60; 
 
Presentation at conferences, events and trade shows:  Key to our dissemination strategy is the “PataFEST Road-
show”, an agenda of events that will be mapped out for the duration of the project. To maximise resources and bring 
mutual benefit to events organised by third parties, PataFEST will schedule out the trade fairs, exhibitions, workshops, 
seminars, conferences, etc. of relevance in Europe and internationally that consortium members can attend. Our target 
is to have PataFEST present in at least 24 events in Europe and internationally during the project -Conferences and 
Industrial Fairs: International Plant Health Conference, Conference of the European Foundation for Plant Pathol-
ogy, International Conference on Environmental Science and Applications, International Conference on Global Plant 
Health Assessment, Global Summit on Plant Science. A philosophy of ‘not wasting’ any dissemination opportunities 
will be instilled in the consortium encouraging partners to capitalise on the relevant marketing and dissemination 
events they are attending or organising to plan a dissemination activity for PataFEST. Finally, P ataFEST will take 
advantage of dissemination events organised by the EC to present the project results as for example Horizon Europe 
Info Days. 
Target Audience: Farmers, Industry along the potato value chain, Bio -based industry of plant health solutions, 
Industry Multipliers-Associations, Innovation programs, Policy stakeholders, national authorities, EC, national gov-
ernmental bodies; 
Key Quantified targets: Conferences and events = ≥24 events by the end of the project; Horizon Impact Award 
=≥1 application; Conference publication = ≥ 1 conference proceeding accepted per year (starting in 2 nd year) per 
research organisation (27 total); 
 
Dedicated dissemination events: PataFEST plan to organize the final conference event in M48 (KNEIA and FUND) 
to release its results to all key stakeholders and maximize the project’s impact. A  policy makers’ session will be 
organis 
ed, inviting members of the Commission expert group on Plant Health Legislation. Key aspects of the event will be 
accessible online to allow stakeholders unable to travel to participate.  In addition, KNEIA and FUND will organize 
two intermediate workshops on the project execution and preliminary results together with brother/related projects and 
clusters to increase the project’s visibility and reach. 
Target Audience: Farmers, Industry along the potato value chain, Bio -based industry of plant health solutions, 
Industry Multipliers- Associations, Innovation programs, Policy stakeholders, national authorities, EC, national gov-
ernmental bodies; 
Key Quantified targets:  2 Intermediate Workshops = ≥60 participants in each; M48 Final Conference = ≥120 
participants  
 
Online dissemination & communication: PataFEST will launch a dedicated website on M6, populating it with 
regular non-confidential updates on our progress and a real-time “scoreboard” for our indicators. The web will serve 
as an enduring internet site for promoting the project’s results and housing all the downloadable public deliverables 
and outputs of the project, and it will also house our ‘ PataFEST Green Channel’ for open access to the peer-re-
viewed publications of the project. The website will be supported by other instruments like the project corporate 
identity tool, the newsletter and e-bulletins. In addition, on M30 the project will launch the Multi-Actor Participatory 
Platform that will last at least 10 years after the project end (exploited by KNEIA). Each partn er will leverage their 
own websites and other online presence (social media, blogs, newsletters and on -line platforms) to disseminate 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 20 of 45 
information about the project, increase visibility of the project’s website and publish press releases stating the project 
objectives in each participant state to drive early adoption and interest. PataFEST will also use social media (Twitter 
and Linkedin) and dissemination channels to maintain the momentum until preliminary results can be published. 
Two videos – an introductory video on M6 for the general public and a divulgative report video on M48 describing 
the final results- will be developed and published on YouTube, project website and social media, to raise awareness 
and engage stakeholders with the project activities and to promote uptake during/after the project. In addition, the 
project will make use of any dissemination route offered by the EC, including publication of our project briefings on 
CORDIS and similar websites (CORdIs News, Cordis Wire, Research*eu results magazine, Research*eu focus 
and Openaire). 
Target Audience: Farmers, Industry along the potato value chain, Bio -based industry of plant health solutions, 
Industry Multipliers- Sectoral Associations, Environmental Consulting & Engineering, Innovation programs, Gen-
eral public and Mass media  
Key Quantified targets:  Corporate identity: logo and templates = Used in all deliverables / materials; Newsletters 
= ≥ 200 subscribers by the end of the project; Project website = ≥8000 visits; Project Videos =≥ 2 videos; Press 
Releases = Direct engagements with 5 journalists and/or influencers; Twitter = ≥ 400 followers; Linkedin = ≥ 200 
followers by the end of the project. 
 
Off-line dissemination & communication: A set of off-line dissemination tools will be developed such as the pro-
ject leaflets, infographics, factsheets, posters and roll-up. They will contain different information depending on the 
information to be exposed. The leaflet will be promoted in fairs and congresses as well as in everyday business life 
of all partners. Furthermore, potentially specific leaflets or posters for technical activities /technology will be devel-
oped to expose the main research and development activities to involve specific stakeholders in the project. Moreo-
ver, a roll up will be developed to be used in each event to make visible PataFEST general concept. 
Target Audience: Farmers, Industry along the potato value chain, Bio -based industry of plant health solutions, 
Industry Multipliers- Sectoral Associations, Environmental Consulting & Engineering, Innovation programs 
Key Quantified targets: Infographics & factsheets = ≥ 200 views by the end of the project ; Leaflets = ≥1000 
leaflets distributed/organisation reached; Project Roll up = ≥5 events where the roll-up is displayed; Posters = ≥ 2 
posters 
 
Policy Feedback: PataFEST will implement several direct and indirect dissemination measures to contribute to pol-
icy shaping and supporting the implementation of new policy initiatives and decisions. In particular, 1 Policy Rec-
ommendation Report will be elaborated and delivered on M40 that will be discussed in the policy event organised 
during the final conference. In addition, project results will be published in newsletters and journals targeted to policy 
such as Science for Environment Policy, Policy Sciences, etc… 
Target Audience: Government & Plant health policy makers  
Key Quantified targets: 1 Policy Recommendation Report discussed in the policy event at the end of the project; 
5 publications targeted to policy-makers. 
 
Specific communication activities: Communication activities are a crucial aspect of this project, to ensure that we 
effectively promote our objectives and outputs, as well as its benefits and impacts to the stakeholders we want to 
reach. As one of the keys to successfully gaining impact is through our ability to secure the cooperation and partic-
ipation of our key stakeholders, they will be the target of our communication activities. Moreover, it is relevant that 
citizens are aware of the project developments, societal benefits and positive impacts since the project is benefiting 
from tax-payers’ contributions. Our communication activities will ensure citizens are informed and feel like they are 
getting value for money.  To maximise the impact of our communication activities and guarantee that they will be 
effectively intertwined with the dissemination effort, the communication plan, as part of the PDEC, will follow 4 steps: 
1. Identify and list all possible stakeholders - the target audiences of our dissemination activities will be used 
as the starting point (in addition to any other stakeholders that might be considered important). 
2. Organize our stakeholders - the target audience of our communication activities will be analysed and categorised 
into “communities of support” for helping PataFEST to realize its ambition, goals, objectives and impacts.  
3. Development of the PataFEST brand - in order to help us in engaging with our stakeholders the principles behind 
the PataFEST brand (visually identified through its logo) will be further elaborated and documented.