1.2 Methodology 
1.2.1 Concept and overall methodology  
PataFEST is a 48-month RIA action project based on the following activities against the presence of CLso pest threat 
in potato plants and pathogens incidences in postharvest tubers. 
• Molecular breeding: NEIK will establish a singular and complete catalogue of mapped resistance genes against 
potato pest and diseases using different tools, starting with the compilation of all already annotated and published 
RGs on the potato reference genome. This initial compilation will be com pleted by mapping rece ntly published 
potato resistance genes to the Potato Reference Genome . Besides, t his collection will be extend ed by the 
compilation of all relevant resistance genes from de PRGdb, searching the potato orthologues ; mapping and 
validating these genes to the Reference Potato Genome. Furthermore, published Potato Resistance QTLs will be 
mapped to the reference genome via projection , using collocated probes/primers with known sequences  and 
identifying the potential collocated RG that caused the QTL. In a second step, a molecular characterization of the 
working collection of potato accessions will be achieved using SNP GGP V3 Potato array, which contains already 
many resistance genes. Additional important RG will be analysed for SNP by using innovative and novel targeting 
sequencing strategies such as SPET or CAPTURE with the Germplasm accessions. Finally, NEIK and INIAP will 
validate the RG by characterizing the accessions of the Germplasm Collection with respect to their resistance level 
to important diseases (and pests) using field trails and bioassays. Moreover, Association Studies between observed 
phenotypic resistance levels and molecular SNP data will be performed for validating important resistance genes. 
• Early detection and surveillance tools : UPOL will perform correlation of induced plant stress condi tions with 
data obtained by a photometric system used in PHTS approaches. The system based on RGB cameras, FluorCam, 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 6 of 10 
IR, and hyperspectral cameras will allow the study of the phenotyping changes of plant and tubers in non-invasive 
manner. The studies will be performed in model plants under in vitro and in soil testing in crop -based bioassays 
confirming the possibility of a biological translation through species. The developed screening approaches will 
identify and describe the plant response allowing the identification of new targeted biomarkers. A sequence of serial 
and parallel targeted bioassays based on direct antibacterial and antifungal in vitro testing will be combined with 
high-throughput plant-based bioassays using different model pathosystems. Complementarily, CRUN will identify 
VOCs related to the infection of potato tubers with the selected pathogens. For this, the headspace of small potato 
microcosm experiments will be analysed using chromatography techniques as it allows a high concentrat ion fold 
of the compounds produced . A full metabolomic approach will done by means of LC -MS/MS to identify non -
volatile biomarkers, such as phenolic compounds, non-structural carbohydrates, and plant growth regulators, linked 
to the development of the pathogens during potato postharvest storage. 
On the other side, IRIS will build up a multilayer digital tool (smartphone or tablet app) which will act as a storage 
unit and data processing unit for the image analysis. The  inserted data will be processed within  the platform to 
generate an accurate response in terms of detection.  In addition, artificial intelligence-based models also developed 
by IRIS will be embedded in the platform to generate results based on the process ing of the data captured by the 
operator. The digital tool will allow remote acce ss as well as it will be programmed as a self -learning database, 
meaning that a "low-cost" device could be used for early detections of the desired markers. 
• Pest and pathogen disease control solutions: TECHN and FUND will work on the development of chemical-free 
solutions to treat and control plant pests and postharvest pathogens disease, respectively. TECHN will propose to 
develop non-toxic and sustainable wax sprays  amended with bioactive natural compounds (e.g., essential oils) to 
render potato plant lea ves super hydrophobicity  properties and provide both repellent and anti -adhesive 
performance against CLso vector and soil-borne antifungal effect. FUND will formulate water-based biocontrol 
coatings for postharvest potato  tubers. Enzyme s as lactoperoxidase system (LPS) and antagonist yeasts as W. 
anomalus will be selected as biocontrol agents and incorporated into formulation . Moreover, hydrocolloids  and 
lipids will be also part of the formulation to provide high oxygen and water vapour barrier properties to maintain 
the quality of potato stored.  Besides, UPOL will carry out simultaneous and cross -testing bioassays by the 
application of PHTS technology to provide a selection of tolerance increasing formulations against both plant pest 
and postharvest pathogens selected. CHEM as an expert industrial developer of crop protection products, will be in 
charge to manufacture both solutions at pre -industrial scale (TRL5) and evaluate th e feasibility of their industrial 
exploitation.  
CRUN will work on the r espiratory gases (CO 2 and O 2) during long -term postharvest storage; tubers will be 
subjected to different graduated CA environments and relative humidity to investigate the potential o f this 
technology to reduce the disease development under commercial conditions. 
• Soil pest management strategies: UNIBO will obtain carriers from biomasses residues that will be functionalised 
with several elements and applied directly to the soil in exper imental plots under controlled conditions (pot s in 
greenhouse). The trials will e valuate the effect of treatments on soil elements bioavailability and microelements 
contents in leaves and tuber. Moreover, the innovative fertilisation will be tested under CLso infection evaluating 
the titre of pathogen in potato tissues by molecular analysis using Differential-Display Reverse Transcription-PCR 
(DDRT-PCR) approach. Tuber pro duced under the described experimental conditions will be also assessed for 
resistance to postharvest pathogens.  Besides, disease incident trials under different clima te scenarios mimicking 
predicted extreme rainfall and drought periods will be conducted a t CRUN in a phenotyping glasshouse facility 
designed to trial crop-soil systems at pilot scale under a multi-sensor gantry. The facility replicates all stages of the 
whole crop production cycle  plus rotational context (multiple cropping seasons) with predefined soil physical 
conditions affecting fungal and bacterial movement, and recreates the dynamic interrelationships of soil health,  
water use, biotic stresses (pathogens, weeds, pests), environmental variables.  
• Integrated plant management: Several IPM strategies will be considered in PataFEST project. One case of study 
will be carried out in Ecuador. There, INIAP will host field bioassay trials in their facilities und er real condition 
(presence of CLso and its vector in potato plant)  evaluating the behaviour of potato varieties already selected for 
their resistant traits against CLso and its vector. Besides, INIAP will validated in potato plant the capacity of the 
image analysis digital tools to predict the presence of CLso disease in potato plants in fields. Finally, pesticide-free 
natural solution performance will be evaluated on potato p lant to study the repellent effectiveness agai nst BC 
presence and the antifungal properties against soil-borne pathogen in tubers harvested. In Europe, two IPM cases 
of study will be organized both in UDAPA (Spain) and in BOEH (Germany) potato warehouses for the postharvest 
technological solutions trials. Biocontrol superficial coating solution combined with CA technology and low-cost 
sensor device will be tested to early detect and control the pathogen spoilage in potato stored. Finally, UDAPA will 
also ev aluated aquaculture by-product-based soil treatment application in potato crop un der real cultivation 
conditions (Spain). Other case of studies for soil management and postharvest IPM strategies will be planned around 
Europe thanks to the potential involvement of ASAJA and EUPAT associated members. 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 7 of 10 
• Citizen science: ECSA and KNEIA will be in charge to involve citizen scientist in the activities that will be organised 
along the PataFEST project execution. Results obtained will significantly contribute to boost the collaborative efforts 
to detect and control emerging pest threat and pathogens disease incidence. 
• Joint Research Center  involvement: As this topic describes, the involvement of the JRC is envisaged once the 
project is funded. JRC will support the analysis of the potential impact of the studied p ests and the development of 
economic and environmental solutions. 
1.2.2 Related research and innovation activities 
The activities developed in PataFEST linked with many previous and ongoing R&D initiatives described below: 
Project Main result/knowledge feeding into PataFEST 
PAPACLIMA (FAO, 2016-2019). 
Partner: NEIK 
Detection of candidate genes against fungi. Knowledge and software for 
performing different association mapping techniques 
Evaluation of fungal diseases 
POISE (EIG concert Japan, 2016) . 
Partner: UPOL 
Identification of biomarkers related to tolerance level to abiotic stress in 
tomato and rice plant. 
QCAP: (Interreg NWE, 2017 -2019). 
Partner: CRUN 
Detection and identification of potato spoilage VOC biom arkers under 
postharvest cold storage conditions. 
PHOTONFOOD (H2020, 2021 -
2024). Partner: IRIS 
Development of the global system control, software and data 
management and processing platform.   
ANTISEPTIC-WAX (ERC H2020 -
PoC, 2018-2020). Partner: TECHN 
Environmentally friendly wax -spray green technol ogy to eliminate 
attachment and development of pests on plant leaves surfaces. 
REPEAR (FP7, 2014-2017). Partner: 
FUND 
Development of superficial coatings based on natural additive to reduce 
respiration rate, c ontrol dehydration, and pathogen s spoilage of 
postharvest pears. 
ADAPT (H2020, 20 20-2024). 
Partner: EUPAT 
Dissemination of the project objectives and results vi a internal and 
external communication channels. 
1.2.3 Gender dimension 
PataFEST does not include the integration of the gender dimension (sex and gender analysis) in R&I as the topic 
2022-F2F-02-02 does not require it. Nevertheless, the project has a strong multi-actor participatory approach and 
involvement of citizen, thus it will commit to address the diverse needs of citizens regardless their gender and sex.  
1.2.4 Open science practices 
The project will follow an Open Science Strategy  (OSS). The preliminary type of research data, exploitation route 
and IP strategy will be outlined in the Exploitation P lan (available at the 2nd stage). This plan will show that some 
results with commercial and/or industrial important value will be protected as IPR or trade secrets, and thus they will 
not be included in PataFEST’s OSS. The research results obtained by the work carried out by researchers will follow 
these Open Science practices: 1) Open Access (OA) to peer-reviewed scientific publications ensuring at least under 
upon publication, deposition of the author accepted manuscript (AAMs) or version of record (VOR) in a trusted 
repository and immediate open access via the repository under CC BY or equivalent. Alternatively, some research 
results will be made available in the Open Research Europe; 2) Early and open sharing of research through pre-
registration, registered reports, pre-prints or crowd-sourcing; 3) Researchers will participate as much as possible in 
open peer-review in related topic of PataFEST; 4) Multi-actor approach activities in the co-creation of tasks from 
the beginning and across the project duration.  
1.2.5 Research data management and other research outputs 
The Data Management Plan (DMP) will consider all the data that the project will generate and use and will detail 
whether and how it will be used, exploited or made accessible for verification a nd re -use; how and under what 
conditions it will be curated; and how it will be interoperable with regard to specific quality standards. Data refers to 
any kind of result including statistics, results of experiments, measurements, observations resulting from trials and 
demonstration, survey results , interview recordings , images and bibliographic metadata  used for the validation 
publications. According to EC recommendation, as part of making data findable, accessible, interoperable and re -
usable (FAIR), the DMP will include information on: 1) handling of data during & after  the end of PataFEST 
project; 2) what data will be collected, processed and/or generated; 3) which methodology and standards will be 
applied; 4) whether data will be shared/made in OA; 5) how data will be curated and preserved (including post-
project). DMP will not have impact on IPR, because the decision to publish OA documents come after a more general 
decision on whether to first seek protection for IPR. The data will be deposited via OA in a trusted repository under 
the latest available version of the Creative Common s Attribution International Public License (CCBY) or Creative 
Commons Public Domain Dedication (CC0) or a licence with equivalent rights. 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 8 of 10 
1.2.6 Compliance with the ´do no significant harm principle (DNSH)’ 
All the research activities of PataFEST will comply with DNSH principle under the Recovery and Resilience Facility 
Regulation of EU. PataFEST fulfils DNSH in different ways: 1) no activity is harming the climate change mitigation 
as the developed plant health products are fossil-free; 2) no activity is harming the circular economy concept. All 
the contrary, the project will apply circularity principles in the plant health protection products  leading to more 
resource efficiency , to zero -waste practices, and to sustainable  and 4) no activity is harming biodiversity and 
ecosystems as the project enhances potato genetic variety on agricultural land. 
2 IMPACT