4. Design and implementation of effective communication campaigns (and supporting tools and materials): We 
will ensure regular communication to our stakeholders through these campaigns, which will involve the use of 
emails, face-to-face meetings (for policy-makers), leaflets, posters, the website and social media, etc. A press and 
media relations campaign will be implemented throughout the project to ensure media interest and coverage. 
 
Clustering and Networking activities:  PataFEST will establish close collaboration and synergies with related 
projects, networks, clusters and initiatives  at the European and national/regional level to share information and 
maximise the visibility of the project results. The project will potentially exchange results and deliverables, organize 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 21 of 45 
possible joint dissemination events (2 intermediate workshops) and clustering activities with other European pro-
jects funded under the same topic or other related topics/projects. In addition, PATAFEST will seek links with the 
broader dissemination strategies of the European Foundation for Plant Pathology, the European Centre for Disease 
Prevention and Control, the European Chemicals Agency, the European Environment Agency and the European 
Commission’s Joint Research Centre, etc., at pan-European level, as well as those of National federations and asso-
ciations of relevance.  
A prominent feature to heighten the project visibility is the Multi-Actor Participatory Platform (MAPP, T5.5). It 
will provide an extended network of relevant stakeholders of the potato value chain across Europe and internationally. 
The target stakeholders are: farmers, vegetable producers and traders, bio-based industry of plant health and 
soil solutions, scientific community, consumers, policy makers and general public. MAPP will organize, structure 
and offer a point of information on the topic of the project for supporting users in their valorisation decisions, and, 
meanwhile, following the open science principle s, collect feedback and expectation of target stakeholders & end -
users on the project activities and results. The MAPP will also include a special feature with all the citizen of science 
activities with a link to the eu-citizen.science thanks that our partner ECSA is the legacy organisation of this platform. 
In this way, the planned communication activities will be used best to maximize future dissemination and exploitation 
of the project results. 
Target Audience: Relevant European and International Organisation; Brother Projects Partners, Potential indus-
trial end-users; Industrial Multipliers and Associations 
Key Quantified targets: M48 Final Conference = ≥120 participants; 2 Intermediate Workshops = ≥60 partici-
pants in both; Multi-Actor Participatory Platform = 1; Involvement in network/clusters  =project entrance in at 
least 1 cluster will be evaluated; Inclusion in EU dissemination resources such as the EU Horizon Magazine 
Citizen Science and other activities to engage the general public : PataFEST will promote citizens engagement 
through Citizen Science activities that ECSA has planned in WP 1, WP 4 and WP 5: i) 2 events (one in the Long 
Night of Science in Berlin and other one in the Experimental Field Station of ANEC (Spain)  with the purpose of 
collecting scientific data of potato resistance gens (T1.6); ii) 3 practical workshops (Germany, Spain and Ecuador) 
where citizens and owners of small horticulture crops will have the oppotunity to test the bio -based sustainable 
solutions applied to potato soil (T4.3); and iii) 8 webinars  to promote the participation of citizens in scientific 
discussion groups with PataFEST’ scientist and to disseminate the main technological solutions to tackle potato 
emerging threats. In addition, the project will develop a comprehensive strategy for activities with the general public, 
including, press releases, communication campaigns and publication of articles in newspapers and popular 
magazines. Television is considered a valuable channel in this sense: local channels will be contacted. “ Futuris” 
(“Euronews” channel) and the Horizon Results Platform TV will be considered for a wider coverage.  All ther 
partners, but specially KNEIA, FUND (as coordinator), ECSA (expert in citizen science) and our key agriculture and 
trade partners (UDAPA, EUPAT and ANEC),  will exploit their communication units specialised in maximising media 
and public outreach as well as building targeted dissemination tools for research and innovation results. 
Target Audience: General public, owners of small crop farms, and mass media (Futuris in Euronews & HRP TV),  
Key Quantified targets: Molecular biology experiments with citizens = 2; Co-creative workshops targeting citi-
zens with urban gardens and/or small size crop farms: = 3 (Germany, Spain & Ecuaador); Citizen Science Webi-
nars = 8  
 
Exploitation Plan and Business Model: A preliminary Exploitation Plan has been drawn up considering the contri-
bution of the results to patents, new or existing technologies, services, infrastructures, knowledge bases and standards, 
to ensure the project innovations are delivered to the market. Our intention is to realise all the exploitation pathways 
for the results: A) Commercial exploitation- a key exploitation route will be the industrial use of the project 
knowledge and technical/technology developments, for the creation of new technological options, new processes 
and advisory services to deliver high competitiveness and growth impacts. B) Further research- providing 
the knowledge and skills for future spin-out research and development projects will have a high impact for raising the 
European knowledge base while promoting the targeted industrial sectors’ transition to the green economy; C) Con-
tribution to standards and policies- the project results will contribute towards a regulation and standard development 
and policy revision in the project field. Cooperation with regulatory bodies and third -party sales and distribution li-
censees in the project field will be implemented. This process has already begun through the concept development and 
pre-project market validation work carried out by the partners within their existing customer bases. Key Exploitable 
Results of PataFEST will be defined as knowledge, products, technologies and results having a potential for indus-
trial or commercial application in research activities or for developing, creating or marketing the products and pro-
cesses obtained. Some of the identified results to be exploited are presented below in Table 2.2: 
 
 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 22 of 45 
Table 2.2. PataFEST Key exploitable results (KERs) 
KERs Proposed IPR tool Partners 
Potential end users 
and time to market 
(after projects end) 
Pest monitoring 
and resistance po-
tato varieties se-
lection 
Developing an user friendly bioinformatics 
tool (Patview-Patblast) with all integrated pro-
ject results, integrated genomic project re-
sources and other resources (Literature, Links, 
Support Documents), as well as useful tools 
for performing local and external BLAST 
searches and other utilities. All resources can 
be modified/ extended by the user according to 
the needs. This tool will be of public access 
and easy to use. 
NEIK in col-
laboration 
with INIAP 
and UPOL 
Scientific community 
(Universities, RTOs) 
specialised genetic re-
sources for plant protec-
tion. 
Time to market: ~2 
years 
Phenotype-based 
High-throughput 
Screening (PHTS) 
technology 
Further internal research; Collaborative Re-
search - results can be used as background of 
future collaborative research projects. 
UPOL 
Scientific community 
specialised development 
of digital tools for pest 
and pathogen early de-
tection. 
Time to market: ~2 
years 
VOCs sensors 
Patent and license for commercial use; the re-
sults will be used as basis for internal and col-
laborative projects. 
FUND, IRIS, 
CRUN 
Agrochemical develop-
ers, farmers, field ma-
chinery & ag-tech pro-
ducers, advisors, RTOs 
Time to market: ~4 
years 
AI Prediction 
Model 
Internal service creation to provide AI models 
to the smart agricultural sector. Collaborative 
Research 
FUND 
Providers of smart agri-
culture products & ser-
vices, Farmers. Agricul-
tural advisers 
Time to market: ~3 
years 
Mobile hardware 
for early detection 
A freeium business model access: i) Integra-
tion into existing databases to ensure further 
scaling of the project results ; ii) PataFEST app 
containing project outputs (open access) ; iii) 
Paid services for commercially exploitable re-
sults will be developed 
IRIS 
Public and private scien-
tific and technical com-
munity. Educational in-
stitutions. 
Time to market: ~4 
years 
Postharvest bio-
control solutions 
(biocoatings) 
Collaborative Research both in EU and Na-
tional schemes; B2B relationships; internal 
product development and service creation. 
FUND, 
CHEM (for-
mulation 
scale-up) 
Bio-based coating com-
panies. Scientific com-
munity. Agriculture sec-
tor. Farmers. 
Time to market: ~6 
years 
Plant protective 
wax solution 
The developed generic plant and crop protective 
wax solutions can be tailored in future projects 
for additional specific pests via collaborative fu-
ture research with public research organisations 
and private sector; as well for commercial licens-
ing.  
TECHNCHE
M (formula-
tion scale-up) 
Plant soil solutions 
(biofertilizers) 
Further internal research in collaboration with 
other research organisations and chemical in-
dustries to produce a more generic plant pro-
tective wax product. 
UNIBO, 
CHEM (for-
mulation 
scale-up) 
Exploitable foreground will be the basis for the preparation of the Exploitation Plan for the companies of the con-
sortium in order to encourage the future investments for market entry of the results of the project. The Exploitation  
Plan, included as a part of the PDEC, will include the following parts:  
1. Key Exploitable Results and areas of application, its dissemination on the basis of the communication strategy 
2. Analysis of current and target markets:  
• Market analysis with a focus on European market, but considering global trends and needs, for all involved 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages         
PataFEST              Page 23 of 45 
industrial sectors (size, trends, share the technology/product could reach, main competitors, competitive ad-
vantage, etc.). It also includes a broad analysis of the stakeholders along the value chain (stakeholder map-
ping), which is relevant for the fine -tuning of the target audience for the specific communication of the 
results towards the market uptake, to be considered in the exploitation plan. A PEST analysis will  be per-
formed to characterize the Political, Economic, Socio -Cultural, and Technological factors and changes to 
understand the general environment. Markets continuous monitoring will be applied to detect new trends and 
possibilities and allow the consortium to react and adapt the projects' outcomes to the market changes.  
• Competitive analysis: identification of the main competitors, (direct and indirect), -to understand the target 
customers’ needs and expectations, and comparison with other solutions in the market or under development. 
This will be accomplished by performing a Porter’s analysis for PataFEST innovative exploitable results and 
target markets to determine the level of competition expected and support business model development.  
• SWOT analysis (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats) to identify the internal and external fac-
tors that are favourable and unfavourable for commercial exploitation.  
3. Business model including marketing strategy and main clients: will be elaborated using CANVAS methodology 
adapted to the relevant target markets. Value finance will be studied beyond the business model definition and 
will be approached by assessing the sustainability of business, by identifying future steps strengthening or threat-
ening the business case, by assessing the commercial potential of the technologies, etc. 
4. The partners will define IP within the project by relevant fields, results and protection, and the PDEC will cover 
IP ownership with clear definitions of foreground and back ground information, setting a framework by which 
all the consortium members can contribute to the exploitation and commercialisation of the project results.  
Target Audience: Government & Plant health policy makers, Farmers, Industry along the potato value chain, Bio -
based industry of plant health solutions, Environmental Consulting & Engineering, Innovation programs; 
Key Quantified targets: 1 Policy Recommendation Report discussed in 2 policy events; Patents = ≥2; Horizon 
Impact Award = ≥1 application; Exploitation Plan = 1 (Final version delivered on M48); Research Ownership 
List (ROL) = 1; Joint Ownership Agreement = ≥1; Exploitation Agreements = ≥1; Horizon Results Platform = 
≥3 results presented during the project’s lifetime; Innovation Radar = ≥3 key project results published;  
 
Strategy for the management and protection of knowledge and intellectual property rights:  The consortium 
will implement an integral strategy for the effective management of the intellectual property generated in the 
project, including protection measures. Key pillars of the IPR management and protection strategy will be: 1) Deep 
evaluation of the “Freedom to Operate”, in relation to the background owned by consortium members or potential 
third parties: the freedom to operate will be constantly assessed in relation to possible patents that might be published 
in the course of the project; 2) Selection of the IP Manager (KNEIA), as IP expert, to guide the consortium toward 
the implementation of IPR strategy; 3) The different exploitation routes envisaged will be always aligned and com-
mensurate to the expected impacts (Destination), the expected outcomes (Topic), the described impact pathways 
and the project results, to ensure their vi ability and opportunity; 4) The strategy will guarantee the dissemination 
and publication of the results do not interfere with IPR management but serve it: to protect the exploitation potential, 
a confidentiality policy will underpin our dissemination acti vities. The project results will be assessed in terms  of 
novelty, patentability and protection as part of an effective knowledge management strategy. For the results ob-
tained, ownership, protection and use will be considered in detail. Ownership of patents will be clearly defined and 
governed by the Consortium Agreement. Results shall be owned by the participant generating them. To avoid doubt 
or confusion over ownership, a protocol of procedures will be defined, which w ill be followed by each partner to 
clearly show the development of the generation of knowledge or results. Whenever the results are generated jointly, 
they will be jointly owned. Allocation and terms of exercising this joint ownership will be agreed in Joint Owner-
ship Agreements. However, an overriding principle will be that the participating industry partners are always 
provided with the access to the results to exploit them in accordance with the needs and strategy of their busi-
ness. Access rights to results for implementing the project will be granted on a royalty-free basis. Access rights for 
use purposes will be granted either royalty-free, or on fair and reasonable conditions (established in Exploitation 
Agreements to be negotiated between the requester and granter of the access rights).  
 
Follow-up Plan: The PDEC will include a follow -up plan to foster the exploitation and uptake of the results after 
project end. The consortium will pay an effort in starting already exploitation actions during the project execution. 
Nevertheless, if no exploitation takes place, following Horizon Europe indications the consortium will use the Hori-
zon Results Platform for making their exploitable results visible, during the first year after the end of the project. In 
addition, the MAPP, including the citizen of science activities with a link to the eu-citizen.science will be active at 
least 9 years after the projects end (KNEIA will be responsible).
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02- 02- two-stage - PATAFEST        
PataFEST              Page 24 of 45
2.3 Summary  
Specific Needs Expected Results (linked to project’s results) D & E & C measures Target Groups 
In 2020, the EU's potato production was 
55.3 million tonnes (=€12.3 billion). 
Globalisation and climate change are the 
main drivers for entrance of emerging or 
new potato pests to EU: CLso is spread by 
the vector psyllid BC causing Zebra Chip 
with severe potato yield losses (up to 
100%). 
Excessive use of pesticides and the transi-
tion towards their bio -based counterparts, 
increase resistance in bacteria, insects, and 
soil-borne pathogens, and reappearance  of 
soil pathogens, potentially increasing the 
incidence of soil infections during posthar-
vest storage. 
To preserve the health of potato plant and 
the quality of the final product against its 
emerging pests, the project PataFEST stud-
ies different solutions for early detection 
and prevention and incorporated in a IPM 
strategy.  
PataFEST expects to generate 18 results (R):  
Early detection: 
- Monitoring and control protocol of CLso spreading and its vector BC 
(R1), mapping of potato resistance genes (R2) and marker-assisted selec-
tion in molecular potato breeding (R4). 
- Analysis of 500 samples for postharvest disease resistance and 150 of Ec-
uadorian samples for CLso and its vector BC resistance (R3). 
- Identification of biomarkers in infected plants and tubers to be used in the 
development of an image analysis digital tool (mobile app) and VOCs 
sensor using improved with AI-based models (R5-R6). 
Prevention strategies: 
- Plant solutions against CLso (green wax sprays), natural soil management 
strategies (biofertilizers) and biocontrol coatings against soil borne path-
ogens (R7-R9) 
Validation of the pest management solutions in field trials at selected EU 
locations and Ecuador (R10-R13) 
Citizen Science strategies to engage general public and farmers and to col-
lect relevant scientific data (R14-R15). 
Multi-actor approach  to share knowledge, experience and ensure eco-
nomic sustainability of EU potato production through an effective dissemi-
nation & communic ations plan and creation of “practice abstracts” to the 
EIP-Agri repository (R16-R18) 
6/8 Scientific publications. 
60 EIP-AGRI practice abstracts. 
24 Conferences and events.  
1 Horizon Impact Award. 
1 Conference proceeding per year 
per partner. 
2 Intermediate workshop. 
1 Final conference. 
Logo, website, videos (x2), press 
releases, social media, in-
fographics, roll-ups, leaflets, post-
ers. 
1 Policy Recommendation Report 
5 publications to policy-makers. 
Multi-actor participatory platform 
+ Citizen of Science events (2 sci-
entific events, 3 experimental field 
workshops, 8 webinars. 
2 Patents, Exploitation Plan, Re-
search Ownership List (1), Join 
Ownership Agreement (1), Inno-
vation Radar (3) 
Scientific/Technical 
community 
Farmers 
Industry along the po-
tato value chain: 
Breeders 
Producers 
Traders 
Associations and Co-
operatives 
Bio-based industry of 
plant health solutions 
Environmental Con-
sulting & Engineering 
Citizens 
Plant health policy 
makers 
Sandarisation bodies 
National authorities 
European Commission 
OUTCOMES IMPACTS (linked to Expected Impacts (EI) of the destination and KIPs) 
OC1: Relevant and free access information to better identify the most suita-
ble potato varieties resistant to plant pest threat and soil -borne pathogens in 
postharvest storage. 
OC2: Early detection tools and sustainable solutions to improve plant and 
soil health and to control postharvest pathogens aiming the reduction of fos-
sil-based pesticides and fungicides applied in potato crops. 
OC3: Field trials both, in potato plant and in tubers, during postharvest stor-
age of the technologies developed at TRL5 to validate the effectiveness of 
the IPM strategy of potato emerging threats and disease. 
OC4: Use of citizen science activities in the agriculture sector as an effective 
supplement to pest management approaches. 
OC5: Provide the foundations and drivers for future development and imple-
mentation of IPM strategies by farmers and other key players in the event 
that these emerging potato pests outbreak in EU. 
- Of the 500 analysed samples, at least 5% potato resistance varieties for targeted diseases and pests will 
reach the market (EI 3 → KIP 1) → Replicability of PataFEST molecular characterisation strategies to 
other similar crops (e.g. carrots, pepper, etc.). 
- Development of sustainable innovative solutions (including cutting edge digital techs) for early detec-
tion, surveillance, treatment and (bio)control of potato pests in pre-harvest and post-harvest strategies: 
50% reduction of BC, 25% reduction of ZC, 40 -50% reduction of soil-borne pathogens, 90% of relia-
bility in the detection of CLso-infected potato (EI 1 → KIP 7 & 9) → Further development to go from 
TRL 5 to TRL 7 to achieve an Integrated Pest Management to protect EU potato production. 
- Scientific data is also produced by citizens using citizen science initiatives and activities  that will be 
active beyond the project’s duration ( EI 3 → KIP 6) → the platform eu -citizen-science will hold a 
special future of the project’s citizen science activities along its duration and beyond (~9 years). 
- Creation of an interactive innovation model to help the implementation of potato IPM across different 
professional backgrounds (‘Multi-Actor Approach’) (EI 1 & 3 → KIP 5 & 5) → The multi-actor par-
ticipatory platform will be active at least 9 years after projects ends. 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02- 02- two-stage - PATAFEST        
PataFEST              Page 25 of 45 
3 IMPLEMENTATION
3.1 Work plan and resources  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.1 PataFEST Gantt Chart.
M1 M2 M3 M4 M5 M6 M7 M8 M9 M10 M11 M12 M13 M14 M15 M16 M17 M18 M19 M20 M21 M22 M23 M24 M25 M26 M27 M28 M29 M30 M31 M32 M33 M34 M35 M36 M37 M38 M39 M40 M41 M42 M43 M44 M45 M46 M47 M48
1 Pest monitoring and resistance potato varieties selection  (Leader NEIK)
T1.1 Monitoring of pest spread pathway and microbial ecology study (UPOL)
T1.2 Compilation of mapped resistance gene against insects, bacteria and soil-borne pathogens 
(NEIK)
T1.3 Molecular characterization of the working collection of potato accessions (NEIK)
T1.4
Validation of RG by characterizing the accessions of the Germplasm Collection with respect to 
their resistance level to CLso pest disease and soil borne postharvest pathogens using field trails 
and bioassays (NEIK)  
T1.5 Developing of database and integrated bioinformatics platform for compilated finding results 
(NEIK)   
T1.6 Inviting citizens to engage in molecular biology experiments (NEIK)
2 Early detection and surveillance tools (Leader IRIS)
T2.1 Identification of phenotyping traits (biomarkers) in infected plants and tubers through (PHTS) and 
high-precision phenotyping (UPOL)
T2.2 Identification of VOCs biomarkers of infected potato tubers during postharvest storage (CRUN)
T2.3 Building up portable tools able to perform real time early detection of diseases in plants and 
tubers for potato warehouses (IRIS)
T2.4 AI-based models for the decision support system (DSS) development, implementation, and 
optimisation (FUND)
3 Prevention strategies based on sustainable solutions (Leader FUND)
T3.1 Natural plant solution with repellent and anti-adhesive properties against CLso vector (TECHN)
T3.2 Postharvest biocontrol coating solutions and controlled atmosphere technologies (FUND)
T3.3 Application of PHTS as a technology to select tolerance increasing formulation against pest and 
disease (UPOL)
T3.4 Plant soil management strategies (UNIBO)
T3.5 Sustainable solutions feasibility manufacturing at pilot plant (CHEM)
4 Pest and disease management integration strategies (Leader ANEC)
T4.1 Validation field trials against CLso pest disease under real condition in Ecuador (INIAP)
T4.2 Validation of postharvest technologies in European potato warehouses (AB)
T4.3 Evaluation of potato plant pesticide free natural solution and soil treatment solutions under real 
cultivation conditions in European countries (UDAPA)
T4.4 Technical and economic assessment (TEA), Environmental Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) and 
Social LCA (AINIA)
T4.5 Policy reccomendations (EUPAT)
5 Dissemination, communication and exploitation of results (Leader KNEIA)
T5.1 Communication activities (KNEIA)
T5.2 PataFEST dissemination (KNEIA)
T5.3 Exploitation of results and Business model (KNEIA)
T5.4 PataFEST Clustering (KNEIA)
T5.5 Multi-Actor Participatory Platform (MAPP) (KNEIA)
6 Project Management (Leader FUND)
T6.1 Administrative & financial management (FUND)
T6.2 Scientific, decision-making and risk management (FUND)
T6.3 Data management plan and data interoperability (FUND)
YEAR 4PataFESTWP YEAR 1 YEAR 2 YEAR 3
D6.3
D4.1
D3.1
D1.1
D2.1
D2.2
D3.2
D3.4
D4.2
D4.3
D3.3
D5.1
D6.1
D1.2
D1.3
D1.4
D1.5
D2.3D2.4 D2.5
D2.6
D3.5
D4.4 D4.4
D5.2 D5.2
D5.3 D5.3 D5.3
D5.4 D5.4
D6.2 D6.2 D6.2
D4.5
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 26 of 45 
 
 
PataFEST work plan will be implemented in 48 months and 
it is divided into 6 work packages aimed to fulfill the general 
requirements set out by the target HE ‘s topic and promoting 
the interaction between all participants.  
In the first part of PataFEST, pest spread pathways and the 
main resistance potato varieties  against CLso and 
postharvest pathogen will be explored at molecular level 
(WP1). Then, PataFEST will develop early detection and 
surveillance tools as image analysis digital tool (mobile 
app) and portable VOCs sensor for the rapid diagnostic of 
the pest a nd pathogens disease s development (WP2). 
Besides, PataFEST will include the development of pest 
prevention strategies based on sustainable and effective plant and soil treatments and biocontrol coating solution 
to control incidence of soil-borne pathogens during the potato postharvest storage (WP3). 
In a second part of PataFEST, environmentally friendly and innovative mitigation strategies developed will be 
integrated and validated in a relevant environment (TRL5).  Dedicated dissemination, communication and  
exploitation activities will secure the maximum impact of the project (WP 5). Finally, WP 6 deals with the 
management of the project in order to make all the proposed developments in line to the PataFEST objectives. Figure 
3.1 provides an overview of the work packages and their timing (Gantt Chart) and Figure 3.2 shows PataFEST work 
plan structure. 
Work Package No. WP1 Starting date / Ending date  M1 / M48 
Work Package title Pest monitoring and resistance potato varieties selection (Leader: NEIK) 
Objectives  
• Development of the BC and plant sampling protocol. 
• Optimisation of the specific primers for CLso and BC detection. 
• CLso spreading pattern analyses across the target area. 
• Development of monitoring protocol for surveillance, detection, and control of plant pests and its vector. 
• Set up a catalogue of mapped RGs against insects, bacteria, and soil-borne pathogens. 
• Molecular characterisation of the working collection of potato accessions. 
• Validation of RGs in the working collection of potato accessions with respect to CLso pest disease and soil-borne 
postharvest pathogens. 
• Preparation of the obtained Results for Publication and Dissemination. 
Description of Work 
T1.1. Monitoring of pest spread pathway and microbial ecology study (M1 -M36). Leader: UPOL. Participants: 
INIAP. 
Subtask T1.1.1 Sample design of the monitoring pipeline. Leader INIAP 
To monitoring the vector BC, yellow sticky traps will be used in the field to count adults of the potato psyllid and 
direct observation for the other development stages. To capture the specimens, suction vacuums or net will be used. 
The insects will be preserved in alcohol and later the entire adult will be used for the molecular analyses. Complete 
plants will be taken from the field and transplanted into pots for their movement from the field to the laboratory. 
Several parts of the plant will be used such us petiols, aereal tubers, stolons, and underground tubers for DNA 
extractions. Plant tissue samples will be taken from different plant development stages, including tuber when they 
form. 
Subtask T1.1.2 Molecular characterisation of ecological pest spread pathway. Leader UPOL. Participants: INIAP  
To identify genetic diversity and spread patterns UPOL will use the result of the standardi sed collecting protocol of 
the pest samples from the T1.1.1. The DNA will be extracted using the available commercial kits. A modelling 
approach to surveillance, detection, and control of CLso pest and its vector will be carried out using different 
molecular DNA base approaches. Initially, UPOL will review and collect all public genomic information of BC and 
CLso as assembled genomes, 16S barcodes and commonly primers used for the target taxa detection. Then, in order 
to extend the existing molecular knowled ge with the specific haplotypes that are present in the working area, the 
whole genome of the CLso sampled across Ecuador will be sequenced with the aim to produce 150-200 high quality 
bacterial genomes using PacBio Sequel II HiFi reads. The genomes will b e assembled using SMRT Link bacterial 
assembler and the genes will be annotated by the RAST web service. Moreover, GWAS analysis will be performed 
among all the sequenced genomes to identify the molecular diversity and potential functional differences that  can 
connect with the pathogenies of the CLso pest and disease response. The vector population will be monitored for the 
CLSo strain type pooling several individuals per location. The target gene will be 16S rRNA sequences, a commonly 
extended marker used for classification and identification of bacteria and archaea. 16S rRNA genes of distinct regions 
will be amplified and taxonomically identified using publicly available NCBI GenBank and Q-bank databases (500-
Figure 3.2. PataFEST Work Plan 
 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 27 of 45 
1000 samples). Combining precise location infor mation and the collecting data of the samples, UPOL will infer 
spreading patterns through the target area using a continuous phylogeographic approach. Moreover, to optimize the 
accuracy of qPCR detection, UPOL and INIAP will critically analyse the previous  findings and design the set of 
unique primers to specific target pest strains and its vector. Then, a surveillance monitoring protocol of CLso strains 
and BC will performed using optimised qPCR approach (1500-2000 qPCR assays). 
T1.2. Compilation of mapped  resistance gene against insects, bacteria and soil-borne pathogens (M1-M18). 
Leader: NEIK. Participants: INIAP 
To carry out this task, the following resources will be exploited, in order to get the targets that modulate the defence 
against the pathogens: i) annotation and compilation of already mapped RGs on the SNP GGP V4 chip (35K) Potato 
array, (ii) annotation, compilation and mapping to the Potato Reference Genome of Potato RGs available at NCBI 
and from the Potato Genome Sequencing Consortium (PGSC) at SPUD DB;  (iii) compilation of relevant RGs from 
the Plant Resistance Gene Database (PRGdb) and identification of Potato orthologues and mapping of these genes to 
the Reference Genome.  
Finally, considering the targeted sequencing task (T1.3), in addition, an inventory of available SNPs within the genes 
at NCBI (dbSNP), SPUD DB Genome browser (Track GBS SNPs) will be established. 
T1.3 Molecular characterisation of the working collection of potato accessions  (M12-M30) Leader: NEIK. 
Participants: INIAP. 
For this purpose a broad germplasm working collection will be analysed based on : i) Germplasm collection from 
NEIKER with 40 wild species, 35 native potato varieties and 230 old and new European cultivars ; ii) around 150 
samples (DNA aliquots) from INIAP which will be characterised for their tolerance level to both, CLso and the insect 
vector and ; iii) potato cultivars and accessions of interest from other Project partners (DNA aliquots and tuber 
materials for validation will be provided).  
A total of up to 500 accessions describe above will be genotyped by the following methods: i) characterisation of all 
germplasm collection accessions using the SNP GGP V4 chip (35K) Potato array manufactured by NEOGEN Europe; 
ii) integrated SNP and targeted sequencing through SPET technologies using a selection of additional important R -
genes not included on the previous chip in all germplasm accessions. 
T1.4 Validation of RG by characterizing the accessions of the Germplasm Collection with respect to their 
resistance level to CLso pest disease and soil-borne postharvest pathogens using field trails and bioassays. (M1-
M36). Leader: NEIK. Participants: INIAP, UPOL. 
Subtask T1.4.1 Selection and multiplication of plant material for bioassays. Leader:NEIK. 
NEIK will carry out the multiplication of selected plant materials for the bioassays in T1.4.3 and for other partners 
involved in WP1(T1.4.2) and WP2 to include these materials in their planned experiments. The required in vitro plants 
and minitubers of local and introduced germplasm will be produced using tissue culture, stem cuttings and hydroponic 
or aeroponics technologies in automated greenhouses. In addition, INIAP will perform PCR tests for CLso during the 
process to ensure the production of free CLs o tuber seed. At least 20 in vitro plantlets and 10 kg of seed tubers per 
genotype will be produced for using them in the proposed activities. 
Subtask T1.4.2 Characterisation of the tolerance against CLso and potato psyllid vector. Leader: INIAP. 
The characterisation of tolerance level to both, CLso and the insect vector will be performed from around 150 samples 
supplied by INIAP consisting of 100 samples of advanced breeding materials, wild species, native species and at least 
50 European potato varie ties using greenhouse and field trails.  BC adults obtained from a CLso -positive INIAP´s 
colony will be reared on potato plants. Adult behaviour, mortality, and number of adults, eggs and nymphs will be 
measured. Symptoms description in plant and tubers will be recorded. In field conditions under natural BC infestation 
symptoms, severity and incidence of zebra chips in plants and tubers, insect mortality and presence of eggs will be 
recorded. At harvest time, yield and fried chip/tuber quality (score from 1  absence -5 extreme symptoms) will be 
evaluated. The PCR test will be used to confirm the presence of CLso in the different experiments. 
Subtask T1.4.3 Characterisation of resistance level to postharvest diseases. Leader: NEIK. 
Other accessions of the Germplasm Collection will be characterised with respect to their resistance level to postharvest 
diseases (dry rot caused by F. sambucinum, black dot caused by C. coccodes, and silver scurf provoked by H. solani) 
using bioassays. For Fusarium susceptibility evaluations potato mini tubers will be wounded internally and inoculated 
with agar plugs containing the pathogen. After 20 days the depth and width of the rot area are m easured. For 
Colletotrichum and Helminthosporium susceptibility evaluations potato mini tubers will be planted in artificially 
infested soil with conidia (H) or microsclerotia (C), respectively. For disease assessment the tubers will be examined 
after incubation for the presence of setose microsclerotia of C. coccodes or the characteristic conidiophores of H. 
solani. The number of lesions will be counted and/or the percentage of the surface area covered by sporulating lesions. 
Complementary, an automated rapid PHTS using RGB-imaging in controlled conditions developed in WP2 by UPOL 
will be employed to increase the testing throughput. In a phenotyping device condition of a commercial warehouse 
will be simulated to cover broader spectrum of postharvest scenarios. 
Subtask T1.4.4. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS). Leader NEIK.  
Association studies will be performed using GWASpol (GWAS using different models) between observed phenotypic 
resistance level data and molecular SNP data from WP1. In addition, the predicted performance data from WP2/WP4 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 28 of 45 
experiments will be also used as phenotypic data for association studies and the resu lts will be compared. Finally, a 
selection of promising RG for each targeted disease or pest based on the association signals results. 
T1.5 Developing of database and integrated bioinformatics platform for compilated finding results (M12-M48). 
Leader: NEIK. Participants: INIAP, UPOL, ECSA. 
Firstly, a compilation of all results obtained in WP1 in form of databases and derived publications will be performed.  
Then, a user-friendly bioinformatics tool (PATVIEW-PATBLAST) will be developed with all the integrated project 
results, integrated genomic project resources and other resources (Literature, Links, Support Documents), as well as 
useful tools for performing local and external BLAST searches and other utilities. All resources can be modified/ 
extended by the user according to the needs. This tool will be of public access, easy to use and developed by NEIK. 
T1.6 Inviting citizens to engage in molecular biology experiments  (M12-M48). Leader: ECSA. Participants: 
FUND, NEIK, UPOL, ANEC. 
ECSA and ANEC will coordinate 2 molecular biology experiments involving citizens of all backgrounds with a strong 
interest in science to promote scientific discussion with PataFEST scientists from FUND, NEIK and UPOL and to 
generate scientific data of potato RGs. One workshop will be hold in the “Long Night of Science in Berlin”, and the 
other one in the “The Doctor’s Farm, Experimental Field Station” of ANEC. The experiments will consist of DNA -
extraction and PCR-sequencing of potato samples supplied by the participants. For both events, main results obtained 
as information about potato RGs, molecular biology methods for potato health and project updates will be 
disseminated in the citizen science webinars (WP5). 
Deliverables: D1.1 Monitoring results of CLso spreading pattern (UPOL, M36); D1.2 Catalogue of Potato RGs with 
SNP information (NEIK, M18); D1.3 Genotypic Potato Chip data and SPET data (NEIK, M30); D1.4 Association 
study results, predicted performance data and selection of most promising RG for pest and postharvest diseases. (NEIK, 
M36); D1.5 Result databases and bioinformatics tool for publication and dissemination actions (NEIK, M48). 
 
Work Package No. WP2 Starting date / Ending date  M1 / M48 
Work Package title Early detection and surveillance tools (Leader: IRIS) 
Objectives  
• Develop image analysis (e.g. , smartphone) application for the early detection and surveillance of the plant pest 
diseases. 
• Develop low-cost diagnostic solutions as VOCs sensor devices to detect postharvest pathogens in potato ware-
houses. 
• Define key features of for the future and emerging pests and disease spreading (climate changes and pest globali-
sation). 
Description of Work 
T.2.1 Identification of phenotyping traits (biomarkers) in infected plants and tubers through (PHTS) and high-
precision phenotyping (M1-M36). Leader: UPOL. Participants: CRUN. 
Subtask T.2.1.1 Rapid PHTS for validation of the testing pipeline through proof -of-concept with model potato 
genotypes and pathogens. Leader: UPOL 
Rapid PHTS method will be adopted by UPOL for potato plants and microtubers  of model potato accessions (with 
known contrasting level of pathogen resistance) and pathogen species defined by WP1. Segments of in vitro generated 
potato shoots will be grown in multiwell plates in HTS -vertical phenotyper device with controlled conditio ns. Top-
view RGB imaging will be performed during the cultivation to obtain series of RGB images documenting time -
dependent progression of morphological and colour changes in potato shoots infected with selected pathogens. In the 
case of microtuber phenotyping, conditions of a commercial warehouse will be simulated to cover broader spectrum 
of postharvest scenarios. Libraries of RGB pictures obtained will be used as training datasets for development of the 
AI-based applications for the early detection and surveillance of the plant pest diseases in T.2.4 and their validation.  
Subtask T2.1.2 High -precision phenotyping of potato plants and tubers for detection of biomarkers and 
characterisation of the accessions selected for potential resistance. Leader: UPOL. 
High-precision phenotyping at OloPhen of UPOL using non -invasive imaging with different sensors (RGB, IR, 
hyperspec, Fluorcam) to analyse the development of the changes caused by selected pests on potato plants and 
pathogens on tubers in controlled condit ions will be developed. Multivariate statistical approaches will be used to 
identify both morphological and physiological traits as biomarkers of the infection and the most informative sensor(s) 
for their detection. The identified biomarkers will be used in T2.3 and f inal protocol for characterisation of the 
accessions of the Germplasm Collection selected in T.1.3. This protocol will be also used for analysing the effects of 
natural and sustainable solutions for potato plant and postharvest tubers in WP3 for the identification of concentration 
ranges that are not negatively influencing the plant growth and development.  
Subtask T2.1.3 Phenotyping potato plants and tubers for the validation of the biomarkers identified in T2.1.2.  
Leader: CRUN. 
Infected and control commercial cultivars and accessions selected for their resistance to infection will be grown under 
controlled glasshouse conditions. Above grou nd images will be taken at least at five stages throughout plant 
development for early detection of disease development (T3.4). Harvested tubers will then be stored under commercial 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 29 of 45 
storage conditions and further phenotyped using RGB and hyperspectral cameras at regular intervals (e.g., monthly); 
multivariate and machine learning approaches will be used for tuber classification based on disease evolution. 
T2.2 Identification of VOCs biomarkers of infected potato tubers during postharvest storage (M1-M36). 
Leader: CRUN. Participants: FUND. 
Subtask T2.2.1 Identification of VOCs and potential biomarkers related to the infection of potato tubers with the 
selected pathogens. Leader: CRUN. 
CRUN will analyse t he headspace of small potato microcosm stored under con ducive conditions for disease 
development using Thermal Desorption-Gas Chromatography-Time of Flight-Mass Spectrometry (TD-GC-ToF-MS). 
Biomonitoring TD tubes will be used for the selection of  low/medium molecular weight compounds. The 
methodology has been selected as allows a high fold concentration of the volatile compounds produced. An initial 
identification of compounds and a non -targeted metabolomic analysis will be carried out using specific format files 
(ELU and FIN files) by AMDIS (Automated Mass Spe ctral Deconvolution and Identification System) based on the 
2014 NIST library56 
Subtask T2.2.2 Quantification of VOC biomarkers under simulated postharvest storage conditions. Leader. CRUN. 
The preliminary target compounds identified in T2.2.1 will be investigated by CRUN. Both, commercial potato 
cultivars (n=2) and varieties selected from WP1 will be stored under simulated commercial scenarios. Once presence 
of some key VOC species has been confirmed the right standards will be purchased from VOCs and calibration curves 
built for analysis determination of VOC concentrations.  
T2.3 Building up portable tools able to perform real time early detection of diseases in plants and tubers for 
potato warehouses (M6-M48). Leader IRIS. Participants: FUND, CRUN, UPOL. 
Subtask T2.3.1 Development of a portable VOCs sensor for potato warehouses. Leader: FUND. 
FUND will develop an array of electrochemical sensors for the early detection of potato diseases. El ectrochemical 
sensors will detect the concentration of VOCs selected as biomarkers in task 2.2. For this purpose, FUND will select 
suitable supports for the sensitive material, focusing mainly on Interdigital electrodes and three electrodes 
configuration. Sensitive material will be based on MOFs or conductive polymers such as Polyaniline or 
Polythiophenes compounds which are able to detect several VOCs. Suitable electrochemical technique will be 
employed (potentiometry, amperometry or chemiresistive) depending on the sensing material selected for the optimal 
biomarker. Different inks containing sensitive materials, binders, surfactants, and other additives will be developed 
in to cover the surface of the electrodes. Each sensor will be characterised using electrochemical techniques and 
microscopy. The array of sensors will be tested with pure, binary, and tertiary mixtures of biomarkers in order to know 
the possible interferences among sensors. In case of the interferences were high, an e -nose could be develo ped in 
order to improve the selectivity and accuracy of the array to make predictive measures. IRIS will integrate the sensors 
developed by FUND into a printed circuit board (PCB), this PCB will contain components for powering up the sensors 
and signal conditioning components for measuring changes in the range of mV and µA. The PCB will be able to 
convert the electrical signal coming from the sensor array, generating a digital signal compatible with the user 
platform. Finally, a full sensor prototype (array plus electronics) will be validated using accelerated tests at lab scale 
introducing the sensors in a chamber containing 10Kg of infected potatoes. 
Subtask T2.3.2 Digital platform design: Specifications, methods and preliminary requirements. Leader: IRIS.  
The initial specifications and protocols for the digital platform design will be determined. In collaboration with other 
partners involved in WP2, IRIS will perform an exhaustive study for the road mapping and designing of the different 
layers and domains that will conform the digital platform. Also, an assessment of the data sources and data formats 
will be performed to upgrade the government, utilisation, and optimisation of the resulting platform. 
Subtask T2.3.3 Mobile app development, integration, and optimisation. Leader: IRIS. 
IRIS will develop the digital platform for the data gathering and data analysis; based on the specifications resulting 
from T2.3.2 . Here, a compendium of micro -architectures supporting a global backend -frontend system will be 
produced. The digital tool wil l count also with an adaptable application allowing it to operate also from portable 
devices such as tablets and smartphones. The system will also include a user -friendly top layer for practical and 
satisfactory experience, optimised to the end-users needs. In addition, the platform will be able to host optimised AI-
based algorithms (Decision Support System - DSS), which will be the core element for the real -time in-field image 
analysis of the potato contaminants with a single shooting of the product. After the system has been optimised in the 
next task 2.4, it will be ready for deployment and validation (WP4). 
T2.4: AI-based models for the decision support system (DSS) development, implementation, and optimisation 
(M12-M48). Leader: FUND. Participants: IRIS, ECSA. 
The DSS will be developed in accordance with the insights determined and provided by tasks T2.1 and T2.2 regarding 
the biomarkers and VOC s detection and identification. Employing the raw data provided from lab/pilot scale trial 
(T2.2) and commercial storage (potato warehouse trials in WP4) will be processed by Machine Learning techniques 
to provide a higher-level information, and fused with different data sources, related to the KPIs. The DSS will include 
two very differentiated sets of AI-based algorithms: one set will be correspondent to the image-analysis for the real-
 
56 National Institute of Standard and Technology, US Government. 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 30 of 45 
time detection of potato pest diseases; and another set will be linked to the prediction of pest and disease spreading 
based on climate change and globalisation influences. 
Subtask T2. 4.1 Context risk model of pest and disease spreading based on climate change and globali sation 
influences (Data driven climate model). Leader: FUND. 
The objective is to identify whether current meteorological and environmental conditions are favourable for the CLso 
spread in European territory, in accordance with the scenario already existing in Ecuador.  Furthermore, it will be 
studied whether climate change will generate these conditions in Europe and an estimate will be made regarding the 
timing of its appearance in case the data can represent this knowledge.  For this purpose, there  will be developed a 
model capable of comparing the context and ecosys tem of pest-free areas, particularly Europe, and areas where the 
pest has been detected in Ecuador. The model will be powered by current and historical climatological data provided 
by ECSA, as well as other possible data on the current and past context taken from bibliographic sources, focusing 
especially on the bibliography on environmental forecasts caused by climate change. 
Subtask T2.4.2 Predictive model development based on AI algorithms for the early detection tool (app) of the pest 
and diseases. Leader: FUND. 
In this subtask, a predictive model based on Machine Learning techniques will be designed and developed by FUND 
for the prediction/classification of pest diseases mobile app. The data used to learn will be provided from the study of 
phenotypes (T2.1), VOCs biomarkers (T2.2), and resistance gene information including G WAS results (WP1). The 
data in image format drives the techniques used from the Deep Learning area, with all other inputs included in the 
model as contextual or complementary information. After the model has been designed and implemented, it will be 
trained in a first stage with the available data. After that, the machine learning models will be validated on WP4, both 
on plant and postharvest potato tube rs. The data genera ted during the validation process will be used to refine the 
models and improve the quality of the results. 
Deliverables: D2.1 Identification of phenotyping traits in infected plants and tubers (UPOL, M36 ); D2.2 VOCs 
biomarkers identification and quantification results (CRUN, M36); D2.3 Development of a portable VOCs sensor for 
potato warehouses  (FUND, M36) ; D2.4 Alpha version of PATAFEST d igital platform design development for 
validation (IRIS, M20); D2.5 DSS design, development, and optimisation for the early detection of potatoes diseases 
and pest spreading. (IRIS, M42); D2.6 AI-based algorithms developments for the real-time detection of potato diseases 
and prediction of pest and disease spreading (FUND, M48). 
 
Work Package No. WP3 Starting date / Ending date  M1/ M40 
Work Package title Prevention Strategies Based on Sustainable Solutions (Leader: FUND) 
Objectives  
• Provide natural and sustainable solutions to prevent pest spread by controlling the vector in potato plants.  
• Investigate biocontrol solutions and controlled atmosphere strategies to reduce postharvest disease incidence and 
severity. 
• Reduce the incidence of CLso and post-harvest pathogens in potato crop increasing plant health status thanks to 
the optimised nutrient availability and improved plant soil management. 
Description of Work 
T3.1 Natural plant solution with repellent and anti-adhesive properties against CLso vector (M1-M36). 
Leader TECHN.  
TECHN will study the evaluation of various formulations to assess different possible processes to prepare coatings 
based on their wetting and self-cleaning properties on a plant leaf model substrate. Concentration screening of specific 
fatty acids and solvents; air/liquid ratio and rate of spraying will be determined.  
In parallel to the previous activity, TECHN will screen essential oils as repellent solution against psyllids BC (via 
potato aphid mode such as Myzus persicae) and will study their integration into the wax precursors. Screening for 
repellence and deterred oviposition using of the model will employ laboratory bioassays of both choice and non -
choice tests. Subsequently, the most potent essential oil mixtures will be incorporated into the wax precursors. 
Tests with the most promising wax formulations (passive and with added essential oils) will be carry out to establish 
relationships between the coating structure/composition and the resulting wetting, thermal and mechanical properties 
characterisation. Wetting properties for coating quality will be assessed via state-of-the-art characterisation techniques 
for the texture, crystallinity, preferred orientation, size , and strain of the formed wax crystals size; different micros-
copy determinations for mechanical, chemical composition and homogeneity; thermal stability analysis. 
The results collected will be used as an initial benchmark for further formulations that will be developed. 
The stability of the most promising coatings against different types of environmental stresses will be evaluated by 
exposure to various levels of humidity, UV light and temperature conditions for extended periods of time. First 
screening will be performed at TECHN. Then, a suitable test schedule will be established with sets of normed test 
procedures to mimic conditions relevant to coatings for potato plant leaves. These tests will be carried out using 
specialised climate chambers that will simulate various varying weathering conditions present.  
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 31 of 45 
Comprehensive study of the antibiofouling, antimicrobial and vector-repellent properties of the resulting coatings will 
be carried out. Anti-adhesive properties provided by the wax coatings on target substrates and different environmental 
conditions will be investigated and quantified.  
Characterisation of leaves photosynthetic activity, transpiration rate, and super -hydrophobicity by wax coating 
treatment will be evaluated. Morphological features of the coatings using different spraying techniques and conditions 
will be assessed using SEM. Coating thickness, uniformity, its elasticity during leaf tissue expansion and persistence 
will be evaluated under SEM observations.  
T3.2 Postharvest biocontrol coating solutions and controlled atmosphere technologies (M1-M36). Leader: 
FUND. Participants: CRUN. 
FUND supported by CRUN will carry out in vitro and in in vivo explorations testing biocontrol  effect of both 
Lactoperoxide system enzyme (LPS) and antagonisti c yeast incorporated into edible coatings against soil -borne 
pathogens responsible of the postharvest potato diseases as C. coccodes, H solani, F sambucinum. 
For the in vitro analysis, Lactoperoxidase system enzymes (LPS) will be prepared adjusting the ratio of the different 
components and the enzymatic activity will be assessed. W. anomalus will be also prepared at different concentrations 
to be tested against target soil -borne pathogens. Turbidity test will be carried out against the soil -borne pathogen 
candidates to identify the optimal antimicrobial concentration of LPS and antagonistic yeast.  
Once obtained the optimal antimicrobial concentration, solution of enzymes and antagonist yeast will be incorporated 
into water based edible coating. Coating solutions will be composed by several ingredients/additives as 
polysaccharides, lipids ana other functional compounds (surfactants, emulsifiers, antioxidants, etc.) edible coatings 
should provide improved barrier to gases and good mechanical properties to completely cover the surface and reduce 
senescence of the products treated.  
In vitro studies will be performed to assess the antimicrobial activity of film -forming solutions including agar disk 
diffusion, dilution methods, spore germination assay, enumeration by plate count method, and film surface inoculation 
test. Besides, barrier properties as oxygen and water vapour permeability, mechanical properties, gloss, viscosity, 
colour, surface tensions etc, will be determined.  
Formulation prototypes, that best results showed in in vitro studies, will be tested in in vivo on potato surface, and 
stored under control (air/commercial industrial conditions) and different controlled atmospheres (CO2:0,5-10%; O2:2-
5%) Real-time respiration rate and pathogen incidence (presence or absence) and severity (% of total surface affected) 
and quality parameters as starch content, dry weight, reducing sugars will be evaluated during storage. Moreover, a 
full metabolomic approach will be carried out by means of LC -MS/MS to identify non-volatile biomarkers, such as 
phenolic compounds, non -structural carbohydrates. and plant growth regulators  linked to the development of the 
pathogens during potato postharvest storage. 
T3.3 Application of PHTS as a technology to select tolerance increasing formulation against pest and disease 
(M1-M36) Leader UPOL. Participants: FUND, TECHN, UNIBO. 
Rapid PHTS method with model plant Arabidopsis will be used by UPOL for simultaneous assessment of potential 
phytotoxic effects of natural plant solution with repellent and anti -adhesive properties developed by TECHN . 
Individual components of the formulati on, their combinations in different concentration ratios will be screened by 
foliar application on Arabidopsis seedlings grown in 24 -well plates in controlled conditions in a dose -dependent 
manner. Periodically, the dynamics of growth and colour changes in the rosettes will be monitored using non-invasive 
top-view RGB imaging. The obtained morphological and physiological traits of the treated and non-treated plants will 
be compared and the components or their combinations with negative effects will be repor ted. The overall effect of 
the candidate formulations for the final product on the morphological and physiological status of potato plants will be 
then assessed by multisensor PHT Potato plants of selected genotypes will be grown in pots in the OloPhen platform 
under controlled conditions simulating the targeting field environment. The repellent solutions will be sprayed in 
different concentrations and doses and the plant vigour will be analysed to the detail by RGB, thermal, hyperspectral, 
and fluorcam sen sors. Similar approach will be applied in the case of testing of the postharvest biocontrol coating 
solutions developed by FUND. Rapid PHTS method will be used to support the quantitative testing of the effect of 
formulation prototypes on pathogen incidence (presence or absence) and severity (% of total surface affected).  
T3.4 Plant soil management strategies (M1-M36). Leader: UNIBO. Participant: CRUN. 
Chitin (chitosan) and calcium carbonate -based products, obtained from processing of biomasses res idues and 
agricultural waste (e.g., seafood), will be used as carrier(s) of nutrient elements. Carrier(s) will be bound to phosphate 
group(s) and functionalised with elements (micronutrients). The efficiency of the functionalisation will be proved by 
elemental analysis (ICP) and release test in selected chemical media (e.g., relevant buffers). The compounds obtained 
will be applied, as amendments, directly on soil in experimental potato production plots under controlled conditions. 
Different ways of application (liquid dispersion, solid etc.), doses and treatment timing will be compared.  
The trials will evaluate the treatments effect on soil elements bioavailability of each microelement content in potato 
leaves and in tuber at diffe rent stages of the production cycle. A general nutritional status of the plants will be also 
checked at the end of each growth cycle of the plants. Both untreated and chemical fertilised soils will be considered 
as control treatments. The best experimental conditions will be repeated in a second cycle under controlled conditions 
extending the trial to further potato varieties to improve robustness of results obtained. 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 32 of 45 
To test the effects on the potato plant health status of the innovative fertilisation unde r CLSo infection, trials will be 
carried out exclusively in a dedicated section of UNIBO greenhouse following the European standard good practices.  
Trial experiments will be set on potato plants from the better performing variety, chosen according to the accumulation 
of selected elements that will be grown on untreated soil, as negative control, and on soil where fertili sation will be 
applied by previously defined protocols optimizing the nutrient bioavailability. 
Under the described experimental conditions, the pathogen infection will be applied at different times, within growing 
stages from sprout development and tuber initiation, in different and subsequent experiments. Plant infection will be 
obtained by grafting to decipher the direct effect of nutrients on pathogen development on its host. 
The infection level and the biological activity of CLSo in potato tissues (leaves and tubers) will be assessed by visual 
screening and, respectively, by a Droplet Digital PCR (ddPCR) and RT-ddPCR.  
The experimental conditions returning the highest protection level of potato plants against CLSo, will be repeated as 
previously described in a new complete production cycle, including different potato varieties, to validate the results 
obtained. Tubers produced under the described experimental conditions will be also assessed for resistance to post -
harvest pathogens. Specifically, tubers collected from trials showing improved nutrients elements accumulation will 
be used in post -harvest conditions experimen ts to evaluate changes in the susceptibility to post -harvest pathogens 
such as F. sambucinum. C. coccodes, and H. solani, Before or during storage, artificial inoculation will be applied 
sparing a conidia suspension of the selected pathogen at wounded surface of the tubers at different time after injury. 
According to the pathogen behaviour the progression of the infection will be monitored at different time by visual 
scoring while data analysis will search for tuber lots from fertilisation trials that minim ize pathogen growing when 
compared to tubers form untreated soil. 
At CRUN the effect of extreme climate conditions (e.g., prolonged period of drought) as expected under future climate 
change scenarios on potato plant growth, tuber production and disease severity will be tested under controlled 
environment conditions. Large 1 m 3 lysimeters in the new Agri -Tech supported Plant Phenotyping and Soil Health 
facilities will be used to grow potatoes in a well-draining sandy loam soil. Lysimeters are placed on balances to record 
water usage of each and steer an automated irrigation system, supported by soil moisture sensors recording  wetness 
at depth, to maintain predetermined soil wetness and allow to impose drought stress. Triplicate lysimeters with and 
without drought stress and plus or minus introduction of diseases (viz., black dot, silver scurf, dry rot) will be 
compared for the effect on growth, tuber development, tuber disease severity upon harvesting and following storage 
in our postharvest facilities. Belowground cameras will be used to monitor tuber and root development; a phenotyping 
platform will scan all lysimeters in the  glasshouse at fortnightly intervals. Sensors include 3D laser (monitoring 
growth), Thermal (stress, transpiration), hyperspectral (pest and disease) and RGB (development, pest, and disease). 
Results will be correlated with those observed in the experiments carried out in T2.1.3. 
T3.5. Sustainable solutions feasibility manufacturing at pilot plant  (M14-M40). Leader CHEM. Participants: 
FUND, TECHN, UNIBO. 
CHEM as an expert industrial developer of crop protection products  developed, will be in charge to manufacture 
natural plant solution with repellent and anti -adhesive properties, postharvest biocontrol coatings and alternative 
biofertilizer soil treatment at pre -industrial (pilot plant) scale (TRL5). Several optimisation steps wil l be further 
included to have a defined production protocol for each final product.  FUND TECHN and UNIBO as solutions 
developer, will support CHEM on the manufacturing process. Periodically, functional activity of each solution 
manufactured will be evaluated during a defined storage shelf life (maintaining antimicrobial activity, e.g.). Besides, 
pre-industrial manufacturing will be carried out according to standard of  quality, safety, and respect for the 
environment (toxicity assessments) . For  this, quality and toxicity analysis will be determined on the solutions 
produced. Finally, required amounts of each solution will be manufactured to be tested in field validation trials during 
the WP4 execution. 
Deliverables: D3.1 Natural plant solution with repellent and anti-adhesive properties developments (TECHN, M36); 
D3.2 Postharvest biocontrol coating solutions and controlled atmosphere technologies  developments (FUND, M36); 
D3.3 Application of PHTS results (UPOL, M36).; D3.4 Plant soil management strategies report (UNIBO, M36); D3.5 
Report of sustainable solutions manufacturing for pilot plant trials (CHEM, M40). 
 
Work Package No. WP4 Starting date / Ending date  M12 / M48 
Work Package title Pest and disease management integration. Leader: ANEC 
Objectives  
• Implement the technologies developed and carry out plant bioassays trials against CLso pest disease in an intended 
environments beyond Europe (e.g., Ecuador). 
• Validate the postharvest technology and soil treatment solution at TRL5. 
• Carry out a techno-economic analysis, environmental and social benefits. 
• Define measures for the implementation of new policy initiatives and decisions. 
Description of Work 
T4.1 Validation field trials against CLso pest disease under real condition in Ecuador (M20-M48). Leader: 
INIAP. Participants: CHEM. 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 33 of 45 
Subtask 4.1.1 Testing potato varieties against BC and CLso. Leader: INIAP. 
CLso-infected BC collected from Zebra Chip affected research plots in INIAP Research Station  (Sta. Catalina , 
Ecuador) and maintained at INIAPs facilities will be used for these experiments. Selected potato varieties (at least 30) 
from T 1.3 and other origins (Europe) will be tested under greenhouse and field conditions for resistance/tolerance to 
BC and CLso. Under green house to inoculate plants, five potato psyllids from a INIAPs laboratory colony will be 
released at the base of individual plants within each cage (40 psyllids/cage). Choice and non-choice experiments for 
BC will be developed according to T1.4.2 procedure. The best materials for resistance/tolerance to BC and CLso will 
be selected for field test under natural conditions, information about severity, incidence, number of BC adults, nymphs 
will be recorded based on weekly monitoring and chip tuber quality will be evaluated. 
Subtask 4.1.2 Validation of digital tool under natural conditions of CLso infections in potato. Leader: INIAP. 
Digital tool build up for the early detection and surveillance of CLso infections in potato plants, will be tested under 
greenhouse conditions with confirmed potato CLso infected with BC at different phenological development stages, 
plants with different symptoms expression and tubers, compared with healthy controls.  Under field conditions digital 
tool previously tested will be validated in potato plants and tubers infected with ZC. 
Subtask T4.1.3 Validation of free natural solutions against BC. Leader: INIAP. 
In in vitro potato plantlets will be planted into individual pots in greenhouse,  BC adults obtained from an CLso -
positive INIAPs colony will be reared on potato plants. At least six biorational insecticides solutions manufactured 
by CHEM with potential to control BC will be chosen to carry out bioassays on potato plants . Adult behaviour, 
mortality number of adults, eggs and nymphs will be measured on leaflets. The biorational products with better control 
of BC will be evaluated under field conditions using large plots (at least 2 ha).  
ECSA supported by INIAP will hold two co-creative workshops with potato small-scale farmers in Ecuador. In the 
first one, an overall dissemination of the PataFEST  project will be shared amongst the participants explaining the 
strategy approaches and solution to implement. In the second workshops, farmers will have the change to carry out 
free trials of a selected biorational insecticides solution on potato plants i n their facilities and evaluate the repellent 
effectiveness against BC. 
T4.2 Validation of postharvest technologies under real conditions in European potato warehouses (M20-M48). 
Leader: AB. Participants: FUND, CHEM, BOEH, ECSA, TERREA. 
Subtask T4.2.1 Validation of postharvest biocontrol solution. Leader: TERREA. 
Validation of postharvest technologies will be carried out in AB (UK), TERREA (France) and BOEH (Germany) 
warehouses on two ware potato varieties including organic crops: one common potato variety (Vivaldi or La Vie) for 
all the countries involved and a second one variety different selected for each geographical area. 
CHEM will ship solutions to warehouses and application will be done by dipping potato in a tank or surface sprayed 
and let dried before the entrance in the storage chambers. At least 2 tons of potato (per year) will be tested and stored 
during conventional storage period. Trials will be validated  on both organic and conventional potato tubers during 
two postharvest seasons. 
Subtask T4.2.2 Validation of portable tools for postharvest warehouse. Leader: BOEH. 
VOCs portable sensor devices developed in WP3 will be also validated by the same partners in potato warehouses. 
Potato samples will be placed in potato vented boxes and introduced into a storage chamber (100Kg  potato). To 
concentrates organic volatiles generated from potato samples, pallets will be wrapped into semipermeable (avoiding 
the complete absence of oxygen) or introduced in a methacrylate storage chamber. Real time VOCs monitoring will 
be done during a defined period of 6-7 months per each potato postharvest season. Trials will be validated during two 
potato postharvest seasons. Periodically, presence of soil -borne pathogen incidence (presence or absence), severity 
(% of total surface affected) and quality determinations as sucrose and reducing sugars will be determined. 
App digital tool developed in WP2 for the early detection of postharvest pathogen developed will be also validate in 
potato tubers stored in warehouse. During the storage, the app will be used to acquire information from the pathogen 
evolution, periodically. Validation will be done during two potato postharvest seasons.  
T4.3 Evaluation of soil treatment solutions and potato plant pesticide free natural solutions under real 
cultivation conditions in European countries (M20-M48). Leader: UDAPA. Participants: CHEM, UNIBO, 
BOEH, ECSA, ANEC, TERREA, AB. 
Validation of soil treatment solutions will be carried out in UDAPA (Spain), TERREA (France) and BOEH (Germany) 
under real conditions. Solutions will be shipped by CHEM evaluated on at least 2 ha including both organic and 
conventional potato crops during two growing seasons. Periodically, soil quality will be determined by UNIBO 
analysing macronutrients content (N,  P, K) and presence of soil -borne pathogens (metagenomics analysis) for the 
evaluation of soil health. 
Potato pesticide free natural solution will be also tested in European potato fields by UDAPA (Spain), TERREA 
(France) BOEH (Germany) and AB (UK) against aphids’ threats. Pesticide free natural solution will be tested on plant 
by spraying application on 1 ha of fields. Natural solution effectiveness was measured by the presence of aphids 
(number of captures) through locating insect sticky traps close to the plant both treated and control. 
Besides, ECSA and ANEC will hold three co-creative workshops with citizens that have urban gardens in Berlin -
Bradenburg region and small horticulture crop farmers  in Spain. During these workshops, PataFEST will be 
introduced and the opportunity to carry out free trails of natural solutions for plant and soil will be provid ed to the 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 34 of 45 
participants. By this way, citizens will feel involved in the PataFEST scientific activities and during workshop their 
concerns and questions related the integration of strategies to overcome emerging crops pest and disease threats will 
be addressed to PataFEST expert partners. 
T4.4 Technical and economic assessment (TEA), Environmental Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) and Social LCA 
(M12-M48). Leader: AINIA, Participant: All. 
Subtask T4.4.1 Technical and economic assessment. Leader: AINIA. 
Technical viability & readiness for each strategy will be individually validated with the support of the partners 
involved in the project.  AINIA will analyse the technical and economic feasi bility of the three different strategies 
developed in previous WPs. Outcomes will be assessed via a sensibility and risk analysis to determine potential hot 
spots limiting the feasibility of a technology and elucidating the best strategy for industrial imp lementation. Cost 
estimations and profitable analysis will be conducted.  
Subtask T4.4.2 Environmental Life Cycle Assessment, Social Life Cycle Assessment and Life Cycle Cost Analysis. 
Leader: AINIA. Participant. All 
This subtask embodies the assessment of the potential environmental impacts of the three strategies tested in 
PataFEST according to ISO 14040/14044. AINIA will develop specific questionnaires to collect inventory data from 
experimental applied strategies developed in previous WPs. The environmental impact categories to be included in 
the analysis are among others: GHG emissions, primary energy demand, and resource depletion, and complemented 
with additional impact categories based on EU ILCD and PEF methods. The social impacts and socio -economic 
benefits of P ataFEST strategies will be assessed following the UNEP -SETAC guideline for S -LCA. The activity 
variables will be determined, subcategories for the LCSA will be defined and key stakeholders will be identified. The 
S-LCA will follow a similar structure and will be conducted in parallel to the E -LCA. The total cost of  ownership 
including the capital, operational costs and cost reductions resulting for the P ataFEST strategies will be analysed by 
performing an LCC analysis in parallel to the LCA (in terms of functional unit and approach). The analysis will be 
developed in two steps: cost identification and cost benefits analysis. Based on obtained CAPEX and OPEX, financial 
indicators (e.g., NPV) will be calculated to assess the economic feasibility of PataFEST. 
T4.5 Policy Recommendations (M12-M48). Leader: EUPAT. Participant: All. 
The aim of this task is to provide feedback to policy measures generated by the project that will contribute to 
designing, monitoring, reviewing, and rectifying (if necessary) existing policy and programmatic measures or shaping 
and supporting the implementation of new policy initiatives and decisions. For this purpose, the main current EU 
policies will be identified, and their different aspects of sustainable development will be analysed and assessed, 
including how to incorporate social and economic aspects into those policies. To create real impact with their work, 
all partners will translate the policy recommendations into their national language(s) and will widely disseminate them 
among relevant stakeholders in the policy and decision-making cycle. Most of them ANEC, EUPAT, JRC, etc. have 
several years of experience in lobbying and advocacy work, they can make use for this of already existing networks 
and contacts. The same applies for the European recommendations. These recommendations will be sent to the EC, 
the European Parliament, the Committee of the Regions and multiplicator European networks, the Commission Expert 
Group on Plant Health Legislation. 
Deliverables: D4.1 Validation field trials against CLso pest disease under real condition in Ecuador (INIAP, M48); 
D4.2 Validation of postharvest technologies tested in European potato warehouses (AB, M48); D4.3 Validation of 
natural and sustainable solutions for potato plant and soil under real cultivation conditions (UDAPA, M48); D4.4 
Report on TEA, LCA and LCC methodologies (AINIA, M30, M48); D.4.5 Policy recommendation report (EUPAT, 
M40). 
 
 
Work Package No. WP5 Starting date / Ending date M1 / M48 
Work Package title Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation (Leader: KNEIA) 
Objectives  
• Enable potential future exploitation of the project results by disseminating them to the relevant stakeholders.  
• Ensure project’s findings are widely communicated to the scientific community and the general public.  
• Document undertaken and proposed dissemination and communication activities.  
• Ensure the project results reach the relevant stakeholders who will use and implement them. 
• Guarantee IPR management according to the Guidelines of the EC within the Consortium Agreement 
• Ensure clustering and coordination with other related EU/National projects and initiatives. 
• Attract business partners and potential stakeholders and to create market demand. 
Description of Work 
T5.1 Communication activities (M1-M48). Leader: EUPAT. Participants: All. 
Subtask 5.1.1 Communication Plan and reporting on communication: Leader: EUPAT.  EUPAT, with the support 
of KNEIA and FUND, will draw up a Communication Plan, as part of the PDEC (D5.3), to mobilise stakeholders’ 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 35 of 45 
interests and secure their support to the project. This plan will be closely linked with the dissemination activities, and 
it will follow the steps described in section 2.2.  
Subtask 5.1.2 Project website: Leader: KNEIA. A project’s website will be developed by KNEIA and managed by 
KNEIA, EUPAT and FUND. It will serve as a communication tool to all target audiences and it will host a restricted 
access area for partners to store information and facilitate file sharing and internal communication. The public site 
will present the project brand and non -confidential project information, including infographics presenting the 
strategic, competitive and economic benefits, the PataFEST open access publications, etc. The platform will enable 
to disseminate non -confidential results (public reports, deliverables, publications as part of our green open access, 
etc.). It will also house on-line training tools and educational materials and will incorporate 2 official project videos. 
At the end of the project, the relevant public information and results will be kept as the central virtual hub for post -
project activities. 
Subtask 5.1.3 Communication and promotional materials: Leader: EUPAT. Project leaflets, posters, project video, 
newsletters and promotional materials (gadgets for tradeshows, etc.) will be designed by KNEIA with the strong 
support of EUPAT and shared with all partners in order to support project communication and branding efforts. Two 
dissemination videos – an introductory video on M6 for the general public and a dissemination report video at the 
end of the project describing the final results - will be developed. They will be published on PataFEST’s main 
communication channels (Y ouTube, website, and social media profiles) as well on EUPAT and other project’s 
partners’ channels to raise awareness and engage stakeholders with project pilots and to promote uptake after the end 
of the project. These materials will be reported and Annexed to the Communication Plan as part of the PDEC.  
Subtask 5.1.4 Social/digital media channels: Leader: KNEIA. This subtask will exploit the potential of reaching our 
targeted audiences through social media channels: a social media grid will be drawn up; it will plot the most 
appropriate social media channel for targeting specific audiences. Appropriate pages will be designed for each channel 
and a content maintenance plan will be put in place for managing the streams of information to secure and maintain 
followers. Social and digital media will contribute to create ‘communities of support’ to the project. Tools such as 
Twitter, LinkedIn and YouTube will be used. Visual media, videos, animations, icons and info-graphic imagery, and 
importantly, mobile enabled content and richer content experiences will be developed by KNEIA with the support of 
EUPAT and other partners. 
T5.2 PataFEST dissemination (M1-M48). Leader: KNEIA. Participants: All. 
A dissemination plan will be developed as part of the PDEC, building on the preliminary plan in Section 2.2 and in 
complete alignment with the principles of Open Science. The following activities will be executed : i) Publishing at 
least 6/8 scientific articles in journals and conferences (after preliminary IP protection check); ii) generation of at 
least 60 “practice abstracts” to contribute to EIP -AGRI repository; iii) organising special webinars and scientific 
workshops; iv) targeted placement of articles  and features in relevant trade and industry focused publications; v) 
organisation of the “PataFEST Agenda” of events that will be planned for the 48-month project duration: trade fairs, 
exhibitions, workshops, seminars, conferences, round tables, etc., that the consortium is already planning to attend or 
organising as part of ongoing activities. The target is 24 existing events  as well as the organisation of dedicated  
project workshops and webinars: 2 intermediate workshops with brother projects, a final conference (M48) will be 
organised in Spain (FUND and KNEIA) to showcase results/impacts, 3 citizen science workshops to test PataFEST’s 
natural solutions for plant and soil in citizens’ own urban gardens and farmers (T4.3) and 8 citizen science webinars 
(ECSA). 
T5.3 Exploitation of results and Business model (M1-M48). Leader: KNEIA. Participants: All. 
A draft of the Exploitation Plan will be delivered as part of the PDEC (D5.3,). Built on the information already 
provided in Section 2.2, the Exploitation Plan will be structured as follows: i) the planned key exploitable results 
and their expected key applications: development status, facts and figures that facilitate the assessment of the potential 
impact, differences from existing competing products/services, main IPR issues to be clarified in the consortium 
agreement; ii) the exploitation team: partners  involved in the exploitation activities providing information on their 
previous experience and business interests, complementing external resources if not in the consortium; iii) the market: 
the potential geographical and economic size of the market, mark et trends, main competitors and competitive 
advantage; iv) Business model including marketing strategy and main clients: will be elaborated using CANVAS 
methodology adapted to the relevant target markets. Results ownership list will be included in the final periodic report 
as well as in the final version of PDEC. 
T5.4 PataFEST Clustering (M1-M48). Leader: KNEIA. Participants: All. 
This task will ensure that PATAFEST is networked with relevant national and international projects, initiatives and 
networks. Networking with other projects will ensure knowledge interchange and reuse between previous and future 
projects. A close interaction with other proposals selected for funding under the same or closer topics will be ensured. 
The networking plan will take into account relevant projects within international stakeholders and other EU/national 
projects (some of them identified in Section 1.2). Most of the project partners are members of relevant networks, 
groups and associations. These memberships will be instrumental to promote cooperation and integration with 
PataFEST. Members of consortia of the networked projects will be invited to the 2 intermediate workshops (Task 5.2) 
and exchange of (non -sensitive) information will be implemented (e.g., by exploiting the newsletter or through 
dedicated meetings). One section of the Newsletter (Task 5.1) will be dedicated to the information on other ongoing 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 36 of 45 
projects and exchange of newsletters from the other connected projects will be pursued. The progress of this task will 
be reported in the PDEC. 
T5.5 Multi-Actor Participatory Platform (MAPP) (M1-M48). Leader: KNEIA. Participants: All. 
The project will develop the MAPP (D5.4), an ad hoc online platform within PataFEST’s website to ensure 
identification, engagement, inclusion and active participation of relevant stakeholders of the potato value chain and 
their diverse perspectives (including the Quadruple Helix –Government, Industry, Academia and Civil Society- plus 
policy makers, relevant associations and coordinators of other projects in the same topic ). The MAPP will act as 
instrument for knowledge sharing and engagement with both other successful operating and future HE projects. The 
role of this platform will be to organise, structure and offer a place for knowledge sharing for supporting users in their 
valorisation decisions, while collecting feedback and expectations of relevant stakeholders & end-users on the project 
activities and results. Thus, a dedicated section with all the citizen of science activities will dedicated. This collected 
information will contribute to define common development campaigns aimed to unlock the potentials of the project 
exploitation strategies in different EU Countries. All stakeholders identified will be invited to participate in an online 
survey designed to measure stakeholder characteristics, knowledge, interests and expectations relevant for the project. 
Based on the outcome of the survey, more tar geted dissemination and exploitation actions will be implemented and 
relationships built with key stakeholders to the project. Survey results will feed the revision of the PDEC (D5.3). 
Deliverables: D5.1 Project Website (KNEIA, M6); D5.2: Project Videos (KNEIA, M6, M48); D5.3 PDEC - Plan for 
the dissemination, exploitation and communication activities (KNEIA, M6, M24, M36); D5.4: Multi-Actor 
Participatory Platform (KNEIA, M30, M48). 
 
Work Package No. WP6 Starting date / Ending date  M1 / M48 
Work Package title Project Management (Leader: FUND) 
Objectives  
• Coordinate and manage the project and the efficient, smooth, and timely execution of all activities. 
• Ensure an accurate and on time communication flow among the project partners and with the EC to track the 
project progress and meet its objectives. 
• Complete the project within the agreed time schedule and budget. 
Description of Work 
T6.1 Administrative & Financial Management (M1-M48). Leader: FUND; Participants: All. 
FUND will be responsible for the administrative coordination of the project, delivery and follow -up of all 
administrative documents required by the EC, and keeping the cons ortium up to date of any information 
communicated by the EC. All the administrative procedures will be defined both in the consortium agreement and on 
the project manual; this will cover management, reporting, documents, review, general quality assurance, standards, 
etc. The quality control will be important to check that all contributions and conclusions are consistent and meet the 
requirements for the deliverables, reports, and other documents. The coordinator will be responsible for the economic 
coordination of the project, including follow-up and delivery of all financial documents required by the EC and will 
distribute the EC contribution amongst the partners according to the GA and CA. 
T6.2 Scientific, decision-making and risk management (M1-M48). Leader: NEIK; Participants: All. 
The main decisions of the project will be taken by the Scientific Coordinator ( NEIK). All decisions will be 
implemented through regular 6 -monthly consortium meetings. The project progress and any deviations will be 
reported to the project coordinator continuously, and to the Steering Committee by half-yearly meetings, to evaluate 
the Project’s scientific progress and any need of eventual corrective measures. The risks and mitigation/contingency 
measures in Section 3.1.4 will be continuously monitored and updated.  
T6.3. Data management plan and data interoperability (M1-M48). Leader: FUND; Participants: All. 
A Data Management Plan (DMP) will be developed to ensure that scientific research data will be easily discoverable, 
accessible, assessable, and intelligible, useable beyond the original purpose for which they are collected, as well as 
interoperable to specific quality standards. Procedures for handling research data, data to be shared and published in 
open access, how data will be stored and preserved (during and after the project) and security measures to be 
implemented to prevent unauthorised access to project data and documents will be defined. 
Deliverables: D6.1 Project manual: Guide for the execution of the technical and administrative work (FUND, M6); 
D6.2 Data Management Plan and update version (FUND, M6, M24, M48). 
3.1.1 List of work packages 
WP Work Package Title No Leader P/M Start 
Month 
End 
month 
1 Pest monitoring and resistance potato varieties selection 2 NEIK 118 1 48 
2 Early detection and surveillance tools 4 IRIS 223 1 48 
3 Prevention strategies based on sustainable solutions 1 FUND 190 1 40 
4 Pest and disease management integration strategies 15 ANEC 175 12 48 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 37 of 45 
5 Dissemination, communication and exploitation of results 5 KNEIA 126 1 48 
6 Project Management 1 FUND 50 1 48 
Total 882   
3.1.2 List of deliverables 
Del. # Deliverable name WP Participant Type Diss. 
level 
Delivery 
date 
D1.1 Monitoring results of CLso spreading pattern 1 UPOL R CO M36 
D1.2 Catalogue of Potato RGs with SNP information 1 NEIK R CO M18 
D1.3 Genotypic Potato Chip data and SPET data 1 NEIK R CO M30 
D1.4 Association study results, predicted performance data and 
selection of most promising RG for pest and postharvest diseases 1 NEIK R CO M36 
D1.5 Result databases and bioinformatics tool for publication and 
dissemination actions. 1 NEIK OTHER PU M48 
D2.1 Identification of phenotyping traits in infected plants and tubers. 2 UPOL R CO M36 
D2.2 VOCs biomarkers identification and quantification results 2 CRUN R CO M36 
D2.3 Development of a portable VOCs sensor for potato warehouses 2 FUND R CO M36 
D2.4 Alpha version of PATAFEST digital platform design 
development for validation 2 IRIS OTHER PU M20 
D2.5 DSS design, development, and optimisation for the early 
detection of potatoes diseases and pest spreading 2 IRIS OTHER PU M42 
D2.6 AI-based algorithms developments for the real-time detection of 
potato diseases and prediction of pest and disease spreading 2 FUND OTHER CO M48 
D3.1 Natural plant solution with repellent and anti-adhesive properties 
developments 3 TECHN R CO M36 
D3.2 Postharvest biocontrol coating solutions and controlled 
atmosphere technologies developments 3 FUND R CO M36 
D3.3 Application of PHTS results 3 UPOL R CO M36 
D3.4 Plant soil management strategies report 3 UNIBO R CO M36 
D3.5 Report of sustainable solutions manufacturing for pilot plant 3 CHEM DEM CO M40 
D4.1 Validation field trials against CLso pest disease under real 
condition in Ecuador 4 INIAP DEM CO M48 
D4.2 Validation of postharvest technologies tested in European potato 
warehouses 4 AB DEM CO M48 
D4.3 Validation of natural and sustainable solutions for potato plant 
and soil under real cultivation conditions 4 UDAPA DEM CO M48 
D4.4 Report on TEA, LCA and LCC methodologies 4 AINIA R CO M30, M48 
D4.5 Policy recommendation report 4 EUPAT DEC PU M40 
D5.1 Project Website 5 KNEIA DEC PU M6 
D5.2 Project Videos 5 KNEIA DEC PU M6, M48 
D5.3 PDEC - Plan for the dissemination, exploitation and 
communication activities 5 KNEIA R CO M6, M24, 
M36 
D5.4 Multi-Actor Participatory Platform 5 KNEIA DEC PU M30, M48 
D6.1 Project manual: Guide for the execution of the technical and 
administrative work 6 FUND R CO M6 
D6.2 Data Management Plan and update version 6 FUND DMP CO M6, M24, 
M48 
R: Report; DEC: Dissemination, exploitation, and communication; DMP: Data management plan; DEM: Demonstrator, pilot, prototype, plan designs; OTHER: 
Software, technical diagram, algorithms, models, etc..; CO: Confidential; PU: public. 
3.1.3 List of milestones 
M# Description WP(s) Date Means of verification 
M1.1 Analysis of CLso spread pathway WP1 24 At least 80% of CL so samples will be 
successfully sequenced. 
M1.2 Catalogue of mapped RGs with 
integrated SNP WP1 12 At least 80% of the RG target resources 
will be exploited. 
M1.3 Polymorphic Genotypic Potato 
Chip Data and SPET data WP1 26 
Molecular characterisation of 350 
germplasm collection (SNP chip array 
and SPET) will be analysed. 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 38 of 45 
M# Description WP(s) Date Means of verification 
M1.4 
Bioassays tolerances 
characterisation and validation 
against CLso, psyllid vector and 
postharvest disease. 
WP1 30 
100 potato samples will be 
characterised against the three target 
agents. 
M1.5 
Associate analysis and 
compilation and integration 
resource using bioinformatics 
platform. 
WP1 38 
80% of target tolerances resources 
databases and trait association studies 
will be integrated in the platform. 
M2.1 
Identification and monitoring of 
phenotyping traits (biomarkers) 
through PHTS as a technolog y to 
diagnose the potato health plant. 
WP2 26 
At least 15 different morphological 
and/or physiological as biomarkers will 
be successfully identified using HTPS 
technology. 
 M2.2 
Development of high -
performance portable VOCs 
sensor and digital tool field 
application for the real time early 
detection of ZC and potato 
pathogen disease. 
WP2  36 
Sensors will be able to detect at least 2 
identified VOCs biomarkers. At least 
80% reliability detection performances 
by using mobile application. 
M2.3 
Fitting and prediction 
performance of AI algorithms for  
the early detection of plant pest 
and postharvest pathogens; AI 
algorithm of pest and disease 
spreading based on climate 
change and globalisation. 
WP2, 
WP4 30 
Different means of verification to 
obtain information for different case of 
use and decisions to evaluate. F1: 0.85-
0.9; ROC-AUC (receiver operating 
characteristic-area under curve) : 0.8-
0.85; PR-AUC (precision recall -area 
under curve): 0.75-0.8 
M3.1 
Effectiveness of plant natural and 
sustainable solution with CLso 
repellent action; biocontrol 
solution and controlled 
atmosphere strategies for the 
postharvest pathogen reduction. 
WP3, 
WP4 30 
Application of pesticide free natural 
solutions will reduce the  presence of 
psyllid (BC) by at least 50% and the 
incidence of ZC by 25%. 
Combination of biocontrol coatings and 
controlled atmosphere storage 
treatments will decrease at least 40% 
the incidence of soil-borne pathogen. 
M3.2 
Effective soil management 
strategy to increase plant health 
status. 
WP3, 
WP4 30 
Soil management strategies will reduce 
incidence of CLso and post -harvest 
pathogens in potato crop by 30%. 
M3.3 Sustainable solutions 
manufacturing at pilot plant. WP3 30 
Pesticide free solution for potato plant; 
biocontrol coating and alternative 
biofertilizer for soil prototypes will be 
manufactured producing at least 100L 
per solution. 
M4.1 
Testing technologies in plant 
bioassays trials against CLso pest 
disease in an intended 
environments beyond Europe 
(Ecuador). 
WP4 40 
At least 20  potato varieties having 
resistant traits against CLso  will be 
evaluated in field trials; 2 ha of potato 
plants will be treated using pesticide 
free natural solutions against CLso 
vector; digital tool will be  in field 
performing 90% reliability on the 
diagnostic detection of CLso disease in 
potato crops. 
M4.2 
Validation of the postharvest 
technology and soil treatment 
solution at TRL5. 
WP4 40 
VOCs portable sensors will be 
validated on potato (100 Kg) under real 
postharvest warehouse storage 
condition; postharvest biocontrol 
solution will be tested on 1 ton s of 
potato; digital tool will be operated and 
validated under real conditions. 
M4.3 Integrated TEA, LCA and LCC 
assessment . WP4 36 At least 80% of input and data received 
from all WPs will delivered by partners 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 39 of 45 
M# Description WP(s) Date Means of verification 
M5.1 Development of online multi-
Actor Participatory Platform WP5 36 
Engagement with other successful 
projects under the addressed HE call 
and other future HE projects. 
M5.2 Deploying dissemination 
activities  WP5 36 
At least 45 Practise abstract published; 
a total of 15 (national and international) 
events organised, and 5 citizen science 
activities.  
3.1.4 Critical risk for implementation 
Description of risk (indicate level of (i) 
likelihood, and (ii) severity: 
Low/Medium/High) 
WP(s) Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
Low resolution of the 16S gene to infer 
spread patterns (i) Low, (ii) Low. WP1 Deeper sequencing to stable backbone of the 
phylogenetic tree. 
Failure in obtaining at least 300 Potato RGs 
with integrated SNP. (i) Low, (ii) Medium. WP1 
Analysis of additional, recent Potato Resistance gene 
/QTL studies as well as SNP studies which are 
coming up during the project duration. 
VOCs concentration and detection method 
does not differentiate between control and 
infected tubers. (i) Low, (ii) Medium. 
WP2 
General VOCs markers with potentially less 
resolution will be used as alternative to differentiate 
between infected and control tubers (e.g., acetone) 
No identification and monitoring of 
phenotyping traits (biomarkers). i) Low, (ii) 
High. 
WP2 
Five different sensors (RGB, FluorCam, IR, two 
types of hyperspectral) will be used, each able to 
analyse from 3 to 20 different morphological and/or 
physiological traits. Multivariate statistical 
approaches will be used to identify the most 
informative traits. 
High interference detected by VOCs sensor.  
i) Medium, (ii) Medium. WP2 
E-nose technology would be developed in order to 
improve the selectivity and accuracy of the array to 
make predictive measures 
Inability to generate user adoption for the 
mobile app. (i) Medium, (ii) High. WP2 
To facilitate adoption, seamless user experience will 
be ensured, deliver quick value to the user and also 
employ gamification techniques for onboarding users 
to the platform. 
Inability to access data from Third Party 
Apps. (i) Low, (ii) High. WP2 
Project coordinator will approach the 
owners/managers of these Third-Party applications to 
propose an integration (the ability for the PataFEST 
mobile app to be a catalyst for an open ecosystem 
that promotes data sharing would be a valuable and 
impactful measure). 
Poor performance of algorithm fit modelling 
(< 0.7 AUC). (i) Medium, (ii) High. WP2 
Accuracy readjustment of data, in order to increase, 
correctly classified points by a total number of points 
on the test set. Being: Accuracy = #correctly 
classified points / #misclassified points. 
Low effectiveness of plant, soil, and 
biocontrol postharvest solutions. (i) Low, (ii) 
Medium. 
WP3 
Higher concentrations of bioactive ingredients will be 
tested and/or alternative functional compounds will 
be included in the enhanced formulation prototypes. 
Extreme weather conditions leading to high 
temperatures in the glasshouse. (i) Medium, 
(ii) Medium. 
WP3 Avoid running during summer months; use vertical 
screens in the glasshouse to reduce effect. 
Introduction of other diseases affecting crop 
development and yield. (i) Medium, (ii) 
Medium. 
WP3 
An agreed crop management plan will be in place 
prior to the start of the experiment; close daily 
monitoring of crop for early detection and prompt 
response. 
Low performance properties of the 
sustainable solutions manufactured at pilot 
plant. (i) Medium, (ii) High. 
WP3 Manufacturing processing steps will be reviewed and 
adjusted at pilot plant level productions. 
No presence of ZC infected potato plants 
under field and greenhouse conditions. (i) 
Low, (ii) Low. 
WP4 Maintain an infected CLso and BC colony under 
INIAP´s facilities 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 40 of 45 
Description of risk (indicate level of (i) 
likelihood, and (ii) severity: 
Low/Medium/High) 
WP(s) Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
Potato varieties selected not suitable for the 
trial validations. (i) Low, (ii) Low. WP4 
Other potato varieties will be selected according to 
their availability and higher susceptibility to be 
infected by pathogens. 
Data or information delay for the sustainability 
and techno-economic assessment. (i) Medium, 
(ii) Medium. 
WP4 
The progress will be monitored throughout the project 
and delays will be identified early and addressed. 
Further, strong internal communication will ensure 
that partners are clear on when and what information 
is expected delivered. 
3.1.5 Summary of staff effort 
Participant WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 TOTAL 
1 FUND 2 85 37 10 10 20 164 
2 NEIKER 40 4 3 3 3 8 61 
3 INIAP 14 0 0 18 3 1 36 
4 IRIS 0 72 0 1 3 1 77 
5 KNEIA 0 0 0 1 48 1 50 
6 CRUN 0 21 30 1 5 6 63 
7 UDAPA 0 0 0 15 3 1 19 
8 CHEMIA 0 0 15 1 3 1 20 
9 UPOL 52 40 35 1 3 1 132 
10 TECHN 0 0 33 1 3 1 38 
11 EUPAT 0 0 0 5 5 2 12 
12 UNIBO 0 0 35 1 3 1 40 
13 BOEH 0 0 0 12 3 1 16 
14 ECSA 5 1 1 10 12 1 30 
15 ANEC 5 0 0 20 10 1 36 
16 TERREA 0 0 0 12 3 1 16 
17 AB 0 0 0 12 3 1 16 
18 AINIA 0 0 0 51 3 1 55 
 118 223 190 175 126 50 882 
3.1.6 Subcontracting cost 
3. INIAP → 14,000 €: Sequencing service for CLso detection; BC colony maintenance (service).  
7. UDAPA → 2,000 €: Soil analysis and plant virus analysis. 
17. AB → 7,250 €: Albert Bartlett grows potatoes on subcontracted land and sub -contracts long term commercial 
storage. 
18.AINIA → 50,000 €: Social-LCA analysis subcontracting. 
3.1.7 Purchase cost items (travel and subsistence, equipment, and other goods, works and services) 
2.NEIKER Cost, € 
112,000 
Justification (only partners which the sum of the costs for ’travel ’, ‘equipment’, 
and ‘other goods  and services’ exceeds 15% of the personnel costs ) 
Travel 30,000 
2 Researchers attendance to 2 annual meetings/year (Nº of travels= 16);  4 
Researchers attendance to 1 National Congress / year (Nº of travels= 16); 2 
Researchers attendance to 1 International Congress (EAPR, ALAP)/ year (Nº of 
travels= 8) 
Other goods & 
Services 82,000 
WP1: SNP GGP V4 chip hybridations, SPET Analysis, DNA extractions, Materials 
for multiplication and bioassays; WP5 : Materials for Publication, Dissemination, 
Open access fees, Congresses Inscription Fees; WP6 : Host of 1 Project Meeting  
and CFS cost. 
3.INIAP 69,100  
Travel 12,000 Travels to some project meetings and technical meetings for validation activities in 
selected locations in Ecuador  
Equipment 7,100 
INIAP´s equipment ). P artial time dedicated to project activities : Molecular lab 
equipment and weather data logger, 25% and 20% allocated to the project, 
respectively. 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 41 of 45 
 
57 For partner Technion, such Costs include special purchase of services to be purchased from its fully owned and controlled entity Technion Research & 
Development Foundation Ltd. (“TRDF”), under the provisions of Article 6.2.C.3 of the Grant Agreement. Additionally, the costs  mentioned under “Personnel 
Cost” and “Summary of Staff Effort”, also include costs of personnel seconded by TRDF to Technion (the Beneficiary), under the provisions of Article 6.2.A.2 
and A.3 of the Grant Agreement. All costs above constitute an integral part of the total Technion budget in the Project. All services, items and secondments will 
be provided and put by TRDF at the disposal of Technion, at the premises of Technion, so Technion carries carry out the work of the Project. 
Other goods & 
Services 50,000 
Consumables and supplies for the activities of evaluation of germplasm and 
validation of genotypes and products for B.cockerelli control in controlled and field 
conditions. 
4.IRIS 100,990  
Travel 11,200 7 Project meetings, in stallations and dissemination events attendance during the 
project. 
Equipment 15,850 
Depreciation of computing prototypes: laptops (x2), android or IOS smartphones 
and/or tablets (x2), for use over the project lifetime for the development, hosting, 
testing and validation of the digital tools and apps; bug fixing.  Sensorics and related 
equipment including wiring. 
Other goods & 
Services 73,940 
Servers and Cloud hosting fees and internal services over the course of the project. 
Database and interface management, licensing and security, adaptability and 
connectivity related costs with readers . Tutorials & platform optimi sation & 
updates. Market analysis and exploitation analysis related costs (5 K). Host of 1 
project meeting. CFS cost (6 K). 
5.KNEIA 69,200  
Travel 13,200 8 project meetings x 2 people. 2 dissemination travel per 2 people  
Other goods & 
Services 56,000 
Project website (stock images, domain, other developmen costs 9; Dissemination 
materials (poster +leaflets+ pen drives) ; Videos (production expenditures) ; 
Conference organi sation (Presential and Hybrid conferences) ; Conference 
attendance fees; Market Surveillance . 
7.UDAPA 26,500  
Travel 10,500 8 project meetings x 1 person; National travel s to assist to field trials, participation 
in 1-2 commercial fairs x 2 persons . 
Other goods & 
Services 16,000 Costs to cover the field trials: Potato seed, irrigation, fertilizers, pesticides, 
cultivation costs, harvest and storage ; Visitor fees to commercial fairs + 2 persons . 
8.CHEMIA 25,000  
Travel 9,000 8 project meetings x 1 person; National travel s to assist to field trials, participation 
in commercial fairs: 2 international and 2 national (Italy) . 
Other goods 
& Services 16,000 
Material to prepare the formulations: solvents, surfactants, active ingredients, small 
laboratory materials (10 k€); Shipping costs of the formulations (100 L --> 400 € 
to Europe; to Ecuador 1000: 5 k€ in total for all the shipment) . 
9.UPOL 203,935  
Travel 50,135 
3 technical meetings within WP1, WP2 and WP3 (1 meeting/person/WP); 10 
travels to participate in scientific conferences to present results of WP1, WP2 and 
WP3; 24 travels to 2 project meeting/year, including Kick off meeting for 3 
representatives of WP1, W P2 and WP3.    
Other goods 
& Services 153.800 
1) expenses covering consumables and material for PHTS in WP1, WP2 and WP3, 
needed for technical optimi sations and upgrades of the phenotyping devices for 
PHTS  (electronic materials, HW components, RGB cameras) and the phenotyping 
experiments in OloPhen platform (multiwell plates and special pots for cultivation 
of the potato plants, chemicals and growth media f or in vitro propagation), 2) 
services needed for maintenance and upgrades of the OloPhen platform for the 
capacity allocated to the project, 3) Library preparation kit consumables and 
consumable laboratory chemicals, buffers, plastics, and chemicals relate d to qPCR 
for WP1; 4) WGS sequencing services for WP1.  
10.TECHN57 93,500  
Travel 19,000 2 Technical trips to Ecuador ; 4 trips to fairs (1 per year) ; 4 Trips for Dissemination 
(1 per year). Project meetings. 
Other goods 
& Services 74,500 Chemicals and reagents; media for microbiological assays, fluorescent probes;  
disposable laboratory consumables . CFS Cost. 
12.UNIBO 55,500  
Travel 10,500 International and national symposiums, 8 persons ; 6 project meetings . 
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 42 of 45 
3.1.8 Internally invoiced good and services 
3. INIAP → 10,000 €: Multiplication of plant selected materials (in vitro & tubers) for characterisation of 
resistance/tolerance, Lab analysis for Clso diagnosis; Multiplication of selected genotypes for validation experiments. 
6. CRUN → 91,744.30€: CHAPs rental for facilities and Agri-EPI Rental to grow potato tubers under controlled 
conditions simulating different climate scenarios. 
10. TECHN → 187,450 €: Funds are requested for Technion infrastructure equipment services dedicated to materials 
characterisation as well as facilities of microbiology infrastructure. These include facilities for imaging such as SEM, 
TEM, FIB, confocal microscopy, etc. Facilities for chemical and structural characterisation (such as TGA,XRD, etc.); 
facilities for surface and topography characterisation (such as AFM, XPS etc.). Microbiological infrastructure 
includes usage of autoclaves, greenhouse facilities, plate-readers, etc. As an example, an hour of TEM service costs 
400 NIS, SEM and XRD costs 300 NIS per hour. As characterisation is a major part of the research, we are requesting 
about 58,000 euro per year. This is equivalent of ~650 hours per year on average of characterisation and microbiology 
facilities usage (for 45 weeks per year, this is under 15 hours per week). 
12.UNIBO → 4,000 €: Use of 1 box at the greenhouse centre (Bologna University) for experimental plots trials. Use 
of testing facilities for chemical and phytosanitary analyses.
3.2 Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole 
The full R&D potential of PataFEST consortium is met in the preliminary phases of  the proposal preparation by 
identifying the main barriers, challenges and problems that the actors working across the potato sector, farmers, 
consumers and citizens are currently facing. In order to build up the project's objectives and maximise our results 
and outcomes, Funditec, as coordinator, has involved technology suppliers, potato producers, agricultural/potato 
associations and cooperatives, and citizens/consumers at the early phases of the design of the work packages. This 
multi-actor approach, along with the partners’ complementing skills will speed up the creation and adoption of the  
Integrated Pest Management  strategy from the start of the project and over time. In addition, the Multi-Actor 
Participatory Platform will also be essential for promoting rural community engagement at all scales (local, national, 
and worldwide) and for spreading the project's proposed measures against emerging potato pests after project’s end. 
This is possible because PataFEST strategically involved 2 agricultural cooperatives (UDAPA and ANECOPP) and 
the EUROPATAT association working very closely with the farmers, traders, and professionals’ experts of potato 
and other vegetables production. PataFEST consortium includes 18 partners from 9 different countries (6 from EU 
and UK, Israel and the international collaboration established with INIAP from Ecuador). PataFEST has a strong 
representation of SMEs, 33% of the consortium partners (IRIS, KNEIA, UDAPA, CHEM, BOEH, TERREA) and 
large companies (11%, ANEC, AB) which is accompanied by 4 RTOs (22%: FUND, NEIK, INIAP and AINIA), 
4 Universities (22%: CRUN, UPOL, TECHN and UNIBO) and 2 associations (17%: EUPAT and ECSA). The 
capacity of each partners is critical for the implementation of this project: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other goods 
& Services 45,000 
Raw material (agricultural waste, soil, pots, fertilizers, plants), Lab consumables 
(reagents, disposable plastics) + soil microbi ota analysis ; Fees to Open Access to 
peer reviewed scientific publications ; Host of 1 Project Meeting and CFS cost.  
16.TERREA 18,000  
Travel 10,500 Participation in commercial fairs (potato europe, world potato congress, fruit 
logistica); 8 consortium meeting/year, including Kick off meeting  x 1 person.  
Other goods 
& Services 7,500 Potato use in the warehouse ( ~ 5 tons), tools for field trials, quality analysis 
(sugars), fee visitor to commercial fairs . 
17.AB 25,572.5  
Travel 13,312.5 
National travels to the field and storage facilities for trials, Participation in 2 
commercial fairs x 2 persons; 8 travels/person (2 consortium meeting/year, 
including Kick off meeting) x 1 ,5 persons.   
Other goods 
& Services 12,260 
Potato seeds, irrigation, Cultivation, Harvest, Fertilizer, Pesticides (e.g.blight 
control) (assumption 1 ha:  60Tons harvested potato used for trials and not onward 
sale); Visitor Fee to participate in 2 commercial fairs x 2 persons.   
 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 43 of 45 
Scientific/Technical suppliers 
RTO 
↓ 
Coordinator 
Spain 
↓ 
Postharvest 
biocontrol solutions 
AI algorithm 
prediction model 
Portable volatiles 
sensor 
FUNDITEC is a RTO that develops innovate projects in its own laboratory facilities located in 
Madrid (currently running 9 EU projects, one as coordinator). FUNDITEC has three strategic 
research areas Advanced Materials, Agr iFood and Digital Transformation , all of them 
participating in PataFEST. The leader of the project is Dr. Christian Guidelli , Principal 
Researcher of the Agrifood Department and coordinator of the project. In addition, he will 
be responsible of the postharvest biocontrol solutions development. He has more than 10 years 
of experience on the development of edible coatings with antioxidant and antimicrobial 
properties for meat, fresh and minimally processed fruits and vegetables and in the development 
of alternative and natural methodologies to extend the food shelf life . Two other researchers 
participate in the project: Dr. Alejandro Echeverria and Dr. Jose Ignacio Lozano. Alejandro 
is a Computer Engineer and PhD in Computer Engineering and Telecommunications 
(specialising in artificial intelligence and evolutionary computation) and will be in charge of the 
development of AI algorithms for prediction models . Jose Ignacio is PhD in organic 
electrochemistry and expert in managing of technological innovation. He has a vast knowledge 
in developing applied research  for industrial processes at large scale, development of smart 
materials, catalyst and industrial processing technology. He is in charge of the development of 
the portable volatile sensors. 
RTO 
↓ 
Scientific 
coordinator 
Spain 
↓ 
RGs identification 
Molecular Breeding 
NEIKER is specialised in creating innovative solutions for the agro -livestock and forestry 
sectors. The scientific team of NEIKER  belongs to the Department of Plant Health and 
Production (Dr. Amaia Ortiz, Dr. Enrique Ritter, Dr. Jose Ignacio Rui z de Galarreta and 
Dr. Leire Barandalla) and is composed by researchers with a long trajectory in the developing 
of new potato varieties adapted to different agro-climatic conditions and resistance to viruses, 
fungi and bacteria. NEIKER has an annual budget of 13 m€ and performs an average of 120 
R&D projects.  In order to complete all foreseen tasks in PATAFEST, an extended 
Bioinformatics platform including Software is available for data analyses, over 200 m2 of fully 
automated greenhouses for performing bio-assays and over 70 Ha land for field trials. 
RTO 
Ecuador 
↓ 
Characterisation of 
germplasm Field 
and bioassays 
INIAP is the National Agricultural Research Institute of Ecuador. INIAP’s main research lines 
are plant breeding, agro-biotechnology, integrated crop and livestock managemen t and 
conservation and use of genetic resources. INIAP has 7 experimental stations and 5 experimental 
farm throughout Ecuadorian territory. In this project, the validation of plant bioassays against 
CLso pest disease will be located in one of th ese experimental farms. Dr. Xavier Cuesta and 
Dr. Carmen Castillo are the INIAP’s researchers involved in this project, both are experts in 
potato plant breeding and the psyllid affecting potato crops in South America (> 100 scientific 
publications).  Their deep knowledge and expertise of potato’s threats that are already affected 
in this country is crucial to achieve the objectives of PataFEST. 
University 
Israel 
↓ 
Vector repellent 
and antifungal 
solutions 
Technion- Israel Institute of Technology  is Israel’s first university and its largest center of 
applied research. Technión is ranked as the top university in Israel, listed among the top 100 
universities in the world, and is also famous for its 3 Nobel prizes in chemistry. Prof. Boaz 
Pokroy of the Faculty of Materials Science and Engineering  (expert biomineralisation and 
bio-inspired surface engineering) in and Prof. Ester Segal of the Faculty of Biotechnology and 
Food Engineering  (expert in nanomaterials their interface microorganisms) will lead the 
Technion’s activity in PataFEST. They both demonstrate outstanding research r ecord (>120 
scientific publications each) and vast experience in EU projects (including ERC starting grant, 
ERC PoCs participation, and coordination of several EU projects). Their labs house state -of-
the-art infrastructure for the design, fabrication and d etailed characterisation of biomimetic 
protective plant coatings, including equipment for contact angle measurements, electron and 
confocal microscopes, well equipped microbiology laboratories, and greenhouses. 
RTO 
Spain 
↓ 
LCA & LCC 
AINIA is a private non -profit agrifood technological centre with one of the largest business 
social bases in Europe which is supported by its participation in the following EU -granted 
projects: LIFE ECODHYBAT (awarded as the Best of the Best Environment Project in 2018), 
LIFE LEMNA, SUSCLEAN (FP7 -KBBE) URBIOFIN and CHEERS, amongst many other 
projects. AINIA have a wealth of experience in the application of LCSA methodologies to assess 
environmental and economic impacts of new biorefinery models, bioproducts and r elated 
technologies by using updated versions of the highly -recognised software for LCSA purposes 
such as GaBi software, GaBi Professional database, Ecoinvent (specialised in E-LCA) and some 
GaBi extended databases. In P ataFEST, Dr Alfredo Rodrigo will be the researcher in charge 
of the LCSA within the project. He has more than 23 years of experience as project manager on 
environment issues related to food industry. 

 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 44 of 45 
University 
UK 
↓ 
Volatile biomarkers 
identification Storage 
technology  
Plant soil 
management 
Three groups of Cranfield Soil, Agrifood and Biosciences Centre (CSAFI ) participate in 
PataFEST: Plant Science Laboratory (Dr. Carmen Alamar, lecturer in postharvest biology), 
Soil Systems Group (Dr. Wilfred Otten, professor of soil biophysics) and Applied Mycology 
Group (Prof. Angel Medina, the head of the Applied Mycology Group and the Director of 
Environment and Agrifood Theme). This centre has an internationally recognised profile for its 
research and teaching in Postharvest Technology , Applied Mycology, Soil Science, and Agri -
informatics and it hosts the environmental analytical Facilities which will provide access to 
state-of-the-art facilities for full physiological and metabolomics studies of both non -volatile 
and volatile organic compounds, as well as molecular biology laboratories. Cranfield University 
houses four CHAP environmental simulation rooms (growth rooms) and a glasshouse  that can 
be used to grow potato tubers under controlled conditions (viz., temperature, light, and CO 2) 
simulating different climate scenarios. The glasshouse hosts a Lemnatec phenotyping gantry for 
high resolution plant phenotyping. Additionally, soil lysimeters (1 m3 and 0.5 m3) can be used 
within the glasshouse for pilot scale studies where control field conditions can be simulated 
(e.g., drought and flood) and monitored throughout the experiment. 
University 
Czech Republic 
↓ 
Phenotyping study 
for portable sensor 
development 
 
Palacky University Olomouc (UPOL) is the second oldest university in the Czech Republic 
(founded 1573) educating around 25000 students. In PataFEST, the research will be performed 
in the Czech Advanced Technology and Research Institute - Center of the Region Haná 
(CATRIN – CRH), focused on plant research and the development of plant biotechnologies. 
PataFEST research will be performed in two different research groups: Biodiversity and 
Molecular Evolution (Prof. Ladislav Bocák and Dr. Michal Motyka) and in Phenotyping 
(Dr. Lukás Spíchal  and Dr. Nuria de Diego ). CATRIN-CRH, as a leading member of the 
Czech Plant Phenotyping Network (CzPPN) runs OloPhen, a plant phenotyping platform  for 
automated high-throughput screening equipped with different sensors for non-invasive analysis 
of morphological and physiological traits.  
University 
Italy 
↓ 
Biobased solutions 
for soil management 
From the University of Bologna, the Department of Agricultural and Food Sciences (Ass. 
Prof. Claudio Ratti - Plant Health)  and the Department of Chemistry (Prof. Giuseppe 
Falini) participate. UNIBO has an active patent portfol io of over 370 patents related to more 
than 140 inventions.  It also has an active portfolio of more than 20 patented plant varieties, 80% 
of which are increased in value through active licenses with geographic coverage in countries 
in different parts of t he world.  Thanks to its scientific excellence and a central project 
management support working closely, UNIBO has gained a considerable experience in 
International and European research projects UNIBO is partner of the EIT Knowledge & 
Innovation Communities and many of the most important EU initiatives related to the Horizon 
2020 framework program (i.e. ETPs, EIPs, JPIs, etc.).   At EU level, UNIBO is part of the 
Scientific Advisory boards of JPI HDHL and FACCE JPI, member of the EIP AGRI Focus 
Group Water & Agriculture, ETP Ocean and Biofuels and RTO member of the BIC Consortium 
supporting the JTI Biobased Industry. 
SME 
Spain 
↓ 
Modelling and data 
processing Image 
analysis digital tool 
developer 
The experience of IRIS (>45 M€, >100 projects, >15 patents, ranked as the 6th SME in Europe 
and 1st in Spain in participation in H2020) as an Advanced Engineering company specialised in 
Real-Time Monitoring solutions is crucial to carry out the image analysis for early detectio n 
and surveillance. IRIS’ technologies are based on Photonics -based Process Analytical 
Technology systems and Industrial Artificial Intelligence (Machine Learning and Deep 
Learning) for data-driven process efficiencies and quality standardisation in the Food, Chemical, 
Pharmaceutical, Bio -based and other process industries. IRIS team of 70 multidisciplinary 
experts combines experienced programmers, engineers (optical, mechatronic, electronic and 
process engineers), chemists, physicists, mathematic ians and data scientists, biologists and 
technologists, converging the scientific and technological fields required for Industry 4.0 
solutions development. 
SME 
Italy 
↓ 
Plant and postharvest 
solutions  
CHEMIA’s core business is the production of pesticides and, leading the Italian manufacture 
of products of all toxicological classes and the formulation of solutions with different properties. 
Thanks to the wide range of formulates, Chemia is the perfect partner in PataFEST to formulate 
the new products following the h ighest standard of  quality, safety and respect for the 
environment.  
Agricultural & Potato Associations and Cooperatives 
Spain & Belgium 
↓ 
UDAPA, ANECOOP and EUROPATAT are key players in this project as they bring relevant 
actors that will be benefit of the outcomes of the project. With these three partners, the project 
will reach directly to more than 300.000 professionals of potato and other vegetables. UDAPA, 
is a cooperative in Basque Country (Spain) aiming to professionalize the production processes 
and sale of fresh potatoes . UDAPA has a 14.000 m 2 where the project will validate the soil 

 
HORIZON-CL6-2022-FARM2FORK-02-02 two stages 
PataFEST              Page 45 of 45 
Validator of plant 
soil management 
strategies 
Multi-actor 
participatory 
platform 
Dissemination & 
Communication 
treatment solutions and potato plant pesticide free natural solutions . ANECOOP is Spain’s 
largest agricultural production network of vegetables and fruits with 73 member cooperatives 
and companies across the country (€790.3 million turnover and 845.410 tonnes of production in 
2020-2021). ANECOOP has a strong commmitment to innovation participating in EU projects, 
including Operational Groups (Gocitrus and Climate Change in Stone Fruits) with a strong focus 
on adaptation to climate change, detection of emerging pests (RFF-IPM) and used of agricultural 
residues to for high added value applications (Pro-enrich) and 20 Ha for experimental field trials 
and Biotechnology laboratories.  EUROPATAT has 70 years representing EU potato traders 
(seed, ware and early potato). Currently, it  has 62 members that represent 20 countries in the 
EU and beyond.  All of them will ensure the profesional interest of the sector, facilitate the 
collection of data and information towards all the members, influence policy decision -makers 
about the project’s outcomes and promote networking and communication activitities. 
Potato Producers 
 
Germany, UK, 
France 
↓ 
Validators of plant 
soil management and 
postharvest 
strategies  
The project includes three potato companies from the main EU potato producers as the validators 
of the soil and postharvest strategies  directly in their facilities: Kartoffel-Böhmer (Germany, 
over 30 Ha greenhouse and 250 Ha outdoor production) is a reliable company for food retailers, 
farmers and producers for many decades both at national and international potato markets. 
Böhmer has outdoor and indoor organic production of potatoes which is crucial for the trials of 
PataFEST solutions.  TERRÉA (France) is a SME that belongs to VITALIS network. VITALIS 
is made up of 6 companies which altogether are leading the French trading and packaging of 
potatoes, onions and condiments. Albert Bartlett  is the UK’s leading supplier of potatoes. 
Albert supplies potatoes from their wide network of 62 farmers and growers across UK. 
Citizens and stakeholder engagement, communication, dissemination & exploitation 
SME,Spain. 
Dissemination, 
Communication 
Exploitation 
KNEIA is a SME specialised in providing support to research organisations along the research 
value chain with a special focus on environmental and circular economy approaches. Kneia is 
expert in scientific dissemination, communication, open science and market research in EU 
projects. Kneia has currently 4 Horizon projects and 8 H2020 projects. 
 
Association 
Germany 
↓ 
Citizen of Science  
The European Citizen Science Association ( ECSA) promotes citizen science as a tool for 
evidence-based policy and sustainable development. They support a strong and growing citizen 
science community in Europe and beyond thanks to its wide science network with different 
background. ECSA’s role in PataFE ST is crucial to deploy the citizen science approach 
requested in the topic to ensure that the results are also citizen -generated. ECSA will create 
relevant training activities to engage citizen at all levels. ECSA is algo the legacy organisation 
of the EU-Citizen.Science Platform, which provides resources, tools, training, community 
forums and information on projects, where PataFEST will joint.