3.1 WORK PLAN - WORK PACKAGES, DELIVERABLES AND MILESTONES. ................................ ................................ ........... 39 
3.1.1. Overall structure of the work plan ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 39 
3.1.2. Graphical presentation of the components showing how they inter-relate (Pert chart). ......................  40 
3.1.3. Timing of the different work packages and their components (Gantt chart). ................................ ...... 41 
3.1.4. Technical Risks. ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 42 
3.2. MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE AND PROCEDURES. ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 45 
3.2.1. Organizational structure and the decision-making, including a list of milestones. .............................  45 
3.2.2. Organizational structure and decision-making mechanisms. ................................ .............................  47 
3.3. CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  48 
3.4. RESOURCES TO BE COMMITTED ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 50 
4 MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM .......................................................................................................... 55
4.1 PARTICIPANTS (APPLICANTS) ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 55
4.2 THIRD PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE PROJECT (INCLUDING USE OF THIRD PARTY RESOURCES) ................................ .................  82 
5: ETHICS AND SECURITY ................................................................................................................................. 85
5.1 ETHICS ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  85
5.2 SECURITY. ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  86 
ANNEX I- PERSEO® BIOETHANOL TECHNOLOGY ...................................................................................... 87 
ANNEX II. SUPPORT LETTERS. ......................................................................................................................... 89 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 3 of 92 
1. EXCELLENCE  
1.1.  OBJECTIVES.  
Cost competitive value chains producing added -value products from heterogeneous and complex waste material 
create solutions for the environmental problem of increasing waste flows, reducing pressure on virgin resources, and 
increasing the competiveness of European industry. In this line, IMECAL partner has developed a 
biotechnological patented technology (European Patent EPO 2112226, USA Patent 8399228 B2 and international 
PCT WIPO  099038for obtaining second generation bioethanol from Organic Municipal Waste. In this project 
IMECAL has collaborated with CIEMAT and several Universities and private companies such as Ford Spain & 
NOVO. IMECAL has built a second generation bioethanol plant with capacity to process 25 t/day of organic fraction 
of MSW (PERSEO Bioethanol, www.imecal.com/perseo/). During more than 9 years of the PERSEO project, the 
hydrolysis enzymatic process has been optimised for different MSW feedstocks. PERCAL will use this 
knowledge/background as a starting point to produce new high added value products from MSW. 
PERCAL will exploit Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) as feedstock to develop intermediate chemical products 
at high yield and low impurity level with huge industrial interest . These will be complementary to the 
bioethanol (current PERSEO technology), to achieve a cascade valorisation of the MSW components, i.e.: 
 Lactic acid (LA) to produce: 1) Eco-friendly ethyl lactate solvents by reactive distillation from lactic acid & 
bio-ethanol to be used in cleaning products and inks and 2 ) hot-melt adhesives for cardboard and other non-
food applications in combination with maleic anhydride by reactive extrusion. 
 Succinic acid (SA) as an intermediate building blocks to production of polyols for the polyurethane industry. 
 Biosurfactants by chemical and/or microbiological modification of protein and lipid fraction from remaining 
fraction of MSW fermentation. 
In order to minimize the MSW heterogeneous composition (due to seasonal and origin variability driven by local 
economic, social and climate conditions) limitations as a fermentation feedstock, four main innovations will be 
proposed: i) New enzymatic cocktails to maximize hydrolysis of fermentable organic matter with low inhibitors 
production, ii) the use of high yield, specific and robust strains for each selected acid , iii) the extraction of 
fermentation by -products acting as inhibitors to succinic acid production via  novel membrane electrolysis 
employing an integrated continuous fermentation coupled with simultaneous organic acid removal in comparison 
with SA sequential fermenta tion followed by its separation using an electrodialysis -based and iv) optimize 
simultaneous saccharification and fermentation for lactic acid production followed by a downstream separation 
process based on membrane electrodialysis. To maximize the yield and purity of target organic acids, continuous 
and single step fermentation process will be prioritized in order to allow their integration in the PERSEO plant.  
Proposed non-food applications do not require high purity intermediates, thus their final cost is expected to be 
competitive, due to the current cost of PERCAL’s target final products are 3-4 times higher than bioethanol price. 
Figure 1.1.a shows the scheme of the project including the relation between the partners and main final products. 
 
Figure 1.1.a Scheme of PERCAL project including the main chemical as final products and partners & support companies role. 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 4 of 92 
The Biogenic fraction of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW)1 ranges between 30-50% of total MSW, which represents 
more than 500 kg/capita (EU -27 average), 300 million tonnes overall every year in the EU -322, increasing at an 
annual rate of 10%. Currently, approximately 50% of this volume is landfilled, 30% is recycled (material separation 
and bio-waste recycling, including compost and digestion) and the remaining 20% is incinerated. In spite of the 
strong shift from MSW landfilling to recycling of materials such as plastics, wood or metals and energy production 
from the organic fraction (mainly by incineration), there is a challenge to turn the biogenic fraction into higher value 
products than bioenergy.  
Partners involved in the project have great experience and international reputations in all of the target materials and 
processing techniques. They have participated in many previous projects and industrial applications related to the use 
and production of chemicals from municipal and agroindustrial waste as section 1.3.3 shows 
1.1.1. Overall Objectives. 
Objective 1: To improve enzymes cocktails to maximize organic hydrolysis for several MSW compositions. Target 
to produce up to 85% of potential fermentable sugars contained in the organic fraction of MSW (Linked to WP1). 
Current state-of-the-art enzymatic hydrolysis processes are able to liberate around 65% of all potential fermentable 
sugars present in the organic fraction of MSW. Latest developments in the enzymes engineering field have allowed 
to improve by more than 20 % the amount of fermentable sugars liberated in the hydrolysis step.  New ad hoc 
enzymes cocktails prepared for the different MSW compositions will be tested in order to hydrol yse more than 
85% of all the potentia l fermentable sugars present in the organic fraction of MSW. The hydrolysis of proteins 
contained in MSW will lead to the provision of complex nitrogen sources (i.e. peptides and amino acids) as 
substitute for the commercial yeast extract needed for succinic acid and lactic acid production. In this way, further 
reduction of the cost for fermentation media formulation is expected. Performance indicators: by M18, we plan 
to have the new enzymatic cocktails to increase the amount of fermentable sugars and prot ein hydrolysates over 
the most representative MSW feedstocks. 
Main Partners Involved: IMECAL. Support companies involved: NOVO. 
Objective 2:  To determine the suitability of a given organic MSW composition for the different chemical 
intermediate production routes and its specific potential, based in the fermentation results (Linked to WP1). 
MSW is a very complex mixture, made of many different materials when it comes to nature, origin, composition 
and intrinsic and physical properties. Furthermore, modification in composition of MSW may be expected with 
factors such as wealth, season or consumer’s habits. Therefore the components of MSW (cellulose, hemicellulose, 
lignin, pectin, protein or fat) are found in different amounts and ratios within the different locations, time of the 
year and sorting and collection method. In PERCAL, the different samples will be analyzed and depending on the 
major component their transformation potential will be analyzed for the most suitable application. The same will 
be applied for the fermentation resulting biomass in order to revalorize the remaining fractions i.e. proteins and 
lipids. Performance indicators: by M6, a report of the main requirements of selected products and intermediates, 
by M12, a report on selected feedstocks for each fermentation process, and by M18, a report con Validation of 
fermentation processes will be prepared. 
Main Partners Involved: IMECAL, ATB & AUA. Support companies involved: NOVO & ENERGO. 
Objective 3:   To study the production and purification of Lactic acid (L A) from MSW using sequential and 
simultaneous saccharification and fermentation . Target turnover >90% of fermen table sugars and LA purity 
>90% (Linked to WP2). 
MSW will be exploited to produce lactic acid (LA). Here, the focus will lie on the development of cost effective 
and sustainable bioprocess technologies to lactic acid using newly isolated strains . The production of lactic acid 
will be achieved by  sequential and simultaneous saccharification and fermentation  followed by lactic acid 
downstream separation based on membrane electrodialysis in order to achieve the needs of properties and purity 
for subsequent processing. In this way, the NaOH used during fermentation will be minimised due to re -cycling 
achieved by the electrodialysis membrane system and the steps required for hydrolysis and fermentation will be 
reduced due to the simultaneous operation leading to improved process economics. The supply of MSW-derived 
nitrogen sources will also reduce the lactic acid production cost. Performance indicators: by M18, a report of 
preliminary lab studies of the fermentation of lactic acid using MSW treated (WP1) feedstocks, by M24, we plan 
to define the optimal strategy for LA purification (down -stream) and by M32 a report will be prepared with the 
full process at pilot plant level. 
Main Partners Involved: ATB, AUA & TBWR. Support companies involved: ENERGO. 
                                                             
1 Biodegradable garden and park waste, food and kitchen waste from households, restaurants, caterers and retail premises. 
2 European Environmental Agency report, 2013. 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 5 of 92 
Objective 4:  To study the production and in-line purification of Succinic Acid (SA) from MSW using membrane 
electrolysis technology. Target turnover >90% of fermentable sugars and SA purity >99% (Linked to WP3). 
An efficient bioprocess utilising hydrolysed MSW (developed in WP1) with simultaneous succinic acid extraction 
using electrolytic extraction membrane technology will be developed. A nutrient-complete fermentation feedstock 
will be produced from MSW exploiting not only the carbohydrate content, but also the protein and mineral content. 
Proteins will be enzymatically hydrolysed into peptides and amino acids as nitrogen sources. In this way, the cost 
of media formulation for succinic acid production will be reduced by at least 50%. Pre -treatment of MSW 
hydrolysates may be carried out in the case that inhibitors are present. Fed -batch and continuous cultures will be 
developed with emphasis in continuous operation with immobilised cells to reach an overall succinic acid titer up 
to 60 g/L. We will improve the yield an d productivity by extracting the inhibitory carboxylic acids from the 
fermentation broth using the integrated electrolytic extraction system, while feeding with MSW. Compared to the 
existing downstream technology several steps of succinic acid separation ( cell removal, decolorisation and 
acidification) will be eliminated using membrane electrolysis (ME) extraction providing significant reduction to 
the downstream cost. The advantage of this process is the extraction of the ionic form into an acidic extract solution 
without the addition of chemicals, which will overcome the acidification of neutral pH bacterial fermentations. 
Indeed, at the cathode side of the ME process the microbial broth is neutralized via water splitting, for which 
preliminary data shows that there is no negative impact on the bacteria. More than 90 % of the produced succinic 
acid will be recovered, with high purity (>99%) of succinic acid via evaporation, crystallization and drying as final 
steps. Electrolytic membrane extraction integrated with fermentation will be compared with the elecrodialysis -
based downstream separation process available at ATB. Performance indicators: by M8, a report on the most 
significant inhibitory compounds present in MSW and the substrate performance of the succinic acid producers 
will be addressed. By M18, optimization of succinic acid extraction through membrane electrolysis and by M24 
purification of succinic acid will be reported. By M34, process scale-up will be addressed. 
Main Partners Involved: AUA & CMET. Support companies involved: ENERGO. 
Objective 5:  To valorise the fermentation by-products in order to increase the recovery from the organic content 
of MSW by 25 % (Linked to WP4). 
From the fermentation processes only carbohydrates are converted to bioethanol, LA or SA. Proteins and fats, 
which account for more than 30% of MSW organic fractio n, are still present as by -products. These components 
will be valorised with the aim of producing new Biosurfactants increasing the yield of recovery of MSW. 
Surfactants made from aminoacids and lipids mimic the natural amphiphilic structures with surfactant capacity. In 
this project we aim to obtain the aminoacids from the protein fraction and the lipids from the fat fraction, and to 
explore the chemical, enzymatic or combination of both methodologies. Hydrolyzed proteins will be used also as 
a nitrogen source in the LA & SA fermentation to reduce the use of yeast extract.  Performance indicators: by 
M12, a report  will be prepared  M26, reports on pretreatments for revalorization of the protein and lipid 
fractions will be prepared; by M34 a report on biosurfactant production from lipids and proteins will be prepared. 
Main Partners Involved: IMECAL & HAYAT & CENER. Support companies involved: ARKEMA. 
Objective 6:  To produce ethyl lactate solvents for application in cleaning products and inks by simultaneous 
esterification and product separation process (reactive distillation). Target: To scale up esterification to a  
continuous process with a yield of 3-5L/h; product purity >90% (Linked to WP5). 
The objective is to develop a continuous esterification and product separation process applying a reactive 
distillation process to produce ethyl lactate from two PERCAL bulk chemicals (LA and ethanol).  The processing 
will be adapted and optimized to the selected PERCAL products. This approach will consider any potential 
impurities and product concentration levels. Performance indicators: by M18, a report will be prepared with the 
first esterification test at lab level to evaluate catalysts and raw material quality. A chemical model will be defined 
and validated with experimental data. From M12 onwards, the esterification will be up scaled by using a recently 
implemented and tested reactive distillation column (prototype) to produce products in the range of 3 -5L/h. By 
M30, product quality will be characterized, key process data compiled for further analyses (technical an economic 
analysis) and ethyl lactate samples provided to industrial partners to perform their validation at TRL5. 
Main Partners Involved: TBWR & HAYAT. 
Objective 7:  To produce lactic acid based hot melts for application in cardboard and labels by reactive extrusion 
with similar strength than EVA HMA analogous. Target Shear adhesion strength >10 MPa (Linked to WP5). 
PERCAL will develop a medium viscosity hot melt formulated for label and carton sealing. It will have excellent 
hot tack (Shear adhesion strength >10 MPa ASTM F1921) and fast setting speed (up to 25 m/min). It will maintain 
high adhesion on un-varnished substrates for applications where the finished goods could be stored from - 15 °C 
up to + 35°C. Performance indicators: by M20, a report will be prepared to detail the production of lactide and 
further polylactic acid from purified lactic acid (LA) obtained by MSW fermentation,  in M26 the polymers 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 6 of 92 
obtained will be grafted by reactive extrusion with suitable reactive monomers to improve adhesion capacity. Final 
LA-HMA formulation will be ready in M28 for final validation in SOFTER and HAYAT facilities. 
Main Partners Involved: AIMPLAS & SOFTER. 
Objective 8:  To produce polyester and polyether polyols for application in polyurethanes (PUR). Target > 1,000 
MW, compatible with current petrol based polyester/polyether polyols (Linked to WP5). 
PERCAL will develop a medium viscosity polyester/polyether polyol for polyurethane formulations  with 
enhanced reactivity. It will have an average molecular weight  >1,000 and Hydroxyl Number > 0.02 gKOH /g. 
Performance indicators: by M20, a report will be prepared to detail the production of 1,4 butanediol from purified 
succinic acid (SA) obtained by MSW fermentation,  in M26 the butane diol will be polymerized to form a medium 
molecular weight polyester polyol. Polyester polyol will be integrated and validated in w ell-known PUR 
formulations.  Main Partners Involved: AIMPLAS & COVESTRO. 
Objective 9:  To study the integration of in -line control technologies to the PERSEO pilot plant to increase its 
process control parameters, its versatility & maximize homogeneity of the fermentable feedstock (Linked to WP6). 
In order to improve the performance of the PERSEO biotechnological plant new monitoring technologies will be 
studied by obtaining relevant parameter information through advanced sensors and planning an intelligent plant 
control platform with decision support models. The adaptation of PERSEO Bioethanol® plant to produce LA and 
SA will be studied. Similarly, design and testing of new sensors and control platform for the monitoring of the 
process parameters of interest at laboratory scale and the study of the scalability of the processes and control 
system at full plant level  will be performed. Performance indicators: by M18, a report  on the adaptation of 
PERSEO plant for the versatile production of chemical intermediates and identification of key process parameters 
will be prepared. A report on the monitoring technologies and testing results will be produced by M30 as well as 
a report on the integration of the production in a biotechnological plant configuration (M34). 
Main Partners Involved: IMECAL & VISUM. Support companies involved: ENERGO. 
Objective 10: To demonstrate the safety & regulatory compliance, as well as environmental & economic 
sustainability of the developed processes and products (linked to WP7). 
LCA will be performed on the processes developed for the selected intermediate building blocks  to reduced 
environmental impact vs. current traditional materials. Standard and legislative aspects that apply to the project 
results will be continuously monitored. A safety & Regulatory assessment will be performed during the project. 
Aspects related to waste management and potential health risks will be addressed. Finally, the techno -economic 
viability will be evaluated with inputs from all previous WPs. Performance indicators: by M12, a report analyzing 
the main regulatory frameworks in place in the EU regions considered in the project will be produced. By M30, a 
report for the safe operation of the pilot plant will be produced, as well as a recommendations for a DEMO plant. 
By M36, the LCA and techno-economic assessments will fuel into recommendations for improvements and will 
be taken into account to assess future commercial viability. 
Objective 11: To define sustainable value chains and cross-sectorial connections (linked to WP8). 
Building upon the variability MSW composition from WP1, a supply chain sustainability analysis will be 
performed. Based on existing best practices in the field of circular economy, suitable business models for the cross-
sectorial valorization of MSW will be recommended. Logistics, resources, markets for the products, as well as the 
readiness of their potential converters to shift to such feedstocks, but also the consumer perception of such 
products, the policy and regulatory barriers will also be studied and taken into account into the proposed business 
models. Performance indicator: at M24, an interim report providing supply and sourcing strategies as well as 
robust economically, environmentally and socially beneficial business models will be provided, and its final 
version will be ready in M36. It will also include a th orough market analysis across involved sectors as well as 
policy and regulatory recommendations 
Objective 12: To maximize the innovation impacts of the project for contributing to the uptake of the project results 
for companies’ business and employment growth (linked to WP8). 
The project knowledge and results will be managed and protected. Business and exploitation plans will be 
delivered for all Key Exploitable Results (KERs) to map the post-project phase. A comprehensive dissemination 
and communication campaign will be designed and implemented. Regular knowledge transfer activities will take 
place among partners. Workshops with researchers and participation in educative actions for stakeholders will be 
organized. Performance Indicators: by M12, a robust dissemination plan to support the recognition of PERCAL 
as a reference in the maximisation of value generated to create new opportunities in the green chemical sector will 
be in place. By M34, a suite of training activities (>3) will be organized. By M36, final plans will be in place for 
the transition to the post -project phase to advance the TRLs and sources of further funding to build full DEMO 
scale processes will be analysed focusing on applications where a return on investment is feasible. 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 7 of 92 
1.2. RELATION TO THE BBI JU ANNUAL WORK PLAN.   
 The PERCAL project addresses the topic: BBI 2016.R8 - Emerging technologies for conversion of the organic 
content of Municipal Solid Waste and improving waste-to-chemicals value chains. First on a wider point of view, 
the project is totally aligned with to the BBI road map “The BBI aims at accelerating the building of bio-based value 
chains, starting from sustainable feedstock production and mobilisation towards the implementation and use of bio-
based materials and products (as defined in Value Chain 4- Emergence of new value chains from (organic) waste ). 
We furthermore validate the derived biobased products in most of the strategic area of the S trategic Innovation and 
Research Agenda (SIRA). The detailed relation of the project to the specific challenge and scope addressed by the 
topic are justified in table 1.2.a below. 
Table 1.2.a How PERCAL relates to the scope and challenges of the BBI 2016 R8 topic 
Challenges of BBI 2016 R08 How PERCAL addresses these challenges 
Specific challenge : Conversion processes 
performance is hindered by the high 
variability of the input feedstock, resulting 
in the need of tailored sorting and pre -
treatment of the feedstock. The latter steps 
reduce the presence of inhibitors for the 
downstream steps. However, the costs of the 
sorting and pre -treatment steps, combined 
with the need of high performance 
separation and purification, often hinder the 
overall economi c feasibility of a waste -to-
chemicals value chain. 
Based on the knowledge of PERSEO bioethanol® plant and proposed innovations 
in PERCAL  project, we plan to obtain three  intermediates (LA, SA and ethanol)  
with suitable purity in order to have a more competitive plant than the current state-
of-the-art. The consortium covers all the waste-to-chemicals value chain from MSW 
management until end -users of biobased products) , and their main priority is to  
obtain high quality products (comparable to petrol -based counterparts) with a cost 
comparable to current ones obtained from plant sugars or oils.  
The selected lactic and succinic acid producing strains are expected to tolerate 
moderate concentrations of inhibitors produced during pre -treatment of MSW. 
PERCAL will focus on the optimisation of the downstream process es leading to 
reduced costs (normally the most expensive step).  
Other challenges proposed in PERCAL are full detailed in the 12 target objectives 
defined in point 1.1.1. 
Scope: Develop and validate at lab scale 
innovative processes for conversion of the 
organic fraction of MSW into chemical 
intermediates aiming at: 
 Maximising the yield of recovery of 
intermediates from the substrate; 
 Minimising the presence of inhibitors 
in order to enable achieving profitable 
yields from the conversion of 
intermediates into products. 
Partners such as AUA, CMET and ATB have long-term experience with bioprocess 
development for the production of bulk chemicals. PERCAL will contribute to the 
development and optimization of bioprocesses based on MSW as feedstock by: 
 Enhancing succinic acid production via removal of organic acids produced during 
fermentation by employing an integrated ME extraction system leading to 
elimination of product inhibition during fermentation. 
 Maximising the degradation of remaining oligosaccharides in the MSW -based 
broth due to the effect of electrolysis leading to increased succinic acid production 
yield 
 Reducing the addition of neutrilisers during fermentation due to membrane 
electrolysis or recycling of NaOH due to membrane electrodialysis . 
 Reduce downstream separation costs for acid production due to the application of 
membrane electrolysis that eliminates the need for expensive unit operations 
required for cell removal, colour/protein removal and acidification of succinate.  
 Compare integrated electrolytic extraction system with electrodialysis -based 
downstream separation (ATB) to select the most sustainable pro cess for succinic 
acid production. The electrolysis extraction system for succinic acid production 
will be developed for the first time in PERCAL.  
 The selected bacterial strains for lactic acid production will ensure  simultaneous 
saccharification and ferme ntation at productivities higher than 1 g/L/h and final 
concentration higher than 80 g/L 
 The integrated ME -fermentation system will ensure the production of SA at 
productivities higher than 0.6 g/L/h and concentrations up to 60 g/L  
The innovation should f ocus on production 
of intermediates at high yield and low 
impurity level. 
 The acid form of SA is produced via Membrane Electrolysis (ME) in one step 
process that directly extracts from a broth into a low volume extract solution, 
offering a high extraction yield at low energy consumption around 2 kWh/kg. The 
integrated ME -fermentation system is expected to increase the SA production 
yield from sugars to values higher than 0.7 g/g.  
 Purity over 99 % will be achieved by a combination of ME based separation 
followed by evaporation (to remove acetic/formic acids), crystallisation & drying. 
Direct crystallisation of succinic acid from the concentrated extract will be 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 8 of 92 
Challenges of BBI 2016 R08 How PERCAL addresses these challenges 
evaluated aiming to reduce production costs. 
 The ATB -based process for lactic acid production h as been evaluated with 
numerous crude renewable resources using various bacterial strains resulting in 
yields higher than 0.9 g/g and production of the required isomer percentage and 
purity depending on the application. 
Proposals should take into account seasonal 
and random variability of the MSW content 
and address several compositions of the 
organic fraction, focusing on representative 
case studies taking into account local 
economic, social and climate conditions. 
There are three main factors affecting the organic MSW variability: waste collection 
system, geographic location and seasonality. In PERCAL project all these factors 
affecting MSW composition will be taken into account. Several representative bio -
waste samples coming from different waste collect ion systems (separated and non -
separated), different locations (Northern and Southern Europe; rural and urban 
areas) and seasons will be evaluated. 
The projects should co ver any TRL  from 3 
to 5. In the case of a pilot scale project (TRL 
5), proposals shou ld present a credible cost 
estimate for the proposed processes with a 
preliminary assessment of their 
competitiveness when scaled up. 
PERCAL targets TRL3 -5 as table 1.3.a shows A preliminary business model has 
been prepared by the different partners based on their current sales and 
consumptions, the estimated target cost, their current market share and the expected 
market evolution (table 2.1.d).  
However, due to the TRL at the end of the project, we expect a significant sales 5 
years after project finish when TRL 8 will be achieved. More accurate calculations 
of profit are difficult to make due to the current low yield of some proposed routes.. 
Expected costs are determinate based on the expertise of the PERCAL’s partners 
and the methodology proposed by Hermann et al3 and further papers to calculate the 
techno-economic prospects of new routes for bio -based bulk chemicals. 
Proposals should also incl ude an 
environmental and socio -economic 
assessment. 
WP8 will include all the environmental, economic and socioeconomic assessments, 
including LCA, LCC and S -LCA for the involved processes and the product lines. 
Outcomes will be comparable with current proc esses where applicable in order to 
demonstrate the environmental and social advantages of PERCAL project.  
1.3. CONCEPT AND APPROACH. 
1.3.1. Overall concept 
Implementation of environmental policies, especially waste policies, is one of the European Commission's key  
priorities, as confirmed by its proposal for a 7th Environment Action Programme (EC, 2012) and the Roadmap to a 
resource efficient Europe (EC, 2011). While the EU's Waste Framework Directive (EU, 2008) and Landfill Directive 
(EU, 1999) set binding targets for recycling organic waste and diverting biodegradable municipal waste from landfill. 
With the world population set to approach an estimated 9 billion by 2050, against a background of finite natural 
resources, Europe needs renewable biological resources - not just for securing healthy food and animal feedstuffs but 
also for raw materials to produce industrial products and bio -fuels. PERCAL is in accordance with these priorities 
by maximizing the value of components obtained from MSW. 
On 13 February 2012, t he European Commission adopted a strategy for «Innovating for Sustainable Growth: A 
Bioeconomy for Europe»4. A strong bioeconomy will help Europe to live within its limits. The sustainable production 
and exploitation of biological resources will allow the production of more from less, including from waste, while 
limiting negative impacts on the environment and reducing the heavy dependency on fossil resources, mitigating 
climate change and moving Europe towards a post-petroleum society 
MSW biowaste contains large amounts of polysaccharides (30-40% cellulose, hemicellulose and pectin), lipids (10-
15%) and protein (5 -15%), depending on the origin and pre -processing steps. Efficient conversions of mixed, and 
variable feedstocks are challenging. To date, mixed w astes have been transformed by thermochemical processes, 
such as hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL) and gasification, and by anaerobic digestion, leading to methane and bio -
hydrogen, fuels (ethanol and butanol), compost and fertilizers. Production of more complex chemicals is limited by 
large-scale economic feasibility due to pre -treatment and conditioning costs of the recalcitrant raw materials. 
PERCAL's approach, proposes the fermentation of carbohydrates to ethanol, lactic and succinic acid, and the 
subsequent recovery of current fermentation flow, getting a valorization of the not fermented fractions in value-added 
bioproducts. PERCAL aims to increase the rate of carbohydrates hydrolysis in order to obtain h igh rate of sugars 
for the fermentation process and increase the bioproducts process yields. 
                                                             
3 Herman B.G. and Patel M. “Today’s and Tomorrow’s bio-based bulk chemicals from white biotechnology. A techno-economic analysis”. 
Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 136: 361-388 (2007). 
4 http://ec.europa.eu/research/bioeconomy/index.cfm?pg=policy&lib=bbpp  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 9 of 92 
To do it, PERCAL will use as a starting point the large experience of IMECAL and NOVO in the enzymatic 
hydrolysis of the biogenic fraction of MSW that are capable to convert more than 65% of the carbohydrates in 
fermentable sugars and similar percentage of protein (to be used as a nitrogen source and to reduce the addition of 
yeast extract) in the frame of PERSEO project as table 1.3.a shows. 
Table 1.3.a Initial MSW composition, after PERSEO’s enzymatic hydrolysis and after PERSO’s ethanol fermentation process 
(Dry Fraction of Municipal Solid Waste-DFMSW). 
Main component MSW (g/kg 
DFMSW)  
After PERS EO’s 
Enzymatic hydrolysis 
(g/kg DFMSW) 
After PERCAL’s 
Enzymatic hydrolysis 
(g/kg DOFMSW) 
To be used in: 
Cellulose 302.0 106.0 45.0 Energy production Hemicellulose 46.0 16.0 7.0 
Fermentable Sugars ------------ 225.05 290.05 Fermentation to 
obtain ethanol, lactic 
acid & succinic acid. 
Pectin 77.0 77.0 77.0 
Protein 105.0 105.0 105.0 
Surfactants Lipids 141.0 141.0 141.0 
Others (lignin, ashes…) 329.0 329.0 329.0 Energy production 
PERCAL aims to establish new technologies for microbial conversions of MSW after enzymatic hydrolysis that permit 
to convert the 85% of carbohydrates in fermentable sugar, to select microbial strains able to produce the targeted 
intermediate products with high productivities, and for their subsequent transformation into marketable products . 
Additionally, PERCAL aims to use up to 600 g/kg of DFMSW in biochemical products, more than double than 
current PERSEO technology and other similar technologies currently available at pilot plant scale (see section 1.4.6). 
PERCAL will focus in valorise in a cascade approach the greatest potential (carbohydrates, proteins and lipids) single 
compounds of biogenic fraction of MSW. The valorisation of the remaining fractions will be studied (based on LCA 
social and techno-economic analyses results) for post project further improvements of the overall process economic 
and environmental sustainability, non -useful components could be employed to produce biogas or other type of 
energy. Furthermore, a stakeholder group and networking with other complementary EU projects will be proposed 
to select the best technologies to valorise the separated components from MSW. 
Figure 1.3.a shows the target products, processed involved  and their selected feedstocks The MSW  will be used as 
fermentation substrate in other to obtain higher-value products. Detailed information is presented in section 1.4. 
  
Figure 1.3.a PERCAL Flow Diagram including intermediates and sectors involved in each step. 
                                                             
5 In the PERSEO SSF process, the fermentable sugars are continuously been fermented to ethanol, so this is an estimate of how many 
fermentable sugars will be produced in the hydrolysis step. 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 10 of 92 
1.3.2. Positioning of the Project. 
The activities developed in PERCAL project will be implemented at TRL3 with a TRL target of 5. Most of the 
proposed innovations are based on technologies studied at laboratory level, as it is shown in Table 1.3.b: 
Table 1.3.b. TRL justification of PERCAL developments. 
Technology proposed Current 
target TRL Justify current and final TRL 
Improve the amount of 
fermentable sugars with 
new enzymatic 
cocktails. 
45 
IMECAL & NOVO have  developed and validated physico -chemical and 
biochemical processes for the optimal conversion of different fractions of MSW and 
by-products into valuabl e organic compounds. New enzymatic  cocktails will be 
tested supported by new fermentation routes to max imize carbohydrates use. 
Simultaneous 
saccharification & 
fermentation of LA 
3  5 
ATB has validated lactic acid production up to pilot scale incl. full DSP using 
various agri-industrial resources via application of different fermentation regimes, 
e.g. bat ch, repeated -batch, continuous mode, SSF approach. MSW is a more 
complex system and required a in -depth knoleadge of main inhibitors and the 
interaction of the other MSW components.  
Membrane Electrolysis 
(ME) to in -line 
impurities separation. 
4  5 
Membrane e lectrolysis has been demonstrated at laboratory level, at present a 
process for production of caproic acid from fermentation is operating at pilot scale 
in CMET. Lab scale demonstration will move to scale up pilot plant production for 
SA in collaboration with AUA. 
AUA 3  5 
AUA has demonstrated at lab-scale that Basfia succiniciproducens  can produce  
more than 40 g/L of succinic acid from xylose -rich spent sulphite liquor  derived 
from the pulp and paper industry (BRIGIT – FP7 project). Continuous cultures have 
also been developed using the same waste stream leading to around 25 g/L of 
succinic acid production. Preliminary fermentation on commercial xylose using the 
integrated fermentation-ME system carried out at AUA have led to more tha n 20% 
improvement of yield and productivity. Succinic acid production in an integrated 
system using ME will move from lab to pilot scale in collaboration with CMET.  
Reactive distillation for 
production of ethyl 
lactate 
4  5 
Previous project Green Safer Solvent has demonstrated the technology at lab level. 
LA and ethanol are provided form MSW origin the esterification will be done at lab 
scale to validate the raw chemicals quality and catalysts. After the first phase a 
recently implemented prototype react ive distillation at pilot scale will be used to 
upscale and optimise process and product performance.  
Lactic acid based HMA 
by reactive extrusion. 3 5 
AIMPLAS & SOFTER have great expertise in lactic acid reactive extrusion and 
petrol based HMA formulations. Several papers are found in the literature related 
to these issues. Scale up to TRL5 will be done in SOFTER facilities.  
Polyols from Succinic 
acid. 3  5 
COVESTRO has a vast experience with polyols (partly) made from non -fossil 
resources. Our Cardyon material is made with CO2 based polyols. We are producing 
CO2 based polyols using pilot plant that can also be used for SA based materials.  
MSW biorefinery plant 
monitoring. 3  5 
VISUM has developed tested a range of optical sensors in lab tests with successful 
results for specific applications. New tests tailored to monitoring the production of 
ethanol and acids will be designed and the instruments will be developed and under 
relevant conditions based on the expertise of IMECAL in PERSEO plant . 
We were unable to identify public European projects with the same research objectives as those proposed in 
PERCAL. However, there are a number of national and European projects with strong syner gy with PERCAL, and 
details are summarized in Table 1.3.c.  
Table 1.3.c. Partners’ projects related to PERCAL. 
Description of experience/project Scope End 
Year 
Website for information 
(PERCAL’s Partner) 
BRIGIT: New biopolymers produced from lignocellulosic residues 
for flame retardancy highly demanding applications.  
FP7-
KBBE 2016 www.brigit-project.eu 
(AIMPLAS, AUA). 
BIOREFINE-2G: Production of Dicarboxylic Acids and Bio -based 
Polymers. 
FP7-
KBBE 2017 www.biorefine2g.eu/ 
(AIMPLAS,). 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 11 of 92 
Description of experience/project Scope End 
Year 
Website for information 
(PERCAL’s Partner) 
DAFIA: Biomacromolecules from municipal solid bio -waste 
fractions and fish waste for high added value applications.  
H2020 
Biotec 2021 In negotiation (AIMPLAS, 
VISUM). 
OLI-PHA A novel and efficient method for the production of PHA 
polymer-based packaging from olive oil waste water  
FP7-
NMP 2015 www.olipha.eu (VISUM) 
BREAD4PLA: Demonstration-plant project to produce poly -lactic 
acid (PLA) biopolymer from waste products of bakery industry  
EU 
LIFE 2014 www.bread4pla-life.eu 
ATB & AIMPLAS 
EUBis: Food waste valorisation for sustainable chemicals, materials 
& fuels 
EU 
COST 2016 http://costeubis.org/ 
(ATB & AUA) 
BranLact: Thermophilic lactic acid production utilizing rice bran in 
continuous cultivation 
Bioeco
nomy 2019 Not available (ATB) 
BIOFORSU: Valorisation of the organic fraction of municipal solid 
wastes by conversion to bioethanol and combustible biomass  Spain 
level 
project  
2013  www.imecal.com/perseo/ 
(IMECAL) PERSEO: Ethanol production from domestic solid waste organics.  2012 
Green Safer Solvent:  Esterification of lactic acid and ethanol to 
ethyl lactate by means of reactive separation techniques.  FFG 
Austria 2016 TBWR 
AgriMax: Agri and food waste valorisation crops based on flexible 
multi-feedstocks biorefinery processing technologies for new high 
added value applications. BBI JU  2020 Not available yet (EXERGY, 
VISUM, AIMPLAS). 
ELECTROTALK – impact of electricity on microbial metabolism, 
creation of interfaces. ERC-
StG 2017 www.electrotalk.org   
EU and world -wide data bases have been consulted and there are no patents invalidating the proposed PERCAL 
project objectives. Besides product innovations, the innovation potential for the partners regarding the improvement 
of the municipal solid waste and fish waste fractionation and purification, microbiological processes, downstream, 
catalysis, green chemical and final production processes is substantial. In summary, a search of patents and registered 
intellectual property indicated that, if successful, we would be free to register the developed IP and to operate the 
developed system industrially. 
1.3.3. Approach and methodology. 
PERCAL is a 3 year project, structured into 9 work packages. It will take into account all the development steps to 
obtain added value products from low value by -products to fit real industrial needs, including a work plan with a 
well- balanced structure that will combine research activities final products requirements definition and MSW 
selection and pre -treatment to maximize yield of selected intermediated (WP1), production of intermediates and 
production and validation of final products (WP2,3,4&5), plant study redesign and process monitoring  to produce 
the different acids (WP6) and environmental and economic studies in WP7. PERCAL has a well-balanced consortium 
covering all the value chain from waste valorisation to end-users. 
In the WP1, led by IMECAL, several MSW fractions of the different countries where partners or support companies 
are present will be analyzed or data will be collected from recognized sources and three of them will be selected as 
the most representatives. Different enzymatic cocktails will be tested to increase the fermentable sugars. The best of 
them will be selected for each target fermentation process (LA WP2 and SA WP3). In WP2, ATB and TBWR will 
optimize the LA from the MSW hydrolyses. AUA, CMET and ATB will dev elop an optimised bioprocess for the 
production of SA. In WP4, IMECAL & HAYAT will develop new biobased surfactants using the protein and lipid 
fraction. In WP5, AIMPLAS and SOFTER will develop new lactic acid Hot Melt Adhesives, TBWR and HAYAT 
will develop ethyl lactate solvents and COVESTRO will develop new polyester polyols for the polyurethane industry 
using the acids and alcohols develop in  WP2 and WP3. In WP6, led by VISUM, the focus will be to improve the 
control of the PERSEO plant and study the op timal integration of the new LA & SA fermentation processes  and 
biosurfactants production (from lipid and proteins) in the current pilot plant.  
The environmental and social analyses, safety, energy balance, standardization and economic assessment to validate 
the main objectives of the PERCAL project and will be carried out in WP7 by AUA with the support of all partners. 
Innovation management, business plan and Communication, Dissemination & Exploitation activ ities boosting the 
project results will be done in WP 8 by AUA. EXERGY will be in charge of market analysis and elaborate the 
preliminary business plan for all the PERCAL partners and Stakehol ders companies. WP 9 will be dedicated to 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 12 of 92 
management and risk assessment.  
1.3.4. Sex and Gender analysis. 
The technologies, processes and materials developed in PERCAL are gender-independent. All PERCAL Partners 
have internal gender equality jobs creation and promotion policies. The consortium will foster the presence of women 
in the technical and management teams and decision board implemented to govern PERCAL project: the coordinator 
of PERCAL is Ms. Coll, woman researcher is  in charge of the general assembly (Ms. Carracedo) and Executive 
Board (Dr. Marta Tortajada) . The project aims to contribute to the objectives of enhancing Gender Equality by 
involving numerous female researchers (see section 4) in the project and by and by promoting women researchers to 
play a leading role in work packages. To this end, WP2 (Dr. Donna Dietz), WP4 (Dr. Irantzu Alegria), WP5 (Dr. 
Natalie Rahmen), WP8 (Ms. Rocio Roldán) and WP9 (Ms. Caterina Coll) are managed by female researchers, and 
as it is described in section 4, near to 50% of the staff researchers involved in the project are women. 
The Treaty on European Union, the European policy establishes equal opportunities between women and men. In 
particular articles 2 and 3 establish equality between women and men as a specific task of the Community and also 
to promote equality. Monitoring th e progress toward gender equality in science has become a well -established 
activity of the European Union research policy. In accordance with these principles, the approach of PERCAL is 
fully in line with Directive 2002/73/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 September 2002 on the 
implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment, vocational 
training and promotion, and working conditions. 
1.4. AMBITION 
1.4.1 State of the art and progresses in the field of enzymatic hydrolysis of carbohydrates from MSW. 
Due to its composition (cellulose, hemicelluloses, pectin, lignin,...), MSW is considered as a lignocellulosic substrate. 
The ma in sources of fermentable sugars are cellulose and hemicellulose, and therefore enzymatic approaches 
targeting these 2 complex polysaccharides have been developed. The classical scheme for cellulose degradation 
involves the synergistic action of three classes of enzymes6: 1) endo-1,4-β-glucanases randomly cleave internal bonds 
in the cellulose chain, 2) Exo -1,4-β-glucanases attack the reducing or non -reducing end of the cellulose polymer 
(celobiohydrolases). 3) β- glucosidases convert cellobiose, the major product of the endo- and exo-glucanase mixture, 
to glucose.  The commercial cocktails available are made from fungal cellulases 7. In addition the cocktails are 
enriched with xylanases, and oxidative enzymes that promote the efficiency of the classical cell ulases. Commercial 
enzymatic cocktails available are: Cellic Ctec3 (Novozymes), AlternaFuel CMAX™3 (Dyadic International Inc), 
Jtherm (JBEI), Accelerase TRIO™ (Genecor -DuPont), CodeXyme Cellulase (Codexis), Accelerase  1500 
(DuPont), Accelerase BG (DuPont), Accelerase  XC (DuPont), Accelerase  XY (DuPont), Biogazyme (ASA 
Enzymes). IMECAL has already tested some of them in the PERSEO plant and has identified that the yields can be 
improved with additional enzymes. These additional enzymes are mainly based on amylases which are able to break 
alpha-1,4 and alpha-1,6 glucosidic bonds of starch. Similar to cellulose, starch molecules are glucose polymers linked 
together by these two chemical bonds, as opposed to the beta -1,4 glucosidic bonds for cellu lose. The amount of 
starch in OFMSW is significant , since it contains food such as bread, pasta, rice or potato with a relatively high 
percentage of starch. In the PERCAL project, combination of additional enzymes will be added to commercial 
cocktails in order to increase the yield from 65% to 85%. 
Beyond of the state of the art, PERCAL will focus on the improvement of the hydrolysis process by the synergic 
combination of the most effective commercial cocktails with additional enzymes with the support of NOVO (one of 
the worldwide enzyme producer) and the experience of nine years of PERSEO technology. 
1.4.2 State of the art and progresses in the field of valorisation of the proteins and lipids from MSW 
To date most protein wastes are primarily used as animal feed or fertilizers. For example, Distiller’s dried grains with 
solubles, a by-product from the bioethanol industry, is mostly sold as cattle feed, although it has poor nutrition source. 
Vinasse, a by-product from sugarcane-based bioethanol production, has been used as a fertilizer. 
Valorisation in higher added value products of the protein fraction coming from biorefinery approaches is very crucial 
in order to increase the yield of the whole process 8. Due to the origin of the substrate, its use in food/feed is 
disregarded, but the aminoacids and peptides are valuable for other fields such as agriculture (as biofertilizer) and 
                                                             
6 Horn et al (2012). Novel enzymes for the degradation of cellulose. Biotecnol. Biofuels 5:45 
7 Brethauer et al.(2015). Biochemical conversion processes of lignocellulosic biomass to fuels and chemical-A review. CHIMIA 69, 572. 
8 Villegas-Torres et al. (2015). The protein fraction from wheat-based dried distiller’s grain with soluble (DDGS): extraction and valorization. 
New Biotechnology, 32: 697-611 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 13 of 92 
industry (as a source of chemicals). Hydrolysis is the main approach for the valorisation of proteins9. Depending on 
the target application, different methods are employed: acid/base chemical catalysis when the aminoacids are 
intended for industry; or enzymatic methods, less intensive and destructive, for their use in health or as biofertilizers. 
To the best of our knowledge their use as synthons for biosurfactants has not been reported so far.  
The lipidic fraction is also an important byproduct in biorefinery. It is made of triacylglycerides, diacylglycerides, 
monoacylglycerides, phospholipids and free fatty acids. Additionally the cellular membrane of microorganisms from 
the fermentation processes is primarily composed of phospholipids. No references of the use of lipids from MSW 
have been found in scientific or technical literature. 
Protein extraction can be achieved by employing aqueous-ethanol solutions between 50 and 90% (v/v), pH variation 
and hydrolytic enzymes. Proteases have proven to be an alternative method, but current enzyme costs limit the 
industrial application of this approach. For lipid isolation 10, solvent extraction, mechanical pressing and subcritical 
water technology are the most common processes. It should be also necessary to consider the environmental impact 
of the process and its sustainability. This will pro bably restrict the choice of chemicals used and the energy 
requirements of individual units operations. 
The value of amino acids and vegetable oils as raw materials for the preparation of surfactants was recognized as 
soon as they were discovered early in the last century11. The combination of polar amino acids/peptides (hydrophilic 
moiety) and non -polar long -chain compounds (hydrophobic moiety) for building the amphiphilic structure has 
produced molecules with high surface activity. The amino acid or peptide moiety determines the main differences of 
adsorption, aggregation and biological activity between the amino acid/peptide -based surfactant. Hence, cationic, 
anionic, non-ionic and amphoteric surfactants can be obtained depending  on the free functional gro ups. Further 
modification of these groups allows a fine -tuning of their properties to meet almost every particular application.  
Another way to revalorize the protein fraction within the project will be its application as nitrogen source in LA and 
SA fermentations, as a substitute of expensive yeast extract. After protein extraction, the protein will be hydrolysed 
using well-known proteinases9 trying to achieve a yield of close to 90% depending on the enzyme 12 used and the 
MSW protein composition similar values obtained for other proteins wastes coming from the alcohol industry. 
Beyond of the state of the art, PERCAL will focus on the valorisation of the protein and lipid content coming from 
the by-products of the fermentation processes of MSW (more than 300 g/kg of DFMSW) in order to produce new 
biobased surfactants as a novel application of these fractions. Hydrolysed proteins will be used in the fermentation 
of LA and SA to reduce the consumption of expensive yeast extract. 
1.4.3 State of the art and progresses in the field of production lactic acid production from MSW. 
Biotechnological processes and bio-based products are nowadays in focus of various studies as promising alternatives 
to petrochemical routes and products. Lactic acid (LA) assigns to bi o-based organic intermediates of high interest. 
Up to date it is produced on industrial scale and is available on the market at a competitive price level. In chemical 
industry it serves as a building block for a variety of key chemicals or bulk po lymers, e.g. acrylic acid, polylactic 
acid (PLA), or green solvents. Fermentative LA production is an interesting alternative with respect to the 
conventional petro-chemical route enabling the generation of a product of high purity13. Today, lactic acid is widely 
used in the food, cosmetic, pharmaceutical, and chemical as a monomer for the production of PLA. The global lactic 
acid14 market was estimated to be 700 kt in 2013 and it is expected to reach near to 2 Mt by 2020, growing at a CAGR 
of 15% from 2014 to 2020 up to 18.6% reaching a projected market15 of €3.4Billion by 2020.   
The worldwide research is advancing focused on the use of renewable raw materials as carbon substrates as well as 
nutrient additive sources 16. In this context, there is a strong interest to re duce costs for raw materials a nd to use 
renewable resources. With respect to cost aspect of bioprocess feedstocks the utilization of residues and waste 
materials17, MSW18 in particular, and agricultural by-products19 became the focus of public attention.  
                                                             
9 Kumar et al. (2015). Valorisation of protein waste: an enzymatic approach to make commodity chemicals. Front. Chem. Sci. Eng. 9,295-307. 
10Abdelmoez et al.  (2014),  Oleochemical industry future through biotechnology. J. Oleo Science 63 545 -554. 
11 Infante MR et al. (2004). Amino acid-based surfactants. C.R. Chimie 7: 583-592. 
12 Bals B. et al. (2011), Protease digestion from wheat stillage within a dry grind ethanol facility. Biotechnology Progress, 27(2): 428–434 
13 Neu, A.-K. et al. (2016) Fermentative utilization of coffee mucilage using Bacillus coagulans and investigation of down-stream processing 
of fermentation broth for optically pure L(+)-lactic acid production. Bioresource Technology. 211, 2016,  398–405 
14www.specialchem4bio.com/news/2014/05/23/global-lactic-acid-market-to-grow-at-a-cagr-of-15-5-from-2014-20-grand-view-researc -2014 
15 MarketsandMarkets (2015) LA & PLA Market by Application & by Geography - Global Trends & Forecasts to 2020. 
16 Pleissner et al, Utilization of protein-rich residues in biotechnological processes. Applied Microbiol & Biotech, 100,2016, 2133-40. 
17 Zhang, L.et al. (2015) Simultaneous saccharification and fermentation of xylo -oligosaccharides manufacturing waste residue for L -lactic 
acidproduction by Rhizopus oryzae. Biochemical Engineering J., 94,  92-99 
18 Probst M et al. (2015). A closed loop for municipal organic solid waste by lactic acid fermentation. Bioresource Technology 175:142-151. 
19 Pessione A et al.  2014 Enantioselective lactic acid production by an Enterococcus faecium strain showing potential in agro-industrial waste 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 14 of 92 
Lignocellulosic biomass represents the most abundant global source of biomass, and for this reason it has been largely 
utilized in many applications. Lignocellulosic materials can be used to obtain sugar solutions that may be usefully 
exploited for the produc tion of lactic acid through the following steps: a) pre -treatment to break down the 
lignocellulosic structure, b) enzymatic hydrolysis to depolymerize lignocellulose to fermentative sugars, c) sugar 
fermentation to LA by lactic acid bacteria (LAB) and d) s eparation and purification of lactic acid . In recent years, 
one of the most used processes to obtain LA from lignocellulosic materials is the simultaneous saccharification and 
fermentation20, which is able to prevent enzyme inhibition by the product21. 
At the ATB’s lactic acid fermentation group there are long -term experiences with several feedstocks and bacterial 
strains, respectively. During the last months the application of different substrates formulations came into interest 
from other project activities. Therefore, in PERCAL, it will be possible to start further investigations with already 
existing strains (partly self- isolated bacteria) for the here desired utilization of the C6/C5 sugars after pre-treatment 
of the organic biowaste fraction. One of the main environmental-related advantages of the overall technology at ATB 
is the downstream processing step based on membranes22  to avoid wastes like gypsum.  
Besides the development of high-performance fermentation processes (batch, fed-batch, repeated batch, continuous 
mode) their upgrading into pilot scale will be part of the demonstration activities in relevant environment TRL5. 
Beyond of the state of the art, PERCAL will focus on the performance improvement based on cheap, but probably 
complex and inhomogeneous feedstocks (MSW) compared to already existing approaches for other biogenic raw 
materials. We expect furans and other phenolic substances and acetic acid as a main inhibitors. Pre-treatment steps 
available in ATB facilities will be applied in combination with the use of more tolerant strains 
1.4.4 State of the art and progresses in the field of production succinic acid production from MSW. 
Simultaneous saccharification and fermentation of cotton stalk hydrolysates  (65% glucose , 10% xylose)  with 
Actinobacillus succinogenes reached 63 g/L succinic acid with 0.64 g/g yield and 1.17 g/L/h productivity  23. AUA 
has demonstrated in a FP7 project (www.brigit-project.eu) the efficient production of succinic acid using the waste 
liquor produced by the wood sulphite pulping process 24. Results at lab level in the BRIGIT project are showed in 
Table 1.4 .a. A. succinogenes and Basfia succiniciproducens can consume all the sugars available in the MSW 
hydrolysate used in PERCAL. The BRIGIT feedstock is far more inhibitory than the MSW hydrolysate employed in 
PERCAL due to the high concentration of lignosulp honates, phenolics and acetic acid. Thus, it is expected that the 
organic acids produced during fermentation will be the main inhibitors to achieve high productivity and final 
concentration ( 33 g/L total produced acids for A. succinogenes  and 35 g/L total produced acids for B. 
succiniciproducens 25).  
To tackle this problem, PERCAL will integrate 
succinic acid production via fermentation with  
membrane electrolysis to simultaneously 
remove the produced organic acids. The system 
will consist of a bioreactor coupled to a 
continuously recycling side-stream that passes 
through a high-rate electrochemical cell which 
performs the extractions. 
Table 1.4.a Main results of SA production in Brigit Project.  
Strain Type Fermenta-
tion Type 
Yield (g SA 
/g sugar) 
Productivity 
(g SA /L/h) 
[SA] 
(g/L) 
Actinobacillus 
succinogenes 
Fed-Batch22 0.52 0.39 27.4 
Continuous 0.42 0.7 22 
Basfia 
succiniproducens 
Fed-Batch26 0.54 0.31 39 
Continuous 0.49 0.78 21 
Membrane electrolysis (figure 1.4.a) is an electrochemical extraction technique in which electrodes are present in the 
fermentation broth. Membrane electrolysis stands apart from electrodialysis in that the electrochemical reactions and 
products of the process are utilised in the process, ei ther biologically or physico -chemically. This tends to allow 
lower input power and lower resistance relative to electrodialysis due to a smaller distance between the electrodes, 
and fewer membrane pairs in -between the electrodes. In so -called electro-fermentation water reduction (cathode) 
                                                             
bioconversion: Physiological and proteomic studies; J. Biotechnology 173, 31-40. 
20 Tang Y et al. (2013) L(+)-Lactic acid production from furfural residues and corn kernels with treated yeast as nutrients; European Food 
Research and Technology 236, 365-371. 
21 Hu J, et al (2016), High-titer lactic acid production by Lactobacillus pentosus FL0421 from corn stov er using fed -batch simultaneous 
saccharification and fermentation. Bioresource Technology 214: 74-80 
22 Lin H et al. (2014), Lactic acid recovery from fermentation by bipolar membrane electrodialysis and ionic migration; CIESC J. 65, 4830 
23 Li et al. (2013) Efficient decolorization and deproteinization using uniform polymer microspheres in the succinic acid biorefinery from 
bio-waste cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) stalks. Bioresouce. Technology 135 : 604-609. 
24 Pateraki et al. (2016) Pretreatment of spent sulph ite liquor via ultrafiltration and nano -filtration for bio -based succinic acid production, 
Journal of Biotechnology 233 : 95-105. 
25 Pateraki et al. (2016) Modelling succinic acid fermentation using a xylose based substrate, Biochemical Engineering Journal, 114: 26-41 
26 Alexandri et al. (2016) Evaluation of an integrated biorefinery based on fractionation of spent sulphite liquor for the production of an 
antioxidant-rich extract, lignosulphonates and succinic acid Bioresource Technology 214 : 504-513 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 15 of 92 
typically occurs in the fermentation broth, producing hydrogen gas, driving fermentation, and hydroxide ions, which 
replaces alkaline pH control; whereas water oxidation (anode) occurs in an extract solution,  producing oxygen gas 
and protons, which replaces the addition of acid27.  
The current drives the charged carboxylic acids across an anion 
exchange membrane (AEM) by electro -migration from the high -
volume fermenter into a low-volume acid concentrate extract. AEM, 
also used in electroldialysis, is impermeable to cells and solids, 
resulting in a combined extraction, clarification, acidification and 
concentration step in a single unit . CMET have shown in synthetic 
solutions that low concentrations of acetic acid  (10 g/L)  can be 
extracted into a concentrated solution, in excess of 90 % electrical 
efficiency at 20 A/m2, resulting in an acetic acid extraction of around 
1 kg/m2.d (membrane area). Succinic acid was shown to be driven 
into the extract solution at 1.4 kg /m2.d at 40 A/m 2 for a final 
concentration of 69.4 g/L in the extract solution. 
 
Figure 1.4.a. Membrane electrolysis technol. 
Bacterial succinic acid production requires pH control close to neutral levels resulting in the formation of succinate 
salts that later have to be recovered in their acid form. In membrane electrolysis, the applied current drives the 
succinate anion from the fermentation broth into an extract solution , whereas t he hydroxide ions generated in 
electrolysis replace pH control, and thus dosing the fermentation with costly sodium or potassium hydroxide is no 
longer necessary. CMET has extensive experience in the coupling of fermentation processes to in situ electrochemical 
extraction, and has achieved production of mid chain fatty acids at >80% purity from complex waste streams such as 
thin stillage or grass 28,29.  
CMET has proved that the hydrogen gas that is generated in the fermentation broth can be metabolised by many 
fermenting organisms, theoretically replenishing NADH and thus potentially generating more reduced, higher value 
compounds, improving substrate yields and minimising side-products 26. Hydrogen (H2) supply can act as an electron 
donor in Actinobacillus succinogenes and Basfia succiniciproducens cell metabolism providing enough energy for 
the reductive TCA cycle pathway and possibly diminishing by -product generation. Furthermore, the cells and the 
colour do not pass through the membrane. This means that some downstream separation steps including the removal 
of cells, the removal of proteins/colour and acidification of the succinate salt are not needed. Another advantage of 
electrolysis is that the succinic acid concentration in the aqueous extracted solution can reach high concentrations 
reducing the energy requirements for evaporation or enabling the direct crystallisation from the concentrated extract 
(the level of the purity achieved by this method should be verified during PERCAL). 
The removal of organic acids during fermentation and the supply of H 2 is expected to lea d to higher final SA 
concentration, productivity and yield. AUA and CMET have carried out preliminary experiments with Basfia 
succiniciproducens in a recycled fed batch fermentation coupled with electrolysis membrane extraction leading to 
the overall production of 22 g/L of succinic acid with the extract solution containing 60 g/L of succinic acid . The 
control experiment carried out without in-line SA extraction led to 20 g/L of final succinic acid concentration at 80% 
lower productivity and 40% lower yield than the integrated system. These preliminary results demonstrate the high 
potential of the integrated system.  
Beyond of the state of the art, in PERCAL bacterial succinic acid production will be optimised in an  integrated 
fermentation-electrolysis system leading to higher bioprocess efficiency compared to conventional systems . This 
process will be compared with sequential succinic acid production via fermentation followed by downstream 
separation using an electrodialysis-based process available at ATB. 
1.4.5 State of the art and progress in the field of lactic acid hot melt adhesives (HMA) by reactive extrusion. 
The global hot melt adhesives market30 is projected to reach USD 9.64 billion by 2020, registering a CAGR of 5.73% 
between 2015 and 2020.Hot melt adhesives (HMAs) are solids at room temperature, but when heated form a liquid 
adhesive layer that cools and bonds rapidly to a substrate. HMAs can be useful for high speed manufacturing and 
applications that require bonding versatility, large gap filling, and minimal shrinkage. HMAs do not require a carrier 
fluid such as an organic solvent or water, which eliminates the need for drying the liquid adhesive layer once it is 
                                                             
27 Schievano et al. (2016) Electro-fermentation - Merging electrochemistry with fermentation in industry. Trends in Biotechnology In Press 
28 Stephen et al. (2015) Electrolytic extraction drives volatile fatty acid chain elongation through lactic acid and replaces chemical pH control 
in thin stillage fermentation, Biotechnology for Biofuels, 8:221 
29 Stephen et al. (2014) Electrolytic membrane extraction enables production of fine chemicals from biorefinery sidestreams, Environmental 
Science & Technology, 48: 7135–7142 
30 www.researchandmarkets.com/reports/3607761/hot-melt-adhesives-market-by-product-type-eva 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 16 of 92 
applied to a substrate. Elimination of the drying step reduces solvent usage, increases pr oduction line speeds, and 
lowers transportation costs.  
HMA compositions have historically been based on petroleum-derived polymers, and these compositions are further 
tackified, plasticized, and reinforced with a variety of resins, oils and waxes that can be derived from both petroleum 
and naturally occurring feedstocks such as wood, gum and tall oil rosin, and terpenes. These HMA compositions are 
subject to the cyclical price cycles common to all petroleum-derived materials, and also are generally very resistant 
to degradation once the articles employing them (such as cardboard boxes and the like) are disposed.  
Hot melt adhesives based on polylactic acid31 are claimed to have excellent hot tack strength along with long open 
time and moderate setting time. It can be used as a high performance sealant for heat sealing packaging (up to 80°C). 
To improve flexibility of PLA hot melts, other biopolyesters have been added to the formulation. 
Examples of renewable HMA are detailed in section 1.4.6. However, their commercial acceptance is relativity slow 
due to the high cost which is expected to be corrected once these adhesives move into higher volume production  or 
raw material cost reduction 
Low cost and medium-high purity LA are a suitable raw material to produce HMA as alternative to current EVA or 
renewable HMA. Furthermore, reactive extrusion32 will be suitable to produce low molecular weight polymers as in 
the case of polymer for hot melts adhesives33, it is a continuous & low investment process to tailor-made polymeri- 
zation. It  describes a special extrusion process in which individual 
components are first bonded by a chemical reaction. Twi n screw 
extruders are particularly suitable for the reactive extrusion process 
due to the excellent mixing properties and modularity. The liquid raw 
materials are fed into the twin screw extruder infeed in the 
stoichiometric ratio. The reaction of polymerization takes place in the 
twin screw extruder under constant mixing and kneading  at short 
residence time and free of solvents. Surplus reaction heat is dissipated 
through the barrel wall. AIMPLAS & SOFTER has a broad experience 
in the production of polymers, including PLA, by reactive extrusion 34 
using different types of catalyzers to obtain a several range of 
molecular weight and applications (figure 1.4.b). 
 
Figure 1.4.b Chemical routes to PLA & 
lactides from LA. 
After the production of lactide (by traditional green chemical routes) and low molecular weight PLA (by continuous 
reactive extrusion) and in order to improve its adhesion capacities different reactive co-monomers such glycolic acid, 
maleic acid, methacrylate or glycidyl acrylate will be studied to be grafted with the PLA by reactive extrusion. 
Beyond of the state of the art, PERCAL will focus on the production of hot melts by reactive extrusion of lactic acid 
and other co-monomers using suitable catalyzers and peroxides. The obtained copolymers will be formulate d with 
suitable components as tackifier and wax. In addition, small amounts of various additives (e.g., antioxidants, UV 
inhibitors, plasticizers …) will be used to tailor-made final properties. An in-depth study, will be done to produce in 
one step (reactive extrusion (polymerization and grafting) plus components mixing) full renewable HMA. 
1.4.6 State of the art and progresses in the field of production of ethyl lactate from renewable resources. 
The worldwide solvent market is 15 Mt/y, almost all manufacturing a nd processing industries depend on the use of 
solvents. This large consumption means that eventually some products will leach into the ecosystem, most critically 
resulting in contamination of large amounts of water. Many petroleum -based solvents have the d rawbacks of high 
toxicity and cause ozone depletion. Some examples include the dry cleaning industry’s use of the toxic solvent 
perchlorethylene and degreasers such as trichlorethane and acetone. Ethyl Lactate is an environmentally friendly bio-
solvent that can replace many petro-chemical derived solvents used in industrial and consumer applications, including 
inks, coatings, silicone oil, and grease removers. Its high solvency power, high boiling point, low vapour pressure 
and low surface tension enhances the performance of various resins, polymers and dyes. Ethyl lactate is not an ozone 
depleter, it is biodegradable, and is not a volatile organic compound (VOC). 
In addition to the environmental benefits of these solvents, the economical savings from cheaper disposal make them 
an attractive alternative. Finally, ethyl lactate is not found on the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Toxic 
Release Inventory (TRI) or listed in the Hazardous Air Pollutant (HAP) section. 
                                                             
31 Viljanmaa, M., et. al., "LA Based Polymers as HMA for Packaging Applications", Int. J. Adhesion & Adhesives, 22, 2002, 219-226. 
32 Processing of acrylic hotmelts by reactive extrusion US 6753079 B2 
33 www.pstc.org/files/public/Maris08.pdf 
34 www.innorex.eu/; www.biorefine2g.eu/; www.bio4map.eu/; http://bread4pla.aimplas.es/;    
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 17 of 92 
The esterification reaction of lactic acid and ethanol to ethyl lactate kinetics can be highly accelerated using a catalyst 
and applying moderate temperatures in the range of 70 -80 ºC. At equilibrium the 4 phase solution contains about 
26% ethyl lactate only, therefore to accomplish much higher conversion rates a continuous separation of ethyl lactate 
and water is required. In addition to the main 4 molecules presented (ethanol, lactic acid, ethyl lactate and water) the 
esterification solution also contains significant amounts of azeotropes (water/ethanol, ethanol/ethyl lactate) and lactic 
acid polymerisates (such as di -lactides and tri -lactides). So, the esterification reaction on a detailed level is quite 
complex which is most likely the reason why there is up to now no detail ed chemical model available which also 
includes azeotropes and LA- polymerisates and catalyst.   
Reactive distillation process for the esterification of ethyl lactate is promising approach. PERCAL’ proposal is to 
establish a catalytic zone by means of a built in solid catalyst within a distillation column. In theory such an apparatus 
can deliver a total transfer of introduced LA to ethyl lactate within the catalytic zone. The product ethyl lactate exits 
the system as bottom product accumulated in the column heater while water and ethanol exit at the head.  
Gao et a l35 described an archetypal set -up of a reactive distillation of et hyl lactate without delivering any more 
detailed experimental results, several researchers36-37 describing kinetics of esterification of ethanol and LA to ethyl 
lactate using ion-exchange resins as solid catalysts. Also basic results on the vapour-liquid equilibria in the reactive 
system have been published38. Other researchers described in detail: i) a numeric modelling for a reactive distillation, 
ii) the esterification model process and searched for optimal process parameters for high outputs of mono-ethyl lactate 
and iii) reactive distillation for esterification of lactic acid and methanol to recover methyl lactate39.  
Within the project, a new innovative technology for the production of ethyl lactate on the basis of reactive 
rectification will be developed. This allows performing the esterification of lactic acid with ethanol and the separation 
process of the target product ethyl lactate in one single apparatus. This technique enables significant advantages 
regarding efficiency. It is also foreseen that required investment and operative costs of such a technology are lower 
than for existing methods.  Based on literature data, TBWR has been modelling the esterification process for ethyl 
lactate and designing a prototype reactive distillation for further experimental evaluation.  
Beyond of the state of the art, PERCAL will use a prototype reactive distillation to upscale the production of ethyl 
lactate to a continuous process in the scale of 3-5Lh-1 ethyl lactate.  The process will be specifically designed to the 
characteristics of PERCAL products ethanol and lactic acid from MSW. Also potential synergie s to integrate 
esterification to an existing bioethanol demonstration plant will be assessed for further upscale potential. Through 
increasing the efficiency and developing a single process for ethyl lactate production it will make it easier for new, 
or existing, companies to enter the market. Continuous development and reduction of processing steps for ethyl 
lactate production will be developed from data acquired in this study. The production of highly pure lactic acid may 
also be examined by reversing the reaction after esterification. 
  
                                                             
35 J. Gao et al., Investigation of Ethyl Lactate Reactive Distillation Process, Chemical Engineering Research and Design, 85, 525-9. 2007. 
36 C. S. M. Pereira et al.: Thermodynamic Equilibrium and Reaction Kinetics for the Esterification of lactic Acid with Ethanol Catalyzed by 
Acid Ion-Exchange Resin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 47, 1453-63, 2006. 
37 P. Delago et al., Kinetic Study for esterification of lactic acid with ethanol and hydrolysis of ethyl lactate using an ion-exchange resin catalyst, 
Chem. Eng. J., 126, 111-8, 2007. 
38 D. T. Vu et al.,Vapor-Liquid Equilibria in the Systems Ethyl Lactate+Ethanol &Ethyl lactate Water, J. Chem. Eng. Data 51, 1220-25, 2006. 
39 S. Thotla, S. Mahajani: Reactive distillation with side draw, Chemical Engineering and Processing 48,927–937, 2009. 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 18 of 92 
1.4.7 State of the art and progresses in the field of production of succinic acid (SA) derivate products. 
Bio-succinic acid costs higher than its petroleum based counterpart. 
Although this is the case, microbial production of succinic acid has been 
attracting a lot interest mainly due to four main factors: (i) huge expected 
demand in the next years as section 2 shows (ii) The succinic acid produced 
through traditional chemical routes using petroleum -based starting 
materials cannot give high purity and yield without the usage of high 
temperature, high pressure, etc... On the other hand, microbial succinic acid 
production provides milder and environmental friendly conditions as well 
as good purity and yields. (iii) Potential use of land field organic waste as a 
feedstock for the production of SA, (iv) As the microbial production of 
succinic acid becomes a mature technology, the current bio-SA production 
costs will further decrease. It is highly expected that petroleum -based 
succinic acid will lose its cost advantage in the near future.  
Microbial production of succinic acid also opens new opportunities to bio-
based production of 1,4 -BDO, THF, putrescine (Figure 1.4. c)40  and 
polymers of these such as PBS, PBT, PTMEG, PA-4,6 and PA-4,10. 
 
Figure 1.4.c Diacid platform. 
Beyond of the state of the art, PERCAL will lay the foundation for a truly biobased industry to produce a new range 
of bio based  building block for polyols, resins and polyurethane dispersions (PUD) . PERCAL will avoid the 
competition with food for the production of polyols and truly focus on waste to resources. 
1.4.8 Main competitors.  
Table 1.4.a shows a list the main competitors for the different results that you have identified at worldwide, and 
identify those features (at the different levels: technological, obtained results, state of development, prices, market 
niche, etc.) that your results will have and compare them with the ones that your competitors have.  
Table 1.4.b Main competitors and the main advantages and limitations of current solutions. 
Result Current 
competitor41 
Main advantages of 
the commercial 
solution 
Main limitations of the commercial 
solution. PERCAL Advantages 
Enzymatic 
hydrolysis 
of MSW. 
Eberkem, 
Etanolix, 
Abengoa, 
Bionolix 
No industrial plant for industrial production of chemical products 
from MSW. Mainly focused to biofuels production. 
Use of PERCAL tech. 
for bioethanol, LA, SA 
process, increasing its 
competitiveness. 
Lactic acid 
PURAC B.V, 
Natureworks, 
Galactic, Henan 
Jindan, BBCA, 
Total 
Good product quality, 
food grade product 
possible, highly 
developed 
fermentation & 
downstream. 
All of the competitors are using first 
generation sugars  (beet, cane , corn etc. ) 
high dependency on sugar price. 
Low cost sugars are 
feasible. High yield due 
in-line inhibitors 
removal. 
No-petrol 
source 
Succinic 
acid 
Reverdia, 
Succinity 
Myriant 
Established at market. 
High purity 
Genetic engineering of species to tolerate 
acidic fermentation conditions.  Extensive 
dosing of chemicals to maintain neutral 
conditions is high cost, and requires 
recovery of salt.  High downstream cost  
e.g. formic, acetic or lactic acids removal. 
Extraction of succinic 
acid in -line with 
fermentation process. 
Ethyl 
lactate. 
Corbion, ADM, 
VERTEC, 
Arkema,  
Established at market  
with suitable 
performance. 
Mainly batch esterification, limitations in 
process efficiency to kinetics 
(equilibrium), high demand of product and 
by product separations . High cost versus 
petrol based. 
Reactive distillation 
allows esterification 
and product separation 
in one single apparatus 
                                                             
40 F. H. Isikgor et al. Lignocellulosic biomass: a suitable platform for bio-based chemicals and polymers, Polym. Chem., 2015,6, 4497-559. 
41 Full names of current worldwide competitors are detailed in section 2.1.2 Economic impact. 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 19 of 92 
Result Current 
competitor41 
Main advantages of 
the commercial 
solution 
Main limitations of the commercial 
solution. PERCAL Advantages 
No-petrol 
source 
HMA. 
Collano 
Adhesive AG 
DaniMer 
Scientific 
Hot me lt pressure 
sensitive adhesives 
based on renewable 
sources Good 
temperature service 
0°C to 55°C. 
Lactic acid from sugar or food by -
products (animal feed competition). High 
cost. 
LA from MSW. Low 
cost polymerization 
process (reactive 
extrusion). 
No-petrol 
based 
polyols. 
NOVOMER 
CO2 based polyol – 
first products 
available (PU foams 
for seatings with 
FORD) – lower 
carbon footprint that 
oil based material 
Mechanical properties are in question – 
only a fraction of fossil based raw material 
can be replaced by CO2 
Develop a 100% 
biobased near drop -in 
solution has the 
potential to further 
reduce the footprint of 
PUR products. 
No-petrol 
based 
surfactant. 
Jeneil Biotech, 
AGAE Techn., 
Rhamnolipid 
Inc., Sigma-
Aldrich, 
BioFuture Ltd, 
Ecochem Ltd.,  
Established at market 
with suitable 
performance. 
Noble expensive materials as feedstocks 
Cheap raw materials. 
Different range of 
properties, depend ing 
on the combination of 
lipid and amino-acid. 
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 20 of 92 
2. IMPACT
2.1 EXPECTED IMPACTS. 
The PERCAL project is fully in line with the European BBI Call “H2020-BBI-R08.2016- Emerging technologies for 
conversion of the organic content of Municipal Solid Waste and improving waste -to-chemicals value chains " and 
with the wider objectives, guidelines and policies of several EU leading initiatives, as summarized in table 2.1.a. 
Table 2.1.a Contribution to the expected impacts defined in the BBI 2016 R08 topic text. 
Expected Impact in the 
BBI.2016.R8 topic Expected contribution of the BBI topic. 
Improved yield of 
intermediate 
extraction/recovery from 
the organic content of MSW 
by 20% with respect to 
state-of-the-art or exceed 
80% yield of intermediates.  
 
With the application of improved enzyme cocktails for the carbohydrate fraction and the 
valorisation of the lipid and protein by -products, we expected to valorise up to 600 g/kg 
of Dry fraction of MSW, more than two times than current PERSEO technology or other 
similar technologies described in ANNEX I. 
Main PERCAL 
yield impact. 
Current intermediates yield 
from MSW as a feedstock. 
PERCAL proposed target yield. 
Lactic acid 
Final titer of fed -batch 
fermentation up to 30 g/L42. 
High conversion yield (>85% 
based on fermentable sugars) for 
the production of up to 55 g/L LA 
with >97% enantiopurity  will be 
achieved. 
Succinic acid 
No data available for MSW. 
Up to 40 g/L depending on 
sugar composition, up to 0.54 
g/g yield and up to 0.78 g/L/h 
productivity (based on results 
from the BRIGIT project)  
Up to 60 g/L final SA 
concentration with at least 20% 
higher yield from MSW sugars 
and up to 50% higher productivity 
(depending on MSW composition)  
Biosurfactants 
No data available for MSW. 
40%-90% yield of enzymatic 
hydrolysis using as a by -
products of well-known 
fermentation process  
(depending on the enzyme) 
(reference 9)  
Target is to achieve the same 
hydrolysis yield than described in 
the alcohol industry (reference 9), 
taking into account the complexity 
to manage and control feedstock 
derived from MSW. 
Ethanol 
26g/L (current values in 
PERSEO plant) 
30g/L (expected due to increase % 
of fermentable sugars) i.e., 26% 
higher. 
With the pilot plant at ATB a new biotechnological procedure is realized, allowing an 
efficient refinement of ingredients from p lant biomass and residues into industrial 
products according to the process steps of a standardized sugar -based fermentation 
technology. Besides the feedstock costs which should be much lower here due to the 
utilization of waste the expenses for the down s treaming of a bio -product, for example, 
amount to up to 90% of the entire production costs, depending on the value of the product.  
Validated removal of 
inhibitors to such an extent 
that it allows cost -effective 
downstream processing. 
Membrane electrolysis extraction will be used to remove the production of organic acids 
during succinic acid production in an integrated bioprocess leading to enhanced final 
succinic acid concentration, yield and productivity. The succinic acid will be concentrated 
in the extract solution in the acid form leading to reduced unit operations for the 
purification of succinic acid. The integrated system will be compared with sequential 
succinic acid production via fermentation followed by succinic acid recovery using th e 
electrodialysis-based downstream process available at ATB. 
Due to the importance of separation and purification of the product the investigations 
concentrate on the down-stream processes of lactic acid in the form of lactate salts made 
by fermentation of  the different substrates. Conventional processes are based on 
                                                             
42 Probst, M., Walde, J., Pümpel, T. et al. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2015) 99: 3029. doi:10.1007/s00253-015-6414-7 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 21 of 92 
Expected Impact in the 
BBI.2016.R8 topic Expected contribution of the BBI topic. 
precipitation steps that generate large amounts of chemical effluents. Consequently the 
environmental impact and the operating costs of traditional precipitation processes can be 
reduced by using alternative technologies, such as two-stage electro dialysis. 
Validated process by 
comparison of the resulting 
product yield with the one 
obtained from 
lignocellulosic biomass. 
The difference in yield 
should not exceed 10%. 
AUA and CMET have carried ou t preliminary experiments with Basfia 
succiniciproducens demonstrating that a conventional fed -batch fermentation using 
xylose as carbon source led to 80% lower productivity and 40% lower yield than the 
integrated ME-fermentation system. The in-line extraction of organic acids is expected to 
improve succinic acid production when compa red to lignocellulosic biomass . Similar 
approach will be proposed in the production of lactic acid by microbiological fermentation 
in order to optimize the yield avoiding the negative effect of inhibitors. 
Contribution to the BBI JU 
Key Performance 
Indicators (KPI), 
specifically: 
- Creation of at least 1 new 
cross-sectorial 
interconnection in bio -
based economy clusters 
(KPI 1). 
-  Set the basis for the 
creation of at least 1 new 
bio-based value chain 
(KPI 2). 
In PERCAL a new cross-sectorial interconnection will be proposed to produce novelty 
industrial valuable products from b iogenic fraction of MSW.  Chemical companies 
(HAYAT, SOFTER, ARKEMA & COVESTRO)  will collaborate with biotechnological 
companies (ENERGO & NOVO) and engineering companies  (IMECAL, EXERGY & 
VISUM). Several industrial sectors will be addressed such as solvent s, adheives, polyols 
and surfactants, that are the raw material for a huge number of products (household and 
cleaning products, cardboard, packaging, paints, varnish, etc) 
Three bio-based value chains will be developed using MSW as a main feedstock: 1) Lactic 
acid from fermentative process to produce organic solvents and hot melt adhesives, 2) 
Succinic acid from fermentative process to produce polyols for the polyurethane industry 
and 3) Biosurfactants from the protein and lipid fraction as a by -product of both target 
fermentation processes. Although LA, SA and biosurfactants are already being produced 
from bio-based sources (usually from food competing sources such as sugars and oils), 
they have never been produced from MSW before. This represents a real ch allenge due 
its composition complexity and variability.  
2.1.1 Enhancing innovation capacity and integration of new knowledge. 
Valorising municipal solid waste (MSW) has an environmental rationale and creates an important competitiveness 
opportunity for Europe as described in the European Commission strategy for ’Innovating for Sustainable Growth: a 
bioeconomy for Europe‘. Indeed, addressing our societal challenges is a major catalyst for increasing our innovation 
capacity and for the integration of new knowledge generated as a result of research into practical societal and 
industrial contexts.  
The percentage of chemical production based on biotechnology is estimated to increase from less than 2% in 2005 
to approximately a quarter of all chemical production43 by 2025. In EU28 2013, the chemical and plastics represented 
a turnover of 42 billion €  and 200,000 employees 44. Initiatives such as PERCAL are enablers for innovation in 
countless other sectors that can transform these wastes into sustainably sourced raw materials as inputs for countless 
discreet manufacturing and process industries in Europe and internationally.  
To increase the innovation capacity of the industry, our approach is to capitalise on a valuable opportunity for the 
EU municipal waste management, engineering, chemicals, plastics and other end-user industries to work together in 
order to substitute currently used fossil-based counterparts with bio -based materials and to assume a leadership 
position on the world stage.  
The innovation process is only complete when new innovative knowledge is put to industrial use. The innovative 
potential of PERCAL is enhanced by the strong industrial composition of the PERCAL consortium (7 partners 
out of 12; five of them SMEs and three large companies). Five of the industrial partners or support companies are 
BBI full members (CENER, NOVO, ENERGO, ARKEMA and EXERGY). Industrial partners are integrated into 
the project decision making structure to ensure that the involved industrial sectors drive project activities and benefit 
from the project results. To ensure success, industrial partners will lead all the technological WPs an d enable the 
steering of project activities from the perspective of the whole supply and value chain. The success of PERCAL will 
be mainly based on the strong interaction and partnership of SMEs/industry and research organizations, all highly 
skilled in complementary fields as shown in figure 2.1. IMECAL and NOVO will be in charge to select European 
representative MSW streams based on placed and seasonal variables. The selected ones will be pre -treated with 
                                                             
43 Smeets, E. et al. (2014) Evaluating the macroeconomic impacts of bio-based applications in the EU.  
44 http://biconsortium.eu/sites/biconsortium.eu/files/news-image/16-03-02-Bioeconomy-in-figures.pdf  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 22 of 92 
enzymatic cocktails to maximize the production of fermentable sugars and minimize the formation of inhibitors. 
 
 
Figure 2.1.a. Structure and relation between partners in the consortium. 
A fraction of the proteins will be employed as a nitrogen sourc e of fermentation. After that three main routes are 
defined in PERCAL project:  ATB and CENER will be in charge to select the best strains and fermentation process 
to maximize the lactic acid yield. The lactic acid will be chemically modified to produce: 1) Eco-friendly ethyl lactate 
solvents by reactive distillation from lactic acid and the ethanol produced in PERSEO pilot plant to be used in 
cleaning products and inks and 2) hot-melt adhesives by controlled reactive extrusion for cardboard and other non -
food applicationsAUA and CMET will be in charge to select the best strains and fermentation process (including 
its integration in a membrane electrolysis extraction system) to maximize the succinic acid yield. The purified 
succinic acid will be employed as an intermediate building blocks to produce polyester polyols, the main components 
of polyurethane.  Amino acids and lipids from the fermentation steps will be extracted and purified. After their 
chemical or enzymatic treatment, both components will be used to produce renewable and biodegradable surfactants 
as alternative to current petrol based ones. 
The information of pre -treatment, fermentation and downstream of each acid will be used by the engineering 
companies IMECAL, VISUM and EXERGY for the scale-up process study in order to integrate in the PERSEO 
demo plant the key process parameters to maximize the yield of each one using complex feedstocks. 
Cross-fertilization and synergies among partners with expertise in complementary and cascaded processes (VISUM, 
TBWR …) , technologies and products will act as a booster for innovation placing better and more sustainable 
products on the market. The participation of large end -users guarantees high impact and the wide dissemination & 
exploitation of the project results at worldwide level. 
2.1.2 Economic impact: strengthening the competitiveness and growth of companies 
High economic impact will be achieved through strengthening the competitiveness of the Industrial Partners in the 
target market sectors and related ones (intermediate chemicals (SA, LA and ethanol), solvents, hot -melts adhesives 
surfactants and polyols) by: 1) promoting the use of PERCAL  materials, components and systems in high value -
added applications while keeping costs competitive, 2) strengthening and differentiating the EU Industry, 3) 
increasing workers’ skills. Detailed information of each market is presented in the following pages:  
Eco-friendly solvents. 
The solvent market production in Europe is estimated between 3.5 to 4.5 milli on tonnes per year, at prices ranging 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 23 of 92 
from €2.00 to €3.75 per kilo 45. This large consumption means that eventually some products will leach into the 
ecosystem, most critically resulting in contamination of large amounts of water. Many petroleum-based solvents have 
the drawbacks of high toxicity and cause ozone depletion. Some examples include the use in the dry cleaning industry 
of the toxic solvent perchlorethylene and degreasers such as trichlorethane and acetone.  
Ethyl Lactate is an environmentally benig n solvent. Lactate esters have found industrial applications in specialty 
coatings, inks, cleaners and standard cleaning products. It is produced from renewable resources and are neither toxic 
nor ozone depleting. They are biodegradable, and free of volati le organic compound (VOC). In addition to their 
environmental benefits, the economical savings from cheaper disposal make them an attractive alternative. 
The current market share of bio -solvents in the EU is about 1.5% (around 60 kt/year -120 M€) 46. However, bio -
solvents produced from vegetable oils and from starch are progressively replacing petrochemical solvents. One of 
the main factors for their increased consumption is the EU legislation concerning the reduction of volatile organic 
compound emi ssions in the context of the air quality policy. Some estimations point at a potential share of 
approximately 12-40% of the solvents market (i.e., 1.6 Mt/year- 3,200 M€/year) in the next decade.  
Packaging, healthcare sector disposables, detergents, hygiene products, cosmetics and paints are strongly influenced 
by health and environmental concerns and represent areas in which bio -based products could potentially reach a 
substantial market share. The sales of these products in the EU were roughly about € 250  billion in 2005 and the 
healthcare sector is expected to grow due to population ageing. 
Currently all ethyl lactate is currently produced from ethanol and lactic acid made from renewable sources (e.g., 
starch or sugar). PERCAL aims to produce Ethyl Lactate from ethanol and lactic acid coming from the organic 
fraction of MSW. This is an unexplored route to produce bio-based solvents. The PERCAL’s solvent will be used 
exclusively in non-food applications such as cleaning products and non-food contact inks. 
Biosurfactants from modified amino-acids and lipids 
The global surfactants market is projected to reach a volume of 24,000 kt and a value of €40,000 Million by 2020 
with an estimated to grow at a CAGR of 5.5%, by value during the forecast period of 2015 to  202047. The anionic 
surfactants segment dominated the global market, in terms of volume, with 8,000 kt in 2014, followed by the non -
anionic surfactants, the volume of which was recorded at 6,500 kt in the same year. The amphoteric surfactants 
segment, with a share of 7.2% of the global market in 2014, is projected to grow at the highest CAGR during the 
forecast period of 2015 to 2020, as compared with the other surfactant segments. 
The surfactants properties such as wettability, detergency, emulsion, dispersion, stabilization and foam/froth have 
vast practical applications in variety of industries. The market is largely driven by applications such as the 
soaps/detergents, personal care, and industrial and institutional cleaners industries.  
Prolonged usage of surfactants obtained from synthetic sources generates toxic effects such as skin and eye irritation, 
neurotoxicity, mutation, and other health concerns in human beings. Several r egulatory bodies such as Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), Organic 
Consumers Association, and National Institutes of Health (NIH) jointly work to observe the implication of detergents 
on humans. Investment in research and development to introduce new sources of raw materials for the manufacture 
of surfactants is projected to provide opportunities to the surfactants market.  
The global Biosurfactants48 market by revenue was €1,800 million (4% of the market) in 2015 is projected to reach 
€2,200 million by 2020. The high share of biosurfactants in Europe can be attributed to the growing awareness among 
consumers regarding the health hazards associated with chemical surfactants. In add ition, the stringent regulatory 
framework of the region favors the use of bio based products in place of conventional petroleum based products.  
Regardless of their greater biodegradability and reduced toxicity, cost competitiveness still remains the major concern 
for bio based surfactant production. However, recombinant or metabolically engineered, hyper producing strains, 
low cost feedstock could lead to a significant cost reduction. 
Nowadays, 96% of surfactants are produced from petrol based components (e.g., alkyl-benzene sulfonate). PERCAL 
aims to produce surfactants from the protein and lipid fraction of MSW by chemical and enzymatic routes. The 
PERCAL’s Biosurfactants will be used exclusively in non-food applications such as soaps/detergents and industrial 
cleaners industries. 
Competitors and key stakeholders in the alternative solvents and surfactant market. An analysis of the structure of 
the market players and key stakeholders demonstrates that the market is controlled by large companies. Main 
                                                             
45 http://cellulac.co.uk/en/ethyl-lactate/ and http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy16osti/65509.pdf 
46 EU commission report, Monthly Update on Industrial Policy Indicators and Analysis – June 2013-//ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/ 
47 www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/biosurfactants-market  
48 www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/biosurfactants-market  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 24 of 92 
producers of ethyl lactate include Corbion, Galactic, ADM, Musashino Chemical Laboratory, Verte c BioSolvents, 
Somaiya Group, …The biggest players in the surfactant market are include BASF Cognis Henkel AG & Co. KGaA, 
Soliance, MG Intobio, Ecover, Kemin Industries. Identifying and effectively negotiating technology licensees will 
be a key activity for PERCAL partners. The untraditional source (MSW) and sustainability demands of final 
consumers will provide a strong market pull, supported by the new EU legislation. 
Existing Competition: PERCAL offers a proprietary, eco-friendly and effective alternative over existing commercial 
products. Furthermore products will be sold at a lower price than existing solutions due to the raw cost of MSW as 
raw material produced in huge amounts each year. The market expected for VOCs free solvents is huge (1.6 Mt/y) 
and there are market possibilities for many different actors. The potential market for Biosurfactants is 22,000 kt/y 
with an average cost of 1,600-1,700 €/t. 
Potential New Entrants: As the bio-based solvent and surfactants market is growing, with an increasing number of 
applications, it is inevitable that there will be additional companies interested in developing and selling these bio -
based products. However, it is difficult to have a largely available and low cost feedstock for their production such 
as MSW and it is anticipated that the majority of uptake will be from existing manufacturers who will be interested 
in licensing the patented PERCAL technology. By allowing the technology to be licensed, TBWR and HAYAT will 
reduce the incentives for these companies to undertake the costly, slow and risky process of developing alternatives.  
Materials Suppliers: the main ingredients of PERCAL bio -based solvents will be lactic acid and ethanol coming 
from MSW feedstock. MSW is available worldwide at very low price since it is very abundant. Additives required 
for the production of ethyl lactate are used in several processes and are available in the required quantities to meet 
the market demand, with established prices and several suppliers. Biosurfactants are produced by chemical treatment 
of the protein and lipid fraction of MSW, they also use standard reactants in the extraction of surfactants components 
and further chemical modification. 
Main customers: The main customers of solvents and surfactants are large consumer goods manufacturers such as 
HAYAT and small or medium size companies that supply to local market. After PERCAL successful project, 
HAYAT will offer their o wn customers new non -toxic and VOC free “green” cleaning and related products at a 
competitive cost. Current consumption of solvents and surfactants in HAYAT is estimated in 750 t/year. 
Political Groups and Consumers: Bio based solvents are beneficial in terms of health and safety aspects. Common 
solvents are both toxic and flammable, while ethyl lactate is not found on Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) 
Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) or listed in the Hazardous Air Pollutant (HAP) section. EU legislatio n on reduction 
of VOCs is a driver for this adoption . PERCAL will offer the opportunity to provide bio -based solvents and 
surfactants that are both effective and safe. Effectively disseminating this information will be essential to estimulate 
non-governmental organizations (NGO) and consumer pull for PERCAL’s solvents.  Additionally, government 
funding for public -private partnership (PPP) schemes to develop non -toxic solvents & surfactants is likely to 
encourage new players to enter the market. 
Hot-melt adhesives (HMA). 
The global hot melt adhesives market 49 is projected to be worth €9 Billion by 2020, registering a CAGR of 5.73% 
between 2015 and 2020 with a consumption was estimated close to 1.5 million tons in 2014. HMA is a solvent-free 
and thermoplastic material. This market is driven mainly by the need s ubstitution of solvent -borne adhesives. 
However, this market faces certain drawbacks, such as high cost associated with switching to hot melt adhesives and 
volatility in the raw material prices50. Low cost raw material and processes, free of the cost volatility of petrol based 
chemicals, will act as a driving to the growth of the market. 
Ethylene-vinyl acetate (EVA) is the leading product segment and accounted for more than 50% of the total demand 
in 2014. Packaging was the largest application segment and ac counted for more than 33% of the total demand in 
2014 and is likely to continue this dominance up to 2020. They are used in packaging applications such as corrugated 
case and cartoon sealing. Can, bottle and glass labelling are among other major packaging application which this 
adhesive caters. Increasing hygiene awareness among consumers is likely to positively influence disposable product 
demand. Hot -melt adhesives find other significant applications in disposable application such as baby diapers, 
feminine hygiene and adult incontinence products.  
It appears that all hot-melt is currently produced from petrol based polymers (e.g., EVA, polyurethane). PERCAL 
aims to produce HAMs from low molecular lactic acid coming from the organic fraction of MSW by reactive 
extrusion. The HMA from PERCAL will be used exclusively in non-food applications. 
Competitors and key stakeholders in the alternative HMA market. An analysis of the structure of the market players 
                                                             
49 www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/adhesive-sealants-market  
50 www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/europe-hot-melt-adhesives-market 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 25 of 92 
and key stakeholders demonstrates that the market  shared between large companies and small/medium local size 
companies. Main hot melt adhesives manufacturers include The 3M Company, Ashland Inc., Bostik S.A., Dow 
Corning, H.B. Fuller Company, Henkel AG & Company, Jowat AG, Sika AG and Toyobo Co., Ltd. (Japan) among 
others. Identifying and effectively negotiating technology licensees will be a key activity for PERCAL partners. The 
untraditional source (MSW) and sustainability demands of final consumers will provide a strong market pull, 
supported by significant environmental advantages and low expected cost volatility of the raw material. 
Existing Competition: PERCAL offers a proprietary, eco-friendly and effective alternative over existing commercial 
products. Furthermore products would be sold at a similar or slightly higher price than EVA-based HMAs, given that 
MSW is a low cost raw material, but it is in competition with optimized petrol -based process. The potential market 
for VOCs free HMAs is 750 kt/y, i.e., the current market of EVA HMAs. 
Potential New Entrants: As the HMAs market is growing, with an increasing number of applications, it is inevitable 
that there will be additional companies interested in developing and selling bio-based HMAS. However, it is difficult 
to have another feedstock for the production of bio-based HMA with the potential of MSW and reactive extrusion is 
a fast, low cost, low energy consumption and low investment process for HMA production. It is anticipated that the 
majority of uptake will be from existing manufacturers who wil l be interested in licensing the patented PERCAL 
technology. By allowing the technology to be licensed, SOFTER and AIMPLAS will reduce the incentives for these 
companies to undertake the costly, slow and risky process of developing alternatives.  
Materials Suppliers: the main ingredients of PERCAL’s HMAs will be lactic acid coming from MSW feedstock. It 
feedstock is available worldwide at very low price since it is very abundant. Other agents required for the chemical 
production of lactic based HMA (such as  wax, oils, inorganic fillers, …)  are used in several processes and are 
available in the required quantities to meet the market demand, with established prices and several global suppliers. 
Main customers: The main customers of Lactic HMA are large consum er goods packers and small or medium size 
companies that supply to local markets. HAYAT, COVESTRO or ENERGO will use HMA in the packaging and 
labelling of their current products. This will drive to provide 100% biodegradable cardboard and labels. 
Political Groups and Consumers: Solvent-free bio based HMAs are beneficial in terms of health and safety aspects 
in comparison with other types of adhesives (VOCs production). Common adhesives are both toxic and flammable, 
thus the major reasons for replacing them are, on the one hand, the reduction or suppression of volatile organic 
compounds in HMAs and on the other hand the long shelf life and easily disposability of HMAs. EU legislation on 
reduction of VOCs is a driver for this adoption  and by effectively disseminating the benefits o f HMA the required 
non-governmental organizations (NGO) and consumer pull will be achieved. 
Production of SA and related polyols.  
Succinic Acid market worth €400 Million and 
650 kt by 2019. Succinic acid is an important 
intermediate chemical witnessing a high 
demand. It is a building -block chemical for 
producing many specialty and commodity 
chemicals that are used in a wide range of 
applications, such as polymers, food, metals, 
pharmaceuticals, coatings, fibers, solvents, 
lubricants, diesel fuel oxygenates & cosmetics. 
Europe bio-succinic market accounted for over 
45% of the global volume share in 2013. 
 
Figure 1.4-a Bio-Based Building blocks Market structure 
Figure 1.4.b shows the main applications of bio -SA in Europe.  
Regulatory pressure exercised by numerous agencies for 
reduction of greenhouse gas by 20% by 2020 is expected result 
in augmenting market growth over the forecast period.  
Polyurethane is the largest application segment for succinic acid, 
as bio-based SA has the ability to reduce 94.0% gre enhouse gas 
emissions in comparison to that of petro -based. Polyurethane 
foam is currently, the largest consumer of polyols. The 
polyurethane is used in textiles and fibers, auto motive industry, 
furniture, carpet cushion, bedding, insulation purpose in 
buildings and packaging. Its consumption is expected to reach 20 
 
Figure 1.4.b. Europe bio-succinic acid market 
revenue by application, 2012-2020, ($Million) 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 26 of 92 
billion € by 201951.  
Manufacturers such as Cargill, Emery and Mitsui have distinguished themselves  from other manufacturers by 
developing capacities for bio based polyols from plant oils 52. Shifting consumer preference for bio-based materials 
over synthetic chemical is expected to be beneficial for the overall market growth. Major industry has invested 
heavily in R&D initiatives for superior and cheaper bio based products. Governments and regulatory associations 
such as Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), REACH etc. have implemented several guidelines favouring bio 
based polyols usage. Volatile organi c compounds (VOCs) which are environmentally hazardous are used in 
conventional polyols manufacturing. Sustainable bio based polyols emit zero to minimal VOCs in their 
manufacturing process. All the above mentioned factors are expected to drive the overall market in the next years. 
Competitors and key stakeholders in the SA market. Rising environmental concerns coupled with presence of 
domestic bio-based succinic acid manufacturers have shifted consumer focus towards sustainable and environment-
friendly chemicals. The bio -based SA market is controlled by large players like Succinity GmbH, Reverdia and 
Myriant. All of them are using sugars as a fermentation feedstocks. 
Existing Competition : The SA -based polyols from PERCAL will offer significant advantages ov er the existing 
competitive solutions. Some producers can offer a 100% bio-based eco-friendly polyester-polyols based on industrial 
oils (soy, castor, ..). However they are expensive and require land, fertilizers and water to obtain the raw materials. 
The SA based polyols from PERCAL will be competitive in cost and properties versus existing petrol based solutions, 
due to the use of the same chemical monomers as currently used but coming from low cost and renewable raw 
materials. 
Potential New Entrants: As the bio-SA market is growing, it is inevitable that there will be additional companies 
interested in developing and selling bio-SA related polymers. By allowing the technology, COVESTRO will reduce 
the incentives of companies to undertake the costly, slow and risky process of developing alternatives. COVESTRO 
is worldwide leader in the PUR industry, it is difficult to find real competitors in this field. 
Materials Suppliers: the main ingredient of PERCAL bio-based SA derivate are succinic acid, coming from MSW. 
Raw materials are abundantly available worldwide at very low price. Additional additives required for SA 
polymerization (catalysts, solvents, chain extenders, etc…) an d processing (nucleants, lubricants, antioxidants …) 
are used in several processes and are readily available, with established prices and several suppliers. 
Main customers : The main customers of polyols are large (such as COVESTRO) or medium size polyureth ane 
manufacturer companies. COVESTRO will offer their customers new bio-based polyols grades at a competitive price 
and full from renewable sources. COVESTRO is collaborating with Reverdia (bio -SA producer) to develop bio -
based thermoplastic polyurethane. 
Political Groups and Consumers: Increasing use of bio-based SA on account of reduction in carbon footprints along 
with favourable regulatory support in light of rising awareness towards hazards associated with usage of petroleum-
based chemicals is expected to augment market growth. Bio-succinic acid can be used as a replacement to phthalic 
anhydride in manufacturing alkyd resins and offers cost-effectiveness and environmental advantages, which in turn 
will propel its growth over the next six years, however, high cost for bio-succinic acid along with low availability of 
feedstock is expected to restrain market growth over the next years 53. Extensive R&D in manufacturing process by 
various companies in terms of reducing production cost and increasing efficiency  is further expected to offer new 
growth opportunities over the forecast period. 
In summary, the potential impact of the products to 
develop in PERCAL project and the current and 
expected cost are summarized in the table 2.1.c.  
Expected costs are evaluated based on the expertise 
of the PERCAL’s partners and the methodology 
proposed to systematically evaluate the techno -
economic prospects of future production routes of 
bio-based bulk chemicals by Burk et al.54 
Table 2.1.c Potential economic impact of PERCAL target products. 
Target products.  Current// Expected 
price (€/kg) 
Worldwide 
consumption (kt/y). 
Solvents 2.0/1.8 4,500 
Surfactants 3.7/3.5 24,000 
Hot-melt adhesives 2.5/2.5 760 
Polyester Polyols 4.0/4.0 4,000 
 
2.1.3 Business model proposed by each partner for future commercialization of PERCAL developments. 
Regarding the segments in the value chain directly represented in the project , and thus project partners, the 
expected impact is described below, which will result in an increase of the potential market and increased high added 
                                                             
51 www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/succinic-acid.asp 
52 www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/bio-polyols-market 
53 www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/bio-succinic-acid-market 
54 M. J. Burk et al. Biotechnology for Chemical Production: Challenges and Opportunities, Trends in Biotechnology. 34, 187–190, 2016. 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 27 of 92 
value product portfolio of PERCAL’s partners: 
 Renewable chemicals by microbiological and green chemical routes (TBWR, AUA, ATB, AIMPLAS and 
CMET): will select and optimize strains to maximize the yield of the bioreactor or develop new routes based on 
green chemistry. The combination of novel strains to obtain valuable products from complex by-products coming 
from Biogenic fraction MSW is the main and innovative product to develop in the PERCAL project . The 
typical business model for  these partners would be to patent the modified strains, and use the validations in 
PERCAL to either licence out the strains and their applications or enter into joint ventures with companies which 
are already active in this area for the production of chemicals. Several examples exist in the industry that validate 
this business model: Genomatica, Metabolic Explorer, Global Bioenergies, BioAmber and Deinnove are all 
examples of companies that emerged as research -based start -ups after deriving novel engineere d strains with 
differentiating traits enabling them to produce, for the first time, specific bio -based products from renewable 
resources. The PERCAL’s partners are very active in the international industrial biotechnology market as service 
providers and ar e investing in the generation of their own IP in order to progress in the value chain and retain 
more value of their activities.  
 New biorefinery concept using the biogenic fraction of MSW (IMECAL, VISUM EXERGY). IMECAL with 
the support of VISUM (specialist in sensors and monitoring) and EXERGY (energy and mass transfer modelling 
and simulations) plans to develop a new biorefinery plant concepts to produce multiple intermediates in parallel 
or cascade approach. Target products will be ethanol, SA, LA and purified proteins & lipids fractions. This turn-
key plants will be sale by licencing agreement to large MSW plant managers (URBASER, URBAN, FCC, etc).  
 Production of intermediates from MSW such as ethanol, LA, SA (ENERGO). ENERGO is a large chemical 
company interested to include in their portfolio new monomers and new sources of feedstock in their current 
second generation ethanol plant. ENERGO plans to study the adaptation of its ethanol plant to obtain new 
momomers (SA and LA) or to incorporate in a cascade  approach the extraction and purification of rich MSW 
fractions such as proteins or lipids. 
 Additives to launch a new range of eco-cleaning products formulations such as ethyl lactate and surfactants. 
. TBWR plans to either patent the formulations if novelty allows it or to keep them as trade secrets that could be 
licensed to HAYAT, to companies that produce coatings, ink and paints and other cleaning products companies 
out of the HAYAT portfolio products.  HAYAT is a large company, which will use a combina tion of business 
models to introduce its new products in the market. The company expects to create a new range of eco -cleaning 
products with two main customers targets: i) selling directly to specialized retailers that look for products with 
low environmental impact and ii) Institutional customers thought Green Public Procurement 55 to be used in 
cleaning of schools, universities, conference centers, town halls, government buildings, etc.   HAYAT does not 
exclude the possibility of joint ventures although thi s will be considered after establishing a strong market 
presence in other geographic regions by licencing the TBW patent. Production of new products will be considered 
within current assets or through toll manufacturing.  
 Lactic acid based hot -melt additives (SOFTER & AIMPLAS): With a sales agreement with AIMPLAS,  
SOFTER aims to formulate hot melt adhesives using the lactic acid produced by ENERGO and the licencing 
companies of PERCAL biorefinery concept. The HMA will be sold directly by SOFTER to their cus tomers in 
selected countries, using the current sales network of the company. Countries not covered by SOFTER will be 
reached by licencing the technology. Several compounders will be contacted  in order to cover all the European 
market in a first step and USA market in a second step. 
 Polyester polyols for the polyurethane industry (COVESTRO): based on the use of succinic acid to develop 
new polyols to be used in polyurethane formulations special designed for several industrial sectors. COVESTRO 
is a large company, which will use a combination of business models to introduce its new products in the market. 
The company expects moderate growth in these mature markets, strong growth in developing world therefore the 
exploitation focus will be on developing market s. Selling directly to customers and also utilisation of well -
established existing distribution networks has proven a very effective business model in other lines of products 
and it is expected that these will be suitable for the polyurethane industry. COV ESTRO does not exclude the 
possibility of joint ventures although this will be considered after establishing a strong market presence in other 
geographic regions. Production of new products will be considered within current assets or through toll 
manufacturing. 
Business models and plans will be developed to support the commercialisation of each key project result and partner. 
The Business Model and Plan developed in WP9 will integrate IPR, innovation protection and exploitation strategies, 
and the accompanying techno -economic analysis and LCA developed in WP7. This will pave the way for the 
                                                             
55 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/gpp/index_en.htm 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 28 of 92 
successful exploitation of the projec t results. The expected impact, based on a conservative scenario of the value 
chains, is described in qualitative and quantitative terms in table 2.1.d. This results in an estimated benefit (an average 
15% of turnover) of 86 M€ over the period 2025-2030 (5 years after the project end). It is important to highlight that 
the environmental benefits have not been included in these calculations.  
Table 2.1.d. Preliminary evaluation of PERCAL economic impact after 5 years project finish (when TRL8 is achieved). 
Potential 
applications 
Expecte
d price 
(€/kg) 
World Market size (kt/y) 
/Market share56 
Expected 
Turnover57 
(M€/y) 
Direct 
Employ-
ment58 
IP management Required 
investment 
Lactic acid59 1.1 500 // 1% 5.5 16.0 Patented and develop a turnkey 
projects or licencing the 
technology to MSW managers 
or chemical companies. 
MSW 
multiproduct 
(SA, LA, lipid/ 
protein based 
surfactant) 
biorefinery plant 
10-15 M€/each. 
Succinic acid 2.5 
650// 1% (Needs of 
COVESTRO 80% 
conversion). 
11.7 33.0 
Biosurfactants 3.5 
24,000 // 0.02% (current 
HAYAT & other potential 
customer need) 
16.8 48.0 
IPR licencing or shared 
exploitation will be negotiated, 
depending on the target market 
and field. 
Ethyl lactate 
Solvents 1.8 
4,500 // 0.15%(current 
HAYAT & other potential 
customer needs) 
12.2 35.0 Development focus  on a patent; 
licencing for commercial 
exploration to industrial up -
takers 
Reactive 
distillation ethyl 
lactate 1000t/a; 
2,0 – 3,5 M€ 
Lactic acid 
HMA 2.5 
760 // 1 % (current 
PERCAL’s partners & other 
potential customer need) 
19.0 54.0 
Reactive 
extrusion HMA 
350 kg/h, 0.5 M€ 
Polyester 
Polyols for 
PUR60 
4.5 
4,000 // 0.15% (current 
COVESTRO production 
capacity) 
27.6 79.0 
Own production and to sale in 
combination with di-isocianates 
and other chemicals. 
Require moderate 
investment to 
adequate current 
chemical plant. 
Additional market research will be carried out in WP 8 to assess and quantify the needs of the market: existing 
competitors, target markets, customers’ profiles etc., this analysis will confirm and validate market opportunities and 
exploitation routes. One of the issues of the envisaged fermentation processes  is the fact that only a fraction of the 
carbon will be converted into the envisaged final products and a significant amount of microbial biomass (i.e. the 
microbes which are grown in the fermenters) will be produced which should also have some type of val orisation at 
the end of the process, e.g. used in anaerobic digestion for biogas production or others, energy cogeneration, etc. 
2.1.4 Environmental and socially important impacts. 
On 13 February 2012, the European Commission adopted a strategy for «Innovating for Sustainable Growth: A 
Bioeconomy for Europe» 61. This strategy proposes a comprehensive approach to address the ecological, 
environmental, energy, food supply and natural resource challenges that Europe and the world is currently facing.  
With the world population set to approach an estimated 9 billion by 2050, against a background of finite natural 
resources, Europe needs renewable biological resources -not just for securing healthy food and animal feedstuffs but 
also for materials to produce several bio-based products. 
Environmental impact: will be reduced because new bio -based products will be marketed using environmentally 
friendly technologies from the cultivation to the final production, showing a positive CO2 balance relative to existing 
fossil-fuel derived products or other bio-based sources. Table 2.1.e shows the estimated differences between current 
(fossil and Bio based) and PERCAL approaches in terms of Global Warming Potential (kg CO2-Eq.), land use (m2a) 
and Non-Renewable Energy Demand (MJeq.) per kilo of produced polymer or intermediates. Due to the use of waste 
by-products out of agricultural, preferential use of microbial synthesis, highly effective catalysts, low reaction 
temperatures, green chemistry routes, we expect a significant reduction in the three environmental parameters.  
For example, the polyol commercialised today to produce polyurethanes is obtained through the catalytic 
                                                             
56 Expected conservative market share (%) based on current worldwide consumption and production capacity of PERCAL partners. In 
brackets t/y of PERCAL products that will be produced for target market share. 
57 Only considers the turnover the amount of material that PERCAL industrial partners can produce and commercialize (HAYAT, 
COVESTRO, ENERGO, SOFTER & NOVO) or licensing (VISUM, TBW, IMECAL,). 
58 Job calculation 350 k€/job. Average turnover increase in the chemical industry to create a new employee. 
59 www.nnfcc.co.uk/publications/nnfcc-renewable-chemicals-factsheet-lactic-acid 
60 www.plasticsnews.com/article/20130715/NEWS/130719967/report-polyurethane-consumption-set-to-grow-4-5-percent-per-year 
61 //biobs.jrc.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/generated/files/policy/EU%20Bioeconomy%20Communication%20Strategy%20Brochure.pdf. 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 29 of 92 
polymerization of petrol based intermediates. A few percentage of polyols can also be obtained from vegetable-based 
oils (triglycerides) such as castor oil or soybean oil. An LCA  study reported that the production of bio-based polyols 
(soya-based) had successfully reduced 36% of the global warming emissions, 61% less non -renewable energy use 
and 23% less total energy demand compared to the petroleum-based polyols, and the most significant impact comes 
from the energy use for soya harvest. 
Table 2.1e PERCAL expected impact on renewable source content and energy demand. 
 Biobased or Fossil based materials 62. Potential alternatives using PERCAL concept.  
GWP (kg 
CO2-Eq.) 
Non-Renewable 
Energy (MJ/kg). 
Land use 
(cm2a/kg) 
GWP (kg CO2-
Eq/ % less). 
Non-Renewable Energy 
(MJeq./kg/%less). 
Land use 
(cm2a/kg/% less) 
Fossil/Bio solvent 3.7/0.7 81.2/ No data 78/No data 0.5 >28% 28 >65% 20 >75% 
EVA HMA 2.0 76.4 89 1.2 >40% 18 >75% 20 >78% 
Fossil/Bio SA 1.9/0.8 No data/40 66/20,000 0.5 >30% 30 >25% 20 >70% 
Fossil/Bio Polyol 3.7/1.3 88.2/4.97 95/4205 1.0 >25% 4.0 >20% 20 >80% 
Fossil/Bio Surfactant 2.4/1.7 78.7/50.5 78/2500 1.2 >30% 35 >30% 20 >75% 
The life cycle analysis of Myriant’s bio -succinic acid process shows that the carbon dioxide emissions of the bio -
based process are 94% lower than either the existing petroleum -based process to make succinic acid from maleic 
anhydride, or the process to make adipic acid from benzene63. The environmental impact of succinic was summarised 
in an EU study64 based on LCA data for production through the fermentation of sugars using different raw materials 
and purification metho ds. However, bio -based products often show lower environmental performance for impact 
categories such as eutrophication or acidification. The higher impacts found for bio-based products in these categories 
are a consequence of the land use and agricultural activities (such as the use of fertilizers, pesticides and energy). 
In PERCAL, higher GWP reduction will be expected  as the raw material is a true waste, currently without any 
valuable use, and does not require land for its production as opposed to biochemical products from wood or plants. 
Extraction, fermentation & purifications will represent the main environmental impacts in the selected products. 
Additional environmental and heath advantages are found by the use of bio -solvents instead solvents, lactic  acid 
HMA versus EVA HMA and Biosurfactants versus surfactants as detailed in section 2.1. 2 in terms of low toxicity, 
full biodegradation and low or cero VOCs emissions. 
Furthermore, the adoption of safe-by-design approaches will support EU competitiveness in this particular research 
and innovation field. Regulators can additionally use the well -defined predictive tools that underlie the concept of 
safe-by-design and thus improve the regulatory preparedness by timely interactions with innovators developing novel 
applications of polymers and intermediates coming from MSW and MRRM by -products. These interactions focus 
on sharing views and expertise on how best to deal with new safety aspects of innovative products for workers, 
consumers and the environment. A LCA of the key exploitable products will be undertaken in WP8 led by AUA, 
with the support of commercial software and the real data obtained at lab and pilot plant level. 
Employment impact:  
PERCAL aims at a contributing significantly in the large number o f jobs that green chemistry will create in the 
coming years. We expect at least 245 qualified jobs directly related to the sale of new bio-based products five years 
after the end of the project (when TRL8 will be achieved), based on a very conservative European market share as 
detailed in table 2.1.d. According the CEFIC, the sector generated an even greater nu mber of indirect and induced 
jobs – up to three times higher than through direct employment, i.e., PERCAL can create up to 750 indirect jobs. 
In order to remain competitive and maintain jobs in the light of major societal challenges and rising markets in t he 
developing world, the European bioeconomy sectors need to innovate and further diversify. It is estimated that direct 
research funding associated to the Bioeconomy Strategy under Horizon 2020 could generate about 130,000 jobs and 
€ 45 billion in value added in bioeconomy sectors by 2025.65 
In 2014, according to Cefic 66, the European chemical industry produces 16.7% of the world’s chemicals, employs