1.2 million workers and contributes €527 billion to the EU economy. While the value of chemical production gr ew 
about 45% from 1997 to 2017, direct employment in the EU chemical industry decreased by an average annual rate 
of 1.9% from 1996 to 2013. The number of employees in 2013 was 28% less than the 1997 level. i.e., a loss of more 
than 400,000 jobs. That work s out at a 1% drop in jobs for every 1.6% increase in output of non -pharmaceutical 
                                                             
62 a) Althaus H.-J. et al. (2007) Life Cycle Inventories of Chemicals. Final report ecoinvent data v2.0., 8. Swiss Centre for LCI, Empa - TSL. 
b) Hischier R. (2007) Life Cycle Inventories of Packaging. Final report ecoinvent data v2.0., 11. Swiss Centre for LCI, Empa - TSL.  
63 www.myriant.com/pdf/myriant-polyol-technical-bulletin-2013.pdf 
64//biobs.jrc.ec.europa.eu/documents/BISO%20EnvSust%20-%20Bioproducts%20-%20Succinic%20Acid_v3%20-%202016.pdf 
65 BECOTEPS (2011) The European Bioeconomy in 2030: Delivering Sustainable Growth by addressing the Grand Societal Challenges 
66//fr.zone-secure.net/13451/106811/publication/contents/templates/Cefic_F_and_F_2014-Full_report_Blanc_150dpi.pdf    
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 30 of 92 
chemicals. Jobs have fallen, because sales have not kept up with increases in productivity that requires fewer workers. 
Along with jobs created by gaining new customers and being on the leading edge of greener chemicals, additional 
jobs will be created by switching from chemical feedstocks to renewable raw materials. Renewable raw materials 
including wastes and residues will require local processing creating EU jobs and displacing imports of petrochemical 
raw materials. For example a US report states 67 that if around 20% of chemical production switched from making 
petrochemical-based products to plant-based products that would create/transfer 104,000 jobs.  
2.1.5 Policy framework 
PERCAL will contribute to reducing the EU’s dependence on fossil fuels and imported biomass and contribute to 
meeting its energy and climate change policy targets for 2020. To achieve this, PERCAL contributes to the two 
essential elements identified by the EU BioEconomy strategy: a) by promoting the full valorisation of waste biomass 
for the production of resource efficient and sustainable bio -based products through biorefinery, enabling the 
substitution of fossil-based products and reducing biomass dependency in regions where the biomass availability is 
less plentiful 68 and b) by providing sound Dissemination and Business plans  to support the commercialization of 
PERCAL bio-based products.  
More generally, PERCAL fully aligns and supports the EU Innovation Policy and the EU 2020 strategy , as the 
outcome of PERCAL will have significant impact for the municipalities, fish processors, waste managers, 
biorefineries, downstream processors and bio-based product producers and all industrial application sectors with the 
potential of using bio -based products, contributing to the EU Strategy for Key Enabling technologies 69 by 
advancing the knowledge in biotechnologies in order to provide advanced materials. High economic impact will be 
achieved through increasing the competitive advantage of EU Industry by promoting the use of PERCAL bio-based 
products in high value-added applications. It will also consolidate the EU Industry and reduce the EU dependency 
on crude oil.  
Regarding the Lead Market Initiative (LMI) on bio -based products, PERCAL will produce a number of high 
value-added bio-based products for several demanding sectors. All these products have been identified in the LMI 
Final Report 70 as being of high strategic impact and social interest. PERCAL technical approac h, focused on 
sustainable and cost-competitive biotechnologies, and all the accompanying measures planned in the project to foster 
the market introduction of such bio-based products will have a major impact in the EU, protecting the environment 
and human health and strengthening industrial competitiveness. PERCAL will provide substantial elements that will 
contribute to the majority of the Priority Recommendations provided by the LMI Ad-hoc Advisory Group for Bio-
based Products. In addition, the integration  of the biotechnologies and methodologies developed in PERCAL into 
current industrial processes is fully in line with the Environmental Technology Action Plan.  
Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions71 (IED): The IED sets out the main principles for the permitting and 
control of installations based on an integrated approach and the application of best available techniques (BAT).  BAT 
is the most effective techniques to achieve a high level of environmental protection, taking into account the costs and 
benefits. On 7 January 2014, the IED repealed and replaced the following: Directive 2008/1/EC  on integrated 
pollution prevention and control (IPPC), Directive 2000/76/EC on waste incineration and Directive 1999/13/EC on 
activities using organic solvents. New directives can support the production of bio based solvents, polyols and HMA. 
The production of environmental friendly and cost competitive consumer products will be in line with the Green 
Public Procurement. As Europe's public authorities are major consumers, PERCAL’s industry partners can offer the 
developed products for green procurement in a privileged position. 
PERCAL will contribute to Circular Economy (Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament. 
Closing the loop - An EU action plan for the Circular Economy COM/2015/0614. Brussels, 2.12.2015. ) creating 
new products related with secondary raw materials.  Furthermore, PERCAL will promote the part of the 7thEAP (7th 
Community Environment Action Programme) which emphasizes the need for an EU strategy on management waste. 
Finally, PERCAL aims to cover most of the key objectives of the Strategic Innovation and Research Agenda 
(SIRA) published in 2013 by the Bio-Based Industries consortium, related to the development of chemical products 
from biomass by-products, including complex biomass as MSW. PERCAL partners and support companies such as 
NOVO, EXERGY, ARKEMA and ENERGO are full members of BIC consortium and AIMPLAS and CMET are 
associated members. VISUM, COVESTRO and EXERGY are SPIRE members. 
                                                             
67 www.greenbiz.com/news/2011/05/12/green-chemistry-holds-potential-reverse-job-losses  
68 http://www.crossborderbioenergy.eu/gis.html#6  
69 "A European strategy for Key Enabling Technologies – A bridge to growth and jobs ", COM(2012) 341 final. 
70 //ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/innovation/policy/lead-market-initiative/files/final-eval-lmi_en.pdf  
71 http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32010L0075  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 31 of 92 
2.1.6 Barriers. 
The barriers which may affect the expected impacts of the project, and the proposed mitigation measures to remove 
these barriers, are presented in the table 2.1.f. 
Table 2.1.f Main barriers identified and the proposed mitigation actions. 
 BARRIER DESCRIPTION MITIGATION ACTIONS 
Technical 
Technical risks inherent to an R&D project , 1) 
Developed bio-based products do not allow for the 
commercially competitive productivities, 2)High 
downstream process costs, 3) High variability of the 
raw materials, 4) Low quality polymers/additives and 
intermediate products in comparison with 
petrochemical based ones. 
A risk and contingency plan has been outlined and risk 
monitoring strategies (see section 3.2) have been implemented 
in the work plan (see WP9, Task 9.2 Risk indicators definition 
and risk management). 
Market 
Initial Small Market Size for MSW based p roducts: 
Low demand can lead to high unit costs and does not 
allow volumes to grow enough to lower the price (no 
economies of scale) and to be cost competitive. Current 
European policy and support for bio -based products 
and bioeconomy development is unclear.  
Different market products will be proposed, with huge 
potential demand and medium cost (>1.8€/kg) such as 
adhesives, solvents, surfactants, polyurethanes and also 
chemical intermediates which are present in a huge industrial 
products. Through proactive  communication PERCAL will 
provide information to policymakers on project results 
reinforcing the value of bioeconomy development and 
promote bio-based products consumption. 
Social acceptance. 
Imperfect flow of existing information about green 
chemistry safety: In ideal markets, buyers and sellers 
are fully informed on the features of the good or service 
under consideration; however, existing a lack of 
information about service life and durability of 
products coming from waste. 
PERCAL will provide well documented results, 
dissemination materials and product datasheets including 
characterization and environmental data, etc., that will form a 
sound base to support high level development of regulations 
and green procurement policies. During the project extensive 
testing campaigns will be carried out to assess performance 
and long -term durability and realistic estimations will be 
provided by the main project players. 
Industrial There is a risk that the processes and technologies 
developed in PERCAL cannot be scaled up  at 
acceptable costs and that no economies of scale are 
generated when industrializing the processes, due to, 
between others, limited demand, low yield or large 
investment requirements. 
Transfer of PERCAL innovations to industrial partners during 
the project to test and validate the scalability of the processes. 
Economic projections of the full -scale production will be 
proposed in WP7, by the engineering companies.  
Standards 
Need to be fulfil the current standards . Since Octobe r 
2011, CEN, CENELEC and ETSI are working towards 
the creation of a solid standardization framework for 
bio-based products, based on the outcomes of CEN/TR 
1620872. The EC issued four standardisation mandates 
for bio-based products ISO/TC 276 and CEN/TC 411, 
183 & 249/WG 17. More information in section 4 
(Annex 4.2). 
PERCAL Consortium will follow closely the outcomes of the 
active WGs and whenever a project outcome is considered to 
be of relevance to the on-going work, PERCAL Partners will 
establish a liaison ( HAYAT, COVESTRO & AIMPLAS is 
already participating in standardization) to present project 
results and if possible to contribute to the standards (e.g. CEN 
workshop agreements). 
                                                             
72 www.cen.eu/cen/Sectors/Sectors/Biobased/Pages/documents.aspx  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 32 of 92 
 BARRIER DESCRIPTION MITIGATION ACTIONS 
Regulation 
Current legislation is concerned by the potential health, 
safety and environmental risks in relation to bio -based 
products obtained from biorefineries 
PERCAL project will review the legislation applicable to this 
technology in its different areas: i) Regulations REACH and 
CPL (classification, labelling and packaging of substances and 
mixtures) and Legislative Decree EU 10/2011, ii) Directive 
91/689 defining hazardous waste (update: 2008/98/EC), iii) 
Decree 52/97 defining hazardous substance: Assessment of 
the risk to the health a nd safety of workers from the presence 
of chemical agents, iii) Environmental impact assessment 
(EIA), strategic impact assessment (SIA), air and waste 
sectors, Legislative Decree 152/2006 and Decision 
2000/532/EC, etc, to ensure compliance of the develope d 
products, iv) VOCs regulations.
2.2 MEASURES TO MAXIMISE IMPACT. 
Communication, dissemination and demonstration activities are critical for the successful exploitation of PERCAL 
research and innovation findings and accordingly a whole work package will be d edicated to these actions (WP8). 
Communication, dissemination and exploitation are linked activities and must be undertaken in a coordinated way, 
thus exploiting synergies and avoiding overlap between them; in PERCAL they will be coordinated by a 
Dissemination and Exploitation Board  (IPREB, see section 3.2. for a detailed description). Activities and their 
impacts will be continuously monitored  during the project and the resulting actions will be reported in all 
Contractual progress reports. Actions will be reported with subsequent plans for the next project period in the interim 
& final Plan for Exploitation of the Results and Dissemination (PERD), due in months 18, 36 & 48. 
PERCAL will implement a range of activities to ensure the optimal visibility of the project and its results, increasing 
the likelihood of market uptake of the knowledge it produces, and ensuring a smooth handling of the individual 
intellectual property rights of the involved partners to pave the way to knowledge transfer and exploitation. Table 
2.2.a summarizes the focus of activities and how the dissemination and exploitation plan fit together to produce the 
overall PERD. 
Table 2.2.a. Plan for exploitation of the results and dissemination (PERD). 
Communication 
activities 
Purpose – Raise awareness of project aims and outputs amongst broad stakeholder base. 
• Communication KPIs to measure effectiveness and efficiency. 
• Messaging and visual identity of the project and Stakeholder mapping. 
• Communication channels (website, social media, printed materials, scientific & trade journals) 
Dissemination 
plan 
Purpose – Support project exploitation through technical dissemination and industrial outreach. 
• Dissemination strategy: objectives, targets, activities and channels. 
• Dissemination KPIs to measure the dissemination effectiveness and efficiency. 
• Management of the three dissemination activities: 
– packaging knowledge for an effective take up, 
– reaching the selected early adopters to motivate for changes, 
– preparing the effective exploitation of the project results. 
• Dissemination administration (approval, reporting, deliverable). 
• Scientific and trade publications. 
Exploitation 
plan 
• IPR strategy and Exploitation plan for the project results 
• Business models and plans for key project results 
2.2.1 Communication activities  
Communication activities will use a range of communication channels to spread new knowledge and results generated 
by the project. They aim at reaching the dissemination objectives and reinforcing the plausibility of the exploitation 
plan. In order to carry out the project outreach in a comprehensive way, a detailed communication plan will be 
implemented at the beginning of the project  (month 6). It will take the form of a full -fledged communication 
campaign to be designed and rolled out in parallel with the other project activities. It will aim to maximize the impact 
and visibility of the project among all relevant stakeholders in the fermentation, coatings and chemical manufacturing 
sectors at European level. 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 33 of 92 
The communication leader will coordinate the upcoming activities and follow -up on the implementation of the 
campaign. Any successful campaign is based on a thorough, well-structured strategy. This entails the: 
 Identification of the target audiences that should be reached (WHO). 
 Tailoring of the messages towards these target audiences (WHAT). 
 Decision on the best communication channels and tools to reach the target audiences (HOW). 
 Development of a detailed implementation plan (WHEN). 
The clear categorisation of target groups  allows dedicated and targeted dissemination actions to be undertaken 
through specific communication channels and using targeted messaging. 
Our comm unication plan encompasses a comprehensive series of actions (Table 2.2.b) to broadcast the non -
confidential results that are generated during the project to as wide and relevant an audience as possible  in 
order to heighten awareness about the results, to contribute to knowledge building in Europe, and to ensure that as 
many actors and citizens as possible have access to these results. This includes the broader European chemical, food 
and plastic industry, policy makers, researchers and the academic communi ty, training institutes, early stage 
researchers, mass media (TV, radio and the written press) and multipliers for addressing the general public, as well 
as other stakeholders, such as other H2020, EC and national R&D initiatives, ESIF stakeholders, etc. In keeping with 
the general profile of each target audience, the most appropriate communication tools and channels will be selected 
for targeting each stakeholder group. 
Table 2.2.b Outline of the PERCAL Communication Plan. 
Target Audience  Tools & Channels Expected Impacts 
MSW plant management. 
Cleaning products manufacturer 
& their customers. 
Producers of HMA and their 
customers (cardboard, labels, ..). 
Producers of polyurethanes and 
their customers (car, packaging, 
coating, insulation, …) 
Environmental consultancies & 
engineering  
Machinery 
Retailers and consumers 
Industry Multipliers - Sectorial 
Associations (e.g. EuPC, 
EuropaBio, CEFIC, European 
Bioplastics, etc.) 
Standardisation bodies and 
policy stakeholders, national 
food safety authori ties, EFSA, 
EC, national governmental 
bodies, ICC, AACCI, CEN, ISO, 
WHO, FAO, CODEX, AENOR, 
General public and Mass media 
Research and academic 
stakeholders 
Early stage researchers 
Government & policy makers 
Innovation programs 
Educational stakeholders and  
students 
Project corporate identity tools (logo, tag 
line/slogan) 
Project Website, Project Leaflets, Project 
Posters, Powerpoint Presentations, Press 
releases 
Video clip (for YouTube, project website,...) 
Trade fairs/exhibitions : PLAST (It), 
ACHEMA, Interpack, IFAT (Ge), Hispack, 
Smagua (Es), Eurocoat, Europrope (Fr), . 
Conferences, seminars and workshops 
(participation in organising, scientific 
committees, with poster, paper, presentation, 
or chairing):  European Bioplastics, 
Biopolpack, Biopol, EFIB, etc. 
Mass media & Magazines: Newspapers, local 
TV, Packaging to day; Plastic additives, 
bioplastics magazine, etc.  Open Access 
Journal Articles: J. Environ. Monitoring and 
Assessment; Green Chemistry J., J. A pplied 
Polymer Sci., Bioresource Tech., etc. 
Involvement in networks/clusters : Green 
chemistry, European Bioplas tics, EuropaBio, 
Suschem, Municipal Waste Europe, European 
Federation of Waste Management and 
Environmental Services , Related Trade 
Associations, etc. 
Features in Newsletters and e-bulletins 
Visibility on third party web sites  e.g. 
LinkedIn, Slideshare,, Pinterest etc 
Inclusion in EU dissemination resources  
such as the EU Horizon Magazine and the EIP 
Agri Website //ec.europe.eu/eip/agriculture  
Generation of awareness about PERCAL 
and its mission to ensuring sustainable use 
of selected bio -waste in Europe and 
globally.  
Dissemination of new knowledge and 
technologies for transitioning polymer 
related industries to the green economy.   
Effective k nowledge sharing among the 
research and scientific communities, 
which will contribute to the ERA, and to 
the EU recovery package and the EU 2020 
strategy for smart, sustainable and 
inclusive growth. 
Sound communication towards policy -
makers to increase the  influence of the 
project and its results in policymaking 
(which will be reinforced by the presence 
of our expert Associations).  
Communication to retailers and 
consumers about the efforts being made 
by the MSW and Fish sector and the target 
products secto rs to increase their 
sustainability for consumer and 
environmental protection.  
The general public should also feel they 
are getting value for money from public 
funded research that will ultimately 
benefit them as citizens. 
Attract more young people to sci entific 
and research careers, enriching their 
curricula with knowledge from the 
project. Early stage researchers inspired 
by the results, will be motivated to remain 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 34 of 92 
Target Audience  Tools & Channels Expected Impacts 
Other cross -cutting H2020 
projects and international/ 
national projects 
PPPs and EIPs (e.g. EIP Raw 
Materials, BIOTECH, SPIRE, 
BBI, Suschem, etc.) 
Potential technology and 
bioproducts customers 
and EIP raw material  //ec.europa.eu/eip-raw-
materials/ 
Social media: twitter, facebook, utube, 
LinkedIn, Google+ etc… 
Programme meetings 
Policy roundtables  
in EU - research and possibly work in 
areas that are beneficial for society, 
sustainability and innovation. 
 
2.2.2 Dissemination 
The main communication activities are focused on the dissemination of technical information to industry . The 
goal is to disseminate PERCAL objectives and results among the interested industry sectors, demonstrating the 
added value, innovation and new technologies developed within the project. Due to the relevance of this target 
audience, the position of the project consortium within the industry is very important. 
The goal of our communication activities will be to disseminate technical information both to the industry and the 
scientific community. Project results will be disseminated through participation in international conferences and trade 
fairs, and through publications in peer reviewed scientific journals and trade publications in the area of biochemistry, 
polymer processing, bioplastics, etc. Publication in Scientific Conferences related to the PERCAL R&D areas will 
be also issued. Tab le 2.2.c details the number of publications and the journals where the consortium plans to 
contribute. The project will disseminate the results to business stakeholders to make them aware of the expected 
impact of the project and promote the exploitation o f its results. Presentations shall be made by the partners at 
business seminars and trade fairs. Additionally, each of the partners will disseminate PERCAL results in the fairs 
and exhibition they participate. 
Table 2.2.c Activities related to participation in international events and publications in technical journals. 
PERCAL’s 
partner Conferences & seminars. Publications in high impact journals 
IMECAL/ 
ENERGO 
Five  contributions as speaker or poster in 
conferences such as ISWA 73, Int. Petro 
chemistry & Chemical Engineering, 
Unconventional Resources Techn. and 
BioSpain. 
Three publications in the field of waste treatment and 
scientific open access journal (such as Bioresource Tech., 
Environmental sci. & tech., Biomass and Bioenergy & 
Waste management & research) 
AIMPLAS/ 
SOFTER/ 
COVESTRO 
Four contributions as speaker or poster in 
conferences related to bioplastics, bioresins and 
adhesives. Yearly conference of CliB (Cluster 
Industrial Biotechnologies). 
Two publications in adhesive and polyols related journals 
(Adhesion Sci. & Tech., Int. Adhesion & Adhesives, …)  
AUA/CMET/ 
ATB 
Six contributions as speaker or poster in 
European & international conferences related to 
monomers production from biomass 74. 
Five in e.g., Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology,  
Biochemical Engineering Journal, Bioresource 
Technology, J. Biotechnology, J. Cleaner Production etc.  
TBWR/ 
HAYAT 
Two contributions in conferences related to 
Biorefining, green solvents or chemical 
processing as speaker 
Two reviewed papers in Journal as Chemical Engineering 
Research and Design, J. Chemical Engineering Journal, J. 
Green Chemistry or alternatively open access Journals of 
similar focus.  
VISUM Participation in trade fairs and conferences such 
as EuroPACT 2017 
One in a journal such as Chemometrics and Intelligent 
Laboratory Systems or "Chemical Engineering Science"  
EXERGY Participation in two conferences to promote the 
project findings and engage in outreach activities None envisioned 
                                                             
73ISAWA International Solid Waste Association . IFAT World's Leading Trade Fair for Water, Sewage, Waste and Raw Materials Management 
74 World Congress on Industrial Biotechnology and Bioprocessing ; International Conference on Environmental, Industrial and Applied Microbiology, 
BioMicroWorld , European Biomass Conference and Exhibition ; European Forum for Indus trial Biotechnology, EFIB ; International Conference on 
Renewable Resources and Biorefineries, RRB or Symposium on Biotechnology for Fuels and Chemicals.  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 35 of 92 
The project and its derived products will be presented in international conferences in order to gain attention from the 
industry and to contact target clients. In this last regard, the final products will be presented in conferences of specific 
professional sectors such as the petrochemical or consumer goods. When the results are subject to be published with 
no detriment to the economic side of the project, we will choose among the specialized technical peer -reviewed 
journals. However, dissemination of results will start with discussion of results between partners as well as within 
the research organization in order to determine whether confidential information could be disclosed or protection of 
intellectual property should be initiated. If no IPR conflict is found, we are aiming first at presentation of results at 
local and international conferences, which will be an important learning experience for young researchers. Being 
involved in writing the papers will prepare students and young researchers for their further career in academic or 
industrial research. We want to emphasize here that also if part of the results will be protected by patents, we still 
intend to publish after filing of the patent if in agreement with the commercialization partner. 
Open Access will be provided to peer -reviewed papers published by PERCAL’s Partners as table 2.2.c indicates, 
either in an open access journal repository (“gold” model) or for instance using the OpenAire orphan repository. 
Depending on the results published, the selection of the best suited and higher impact repositories will be made on a 
case by case basis in cooperation with OpenAIR provided that the IPREB does not identify issues conflicting with 
the industrial exploitation of project develop ments. Technical press platforms, generic or specific, will be 
continuously used, as well as the own partners communication channels. 
Networking circles: In addition to the direct commercial contacts of PERCAL industrial partners, wider 
dissemination would be achieved through using the partner memberships of trade associations related to the aims of 
the project. Working with trade associations the Consortium would increase the potential for exploitation of project 
results and additionally create a mutual opportunity with the associations to promote green and sustainable chemistry 
within the relevant industrial sectors. Moreover, the know-how transfer of PERCAL to the European industry could 
be also provided by all PERCAL partners via existing contacts to oth er European research institutes and networks, 
such as European Bioplastic, BBI, CEFIC, SPIRE, ECP4 and EuPC. 
Training and knowledge transfer: PERCAL will work to enhance the training of designers, plastics application 
technicians and education of young polymer engineers. In particular, the Guide to explore the conversion routes of 
municipal solid waste (MSW) to obtain high added value products (Task 8.6 and D8.8) delivered by the project will 
be a very useful tool to achieve this goal. This guideline will be published by the consortium and will include new 
important design rules for the various application areas, including the case studies of the demonstrator parts with all 
the necessary information for the adaptation of results to new product developments. As the guide will be published 
at the end of PERCAL, technical and economical evaluations for the developed prototypes will be included. This 
guideline will be a crucial tool for the potential end-users of PERCAL materials and technologies. PERCAL aims to 
Organise 2 workshops (anticipated at month 30 and month 36). The topic will be selected a year ahead of the 
workshop, depending on the results obtained in PERCAL across t echnical, economic and environmental areas. 
PERCAL will showcase the demonstrators developed during the project and to this end the Consortium will analyse 
the feasibility to organise a workshop in the context of a major fair/exhibition in order to maximise the impact. 
2.2.3 Exploitation of results. 
The exploitation routes and corresponding business models will be investigated in WP8. The route for 
commercialization of the results can be logically identified from the PERCAL WP structure and work plan, from 
the logical flow of the project activities and their clear role, as represented schematically in figure 2.1.a. 
Exploitation expert EXERGY will act as coordinator of the exploitation activities and ensure that all IP -owning 
partners as well as potential and  confirmed exploitation partners will work towards a successful technology and 
knowledge transfer to ensure efficient market uptake. The role of the exploitation manager will be to assess the 
commercial potential of the results and liaise with industrial c ompanies to maximize their commercial use. The 
exploitation manager will follow the progress made in PERCAL and will develop full exploitation plans as the unique 
values of the project results are confirmed. The exploitation manager, with support of the me mbers of the IPREB, 
composed of representatives of all partners, and will also be responsible for establishing targeted exploitation and 
dissemination strategies, when the project outcomes reach sufficient maturity. The entire project Consortium will 
discuss this strategy and the corresponding document will be delivered for the mid-term assessment (D8.3-M18 and 
36). An updated and more detailed exploitation plan will be submitted thereafter (D8.6-M36). 
In terms of further contribution to maximize the impact of this BBI action, significant in-kind contribution is 
planned as part of the industrial context of the action and will definitely contribute to increasing the impact and 
reaching the project objectives. Co-funding by partners’ in-kind contribution, the consortium covers close to 26% of 
the overall project budget. This co-funding is justified by the real conviction from the partners (both RTDs  and 
private companies in terms of new projects/services/turn-key plants) that they will on the long term obtain a return 
on their investment when the PERCAL’s solutions reach the market or indeed to further foster its development. In 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 36 of 92 
terms of in-kind and own contribution, most partners have planned a significant amount that is either calculated on 
a flat rate of their full budget . Furthermore, it is noteworthy that three LARGE companies are further contributing 
covering their full costs by themselves. 
All technologies developed by the partners will be considered for exploitation, be it methods, processes or materials. 
A summary of anticipated Key exploitable results (KER) is reported in table 2.2.d. Exploitation issues will be brought 
to the attention of all partners at an early stage in the project ensuring that issues regardi ng market and 
commercialisation, identified during exploitation analysis, can be fed into the R&D actions of the project. 
Table 2.2.d Summary of the key exploitable results. 
WP Key Exploitable Results (KER) Partner Interested 
In Exploitation 
1 
New enzymatic cocktails for improved hydrolysis of carbohydrates and proteins presents in the 
biogenic fraction of MSW, in order to enhance the yield of SA and LA production by fermentative 
processes. 
IMECAL/ NOVO/  
2 Technologies for fractionation of MSW by products to revalorise protein and lipid fractions  IMECAL/ CENER 
3 To develop the utilisation and upgrading of residues and process waste streams and their purification 
and upgrading of lactic acid (LA). 
ATB/ IMECAL/ 
ENERGO 
4 Membrane electrolysis for succinic extraction CMET/ IMECAL/ 
ENERGO 
5 Integrated continuous production and separation of succinic acid  AUA/ IMECAL/ 
ENERGO 
6 Design novel and environmentally friendly processes for the production of biosurfactants from 
amino acids and lipids from MSW fermentation by-products. IMECAL  
7 Development a new lactic acid HMA modified with maleic anhydride as the same properties than 
current EVA HMA. 
AIMPLAS/ 
SOFTER 
8 Process for of ethyl lactate by reactive distillation and production of bio -solvents New range of 
printing inks and cleaning products free of VOCs and lower environmental impact.  TBWR/ HAYAT 
9 Succinic acid as building block for polyols, resins and polyurethane dispersions (PUD). COVESTRO 
10 Plant simulation, sensors control and monitoring. EXERGY/ 
VISUM/ IMECAL 
The first phase of exploitation activities will aim to raise awareness among the project partners on exploitation issues 
In the first 6 months, EXERGY will take the lead in the development of an initial exploitation plan including a 
discussion on what each participant is hoping to gain from the project, and whether the expectations of all participants 
are compatible and coherent. This plan will be updated annually for the rest of the project duration. While the first 
exploitation plan is expected to be general and cover all activities in the project as a whole, the subsequent plans will 
focus more strictly of each of the identified exploitable results of the project. 
The methodology to reach consensus on exploitation issues  and to draw up a final exploitation plan is through 
Exploitation Workshops, described in detail in WP9. The exploitation strategy will answer crucial questions as: 
 WHAT: clarification of exploitation results and development of exploitation routes. 
 WHO: identification of lead partners to achieve each exploitable result and which project partners will exploit 
each exploitable result. 
 HOW: which form(s) will the exploitation of these results take (direct industrial use, patenting, technology 
transfer, publications, etc.). 
 BARRIERS: i.e. identification of (overlapping) IPR and commercialisation conditions - identification of 
risks actions to mitigate them; existing or emerging alternative solutions in competition with results; 
availability of knowledge and resources among participants and willingness to contribute to the result. 
 IP issues and ownership of knowledge. 
An exploitation plan will be prepared for each result and for the project as a whole and it will outline: i) 
 Identification of all exploitable results & intellectual Property Rights (IPR) protection strategy. 
 Analysis and evaluation of the exploitation potential of each result (market). 
 Roadmap of exploitation activities during and after the project, exploitation routes. 
 Technology implementation plan of the project results & the expected socio-economic impact. 
 Factors influencing the exploitation (regulations, standards, etc.). 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 37 of 92 
 Business plan for the key results. (cost-benefit feasibility, potential investors, transfer to other sectors)  
Exploitation tracking: The use of Key Performance indicators will allow the consortium to monitor progress 
towards achieving the projects exploitation objectives for the target products. Table 2.2.e summarizes how the project 
will contribute to the KPI defined by t he EC for Societal Challenges under H2020. More information about the 
contribution of each partner to the KPI (publications and conferences) see table 2.2.c. 
Table 2.2.e PERCAL expected key Performance indicators (KPI) related to Societal Challenges. 
PERCAL’s 
partner Patents and  IPR protection Products/technologies to develop. 
IMECAL Trade secret, new enzymatic cocktails to improve 
MSW hydroxylase. Enzymatic cocktails for MSW pre-treatment. 
ATB/ 
IMECAL 1 Patent to obtain LA from MSW hydrolyses.  Lactic acid production integrated in PERSEO platform.  
CMET/AUA 
1 patent to produce SA using the integrated 
system of fermentation coupled with 
membrane electrolysis extraction 
Succinic acid production integrated in PERSEO 
platform 
IMECAL 1 patent, Production of biosurfactants from the by -
products of MSW fermentation 
Biosurfactants for non -food related applications based 
on modified proteins and lipids. 
AIMPLAS/ 
SOFTER 
1 Patent, Production of hot -melts from lactic acid 
and other co-monomers by reactive extrusion Hot-melts for cardboard applications. 
COVESTRO Use their own technology and patents to produce 
chemicals from bio-SA 
Building block for polyols, resins and polyurethane 
dispersions (PUD) using bio-SA as a main raw material. 
TBWR 1 Patent, Ethyl Lacate by reactive distillation Production of biobased solvents for inks printing and 
cleaning household goods. 
VISUM/ 
IMECAL  
1 Patent or utility model, Global biorefinery 
configuration. 
Process monitoring system to produce Bioethanol, LA 
and SA from MSW. 
Intellectual Property Rights protection activities are managed under WP8. The overall IPR strategy of the project 
is to ensure that partners are able to fully exploit their market position, involving patent protection.  
The Partners will sign a Consortium Agreement (CA) prior to the signature of the Grant Agreement with the BBI 
JU in which all the rules for ensuring confidentiality (procedure for granting publication of the results), ownership 
regime and IPR issues (background included and excluded, ownership, licensing terms, etc) are detailed. Some 
previous knowledge and background in detailed in the description of each partner in section 4. The CA will be based 
on the DESCA model. The CA will include the initial ‘ Key Exploitable Results’ (Table 2.2.d) of the partners and 
patents interest list (Table 2.2.b), which will be the starting point for IPR protection and Exploitation Plans. 
The following three areas of activity have been identified in order to ensure proper IP management and maximize 
the impact and market relevance of the knowledge generated in the project: 
 Proper assessment of the pre-existing knowledge of the various project partners, their potential contribution to 
the project results IP, and potential overlap of IP. In shaping the IP strategy of the consortium these will be 
assessed based on the Consortium Agreement.  
 The assessment report may be used to draft an IP and exploitation agreement, if needed, as an integral part of the 
final exploitation plan, in line with the consortium agreement, and used as an input for the exploitation plans. 
The document will be upgraded  during the project to include new results unforeseen at the beginning of the 
developments as it is needed.  
 The overall IPR strategy annually focuses on the knowledge generated by the project, the IP rights, the 
patentability and optimal IPR protection op tions. Any disputes over IPRs should be settled according to the 
consortium agreement. Legal requirements for commercialization are also explored, in particular through 
“freedom to operate” analysis as well as individual patent filing strategies and drafting of patent applications for 
the most promising project results, as it is needed. 
As described in section 3.2, the SMEs partners will have a higher percentage of participation in the results 
exploitation, so the IPR management will respect at any time the objectives established in this type of Collaborative 
Project and thus watching over SMEs interests. 
Exploitation through Standards development: Successful exploitation will only occur if the market is receptive to 
the products and processes developed in the project. Standards are a critical part of a functioning market place, 
standards for bio -based products are under development at CEN. After ide ntification of the results with 
standardisation potential (initially focused on exploring the conversion routes of municipal solid waste ( MSW), to 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 38 of 92 
obtain high added value products), contacts will be made with relevant standardisation bodies in order to ini tiate, 
for instance a CEN workshop or contribute to existing standardisation activities in ISO. In the case of contributing 
to CEN, PERCAL will propose to CEN Workshop Agreement (CWA), a standardization document developed in a 
CEN Workshop ( www.cen.eu/). All experts interested in developing the document will be welcome in the 
development of such CWA mainly for stakeholder members. The CWA document will likely be a technical 
specification or a technical report, but could al so become a broader guidelines document that includes information 
like guidance for continuous -reinforced plastic materials, best practice and information on material performances 
and production processes, etc. S ome PERCAL partners have a strong link with standardisation bodies such as 
AIMPLAS, COVESTRO and HAYAT. 
Post project execution of exploitation plan: As discussed a central aim of the PERCAL dissemination plan is  to 
‘prepare’ the market in order to reduce the incubation time for PERCAL new products and technologies to a 
maximum of 5 years and to provide knowledge, methodologies and training materials that can contribute to increase 
competitiveness of the EU industry and workers skills in the field , facilitating the widespread adoption and market 
penetration of the developed materials and technologies.  
Table 2.2.f summarises potential exploitation routes for the main key exploitable results. At the end of the proje ct 
PERCAL technology will be at TRL5 and it is expected that a further 5 years will be required to achieve TRL8. 
Significant investment to move from TRL5 to TRL 8 is needed, i.e., additional budget outside of the project must be 
attracted using the patents and the trade secrets generated during the project and detailed in table 2.2.e. 
Table 2.2.f Main target customers and knowledge licencing and sales strategy. 
Product to be developed in 
PERCAL (and IPR owner) IPR licencing and sales strategy. Main target Customers 
1. Cost-competitive technologies for the integral valorisation of MSW components  
Process monitoring system 
(VISUM & IMECAL). Turkey projects, Licensing, joint 
venture, commercial agreements with 
companies active in 
treatment/separation/downstream 
processes. 
Companies interested in the valorisation of 
components of MSW such Large MSW management 
companies (Urbaser, Urban, Engie, FCC, Solum , 
etc), local authorities, etc. 
Global biorefinery 
configuration (IMECAL) 
Proteins and lipids from MSW 
(IMECAL). 
2. Production of intermediated products by microbial fermentation routes.  
Ethanol, Lactic acid and 
Succinic acid (IMECAL, 
NOVO, ENERGO) 
ENERGO own production. 
Licensing agreements with large 
MSW managers for in -situ build of 
Turnkey plants to produce a specific 
product (SA, LA or Ethanol)  
Current ethanol, SA and LA users for non -food 
applications such as detergent/soaps (HAYAT, 
UNILEVER …)  or polyols (COVESTRO, DOW 
Chemical, …), .  
MSW managers and Bioethanol as building block 
(GI Dynamics, TOTAL, Clariant, etc...) 
Modified proteins and lipids to 
produce high added value 
products (IMECAL). 
Licencing or production agreements 
with companies specialized in biomass 
separation and chemical treatment of 
proteins and lipids. 
Large chemical c ompanies such as ARKEMA that 
are looking for applications of amino-acids and fatty 
acids in production of green chemical intermediates 
for polyamides and polyesters. 
3. Production of additives and products by green chemistry routes.  
Lactic acid HMA (SOFTER) 
SOFTER own production. 
Licencing or production agreements 
with HMA production companies. 
Manufacturers of paper or plastic labels, cardboard 
packages, baby diapers, femi nine hygiene and adult 
continence products. 
Companies such as  Ashland, Bostik, Dow 
Corning, Henkel and Sika. 
Ethyl lactate (eco -solvent) 
(TBW & HAYAT). 
Licencing (or selling) of IPR to 
industrial users. 
In case no IPR is granted use 
knowledge to define a process design 
package in cooperation with an 
engineering company to implement 
& commercialize process. 
Industrial partners within PERSEO process to 
integrate ethyl lactate production with bioethanol 
distillation 
Current producers of ethyl lactate and bulk 
chemical producers who are interested to 
implement the ne w production process  such as 
Corbion, Galactic, ADM, Musashino Chemical 
Laboratory, Vertec BioSolvents,  etc.., Producers 
of lactic acid or ethanol to further upgrade their 
product to generate a sustainable solvent. 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 39 of 92 
Polyester polyols 
(COVESTRO) 
COVESTRO own production. 
Licencing or production agreements 
with other chemical companies. 
Producers of polyurethane parts or coatings for 
building, automotive, shoes, technical applications, 
etc. Manufacturer of polyurethane specialities or 
overseas polyurethane companies. 
Biosurfactants (IMECAL) Licencing or production agreements 
with surfactants companies. 
Surfactant producers such BASF Cognis Henkel AG 
& Co. KGaA, Soliance, etc… 
The partners have resources to cover the costs needed to implement the necessary co-funding for further developing 
and marketing the results of PERCAL. Besides internal resources in order to support the commercial exploitation of 
the project’s results; EUREKA, national programs, investment funds (EU Investment Bank. EU Investment Fund) , 
private investors and venture capital, SME instrument will be considered, as well as opportunities brought through 
Regional Funds (ESIF), which should be possible as PERCAL aligns perfectly to the priorities identified under the 
RIS3 strategy for most of the Partner’s countries. To ensure that the maximum potential EU market is reached, the 
IPREB on behalf of the Consortium, will contact and involve Industrial Associations or SMEs in the new supply 
chain of PERCAL across EU thus achieving a multiplying effect and spreading the project results. 
In summary, the protection of the interest of Industry, especially the SMEs, will be guaranteed as they are the 
majority represented in the various boards, and consequently an industry-driven vote will be guaranteed in all levels 
of the management structure. The existing consortium represents the complete research, development, 
manufacturing and material supply chain, thereby ensuring that the IPR protection procedure to be outlined 
within the Consortium Agreement will be effectively managed and that the project results will be protected at each 
stage. PERCAL will result in a number of innovative processes, materials, products and IPR with a high potential for 
commercialization. Therefore this consortium considers the issues of IPR management and protection as particularly 
important and the PEDR will be prepared in order to reduce the time to market to the minimum possible; although 
further developments will be needed after the project end to achieve TRL8. There are no known business agreements 
or commitments which may impose limitations on the exploitation.  
The combined implementation of the proposed Communication and Dissemination Plan and all the IPR protection 
and Management procedures will help to achieve the expected impact of the project by facilitating the maximum 
market introduction of the project results. Additionally, it will ensure a significant impact on the general knowledge 
and skills of the related EU industry and scientific community through Open Access publications and contributions 
to standards, when possible. Consumers and general public will also be made aware of the productivity and 
environmental benefits brought by PERCAL technologies, fostering the acceptance of research on materials 
technologies, processing and final products, as a worthwhile activity with direct impact on the EU socio -economic 
& environment status.  
 
3. IMPLEMENTATION
3.1 WORK PLAN - WORK PACKAGES, DELIVERABLES AND MILESTONES.  
3.1.1. Overall structure of the work plan 
This covers all the planned research activities from final products requirements and MSW characterization, selection 
and pre-treatment (WP1), optimization to obtain the most useful intermediates for the selected final products (lactic 
acid and succinic acid monomers in WP2 and 3 and surfactants from the protein/lipid fraction in WP4). WP5 aims 
to produce adhesives, solvents and polyols from WP2-3 monomers. WP6 will study the PERSEO plant adaptation 
and monitoring for the new proposed microbiological routes. The environmental and economic viability of the new 
products will be evaluated in WP8. Furthermore, WP9 activities are related to communication, dissemination, 
exploitation, business plan and technology transfer activities. WP10 will provide the full management of the project 
in order to make all the proposed developments in line with defined PERCAL objectives. 
WP1:  Final products requirements definition. Characterization, handling and pre-processing of MSW from 
different localizations and seasons.                                                                                  WP Leader: IMECAL 
Definition of the main requirements of selected final products and intermediates. Selection of three representative 
MSW composition. Characterise and develop pre-processing methods ensuring availability and compatibility of the 
selected raw materials and their fractions for further conversions in industrial products (WP2 to WP4). 
WP2: Microbial conversions to lactic acid. Downstream.                                                         WP Leader: ATB 
Develop robust microbial strains for production of lactic acid, by fermentation of pre -treated MSW components. 
LA separation will be achieved by a membrane electro -dialysis based process. Fermentations will be optimized at 
laboratory scale. Downstream processing (DSP) for product extraction and purification will be developed. 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 40 of 92 
WP3: Microbial conversions to succinic acid. Downstream.                                                     WP Leader: CMET 
Select the most  robust microbial strains for production of succinic acid , by fermentation of pre -treated MSW 
components integrated with membrane electrolysis for continuous removal of organic acids produced during 
fermentation. Fermentations will be optimized at laboratory scale. Downstream processing (DSP) for product 
extraction and purification will be developed.  
 WP4: Valorisation of fermentation by-products as surfactants.                                         WP Leader:  CENER 
Develop novel biosurfactants by employing the lipid and protein fraction remaining after the fermentation processes 
to ethanol, LA or SA, of pre-treated and hydrolysed MSW. 
WP5: Green chemical routes to produce solvents, hot melt adhesives and polyols and their further industrial 
validation (TRL5).                                                                                                             WP Leader: COVESTRO. 
Production and industrial validation (TRL5) of: 1) Ethyl lactate by reactive distillation from LA and ethanol, 2)HMA 
by reactive extrusion from LA, and 3) Polyester Polyols by conversion of SA with diamines. Polyester Polyols will 
be validated by PU formation using Di-isocyanates. 
WP6: Study of adaptation and monitoring of PERSEO plant for the production of ethanol, LA, SA, 
protein/lipid derivate with suitable quality to produce the selected final products.             WP Leader: VISUM 
Study the adaptability of a versatile biotechnological plant to obtain different chemical intermediates and to 
determine the most relevant parameters to control and monitor in the PERSEO’s process at industrial level. 
WP7: Environmental, regulatory & economic analyses.                                                          WP Leader: AUA 
Assess the environmental and economic impact of the full process proposed in PERCAL throughout each stage of 
development, to ensure compliance with legislation, to maximise market acceptance and facilitate increasing 
optimisation of these processes and products.  
WP8: Communication, Dissemination, Exploitation, Business plan &Tech. Transfer.  WP Leader: EXERGY 
Complete IPR strategy, dissemination and technology transfer activities to ensure the full exploitation of the 
innovations and scientific results will be carried out. The active involvement of companies in the project, 
representing the different sectors active in the value chain will ensure wide exploitation with realistic objectives and 
plans. Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation Plans will be developed, including the PEDR. 
WP9: Project Management.                                                                                                   WP Leader IMECAL 
Project activities of coordination, efficient grant management (resources optimization), communication with the 
EC, risk management 
3.1.2. Graphical presentation of the components showing how they inter-relate (Pert chart). 
 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 41 of 92 
3.1.3. Timing of the different work packages and their components (Gantt chart). 
Num. Work Packages and Related Tasks Partners 
Num. 
Delivera-
bles 
Project Months  
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 
WP1 Final Requirements. MSW F eedstocks. All (1) D1.1-D1.5      H             
T1.1 Final products & intermediates 
requirements. 
1,2,9,(10),
11-12 D1.1                   
T1.2 Study of variability of organic MSW. All(1) D1.2                   
T1.3 Characterization of MSW samples. 1,3,4,(6)                    
T1.4 Pre-treatment and enzymatic hydrolysis 
improvement from PERSEO process (1),6 D1.3-1.4                   
T1.5 Validation of fermentation processes. 1,3,4(6) D1.5                   
WP2 Lactic acid from MSW. Downstream.  1,(3),4,7 D2.1-D2.3         H  H        
T2.1. Screening & selection of bacterial strains. (3)                    
T2.2 Fermentation processes into lactic acid . (3),4 D2.1                   
T2.3 Downstream processing  for recovery of LA (3),7 D2.2                   
T2.4 Up-scaling of the entire process 1,(3) D2.3                   
WP3 Succinic acid from MSW. Downstream.   D3.1-D3.4               H H   
T3.1 Evaluation of MSW as feedstock.  (4),6 D3.1                   
T3.2 Optimisation of integrated bioprocess for SA 
production and in situ separation.  4,(5) D3.2-3.3                   
T3.3 Succinic acid purification.  (4),5 D3.4                   
T3.4 Process scale-up. 4,(5)                    
T3.5 Optimisation of bioprocess based on electro-
dialysis downstream separation system.  4,(5)                    
WP4 Valorisation of fermentation by -products  D4.1-D4.4                H H  
T4.1 Characterization of the fermentation residue 
of the ethanol/LA and SA processes . (1),6 D4.1                   
T4.2 Hydrolysis of protein fraction  1,(6) D4.2                   
T4.3 Extraction & hydrolysis of the lipid fraction  1,(6) D4.3                   
T4.4 Synthesis of the amino-lipid biosurfactants. 1,(6)                    
T4.5 Biosurfactants in relevant ind. applications. (10) D4.4                   
WP5 Green chemical routes to produce HMA, 
solvent & polyols & Industrial Validation.  2,7,9-11 D5.1-D5.6                 H3  
T5.1 Ethyl lactate as a solvent. (7),10 D5.1-5.2                   
T5.2 LA based HMA by reactive extrusion. (2),9 D5.1-5.2                   
T5.3 Polyester polyol using green chemistry. 2,(11) D5.6                   
WP6 Study of adaptation & Monitoring of 
PERSEO plant for the new intermediates  1,6,7 D6.1-D6.3                H H  
T6.1 Parameters of pre-treatment & fermentation.  (1),6,7                    
T6.2 Parameters of the separation/ purification. (1),6,7 D6.1                   
T6.3 Monitoring of the processes parameters. 1,(7) D6.2                   
T6.4 Integration and adaptation of processes to a 
biotechnological plant configuration (1),6,7 D6.3                   
WP7 LCA, S-LCA, LCC and Regulatory . All(4) D7.1-D7.5                 H H2 
T7.1 Evaluation of synergies with MSW projects   All(12)                    
T7.2 Modelling and simulation of the  process All (12) D7.2                   
T7.3 Product life-cycle-assessment (LCA). All(4) D7.3                   
T7.4 Economic analysis  (LCC). All(12) D7.1                   
T7.5 Social Analysis  All (12) D7.4                   
T7.6 Process inefficiencies Analysis  All(12)                    
T7.7 Regulatory and safety analysis.  All(2) D7.5                   
WP8 Communication, Dissemination, 
Exploitation, Technology Transfer.  All(12) D8.1-8.9  H       H          
T8.1 Communication  All(2) D8.1-8.3                   
T8.2 Dissemination plan.  All(2)                    
T8.3 Exploitation plan All(12)                    
T8.4 Business plans for key results  All(12) D8.6                   
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 42 of 92 
Num. Work Packages and Related Tasks Partners 
Num. 
Delivera-
bles 
Project Months  
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 
T8.5 IPR Management  All(12) D8.4-8.5                   
T8.6 Technology transfer  All(12) D8.7-8.9                   
T8.7 Set up of PERCAL Stakeh olders’ Community  All(1)                    
WP9 Project Management. All(1)   H                 
T9.1 Management of the resources.  All(1)  ╬  ▲   ▲   ╬   ▲   ▲   ╬ 
T9.2 Risk management.  TMC’s members  (1)                    
T9.3 Communication with EC.  (1)                    
WP10 Ethics Requirements  (1)  H                  
*EB: Executive Board, TMC: Technical management Committee 
(1): (X) Leader Legend:  Deliverable  Milestone ▲ Meeting ╬ Kick-Off, Mid Term, Final Meeting  
 
 
 
 
 
3.1.4. Technical Risks. 
The project team has carefully considered the technical risks associated with this project, summarising the potential 
risks, their likelihood and impact, and the actions which will be taken to mitigate them. Significant risks have 
therefore been addressed during the production of the work programme and partnership to ensure that the outcomes 
of the project are achievable (Table 3.1.b). The experience of all partners in their respective fields and a continuous 
co-ordination and risk assessment (T 9.1) will make it possible to overcome or minimise potential problems if they 
arise. The following risks have been identified prior to the project starting. 
Table 3.1.b. Risks and mitigation proposals for different activities to be performed in the PERCAL project. 
Description of the Risk. (Risk Level*, 
and Likelihood (%)). 
Related
WP(s)  Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
High variability of feedstock (M, 60%) 1 
This variability has been taken into account in the strategies 
proposed in WP1 and mitigated already by collecting feedstock 
from diverse but related provenances. Additionally, a 
representative feedstock with a reasonable content of all the 
fractions required for further upgrading can be selected. 
Interferences of fractions for the 
recovery of others (M, 30%) 1 To interact with WP4 to optimize the procedures. 
Production of toxic compounds for 
further fermentation as a result of pre -
treatment (M, 30%) 
1 To implement detoxify mechanisms, depending on the target 
compounds 
Undesired product formation (M, 40%) 1 
To add industrial antibiotics if required (this is not possible if the 
objective is bacterial fermentation of the substrate, but for yeast 
transformation is recommended) 
Inability of microbial strains to efficiently 
utilize all the sugars in MSW feedstock  2,3 To do all operations with the highest cleaning and sterilization 
measures. 
Low titters and/or productivities of the 
fermentation products on MSW (M, 50 %) 2,3 
Iteration with WP1 to improve pre-treatment. If not sufficient, optimize 
the medium further, e.g., by supplementing the MSW feedstock with 
fractions rich in minerals and vitamins. Consider other host strains.  
Fermentation results are not always 
reproducible due to variations in the 
composition of MSW (medium, 50%) 
2 
Identify optimum nutrient requirements and supplement 
fermentation media with commercial sources of nutrients when 
there is lack of specific nutrients from crude fermentation media 
Low performance (yield, productivity, 
titer etc.) of screened cultures in waste 
hydrolysates (low to medium, 25%) 
2 
Identify the biowaste fractions that lead to th e required 
fermentation efficiency and optimise fermentations using only 
these fractions. Use alternative strains.  
The presence of inhibitors may reduce 
fermentation efficiency (low, 15 %) 2 
Adapt additional steps of purification during up -stream 
processing, select more tolerant strains or improve existing 
strains 
The LA fermentation broth contains 
significant impurities originally coming 2 The option to encounter this shortcomings are: 
 Adapt the downstream processing DSP to handle the the 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 43 of 92 
from the MSW feedstock (such as protein/ 
polypeptides, amino acids, high  amount of 
ashes, other organic acids  such as acetic 
acid (high 50%, expected technical 
challenge) 
composition of the final fermentation broth by applying 
combinations of different DSP unit operations such as membranes 
(ultra and nano filtration), electro dialyses, ion exchange and 
recover a high quality LA product. 
 Evaluate and adopt the feedstock supply chain and first processing 
to insure impurities in feedstock are kept at an acceptable l evel for 
final end product. 
 Remove potential acetic acid in the fermentation broth by stripping  
 Use the esterification as an actual cleaning process for LA to deliver 
a high quality end product to the market 
Sugar to succinic acid conversion yield is 
not improved with the integrated 
fermentation membrane electrolysis system 
(high 50%, expected technical challenge).  
3 The expected increase in succinic acid concentration and productivity 
will suffice for the development of an efficient process 
Other impurities are present in the succinic 
acid concentrated solution derived via 
membrane electrolysis (high, 30%) 
3 A downstream protocol will be developed based on the impurities 
present in the concentrated solution 
Excessive fouling of in situ membrane 
(Medium, 40%) 3 
Different membranes and operational conditions will be tested, 
alongside operational regimes that can minimise fouling (e.g high cross-
flow velocity, regular cleaning). 
Negative impact of H 2 on the fe rmenting 
organisms due to a shift in partial pressure 
and available CO2 (High, 50%) 
3 
H2 is expected to have a positive impact on the fermentation, but this 
remains a hypothesis to be tested. If the H 2 strips too much CO 2, an 
increased flow of CO2 may be required. 
Low yield in the biosurfactants 
condensation reactions (Medium, 40%) 4 Different reaction approaches will be tested. Previous purification of 
some aminoacidos and lipids can be implemented.  
Too complex mixture of biosurfactants (M, 
50%) 4 Purification of the most interesting aminoacids and lipids in advance in 
order to perform the condensation reaction with pure species.  
Impurities in the product LA can potentially 
interact or harm catalyst for reactive 
distillation process (low < 10%) 
5 Different solid catalysts will be tested and evaluated;  
Esterification rate in the reactive distillation 
process is insufficient and final ethyl lactate 
product contains significant LA amounts. 
(Medium < 25%) 
5 
Process parameters need adaption, especially increase average resident 
time within the reactive part of the distillation column; change feed 
parameters; increase reactive zone in column; in worst case 
redesign/change geometry by increasing total height of column.  
Water amount within the reactor (coming 
from LA and ethanol raw material) plus 
water produced by esterification is getting 
to high to achieve high efficiencies (High, 
50%, expected technical challenge) 
5 
The process needs to be specifically desig ned, and operated to handle 
the water in the distillation; options: (i) change the process parameters 
(temperature, feed rate…) decrease water content in raw materials (use 
only 96% ethanol and high concentrate LA product >80%); increase 
thermal input, change boiler; in worst case redesign column  
Thermo-mechanical resistance of LA 
hotmelts is not enough for further 
processing Reduction in biopolymer 
properties, bad smell. (High, 30 %). 
5 
Different compatible antioxidants, lubricants and plasticisers will b e 
tested to reduce the action of compounding extruder over the material. 
Use of low shear screw elements and minimize residence time thanks to 
the modular configuration of multi screw extruders.  
Impurities in the product SA can potentially 
interact or harm catalyst for production of 
polyester polyols or other building blocks 
(H, 20%) 
5 
Covestro pilot plant have additional technologies to improve monomers 
purity, some of them will be studied/adapted to the new biobased SA. 
Alternative catalyzers will be proposed and evaluated.  
Parameters of interest are difficult to study 
and monitor (M, 50%). 6 To this end a special effort in technology screening and preliminary tests 
will be done in order to select the most appropriate sensor technology.  
Sensor development and testing taking a 
long time to achieve stable and satisfactory 
results (M, 40%). 
6 
Early stage sensor specification based on process requirements will be 
done and an iterative approach will be taken when starting test definition 
and sensor design in order to correct and foresee deviations.  
Low versatility in the Process plant 
adaptation for Bioehanol, LA, SA 
production (L, 30%). 
6 Study the best techno -economical case in each geographic situation 
having in account the biogenic fraction composition of each MSW.  
PERCAL’s products might be relatively 
expensive (M, 40%) 7 To revaluate and improve the production process to minimize energy 
consume or look for alternative and cheaper energy source. Look for 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 44 of 92 
alternative catalysts that improve yield or reduce energy consume.  
LCA or Energy consume is higher than 
current process (H, 10%)  7 
A comprehensive assessment methodology will be developed early in 
the project lifetime. If the target results cannot be achieved after the 
demonstration phase, strategies for further improvements will be 
developed and optimisation solutions will be applied. Modelling and 
simulation activities to be carried out after the demonstration phase will 
enable the consortium to choose the best and most efficient scenario. 
This will include the use of Aspen Energy Analyzer and exergy analysis 
as tools to optimise the e nergy consumption (heat integration) and to 
potentially reduce GHG and CO2 emissions. 
Simulation software is insufficient to 
simulate, scale -up and model some 
parts of the process or even the entire 
process (M, 10%) 
7 
A deep research of the most accurate thermodynamic models for the 
simulation of the process will be carried out regarding each part of the 
process and the components involved in it. If not sufficient yet, a 
mathematic modelling will be developed based on the specification of 
the process and t he experimental information by means of specialised 
software (e.g Matlab, Simulink…), especially where biologic processes 
are involved. The model will be then integrated into the AspenPlus or 
the required simulation software to have a unique final simulati on 
flowsheet. 
Lack of interest in the PERCAL 
outcomes (M, 50%) 8 Implementation of dissemination and exploitation activities focussing 
on the advantages of PERCAL benefits will be carried out.  
*L=low risk, M=medium risk, H=high risk,  
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 45 of 92 
3.2. MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE AND PROCEDURES. 
3.2.1. Organizational structure and the decision-making, including a list of milestones. 
The Consortium of 
PERCAL will be 
coordinated by Partner 
IMECAL with the support of 
AIMPLAS. The project 
management structure has 
been conceived to ensure the 
competent industrial, 
scientific and business 
management of PERCAL 
project and to enable efficient 
and effective integration and 
communication throughout 
the management chain.  
 
Figure 3.2.a Project Management Structure. 
This management structure has been implemented successfully in similar EU Projects involving AIMPLAS (e.g. FP7 
BRIGIT, BUGWORKERS or BISIGODOS, and H2020 JOSPEL or URBANREC and DAFIA ), and as such, has 
been adopted by the PERCAL Consortium. A schematic representation of t he management structure of PERCAL 
is shown in Figure 3.2.a  the project management structure is clearly industry driven as the Coordinator is a SME 
(IMECAL), AIMPLAS  chairs the Executive Board (EB)  and the SME Partner EXERGY chairs the IPR, 
Dissemination & Exploitation Board (IPREB). All boards have a majority representation of Industrial Partners as 
described below. An overview of the governance structure and decision-making process is also detailed below. The 
composition of the boards and the decision maki ng mechanisms have been designed in order to ensure that all 
decisions are taken in accordance with the Industrial interests, and SME’s interests in particular. 
The structure adopted is particularly business like (as opposed to bureaucratic) to ensure that PERCAL is run 
as a “commercially” orientated project with a very clear business focus. This has been achieved by limiting the 
number of partners represented on each management body, but ensuring that appropriate representation is pooled, in 
order to facilitate and speed up decision taking and ensure prompt reaction and implementation of countermeasures, 
if needed. Nevertheless, there is the opportunity for all partners to express their opinion and canvas support through 
the General Assembly ( GA) which will meet at least twice a year to ratify progress and decisions made by the 
management bodies. The GA has the ultimate decision making power in the Consortium.  
Decision –Making mechanisms: All Boards and Committees will typically meet at least twice per year. Any group 
will deliberate and decide validly provided a majority of its members are present or represented and each member 
will have one vote with the Chairperson having a casting vote if required. Decisions will be taken by a majority of 
two-thirds of the votes of the members present and the members that have delegated their vote. General Assembly 
meetings, meetings involving industrial demonstration or key technical meetings will be face -to-face, conference 
calls will be also encouraged. 
All the partners have the responsibilities described below as a result of taking part in a specific decision making body. 
In all of them, the SME and Industrial participants will have the highest level of decision-making competency 
(majority voting). 
The General Assembly (GA) consists of 12 representatives (one per partner), and is chaired by IMECAL. The GA 
is the ultimate decision-making and arbitration body of the Consortium (the final and highest authority in the project). 
However, it delegates short-term decisions-making actions to the Executive Board (EB). Such decisions do however 
require subsequent acceptance by the GA. The GA will decide on matters relating to: The political strategic and 
economic orientation of the Project, its objectives, definition  and subsequent modifications, including the shift of 
budget of the Project. Actions towards defaulting parties, including their substitution. The nomination and election 
of EB members. The acceptance & exclusion of new parties or affiliates in the ECGA an d in the Consortium 
Agreement. The Consortium Agreement and its Annexes. Description of Work, subsequent Project Implementation 
Plan and ECGA, including proposals and modifications. Ultimate approval of IPR Policies & Exploitation Plans 
proposed by the IPREB. 
The Executive Board (EB) is responsible for the strategic and political guidance of the Project. It is composed of 
one representative of each one of the 1 2 partners. AIMPLAS will chair the EB. The responsibilities of the EB 
include: Overall guidance & supervision over strategic, political, economic & operational day-to-day issues regarding 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 46 of 92 
the Project. Definition, approval and fulfilment of Project objectives. Scientific and Technological Quality 
Assessment. Definition and implementation of risk management methodology at all levels (financial, technical and 
administrative). Evaluation of results and definition of levels for dissemination relating to all kind of information and 
reports. Conflict Resolution. Constitution and administration of the funding. Presentation of the taken decisions to 
the GA periodically. 
The EB will decide on matters relating to: The shift of tasks and responsibilities and budget of the Project. The 
regulations governing the decision -making and operational procedures of the EB and  other Project bodies. The 
method of payment and management procedures of the Community’s financial contribution. Requests for 
subcontracting, within the context of the Project. The actions to be taken in accordance with the evaluation of results 
obtained. The reporting, controlling and auditing procedures concerning the Project. The validation of reports and 
Project Deliverables to be submitted to the BBI JU within the reporting activity together with annual validation of 
the realised expenditure in accordance with the budget of the Project. 
The Technical Management Committee (TMC) is the body responsible for ensuring the overall technical co -
ordination of the Project work, in accordance with the Work Programme, subsequent Implementation Plan, and EB 
decisions, at Scientific, Technical, Financial and Administrative level. The TMC’s main responsibilities also include: 
ensuring co-ordination between WPs, facilitating the take-up of research results, supervision of the implementation 
of the EB decisions, and the assessment of Project results. The TMC, Chaired by IMECAL will be composed by 
the WP Leaders: IMECAL (WP1), ATB (WP2), CMET (WP3), CENER (WP4), COVESTRO (WP5), VISUM 
(WP6), AUA (WP7), EXERGY (WP8) and IMECAL (WP9). 
The TMC will be responsible for: Ensuring the implementation of the decisions taken by the EB at WP level; Making 
proposals to the EB for the re -allocation of material, financial and human resources, tasks and responsibilities. 
Preparing deliverables & other information requested by the EB, based on reports by the WP Leaders. Validating and 
seeking EB approval for subcontracting. Ensuring co -ordination between WPs facilitating the take -up of research 
results in the demonstration activities. Assisting WP leaders on day to day management. Mo nitoring the projects 
technical progress against the identified technical risks, as described in T9.3. 
The TMC will convene meetings with the Work Package Leaders at least quarterly (typically 3 face -to-face 
meetings and 2 conference call meetings) and if applicable with the EB, for purposes of co -ordination and 
management. Where the TMC cannot settle decision making disputes, the decision shall be taken in the EB.  
The Work Package Leaders (WPL) , as identified above will report and be accountable to the TM C. The specific 
WPL will be responsible for their own WP organizational arrangements, work procedures, day-to-day management 
and time schedule, providing that such arrangements, work procedures and time schedule do not conflict with the 
ECGA, the Consortium Agreement, the Description of Work, subsequent Implementation Plans, or requests and other 
provisions made by the appropriate bodies within the Consortium or the BBI JU. Meetings of a specific WP will be 
convened at least quarterly, either face-to-face or by conference/video call. Extraordinary Meetings shall be: a) Called 
in and convened by the corresponding WP Leader; or b) by the TMC Chairperson. 
The Project Coordinator (IMECAL) is the intermediate for communication between the Consortium and the BBI 
JU and shall report and be accountab le to the EB and the GA. The Co ordinator is in charge of the financial and 
administrative management (WP9) of the Project. The Coordinator will submit for EB validation, the reports which 
shall be submitted to BBI JU within the reporting activity. The reports covering project deliverables, supporting 
documents and audit certificates will be provided to the Coordinator by the TMC. For the avoidance of any doubt, 
the Co-ordinator has the capacity of representation of the con sortium before the Commission. The Co -ordinator 
undertakes to keep the Joint Funds allocated by the EU Grant Agreement or by budget in accordance with the 
provisions which will be defined in the Consortium Agreement and in the Grant Agreement and decisions  from the 
appropriate bodies. The main coordinators responsibilities will include:  
a) Periodic Reporting: the project coordinator will be responsible for ensuring the collation and timely submission 
of the contractual reports required by the BBI JU, always according to the EC reporting requirements for the H2020 
Programme. With regards to the project periodic reports, the project manager’s activities shall include: the creation 
of report /information gathering templates, providing support to the project consortium and enabling each project 
partner to undertake their responsibilities for the provision of information to complete such reports and making sure 
that each partner is made aware of the deadlines for the timely delivery of any required information. Project reports 
will be submitted to the BBI JU on due time, including copies of the minutes, presentations given by partners and 
additional information. b) Periodic Commission Questionnaires: if the Commission requires a number of periodic 
questionnaires, the Project Co -ordinator will be in charge of coordinating the complet ion and reporting of these 
questionnaires. c) To ensure the verification and submission of the project deliverable reports: all deliverable 
reports have to be verified initially by the EB before submission to the project coordinator, who will ensure that they 
are according to the EC requirements and submitted timely. d) Coordination of the Periodic and Review Project 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 47 of 92 
Meetings: the project coordinator will assume responsibility for the organization of those meetings, taking into 
account the attendance of the BBI JU representative(s) and the independent reviewer(s) appointed by the BBI. The 
project coordinator will coordinate: the meeting venue, agenda, minutes and other logistical arrangements where 
required, in cooperation with the hosting Partner. e) Collection of Certificates on Financial Statements: the project 
coordinator will ensure that all Partners who are required to provide a CFS, provide them in a timely manner at the 
end of the Project. f) Reporting and Payment of Project Financing: assuming the role of project banker and taking 
responsibility for holding and payment of the project funds in accordance with the agreement of the General 
Assembly and the Consortium Agreement. g) Additional responsibilities of the project coordinator will include: 
coordination for the updating and signature of the project Consortium Agreement and Contract amendments (when 
required); to provide a platform for communication between the BBI JU and the project consortium/ management 
structure; to provide a resource of suppor t and information to the project consortium in fulfilment of the project 
contract and BBI requirements. 
The SMEs and Industrial Partners will own the ultimate decision making in accordance with the 
organizational structure. As detailed above, all Consortium bodies have a majority of Industrial Partners, thus, in 
the end, the decisions are taken by majority voting, guaranteeing that the participating Industries needs and 
requirements are fulfilled and consequently, that the results of the project will be for the benefit of the sectors involved 
in the PERCAL value chain.  
From the Technical point of view, the Project Co -ordinator, delegating day to day work to the defined 
Management Bodies, will monitor the overall progress of the Project in all its aspects, with specific 
responsibilities in this regard for: 
Development of the Technical Report Procedures and the Technical Progress Monitoring and templates for technical 
activities. Assuring interaction between WP’s and technical quality of (intermediate) project  results. Assuring WP 
interaction and also for the project scientific and technical quality assurance. Co -ordination, integration and 
validation of the Technical Reports and Project deliverables to be subsequently submitted to the EC. Co -ordination 
of the other committees’ activities (IPR and Exploitation Board, EB, TMC). 
The IPR, Dissemination & Exploitation Board  (IPREB) will be chaired by partner EXERGY, and the rest of 
Members will be key persons from project partners who are involved in the innovation and IPR generation and 
protection of key technologies for their companies. The IPREB will have the responsibility to support the Consortium 
on IPR issues. It will propose the IPR Policy and the Action Plan for the Exploitation of project results to the EB and 
GA. The IPREB will be responsible for the preparation, monitoring and updating of the list of exploitable results 
and innovations that will be used to monitor the progress and achievements of the project and to assess the Plan for 
the Exploitation and Dissemination of Results (PEDR, including both the Dissemination and Business Plan). The 
IPREB will look to increase the IP protection and ownership awareness, assimilation and implementation, supported 
by training and workshops given by the IPR helpdesk a nd other EC support services that might be considered 
necessary. 
In summary, the protection of the interest of Industry will be guaranteed as they are the majority represented in the 
various boards, and consequently an industry-driven vote will be guaranteed in all levels of the management structure, 
allowing a day-to-day management as in a processing chain at industrial level, with protection of the SMEs interests 
and innovations. 
3.2.2. Organizational structure and decision-making mechanisms. 
The project management structure has been replicated from that used in FP7  and H2020 projects coordinated by 
AIMPLAS. This structure has been proven to be agile and has been successful in properly managing projects of a 
similar nature to PERCAL, solving conflicts and overcoming hurdles for their successful completion. In addition, 
strong cooperation already exists among the majority of PERCAL Partners within FP6, FP7 or H2020 projects, with 
an open management and cooperative approach which benefits from the relevant experience of all Partners. 
Moreover, the project partnership is highly complementary and industry driven; each Partner with sound experience 
in their respective fields of work, have clear objectives and responsibility of tasks, and each of them fully understands 
and is highly committed to exploit the project outcomes, ensuring that the high degree of cooperation achieved 
already during proposal preparation will continue during project execution. 
Innovation Management: the IPREB will implement the Innovation Management strategy  developed within 
PERCAL. All PERCAL’s technology can be exploited by a huge number of additional applications by modification 
of microbial strains, catalysts or green chemistry routes. The Partners complementarities along the value chain and 
their highly innovative nature will foster cross -fertilisation and boost innovation within the project, simply by the 
collaborative execution of the work plan. In addition, the project will constantly look for internal and external 
opportunities in order to f urther promote innovation. T he project will use the disseminati on and business plan in 
order to detect needs of potential customers and future end-users of the results and will proactively look for feedback 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 48 of 92 
from all stakeholders, entities and organisations (industrial platforms, public authorities, standard setters) that can be 
useful to improve PERCAL results, modifying accordingly the work plan if deemed useful. Similarly, the project 
partners will communicate internally the project development, fostering constructive criticism and feedback from 
staff, engineers, and  designers and in particular managers. All this feedback will be gathered by the IPREB and 
discussed during the GA meetings to agree possible modifications of the workplan if improvements in the results can 
occur resulting from this innovation management strategy. 
3.3. CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE  
3.3.1. Overall description: adequacy, complementarities, representatively of the value chain and synergies.  
PERCAL consortium has a well -balanced composition.  The PERCAL consortium brings together a wealth of 
expertise and resources within the areas, including p artners that propose  the best solutions to maximize the 
valorisation of the different components of MSW. The presence of main actors in the whole value chain demonstrates 
the critical mass of complimentary resources that will enable the PERCAL project to achieve its targeted societal, 
industrial, and scientific breakthroughs and commercial success. Each partner has a clearly defined role within the 
project and will contribute specific expertise that will enable the project success. SME partners (IMECAL, TBWR, 
VISUM and EXERGY) and the IND partner  (SOFTER, HAYAT,COVESTRO) and the Industrial Support 
Industrial companies (ENERGO, ARKEMA and NOVO) will provide the fundamental knowledge, technologies and 
expertise in the abovementioned areas required to achieve the project objectives, as their activities within the project 
are fully in line with their own core business and research strategies. Figure 3.3.a shows the role/ expertise of each 
partner in the project and their distribution around Europe. RTD Partners (AIMPLAS, CMET, ATB, CENER and 
AUA) have the necessary research expertise and will provide support to the partners to achieve their objectives. Each 
consortium member has demonstrated a long term commitment to the development of their own research, policy and 
commercial activities within the industrial targeted by the project. All of them therefore offer excellent potential for 
a lasting integration of activities and the creation of a pan-EU culture for the technologies, materials and processes 
developed. 
 
Figure 3.3.a. Sectors and expertise brought by the PERCAL consortium. 
The mobility of resources and personnel will be encouraged throughout the project, not only helping to form strong 
bonds between the consortium members . Those actions are going to be implemented in order to lead towards an 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 49 of 92 
integration of complimentary activities, services and future research projects to improve the composite multi stage 
processing at EU level.  This is a complete storyboard of actors complemented by an advisory board to extend 
industrial and technical insight. 
The table below (Table 3.3.a) gives a brief overview of each partner specific business and their expertise, and the 
main tasks in the project allocated to them based on that expertise. 
Table 3.3.a DAFIA’s Participant Expertise and Tasks Distribution.  
Part 
num 
Participant 
short name Participant business / expertise- Main role in the project 
1 IMECAL 
MSW biorefinery. Process engineering and 
expertise in biotechnological processes to obtain 
bioethanol from MSW.  
Hydrolysis of MSW. Biosurfactants from amino 
acids and lipids. Re -engineering process for 
fermentation of acids. Project Management.  
2 AIMPLAS Research Technology Institute expert in polymer 
materials, nanotechnologies and processing.  
Production of HMA from LA using reactive 
extrusion. Collaboration in Polyester polyols 
production. 
3 ATB 
Develop sustainable technologies for a resource -
efficient utilization of biological systems to 
produce food, raw materials, & energy. 
Bioconversion of the hydrolysed carbohydrates 
from organic municipal solid waste to lactic acid 
(LA). 
4 AUA 
University laboratory expert in 
bioprocess/biorefinery development, LCA and 
bioprocess design 
Bioprocess development for coupled succinic acid 
production and separation using membrane 
electrolysis. LCA studies. 
5 CMET 
University laboratory e xpert on (bio -
)electrochemical production and extraction of 
fermentation products 
Bioprocess development for coupled succinic acid 
production and separation using membrane 
electrolysis 
6 CENER  
Technology center specialised expert in chemical 
processes, microbiology, fermentation process 
and analytical techniques  
Characterization of MSW samples and 
fermentation by -products. Production of new 
biosurfactants from amino acids and lipids. 
7 TBWR 
Applied R&D in biorefining processing; 
separation of lactic acid and amino acids, 
prototype for reactive distillation of ethyl lactate.  
Development of a simultaneous esterification and 
products separation process/reactive distillation 
for ethyl lactate. 
8 VISUM  
Advanced engineering company that specialises 
in process monitoring and control, and process 
optimisation. 
MSW biorefinery processes monitoring a nd pilot 
plant control system study. 
9 SOFTER Production of plastic compounds and hot-melts. Requirements definition & lactic HMA scale -up. 
10 HAYAT 
One of the largest FMCG (household 
cleaning & personal care, baby –care &  
feminine hygiene, and paper tissue & 
towels) manufacturers in Turkey. 
Validation of surfactants, ethyl lactate & HMA as 
a components of their current Industrial products.  
11 COVESTRO 
A world -leading supplier of high -
performance polymer materials for key 
industries. 
Use succinic acid in polyester -based polyols, 
resins and polyurethane dispersions (PUD). To 
provide successful correlation between SA quality 
& final applicability. 
12 EXERGY Provide expert advice to business and the public 
sector on bioeconomy. 
Simulations, plant engineering, energy balance 
and economic studies, business plan activities. 
PERCAL partnership is composed by 12 organizations from 10 EU countries, having the required pan EU approach 
essential for achieving the objectives of the project since it is required to address the EU social and Industry needs in 
the field with a wide EU perspective. Furthermore, to ensure that the long -term and widespread take -up and 
commercial success of the PERCAL results, it is important that the project innovation and research activities are 
undertaken with a strong knowledge of the different industrial sectors addressed. The Consortium therefore ensures 
the participation of different EU regions, whose roles within the project are clearly defined and represent strategically 
important regional objectives, which will address the overall objectives of enhancing European industrial 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 50 of 92 
competitiveness, moving towards a circular economy and hence providing a clear EU added value. 
3.3.2. Industrial/Commercial involvement to ensure exploitation of the results.  
PERCAL project clearly has a number of benefits for the involved SME as we explain on detail along the 
proposal. It enables the transfer and market replication of the new materials for complex waste (MSW) that 
contributes to the developed of four well -defined and high market products, supporting the take -up of the new 
advanced sorting, classification and production technologies and becoming a source of information, training and 
technical / regulatory support. Besides, PERCAL will create a new and more open market/supply chain for the 
materials, technologies and sales as previous figures shows. 
The involvement of all the participants during and after the end of the project, in order to strengthen the industrial 
and commercial exploitation, is a key aspect of the consortium relationship, implemented through the innovation and 
IPR management strategies resulting in the Business Plan included in the Final PEDR. 
During the project. Throughout the life of the project, all project partners will be responsible for updating the project 
‘Plan for the Exploitation and Dissemination of Results’. Dissemination will target ‘take-up’ actions within EU Local 
Authorities-Public Bodies, Stakeholders, SMEs and End -Users to promote the growth of the materials and 
technologies developed into new and existing market sectors; and to encourage SME par ticipation within the 
PERCAL supply chain. Publication and dissemination of project knowledge and results will be conducted on 
agreement between the consortium partners, led by the IPREB chaired by EXERGY ensuring that the SMEs and 
industry interests are not only taken into account but are the real drivers for the exploitation strategy. Managed by 
the IPREB, each project partner will be required to develop their own ‘Exploitation Plan’ that will demonstrate how 
the project results will be integrated into their own forward business plan and research actions. Exploitation activities 
will include: protection and management of innovations, IPR and project results, gathering of reliable market 
intelligence and forecasts, feasibility studies for the creation of sp in-off activities, evaluation of the project results 
for commercialization and application within new markets, steps to implement the proper industrial manufacturing 
policies, and the development of effective support structures to reinforce supply chain. S uch activities are integral 
part of WP8. 
After the end of the project . As explained on section 2.1, all the partners will obtain economic profits from the 
commercialization of the innovative PERCAL new materials and logistic implementation and will be able  to 
introduce to the market cost competitive and sustainable products, increasing/opening markets and besides, to obtain 
profits by licensing the project results related to their knowledge field. However, as it will be detailed in the Business 
Plan and PEDR, the percentages of these profits will be different among the Partners depending on the exploitation 
agreement reached among co-owners which will reflect the percentage of contribution of each Partner during Project 
execution, the Background brought by them to achieve such result, and so on. Furthermore, these economic profits 
will encourage all the partners to contribute in the initial investment necessary to set up the exploitation process, once 
the project is finished. The SMEs participants are economi cally and managerially capable of performing the 
exploitation of the results, based on their turnover, their own investment in R&D and the level of economic 
contribution to the project. The other partners have also the right competences to guarantee the PERCAL exploitation 
of results in their areas. All partners are highly convinced of the potential impact of the project results in their 
businesses, and neither the SMEs, nor the other partners have conflict of interests regarding the areas of 
commercialization/exploitation, from a geographical, technological or market sector point of view. More details are 
provided in section 2.1., where apart from the exploitation interest, the steps to achieve the foreseen impact are 
described.   
Industrial participation is very strong in this project. The consortium includes ten industry partners, with multiple 
and complementary technological, research and business expertise, covering the full spectrum of the activities 
proposed in PERCAL. They are dynamic enterprises with  an active intention and outlook to expand their 
product/service portfolio into new markets. All project industrial partners planning to directly capitalize on the 
PERCAL results as we explain in detail in impact section, either by expanding their existing products/services, or by 
licencing technology. The geographical dispersion of the industrial partners ensures that they will cover an important 
proportion of European markets. 
3.3.3. Other countries. 
In the PERCAL consortium there is one participant from the Associated Countries, Turkey, that as the Article 7 of 
the H2020 Regulation says is fully entitled to participate in this call for proposal with exactly the same right as they 
are considered eligible partners.  
3.4. RESOURCES TO BE COMMITTED  
Each work package has been analysed to determine the personnel, equipment and financial resources required to 
undertake each task. The coordinator will lead the mobilization of these resources, ensuring or correcting any 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 51 of 92 
deviations from the plan through constant monitoring of tasks. The budget distribution has been arranged in order to 
allocate the necessary resources to each partner taking into account their expected workload and involvement in the 
different WPs and their needs for materials and consumables, travel, equipment, other goods and services and 
subcontracting.  
The description of those costs for partners whose ‘Other direct costs’ budget exceeds the 15% of the personnel costs 
is included this section (table.3.4a), altogether an overview of t he main equipment’s to be used during the project 
available at partners’ facilities, which will be integrated through the WPs, has been included in section 4. 
 
 
 
Table 3.4.a. Other direct costs (travel, equipment, other goods and services). 
Partner Cost (€) Justification 
Other goods 
and services 
1. IMECAL 36,500 
Laboratory consumables (12 k€), pilot plant consumables (8k€), Laboratory reactive (6k€), 
Shipment (5k€), WP8: IPR protection, dissemination material and events,  conference fees, 
open access journal (4k€), Audit cost (1.5k€), 
Equipment 20,866.74 PERSEO plant equipment depreciation (plant cost 3 M€ during three years).  
Travel 12,600 Travel to meetings (2 persons attending to 6 general assembly meetings , KOM and 8 trips for 
dissemination activities: fairs and conferences. 
Total 69,966.74  
Other goods 
and services 
2.AIMPLAS 
35.000 
Laboratory consumables (10 k€), pilot plant compounding consumables (15k€), Laboratory 
reactive (5k€), WP8:cost of IPR protection, dissemination material and events, and 
publication fees for open access journal (5k€),  
Equipment 21,200 Co-rotating twin screw extruder (300 k€*24 month use at 25% time), equipment laboratory of 
synthesis (155K*24 moths use at 20% time).10 years depreciation. 
Travel 10,500 Travel to meetings (1 persons attending to 6 general assembly  and KOM  meetings and 5 
dissemination travels, attendance to conferences, fairs and technical demonstrations.  
Total 66,700  
Other goods 
and services 
3.ATB 50,000 
WP4: C onsumables, tools and small equipment (adaptation of existing devices, 
materials/chemicals/kits, sensors, analytical costs, membranes, lab ware etc.)  (45 k€). WP8: 
IPR protection, dissemination material and events, conference fees, open access journal (5k€). 
Travel 10,500 Travel to meetings (1 persons attending to 6 general assembly and KOM meetings and 5 
dissemination travels, attendance to conferences, fairs and technical demonstrations.  
Total 60,500  
Other goods 
and services 
4.AUA 25,000 WP 3 and WP7 consumables and accessories, WP8: IPR protection, dissemination material 
and events, conference fees, open access journal (5k€). 
Travel 10,500 Travel to meetings (1 persons attending to 6 general assembly and KOM meetings and 5 
dissemination travels, attendance to conferences, fairs and technical demonstrations.  
Total 35,500  
Other goods 
and services 
5.CMET 
40,000 
Electrodes for reactors (~2k€/m 2) and membranes (regular replacement, ~150€/m 2) 
Components for peristaltic pumps (9.5 k€), sensors and heaters (2.5k€) to control the reactors. 
WP8: IPR protection, dissemination material and events, conference fees, open access (5k€).  
Equipment 27,040 Belach fermenter, 5L; Electrocell Syncell, including 5 reactor frames  (52 k€ 
depreciation time 5 years, 100% use during 2.6 years project. 
Travel 10,500 Travel to meetings (1 persons attending to 6 general assembly and KOM meetings and 5 
dissemination travels, attendance to conferences, fairs and technical demonstrations.  
Total 77,540  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 52 of 92 
Partner Cost (€) Justification 
Other goods 
and services 
6. CENER 6,855.26 
WP4: L aboratory consumables and reagents, microbial cultures and media, laboratory 
material, etc... WP8:IPR protection, dissemination material & events, conferences fees, open 
access (5 k€).  
Travel 10,500 Travel to meetings (1 persons attending to 6 general assembly and KOM meetings and 5 
dissemination travels, attendance to conferences, fairs and technical demonstrations.  
Total 17,355.26  
Other goods 
and services 
7. TBWR 
35,000 
WP5: Bulk chemicals for the reactive distillation (6 k€), membrans (3.5 k €), catalysts for lab/ 
pilot scale (9 k€), consumables for lab scale experiments (5 k€) and special analytics (7.5 k€), 
WP8: IPR protection, dissemination material & events, conferences fees, open access (4 k€). 
Travel 15,000 WP5: Travel cost to cover mileage and allowance for travels from Vienna to Linz, where pilot 
plant is located: 30 travels @ 220€, 6600€; Other travel costs see bellow table.  
Equipment 15,500 Depreciation for a reactive distillation plant to deploy to the project for 36 Months  
Total 65,500  
Other goods 
and services 
8. VISUM 131,000 
Materials for the fabrication of 2NIR monitoring systems, and for their installation in 
laboratory facilities (optical systems 2x45k€, optomechanical parts: 8k€, mechanical parts: 
8k€, vessels and tubing: 5k€, computer and software for programming control platform: 5k€, 
electronics & interface: 2k€)- Cost of lab consumables for calibration tests and analysis (4k€), 
transportation & insuran ce of prototypes (3 k€)  IPR protection, dissemination material & 
events, and publication fees for open access journal (5 k€).  
Travel  8,400 Travel to meetings (1 person attending the KOM and 6 general assembly meetings and 3 
dissemination travels, attendance to conferences, fairs and technical demonstrations)  
Total 139,400  
Travel 
9.SOFTER 1,415 Travel costs attendance to General assembly meetings  
Total 1,415  
Other goods 
and services 
10. HAYAT 5,500 Inks, cleanning products, surfactants.  laboratory consumables, reactives, … Conferences, 
seminars, fairs assistance fees. 
Travel 5,000 Travel to meeting (1 person assist to 6 meetings in 3 years), visit potential customers, 
suppliers, fairs or conferences. 
Total 10,500  
Other goods 
and services 
11. COVESTRO 
5,000 Consumables, auxiliary equipment, accessories in WP 5 activities  
Travel 6,000 Travel to meeting (1 person assist to 6 meetings in 3 years), visit potential customers, 
suppliers, fairs or conferences. 
Total 11,000  
Other goods 
and services 
12. EXERGY 36,910 
Software: AspenOne (License for 12 month. €16,676), SuperPro Designer (€15,234), IPR 
protection, Open access publication, Registration fees, attendances to conferences  and fairs, 
dissemination materials and evaluation of patentability (€5k).  
Travel 8,400 Travel to meetings (1 person attending the KOM and 6 general assembly meetings and 3 
dissemination travels, attendance to conferences, fairs and technical demonstrations)  
Total 45,310  
 
 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 53 of 92 
Table 3.4.b. Summary of subcontracting costs 
Participant 
No. 
Participant 
Short Name 
Costs 
(€) 
Justification (subcontracting) 
1 IMECAL 62.000 Task 1.3: Laboratory analyses to determine the chemical composition of selected 
substrates. 
Task 1.4: Laboratory analyses for the evaluation of pre-treatment and 
saccharification processes. 
Task 1.5: Laboratory analyses to validate the fermentation processes for the 
production of target bioproducts (ethanol, LA, SA).  
Task 6.1: Study for the selection and optimization  of the relevant fermentative 
parameters for the production of bioproducts at industrial scale. Analysis and control 
of parameters. 
Task 6.4: Study of the integration of fermentative parameters within the appropriate 
working ranges in the demo plant configuration. Analysis of parameters. 
6 CENER 48.000 Task 3.1: Screening and selection of bacterial strain for succinic acid production  and 
first stage of fermentation media optimization assays at lab scale according to 
selected strain. 
Task 4.4: Consultancy and support for the selection of analytical techniques to 
evaluate the activity of biosurfactant samples produced.  
* According to article 13 of G rant Agreement the Best Value for Money will be applied, so that company BIOPOLIS will be 
subcontracted to carry out Table 3.4 b tasks, due to its know-how and consolidated experience in the biotechnological field and 
on these specific tasks in particular. 
 
During the PERCAL three-year project, 7 technical meetings have been planned: kick-off, and one GA meeting each 
6 months; all meetings will be held in EU countries (Spain, Germany, Austria, Turkey & UK). The Consortium has 
estimated around 700 €/trip/person in Europe (350€ flight, 250€ two nigh ts hotel, 100€ meals, taxi, others). In 
consequence, the average cost per partner for PERCAL meetings assistance is 4,900 €, assuming that one person per 
partner attends. Additionally, 2 trips per partner per year are estimated for attendance to conferences, fairs, technical 
demonstrations, etc., this meaning 3,500€ more. Full cost budget for industrial partners is 8,400 €.  
In the case of Research centres three additional dissemination travels will be proposed, i.e., 10,5 00 €.  In the 
coordinator´s case, two people will attend all the meetings, resulting in 10 EU trips  for project meetings and 8 EU 
trips for dissemination activities, this is around 12,600 €.  
In the WP8, for all industrial SME partners a quantity of  4,000€ in concept of IPR protection, Open access 
publication, Registration fees, attendances to conferences, dissemination materials  and evaluation of patentability. 
This amount will be increase up to 5,000€ for the RTD,  EXERGY and VISUM. These costs are included in other 
goods and services cost. 
 
The budget proposed for PERCAL project is 3,394 k€, the BBI request is 2,519 k€ and the in-kind contribution 
876 k€, IND will provide the 19% and SME the 39% of in-kind. The participation and leadership of SMEs 
and IND in PERCAL is clear as they represent the 58% of the Partnership and around 46% of the budget and 48% 
BBI JU contribution. In section 3.2 (management structure and procedures), it can be seen that the relevant Project 
Governance Bodies ( General Assembly, Execu tive Board, Technical Management Committee, Innovation 
Management Board and IPR-Exploitation Board) have a majority of SMEs, having the decision-making power in 
all of them. Also 5 of 9 WPs are led by companies. All of them demonstrate a strong commitment to the project and 
understand the responsibilities that this brings with it and have assumed a fundamental role within the project work 
programme, as clearly summarized in Table 3.4.c.  
 
 
 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 54 of 92 
Table 3.4.c PERCAL Partnership Distribution. 
 
 
To obtain the complementary range of expertise and the critical mass needed (both in human and financial terms), it 
is necessary to bring together, companies and ROs representing the entire supply chain and R&D areas, working in 
close cooperation to solve a common  problem, which cannot be found within a single EU Region, requiring the 
integration of resources from across EU.  
  
Partner type Nº
Percentage of
partnership 
(%)
Total effort
(p/m)
Percentage 
of effort (%) Total Budget EU/ BBI request EU/BBI (%)
In kind
contribution 
In kind
contribution 
(%)
SME 4 33,33% 190,2 43% 1.559.519,68 € 1.216.425,36 € 48% 343.094,32 € 39%
IND 3 25,00% 14,7 3% 165.312,50 € 0,00 € 0% 165.312,50 € 19%
RO 5 41,67% 242,4 54% 1.669.349,08 € 1.302.092,28 € 52% 367.256,80 € 42%
TOTAL 12 447,3 2.518.517,64 € 875.663,62 €
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 55 of 92 
4 MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM
4.1 PARTICIPANTS (APPLICANTS) 
PARTNER 1. Coordinator 
Name: Industrias Mecanicas Alcudia S.A. 
(IMECAL) 
Web page: www.imecal.com/perseo  
Type: SME 
Country: Spain  
Brief description of the organization :  IMECAL is a SME which was founded in 1979 as an engineering 
company in the metal sector, working on demand and manufacturing all type of metal -mechanical equipment for 
civil works, petro -refineries and petrochemical, transportation, refrigeration industry,  industrial auxiliary motor 
and ceramics industry, among others. R & D IMECAL Department has allowed the company to progress in the 
technological field, having made significant partnerships with companies, universities and public research 
organizations. Th e R&D line of production technology for  second generation bioethanol, has developed a 
biotechnological patented technology for obtaining bioethanol from Organic Municipal Waste. In 2007 IMECAL 
built a second generation bioethanol plant with a capacity to p rocess 25 ton/day of organic fraction of MSW 
(PERSEO Bioethanol®). Since this year IMECAL has participated in different projects to test and improve 
PERSEO technology to different MSW raw materials with different companies. IMECAL is member of the 
Biofuels TP Platform-European Union, and participates actively in several national and international conferences 
on biofuels. 
Role in the Project: Project coordinator. In WP1 they work in the selection and analysis of the most representative 
MSW. Develop in collab oration with NOVO the new enzyme cocktails to increase the amount of hydrolysed 
sugars. Development a biosurfactants from the protein and lipid fraction of MSW. Evaluate with CENER, 
EXERGY and VISUM the best technologies to integrate the new products (LA, SA and lipid/protein) in the 
PERSEO technology plant. Contribution to communication, dissemination, exploitation and other related 
activities. 
Scientific team:  
Ms Caterina Coll Lozano, PMP® (F), Chemical engineer by the Higher Technical School of Industrial Engineers 
of the Polytechnic University of Valencia. Project Management Profesional (PMP®) certificate  by Project 
Management Institute (PMI). Executive MBA by Bussines & Marketing School ESIC. Master degree in 
environment coursed in the Department of Chemical and Nuclear Engineering from the Polytechnic University of 
Valencia. Technical Industrial engineer in Chemist by the Technical School of Industrial Engineering of the 
Polytechnic University of Valencia. Stay in the "School of Science" of “In stitute of Technology Sligo" in Sligo 
(Ireland). Stay on the Biomass Unit of the Division of Renewable Energy from the department of Energy of 
CIEMAT. Professional experience of over 15 years in process engineering and environment, mainly developed in 
CEAM (Centro de Estudios Ambientales del Mediterraneo) as Head of laboratory and environmental projects, and 
in IMECAL as Plant Manager of second generation bioethanol pilot plant PERSEO, and R&D Manager. Over the 
last years he has coordinated and participated in several projects at national and international level and performed 
scientific and technical publications in various journals, books and conference contributions. 
Dr. Ing. Marcos Latorre Sánchez  (M) , Chemical Engineer by the Higher Technical School of Industrial 
Engineers of the Polytechnic University of Valencia. Masters in Design for Sustainability from Cranfield 
University (England). PhD in Green Chemistry at Institute of Chemical Technology (Polytechnic University of 
Valencia - Spanish National Research Council). Stay at Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Germany). 
He has more than 6 years of experience in new materials development at laboratory and pilot scale and advanced 
characterization for renewable energy systems. He has participa ted in a number of R&D nationally and 
internationally funded projects aimed at the valorisation of biomass into higher valuable products. He is author of 
10 papers in peer-reviewed journals and has participated in different international conferences. 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 56 of 92 
Ms María Frau Martínez (F) , Technical Agricultural Engineering by the Polytechnic University of Valencia. 
International Welding Specialist (IWS) by CESOL. Senior technician in occupational risk prevention in the fields 
of occupational safety (CIEGS, Polytechnic University of Valencia), Ergonomics and Applied Psychology (IMF) 
and Health at Work (IMF). Extensive experience in handling graphic design programs like Auto -Cad, Inventor, 
Solid Works and Lantek among others. Professional experience in process engineering in Bonduelle Iberica SAU 
(Frudesa) and currently as a mechanical and process engineering in IMECAL, where performs mechanical and 
industrial design projects. 
Mr Jaime Mesa Arguello (M), Industrial Engineer by the Polytechnic University of Valencia. Technical specialist 
in engineering design with CAD Software, manufacturing and inspection of pressurized tanks. Professional 
experience in R&D projects development and process engineering at IMECAL, where performs mechanical and 
industrial design projects. 
Mr Juan Manuel Ferri Palop (M), Telecommunications technical engineer (Electronic Systems specialty) by the 
Polytechnic University of Valencia and Fachhochschule Ulm - Hochschule für Technik (Germany). Technical 
specialist in electronic systems, computer desi gn and modelling programs. Professional experience in R&D 
projects development, and process engineering at IMECAL SA., where performs mechanical, electrical and 
industrial design projects. 
Related publications, patents or products: 
 Method for Recovering Energy from the Organic Fraction of Solid Urban Waste and Associated Facility. 
Signes Nunez, Vicente, ; Ballesteros Perdices, Mercedes, ; Ballesteros Perdices, Ignacio, ; Manzanares 
Secades, Paloma, ; Martinez Garcia, Jose Maria, ; Negro Alvarez, Maria Jose, ; Oliva Dominguez, Jose Miguel, 
; Castaneda Sanchez, Rafael, ; Coll Lozano, Caterina. Spanish patent nº 2303792, European Patent EPO 
2112226, USA Patent 8399228 B2 and international PCT WIPO 099038. 
 Ethanol production from the orga nic fraction obtained after thermal pretreatment of Municipal Solid Waste. 
Mercedes Ballesteros, Felicia Sáez, Ignacio Ballesteros, Paloma Manzanares, Maria Jose Negro, Jose Maria 
Martínez, Rafael Castañeda, Jose Miguel Oliva Dominguez. Appl Biochem Biotechnol (2010) 161:423–431. 
 PERSEO Bioethanol®: Obtención de bioetanol y combustible orgánico a partir de RSU. Caterina Coll y 
Vicente Signes. INFOENVIRO, nº 72, p. 49-42, 2012. 
 Sistema de comunicaciones para el control de una planta de biocombustibles. Josep  F. Signes Palop, Víctor 
M. Sempere Payá, Caterina Coll Lozano. Automática e Instrumentación, nº 444, p. 40-42,  2012. 
 Proyecto PERSEO. Innovación tecnológica para el bioetanol de segunda generación. Rafael Castañeda, 
Caterina Coll, Vicente Signes, Mercedes Ballesteros. RETEMA, nº 121, p.50-56, Especial biomasa 2007. 
Related Projects:  
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
LO2X: Supercritical water co -oxidation of urban sewage 
sludges and wastes 
LIFE 12 
ENV 2016 www.lo2x.com  
BIOFORSU: Valorisation of the organic fraction of 
municipal solid wastes by conversion to bioethanol and 
combustible biomass 
Regional 2013 Not Available 
BIOFUEL: Development for a new integral waste treatment 
process with production of liquid biofuel 
Spanish 
Project 2009 Not Available 
ATENEA: Production of bioethanol from citrus wastes Regional 2008 www.imecal.com/perseo 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 57 of 92 
 
PERSEO: Production of bioethanol from organic municipal 
solid wastes 
Spanish 
Project 2006 www.imecal.com/perseo 
Technical equipment: 
- 25.000 m2 of metal-mechanic engineering facilities to transform metallic plates and sheets to a wide variety 
of industrial equipment: pipes, chemical reactors, distillation columns… Machinery includes: Laser 
cutting, forming, machining, blasting, passivating, assembly and welding… 
- 2000 m2 semi-industrial biotechnology plant (PERSEO Bioethanol®) with a capacity to process 25 ton/day 
of organic fraction of MSW. The plant includes the following units: Pre -treatment, Fermentation, Solid-
Liquid Separation, Distillation, Effluent Treatment, Auxiliary Systems, Final Product Storage, Control.  
- Two physical -chemical laboratories included in the PERSEO semi -industrial plant, with different 
equipment: High pressure liquid chromatography, analytical balance, thermo -balance, cent rifuge, 
microbiology fume extraction, pH meters, incubators with orbital shakers, solid grinders, oven, kiln, 
autoclave… 
 
Pictures of bioethanol PERSEO semi-industrial plant and its laboratories 
 
 
PARTNER 2. 
Full name: AIMPLAS-Asociación de Investigación 
de Materiales Plásticos y Conexas (AIMPLAS) 
Web page: www.aimplas.es 
Country: 
Spain  
Type: RO  
Brief description of the organization : AIMPLAS, Technological Institute of Plastics located in Valencia, is a 
private, non-profit Association with more than 500 associated companies created in 1990. AIMPLAS is formed 
by +120 highly skilled professional, more than 65% with a Masters, Engineering  or equivalent degree in 
Chemistry, polymer engineering, materials engineering or equivalent, including 15 PhD.  
AIMPLAS’ fields of work are related to technological research and development on thermoplastic and 
thermosetting plastic materials & products, its transformation processes and their recyclability and sustainability. 
AIMPLAS generates new knowledge and technologies that can be transferred to companies in order to help them 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 58 of 92 
to increase their effectiveness and competitiveness. 
AIMPLAS has a broad expertise in the fields of recycling, compatibilization, reactive extrusion, biopolymers and 
renewable source materials, special assisted processing technologies and nanocomposites, gained during the last 
years in the frame of EU and national projects. Nowad ays, AIMPLAS is involved in more than 25 European 
projects and has participated in 77 projects in FP5, FP6, FP7, LIFE+, CIP-EcoInnovation EU Programmes, among 
others, coordinating 27 of them. At National and Regional levels AIMPLAS participates in around 1 00 projects 
yearly.  
AIMPLAS, as RO is focused to help companies in the plastic sector to develop new products and increase their 
competitiveness through innovation, has more than 20 pilot plants representing the most relevant 
polymer/plastics/composites production technologies present in the industry nowadays and has state-of-the art test 
facilities for chemical, optical, morphological, mechanical and physical characterisation. These pilot lines and 
laboratories are used by many customer’s every year allow ing them to test new materials, optimize production 
processes and launch new products to the market, supported by AIMPLAS technical staff, resulting in more than 
5000 assays, 170 technical assessments and 120 skills training actions to more than 1500 clien ts per year. 
AIMPLAS has state-of-the-art 8500 m2 facilities, including thermoplastics and thermoset pilot plants, analysis and 
testing laboratories (physical-mechanical, chemical, packaging, automotive and construction) and training areas.  
Role in the Project: In WP5 Production of HMA from LA using reactive extrusion and Collaboration in Polyester 
polyols production. Leader of regulatory and safety analysis. Contribution to communication, dissemination, 
exploitation and other related activities. 
Scientific team:  
Dr. Amador García (M),  PhD in Organic Chemistry by the University of Valencia, working in AIMPLAS as 
researcher in the chemical laboratory since 2009. He has been involved in several regional and FP7 European 
projects focused in nanotechnology areas, materials from renewable re sources and coatings with enhanced 
properties, etc. (SUPIN, TRAINER, NMP INNOREX, RECAN, KBBE BRIGIT, KBBE BISIGODOS, 
BIOREFINE-2G). Before joining to AIMPLAS, he worked as researcher assistant in CIPF (Centro de 
Investigación Principe Felipe) and in the U niversity of Valencia. During 2007 he was in the chemical group of 
Professor Dennis P. Curran (University of Pittsburgh) as visiting researcher. In 2010 he received the Plastic & 
Innovation award. 
Dr. Alba María Ortiz Álvarez (F), European PhD in chemistry by the Universidad de Alcalá, Madrid (December 
2012), working in AIMPLAS as PhD researcher in the chemical laboratory since 2013. Sh e has been involved in 
several national and international research projects focused in different areas such as synthesis of new polymers, 
nanotechnology, materials from renewable resources and coatings with enhanced properties, and so on. Moreover, 
she has being involved in the technical work of on Food contact plastics as well as Pharmacopoeia. Before joining 
AIMPLAS, she worked at the Universidad de Alcalá, where she was involved in research projects. Her research 
focused on the design and synthesis of new enlarged -palladium complexes as recoverable catalysts by 
nanofiltration techniques, contributing in international peer -reviewed journals and in national and international 
conference papers in the field of catalysis, dendrimers and organometallic chemistry. 
Ms. Raquel Llorens -Chiralt (F), Master in Material Engineering by the Polytechnic University of Valencia, 
working in AIMPLAS as Senior Researcher since 2005 in the Compounding Department, focused in new material 
formulations. She has been involved as main researcher in the technical execution of several FP7 Projects focused 
on nano-materials, biopolymers, flame retardants, blends, mineral and natural fibres composites and PVC. Before 
joining AIMPLAS she worked in different private industries (paints, ceramics and metallurgical). 
Dr. Nuria Lopez (F), PhD in Materials by the Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, working as a researcher in the 
Extrusion Department at AIMPLAS since 2003. Extensive experience in polymer processing field, analysis of 
properties and development of new products. Technical advice, evaluation and optimization of materials using 
extrusion processing tech nology, new developments for private companies and close collaboration with other 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 59 of 92 
Research Centres at Regional National and International level. Experience in sustainability developments, as the 
use of biodegradable and compostable materials and additives, materials from renewable sources, the use of natural 
fillers and studies of recyclability of materials. 
Ms. María Llorens (F) graduated in Information Sciences from the Cardenal Herrera-CEU University. Then she 
holds a Master’s Degree in Communication Management and a Master’s Degree in Marketing Management from 
the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya. She has also a Master’s Degree in Management Skills from the University of 
Valencia.  She is currently working at AIMPLAS since 2004 and since 2011 she is the Head of the Marketing and 
Communication department, where she coordinates the relation with media, social networks, organization of 
events, digital marketing and graphic design of the company.  As a result, AIMPLAS was awarded with the LIFE 
prize for the best textual communication for the project BREAD4PLA. 
Mrs. Itziar Carracedo (F)  has a University Degree in Chemical Engineering by Universidad Complutense de 
Madrid. She works in the International Projects Unit at AIMPLAS since 2007. She has been involved in  
international R&D projects funded under, the 6th (PEGASUS, FLOWFREE, INNOFOOT) and 7th (MAC-RTM, 
BUGWORKERS, PLA4FOOD, ESPRIT, NANOONSPECT) Framework Programmes, developing technical 
management and coordination tasks. 
Publications:  
 Signori, F., Boggioni, A., Righetti, M. C., Rondán, C. E., Bronco, S. and Ciardelli, F. (2015), Evidences of 
Transesterification, Chain Branching and Cross-Linking in a Biopolyester Commercial Blend upon Reaction 
with Dicumyl Peroxide in the Melt. Macromol. Mater. Eng., 300: 153–160. 
 Campanella, A., Wool, R. P., Bah, M., Fita, S. and Abuobaid, A. (2013), Composites from northern red oak 
(Quercus robur) leaves and plant oil-based resins. J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 127: 18–26. doi: 10.1002/app.36663. 
 R.M. González, M.P. Villanueva19 – Starch-based polymers for food packaging, Multifunctional and 
Nanoreinforced Polymers for Food Packaging,2011, Pages 527–570 
 Coltelli, M.-B., Maggiore, I. D., Bertoldo, M., Signori, F., Bronco, S. and Ciardelli, F. (2008), Poly(lactic acid) 
properties as a consequence of poly(butylene adipate -co-terephthalate) blending and acetyl tributyl citrate 
plasticization. J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 110: 1250–1262. doi: 10.1002/app.28512 
 Martí-Ferrer, F., Vilaplana, F., Ribes-Greus, A., Benedito-Borrás, A. and Sanz-Box, C. (2006), Flour rice husk 
as filler in block copolymer polypropylene: Effect of different coupling agents. J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 99: 1823–
1831 
 Fang Jm, Fowler Pa, Escrig C, Gonzalez R, Costa Ja, Chamudis L: Development of Biodegradable Laminate 
Films Derived From Naturally Occurring Carbohydrate Polymers.  Carbohydrate Polymers 2005, 60:39-42. 
Projects: 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
BUGWORKERS: New tailor -made PHB -based 
nanocomposites for high performance applications produced 
from environmentally friendly production routes. 
FP7-NMP -
2009-SME 2013 www.bugworkersproj
ect.eu/. 
BRIGIT: New tailor -made biopolymers produced from 
sugars obtained from lignocellulosic residues for flame 
retardancy highly demanding applications.  
FP7-
KBBE-
SME 
2017 www.brigit-
project.eu/ 
INNOREX: Realising the continuous, highly precise, metal-
free polymerisation of PLA using alternative energies for an 
FP7-NMP-
2012 2016 www.innorex.eu/ 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 60 of 92 
 
innovative reactive extrusion.  
BIOREFINE 2G  : Development of 2nd Generation 
Biorefineries Production of Dicarboxylic Acids and Bio -
based Polymers Derived Thereof   
FP7-KBBE 
2013 2017 www.biorefine2g.eu/ 
BISIGODOS: High value -added chemicals and BIoreSIns 
from alGae biorefineries produced  from CO 2 provided by 
industrial emissions.  
FP7 
KBBE 
2013 
2017 www.bisigodos.eu 
Technical equipment: 
- Equipment for mechanical, thermal, rheological and physical tests accredited to perform plastic 
characterization using the EN/ISO standards 
- Rheometer, Optical and electronic Microscopy, DMA, DSC, Thermogravimetry. Raman Spectrometer. 
- Twin-screw co -rotating extruders with gravimetric feeders (to feed solid and liquid additives) and other 
multiscrew planetary extruder.  
- Well-established kilo laboratory for the synthesis of polymers in multigrams to kilograms level. During kilo -
lab synthesis, organic chemists and chemical engineering work together to reach the appropriate cost 
effectiveness of the polyme r synthesis process, optimizing parameters as reaction time, temperature profile, 
amount of catalyst and post-purification steps.  
- The kilolab is equipped with 1, 2, 5 and 15 l glass jacketed reactors able to reach temperatures of 190ºC and 
another 10 l st eel reactor able to reach temperatures up to 250ºC. Moreover, high volume Buchi rotavap and 
high capacity crystallization/filtration systems are available. Other auxiliary equipment as vertical stirrers for 
viscous polymers, vacuum pumps, water traps, nitrogen line and vacuum oven are currently available. 
 
Reactor and Buchi 20 l rotavap 
 
HAAKE™ MiniLab II Micro 
AIMPLAS kilolab is also able to explore the polymer synthesis by means of 
controlled reactive extrusion process. In this context the Kilolab is full -
equipped with HAAKE™ MiniLab II Micro Compounder which is ideal for 
reactive extrusion optimization process, compounding expensive materials 
or small scale materials such as nano -composites, bio -polymers or 
pharmaceuticals. 
To perform all of these approaches, we take up several kind of strategies in 
polymer synthesis as: 
 Ring opening polymerization (ROP) 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 61 of 92 
Compounder  Radical polymerization 
 Ionic polymeriation 
 
 
PARTNER 3 
Name: Leibniz Institute for Agricultural 
Engineering and Bioeconomy (ATB), Dept. 
Bioengineering 
Web page: www.atb-potsdam.de/en.html 
Type: RTO 
Country: Germany 
 
Brief description of the organization: The Leibniz Institute for Agricultural Engineering and Bioeconomy (ATB) 
is a European research and development centre for agricultural engineering with an interdisciplinary field of 
activity at the nexus of biological and technical systems. ATB is funded by the Federal Government and the  State 
of Brandenburg and receives additional third -party funds of around 35% of its budget (total 2015 budget >17.0 
Mio).  
ATB has multi-disciplinary research teams with currently about 250 staff members, 90 of them scientists and PhD 
students. In 2015 scientists published over 115 reviewed papers in international peer-reviewed journals. 
The Institute’s mission is to develop sustainable and highly innovative technologies for the resource efficient 
utilization of biological systems to produce food, raw materials and energy. Climate change and the incipient 
changes in the structure of agriculture represent particular challenges for agricultural engineering research.  
ATB research activities are of interdisciplinary nature and follow a systems approach covering the entire spectrum 
from primary production and consumption of food, feed and non-food biomass including technology assessment.  
The Institute's research work addresses topical scientific questions and contributes to the call for practical guidance 
and support in the domains of politics, industry, agriculture and horticulture. The instit ute owns outstanding 
infrastructure including pilot plants and experimental fields.  Intensive collaboration with universities, other non-
university research institutions and enterprises on national and EU/international level contributes largely to 
elaborate solutions for the agricultural and food industry. 
Role in the Project: Bioconversion of the hydrolysed carbohydrates from organic municipal solid waste to lactic 
acid (LA), which is a main activity of WP2. Collaboration within the other WP’s and support in view of scale-up 
(piloting) and downstream processing sub-tasks. 
Scientific team:  
Dr. Joachim Venus (M) , Senior Scientist “Industrial Biotechnology”, holds a diploma on Biotechnology 
(graduated from Anhalt University of Applied Sciences Köthen/Germany 1984) and a PhD on Bioengineering (TU 
Dresden). He is employed permanently at the Dept. Bioengineering of ATB Potsdam ( http://www.atb-
potsdam.de/en/institute/about-us/team/portrait/portrait/joachim-venus.html).  
Joachim Venus is Program Coordinator for the research program “Material and energetic use of biomass” and head 
of the research group bioconversion/fermentation of biogenic feedstocks/residues at the ATB. His work 
emphasized on the development of continuous processes for the production of basic chemicals - in particular lactic 
acid - from biomass. He has published a great deal of papers in well -known journals of those research fields. 
Moreover, he has taken part in more than 100 presentations and proceedings, since 2003, such as in “World 
Congress on Industrial Biotechnology and Bioprocessing”, “International Conference on Environmental, Industrial 
and Applied Microbiology/ BioMicroWorld”, “European Biomass Conference and Exhibition”, “European Forum 
for Industrial Biotechnology/EFIB2010”, “International Conference on Renewable Resources and 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 62 of 92 
Biorefineries/RRB” or “Symposium on Biotechnology for Fuels and Chemicals”.  
At ATB Joachim Venus is in charge of numerous research projects being carried out in the multi-functional pilot 
plant for the biotechnological production of lactic acid from plant biomass. His expertise and research areas are 
- White Biotechnology, Biorefineries, Scaling-up of Bioprocesses 
- pre-treatment of biomass for microbial conversion processes, bioconversion of renewable resources 
- kinetics of cell growth/product formation and modelling of fermentation processes 
- development of continuous mode processes for the production of basic chemicals (e.g. lactic acid) and biomass 
- operation of a pilot plant facility for the optimization of biotechnological processes 
He is heading the national advisory board "Biotechnology of Renewable Resources" at DECHEMA. On 
international level Joachim Venu s is being also a Management Committee member for Germany in the COST 
Action TD 1203 (Food waste valorisation for sustainable chemicals, materials & fuels, EUBis). 
Dr. Donna Dietz (F), PhD in Bioprocess Engineering by Hamburg University of Technology in Hamburg, 
Germany. During the time in Hamburg, she worked as scientist in FP7 Project Propanergy – Integrated 
bioconversion of glycerol into value added products at pilot plant scale. Sinc e 2012 she is working as senior 
researcher in ATB. Dr.Dietz’s expertise includes microbial fermentation of biobased raw material to value added 
products from lab to pilot scale.  
Ms Kerstin Mehlmann (F), Diploma in biotechnology by the Beuth University of Applied Sciences (Germany). 
She has more than 15 years of experience in fermentations at laboratory and pilot scale and advanced 
characterization of several substrates. Over the last years she has participated in many projects at national and 
international level. Experience in microbiology works and analytical methods, HPLC in particular. 
Related publications, patents or products:  
- Turon, X., Venus, J., Arshadi, M., Koutinas, M., Lin, C., Koutinas, A. (2014) Food Waste and Byproduct 
Valorization through Bio-processing: Opportunities and Challenges. BioResources [Online] 9: 4, 5774-5777 
- Pleissner, D.; Venus, J.: Agricultural residues as feedstocks for lactic acid fermentation. - ACS Symposium 
Series, Vol. 1186 "Green Technologies for the Environment" (2014) Chapter 13, pp 247–263, Chapter DOI: 
10.1021/bk-2014-1186.ch013, ISBN13: 9780841230187/eISBN: 9780841230194 
- Kwan, T.H.; Pleissner, D.; Lau, K.Y.; Venus, J.; Pommeret, A.; Lin, C.S.K.: Techno-economic analysis of a 
food waste valorization process via microalgae cultivation and co-production of plasticizer, lactic acid and 
animal feed from algal biomass and food waste. Bioresource Technology 198 (2015) 292–299. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2015.09.003 
- Pleissner, D.; Venus, J.: Utilization of protein-rich residues in biotechnological processes. Applied 
Microbiology and Biotechnology 100(2016)  Issue 5, 2133-2140, 
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00253-015-7278-6 
- Pleissner, D.; Neu, A.-K.; Mehlmann, K.; Schneider, R.; Puerta-Quintero, G.I.; Venus, J.: Fermentative lactic 
acid production from cof fee pulp hydrolysate using Bacillus coagulans  at laboratory and pilot scales . 
Bioresource Technology 218(2016) 167–173, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2016.06.078 
Related Projects: 
- A.N.Bach Institute of Biochemistry of Russian Academy of Sciences, INBI, Moskau „Enzymes for 
lignocellulosic feedstocks degradation and production of sugars (C6, C5) and value added products“, BMBF / 
DLR (Russia/Germany) – 2010-2013 
- BREAD4PLA: Demonstration-plant project to produce poly-lactic acid (PLA) biopolymer from waste products 
of bakery industry, EU LIFE10/ENV/ES/479 – 2011-2014 
- Food waste valorisation for sustainable chemicals, materials & fuels (EUBis,) – MC Member Germany, COST-
Action TD1203 – 2012-2016 
- Process optimization and investigations for the valorization of residues from the dairy industry (LACTOplus, 
Project-No: 848572), Program “Production of the future”, Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG) – 2016-
2017- 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 63 of 92 
- Thermophilic lactic acid production utilizing rice bran in continuous cultivation (BranLact, Bilateral project 
with Beijing University of Chemical Technology/BUCT, German Call Bioeconomy International 2015) – 
2016-2019 
Technical equipment: 
The ATB has a powerful research infrastructure. We can provide services for external research partners that include 
primary research data, bacterial strain collections, analytical instruments and methods, as well as application 
laboratories. ATB operates facilities for biotechnological and physico -chemical conversion processes to produce 
materials (lactic acid, a base chemical for bioplastics, and biochar) and energy (biogas) pursuing biorefinery and 
cascade concepts for the utilization of biomass.  
R&D facilities description (including analytical suite at ATB) 
 Upstream processing of raw materials & fermentation feedstocks (Equipment for pre-treatment, filtration, 
purification…; Micro -/Ultra-/Nanofiltration; Reverse Osmosis; Ceramic membranes; Hollow fiber 
membranes) 
 Fermentation units from lab to pilot scale (1 litre up to 1000 litres) including continuous mode devices 
coupled with cell retention 
 Downstream processing of raw lactates & lactic acid (Softening, Electrodialysis, Ion exchange 
cations/anions, Decolorization, Evaporation) which could be used/adapted for other bio -based products, 
i.e. organic acids 
 Analytical methods for the main parameters of bioprocesses (e.g. cell numbers, dry weight biomass, strain 
characterization, HPLC for sugars and acids, IC, AAS, element analyzer, GC, ICP, Bio -LC, fibre 
analytics…) 
 Pilot plant for lactic acid (own facility at ATB site for the demonstration of the entire process chain from 
the raw material(s) via bioconversion/fermentation up to final product) http://www.atb-
potsdam.de/en/institute/about-us/research-infrastructure/pilot-plant-lactic-acid.html  
 
From plant raw or waste materials lac tic acid, a basic chemical for bioplastics, is produced in a continuous 
fermentation process. The practical scale of the mentioned pilot plant enables scale -up and optimization of the 
entire process: from testing various feedstocks to conversion and the production of product samples with specific 
characteristics. The aim is to make the process on basis of a wide range of raw materials stable and economically 
competitive. 
 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 64 of 92 
PARTNER 4 
Name: Agricultural University of Athens 
Web page: www.aua.gr/bioprocesses 
Type: HE 
Country: 
Greece  
Brief description of the organization:  
AUA serves agricultural sciences since 1920 and is involved in various research and educational projects including 
over 1500 research projects since 2002 mainly funded by the EC or the National Strategic Reference Framework. 
During the period 2010 - 2015, AUA has been involved in 40 European projects, four as the coordinator and in 
thirty six as partner in the corresponding consortia. The overall EU funding for AUA has been over 8 million euros. 
The staff members of AUA have established numerous collaborati ons with European/International researchers, 
with regular student exchange through the European Projects, bilateral actions with international universities or 
on-going long term collaborations.  
The Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition (DFSHN) of  AUA promotes the existing knowledge on 
Food Science and Human Nutrition through research and development programs conducted in collaboration with 
other Greek and foreign Universities and research institutes as well as with research and development departments 
of small and large Greek food industries. The Department consists of seven laboratories. The Laboratory of Food 
Engineering from the DFSHN is well equipped with adequate infrastructure to support a number of research 
projects funded by national and international research institutions. There are 3 post-doctoral researchers, 13 PhD 
students and 10 MSc students working in research topics related to valorization of renewable resources (including 
agri-industrial waste streams), industrial biotechnology, biorefinery development, platform chemicals production 
(including succinic acid), LCA and techno -economic studies and bioprocess design. AUA research team has 
received more than €1.500.000 since 2011 in the aforementioned research topics.  
The group has more than 30 publications since 2013 on relevant topics. Since 2011, AUA has been involved in 3 
national, 3 bilateral (collaborating with institutions in Spain, Brazil and Germany), 1 FP7, 1 Life+ research 
projects, and 1 project supported by the private sector  (Petrobras, Brazil) focusing on biorefinery development 
from renewable resources and waste streams for the production of various products (including platform chemicals 
and succinic acid in particular). An MSc course entitled “ Food Bioprocesses and Biorefi neries” is organized by 
DFSHN-AUA covering topics in refining of renewable resources, industrial biotechnology and biorefinery 
engineering and design (18 month duration with 6 month dissertation). Dr Ioannis Kookos from the Chemical 
Engineering Department of the University of Patras is also member of the AUA team with expertise in process 
systems engineering, bioprocess design, and techno-economic evaluation.  
Role in the Project: AUA will participate in PERCAL in the following topics: 1) Bioprocess develop ment and 
optimisation for the production of succinic acid using MSW hydrolysates; 2) Collaboration with CMET in the 
development of an integrated bioprocess based on production of succinic acid via fermentation coupled with 
extraction of organic acids by electrolysis; 3) Development and optimization of downstream separation of succinic 
acid via an electrodialysis based process in collaboration with ATB; 4) Process design, techno -economic 
evaluation and LCA of the developed bioprocesses. 
Scientific team:  
Dr Apostolis Koutinas (male, Assistant Professor, DFSHN-AUA) is Chemical Engineer with PhD in biochemical 
engineering and 18 year experience in industrial biotechnology, biorefinery development and design of 
bioprocesses/biorefineries. He is currently superv ising two post-doctoral researchers and three PhD students on 
succinic acid production, downstream separation and bioprocess optimization including life cycle analysis and 
techno-economic evaluation. He has 75 papers in peer-reviewed scientific journals (h-index 21, non-self-citations), 
13 book chapters, 1 edited book and more than 90 international conferences and workshops. He has participated 
in 15 research projects since 2011 and serves as Associate Editor in Biochemical Engineering Journal (Elsevier). 
He is currently Guest Editor in a special issue on “ Advances on Biorefinery Engineering ” in the Biochemical 
Engineering Journal. 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 65 of 92 
Dr Seraphim Papanikolaou (male, Associate Professor, DFSHN-AUA) is Agronomist with 2 MSc Diplomas and 
a PhD in fermentation technology. He has expertise in fermentation technology and bacterial metabolism. He has 
participated in 20 projects, published 85 papers in peer -reviewed journals ( h-index 35, non -self-citations) and 
serves on the editorial board of 5 international journals. 
Dr Ioannis Kookos  (male, Associate Professor, Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Patras) is 
Chemical Engineer with MSc and PhD in Process Systems Engineering. He has expertise in the development of 
mathematical programming formulations for b iorefineries including bioprocesses. He has 50 papers in peer -
reviewed scientific journals with expertise in (bio)process design, techno -economic evaluation, modeling and 
control.  
Mrs Chrysanthi Pateraki  (female, PhD student)  is Biologist with MSc in wine  making and currently a PhD 
student at AUA to graduate at the beginning of 2017. She has carried out research on optimization of succinic acid 
production focusing on bioprocessing aspects and elucidation of microbial metabolism using spent sulphite liquor 
and other renewable resources as feedstock. She has closely collaborated with CMET in the development of the 
integrated succinic acid production system based on electrolysis membrane extraction coupled with fermentation. 
Dr Vasiliki Kchrimanidou (female, post-doctoral researcher) is an Agronomist who acquired her Diploma from 
the DFSHN. She concluded her PhD at AUA in 2016 and has significant expertise in industrial biotechnology and 
biorefinery development 
Related publications, patents or products: 
1) Alexandri M, Papapostolou H, Vlysidis A, Gardeli C, Komaitis M, Papanikolaou S, Koutinas AA, 2016. 
Extraction of phenolic compounds and succinic acid production from spent sulphite liquor. Journal of Chemical 
Technology and Biotechnology, DOI: 10.1002/jctb.4880  
2) Koutinas AA, Yepez B, Kopsahelis N, Freire DMG, Machado de Castro A, Papanikolaou S, Kookos IK. 2016. 
Techno-economic evaluation of 2,3-butanediol production from renewable resources. Bioresource Technology, 
204: 55-64. 
3) Alexandri M, Papapostolou H, Komaitis M, Stragier L, Verstraete W, Danezis GP, Georgiou CA, Papanikolaou 
S, Koutinas AA. 2016. Evaluation of an integrated biorefinery based on fractionation of spent sulphite liquor 
for the production of an antioxidant-rich extract, lignosulphonates and succinic acid. Bioresource Technology, 
214: 504–513 
4) Pateraki C, Ladakis D, Stragier L, Verstraete W, Kookos I, Papanikolaou S, Koutinas A, 2016. Pretreatment of 
spent sulphite liquor via ultrafiltration and nanofiltration for bio -based succinic acid prod uction. Journal of 
Biotechnology, 233: 95–105. 
5) Koutinas AA, Vlysidis A, Pleissner D, Kopsahelis N, Garcia IL, Kookos IK, Papanikolaou S, Kwan TH, Lin 
CSK. 2014. Valorization of industrial waste and by -product streams via fermentation for the production of 
chemicals and biopolymers. Chemical Society Reviews 43:2587-2627. 
Related Projects: 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
FOODPRINT: Development of an integrated strategy for 
reducing the carbon footprint in the food industry sector Life+ 2013 2017 www.foodprint.gr  
Production of enzymes and building blocks (1,3 -
propanediol, 2,3 -butanediol and fumaric acid) for 
petrochemical production from industrial residues 
Industrially 
funded 
R&D 
2017 - 
BRIGIT: New tailor -made biopolymers produced from 
sugars obtained from lignocellulosic residues for flame 
retardancy highly demanding applications.  
FP7-
KBBE-
SME 
2016 www.brigit-project.eu/ 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 66 of 92 
 
BIO4OIL: New bioprocess for microbial oil from crude 
glycerol and cellulosic sugars 
Greece-
Germany 
bilateral 
project 
2015 - 
Nutri-Fuel: Development of novel bioprocesses for the 
production of biofuels from food industry waste streams 
National 
funded 
project 
2015 - 
Technical equipment: 
- The DFSHN -AUA has the adequate infrastructure to carry out submerged fermentations, qualitative and 
quantitative analysis of renewable resources, microbiological techniques and techno-economic evaluation.  
- 7 bioreactors (1 -7 L working volume), 8  shakers, 2 GC -FID, 1 GC -MS, 2 UV -Vis spectrophotometers, 1 
microplate reader, 3 HPLC units with RI, UV and diode -array detectors, 1 FPLC, 5 incubators, 2 rotary 
evaporators, 8 balances with accuracy of 0.0001 g and 0.01 g, laboratory freezers (-40 °C), 7 water baths, freeze 
dryer, 3 centrifuges, 3 laminar flow cabinet, 3 microscopes and various generic equipment for microbiological 
techniques.  
- one semi pilot scale spray dryer, UF/RO membrane system, double effect rising film evaporator and high 
pressure homogeniser.  
 
 
PARTNER 5 
Name: Center for Microbial Ecology and Technology (CMET). 
Web page: http://cmet.ugent.be 
Type: HE 
Country: Belgium 
 
Brief description of the organization:  
The Center for Microbial Ecology and Technology (CMET), formerly LabMET (www.cmet.ugent.be) is part 
of the Faculty of Bioscience Engineering at Ghent University (UGent). CMET houses a group of 80 fulltime 
personnel of which ~25 at a postdoctoral level. CMET is specialized in the fields of applied microbial ecology, 
microbial electrocatalysis, host microbe interactions, treatment and resource recovery of water and waste and 
biomaterials and nanotechnology. The principal research strategy at CMET aims at understanding phenomena of 
microbial ecology in order to manage the vast metabolic capabilities of complex microbial communities to solve 
practical problems. The group is also involved in a series of environmental biotechnology projects ranging from 
nitrogen recovery processes, anaerobic digestion, (trace) metal recovery and so on . CMET has always been a 
leading research group in the field of anaerobic digestion (AD). This is reflected in the number of publications on 
ADs (> 100) and several spin -off companies (e.g. Organic Waste Systems -OWS, EPAS, BIOTIM) and the 
coordinating role CMET takes in e.g. ManureEcoMine (FP7, 2013 -2016). Since 15 years CMET also houses a 
(bio)electrochemistry group, with extensive experience in membrane electrolysis e.g. for sulphide and nitrogen 
recovery as well as production of caustic from waste streams. This experience puts CMET in an excellent position 
to perform the tasks within PERCAL. Furthermore, CMET has extensive experience in participation in EU 
collaborative projects as well as acting as coordinator e.g. for ManureEcomine. 
Role in the Project: CMET is responsible for the development of a membrane electrolysis system coupled to the 
AUA succinic acid fermenter. The process will be optimized in terms of operational parameters, and in a second 
phase be implemented at pilot scale. 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 67 of 92 
Scientific team:  
Prof. Dr. Ir. Korneel Rabaey (M)  is full professor and Head of the Department of Biochemical and Microbial 
Technology at Ghent University. Until mid 2011, he was senior lecturer and incoming director/founder of the 
Centre for Microbial Electrosynthesis at  The University of Queensland where he recently received an Honorary 
Professorship. He is internationally recognized for his work in the field of bioelectrochemical systems, particularly 
with respect to novel process development. He has published over 150 papers in this field (>100 A1/international 
peer reviewed, > 12000 citations, H -index 46) for which he was recently designated as “ISI Highly Cited 
Researcher”. Prof. Rabaey has driven technology development, by better integrating electrochemical concepts in 
the microbial or environmental engineering driven field.  
Mr. Stephen Andersen  is a graduating PhD student at CMET, and was the key developer of the membrane 
electrolysis approach for succinic acid extraction.  
Related publications, patents or products:  
- Desloover, J., De Vrieze, J., Van de Vijver, M., Mortelmans, J., Rozendal, R. and Rabaey, K.  2015 
Electrochemical Nutrient Recovery Enables Ammonia Toxicity Control and Biogas Desulfurization in 
Anaerobic Digestion. Environmental Science & Technology 49(2), 948-955. 
- Andersen, S.J., Candry, P., Basadre, T., Khor, W.C., Roume, H., Hernandez -Sanabria, E., Coma, M. and 
Rabaey, K. (2015) Electrolytic extraction drives volatile fatty acid chain elongation through lactic acid and 
replaces chemical pH control in thin stillage fermentation. Biotechnology for Biofuels 8. 
- Logan, B.E. and Rabaey, K. 2012 Conversion of wastes into bioelectricity and chemicals by using microbial 
electrochemical technologies. Science 337(6095): 686-690. 
- Rabaey, K.  and Rozendal, R.A. 2010 Microbial electrosynthesis: revisiting the electrical route for 
bioproduction. Nature Reviews Microbiology 8: 706-716. 
- Andersen, S. J., T. Hennebel, S. Gildemyn, M. Coma, J. Desloover, J. Berton, J. Tsukamoto, C. Stevens, and 
K. Rabaey. 2014. Electrolytic Membrane Extraction Enables Production of Fine Chemicals from Biorefinery 
Sidestreams. Environmental Science & Technology 48:7135-7142. 
Related Projects: 
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
ELECTROTALK – impact of electricity on microbial 
metabolism, creation of interfaces. 
ERC-
StG 2017 www.electrotalk.org  
MRP Ghent Bio -Economy – fermentation of biorefinery 
sidestreams 
BOF-
UGent 2016  
ProEthanol – fermentation of vinasses for production of 
carboxylic acids EU FP7 2014 www.proethanol.eu  
Scale up of carboxylic acid production and extraction from thin 
stillage IOF 2017  
Microelectronics for Microbiology – development of intelligent 
steering FWO 2019  
Technical equipment: 
CMET facilities are divided between analytical, microbial and molecular laboratories, temperature controlled labs, 
host interaction laboratories and a technology hall were several lab-scale reactors are available from millilitres to 
litres scale. The group  is equipped with a broad range of analysis tools used in the determination of 
physicochemical and biochemical parameters (e.g. GC, HPLC, IC, AAS), microbial parameters (e.g. laminar 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 68 of 92 
flows, anaerobic chambers, flow cytometers, multiwall spectrophotometers) , as well as the molecular 
characterization, identification and quantification of microbial species or groups in diverse communities. 
Moreover, CMET has a broad knowledge and experience in reactor technology (e.g. SBR, CSTR, UASB, RBC, 
MFC, MEC) including also 5 fully automated, 5 -L fermenter systems. Also due to its high activity in 
electrochemical research, CMET is provided with different tools for electrochemical characterization (e.g. ~60 
potentiostats, rotating disc electrodes and a wide variety of test cells).  
 
PARTNER 6.  
Full name: FUNDACION CENER-CIEMAT 
Web page: www.cener.com 
Country: 
Spain Type: 
RTO 
 
Brief description of the organization:  
The National Renewable Energy Centre (CENER) is a technology centre specialised in applied research, and the 
development and promotion of renewable energies. It is highly rated and has acknowledged national and 
international prestige. CENER, as a foundation, is an organisation destined to support renewable energies sector 
competitiveness in order to help comp anies to reach their R&D needs: It offers high added value services and 
activities and transferring technology by means of a cutting -edge technological infrastructure, with the most 
modern laboratories and facilities in Europe. 
CENER´s Biomass Energy Department is composed of a multidisciplinary staff, over 20 people, some of them with 
more than ten years’ experience in the Bioenergy Sector and specific knowledge in biology, chemistry, agronomy 
and chemical engineering. There is also a full equipped laborat ory with specific areas dedicated to: chemical 
processes, microbiology, fermentation processes and analytical techniques and the Second Generation Biofuel 
Centre (CB2G) which is a research infrastructure devoted to advanced biofuels  and bioproducts  process 
development. Since its foundation in 2002, it has been developing R&D activities in the bioenergy sector. These 
activities range from the evaluation of biomass potentials to conversion using different routes (biochemical and 
thermochemical) and also including the lifecycle analysis of all these processes. 
Other relevant information:  
 CENER’s Biomass Department is an associated member of the BIC Initiative. 
 CENER’s Biomass Department is a member of the EERA Bioenergy Joint Programme Steering Committee 
Role in the Project: CENER participates in WP1 in characterization of MSW samples and fermentation by -
products; in collaboration with IMECAL, Validation of MSW as fermentation feedstock. I n WP4, CENER will 
be leading the WP4 and production of new biosurfactants from amino acids and lipids. Contributes to   WP7 (LCA 
and techno -economic assessment) and WP9 (Business plan, exploitation, dissemination and communication 
activities). 
Scientific team:  
Dr Javier Gil  (M) took his PhD in Science (Chemical Engineering program) in 1999.  He is the Director of the 
Biomass Department of CENER (National Renewable Energy Centre of Spain) since September 2015 
coordinating the activities in several bioenergy fields: resources evaluation, sustainability studies, biofuels, 
bioproducts and thermochemical applications (torrefaction and gasification). Since 2002 to 2015 he also worked 
at CENER, prior he has occupied several R&D positions in Fraunhofer UMSICHT Institute and University of 
Zaragoza working in projects focused on biomass gasification and tar cleaning. In all these R&D organisations 
he has had the opportunity of coordinating and participating in several RTD - Biomass related projects, both 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 69 of 92 
National and European funded  
Ms Irantzu Alegria (F)  holds a MSc in Biology by the University of Navarra. As Researcher of the Biomass 
Department since 2002, she has been working in second generation and advanced biofuels and biorefineries.   Her 
main expertise is in biochemical conversion of biomass into biofuels and/or bio-based products, completed with a 
wide knowledge of analytics and biological conversion. She has participated in RTD projects focused on 
biochemical conversion of biomass into bioenergy and/or bio-based products. She also actively participated in the 
design of a pilot plant for biochemical conversion of biomass located in Aoiz (Navarra). She coordinates the 
technical work and monitoring the work from several EU f unded (H2020, Interreg, etc.) as well as national and 
regional projects.  
Ms Ibai Funcia (M) has a Degree in Chemistry and an Interuniversity Master's degree in Project Management. 
Since July 2003 has been working in CENER’s Biomass Energy Department as a Biomass Researcher. Main 
research lines are thermo-chemical route: biomass torrefaction, biomass combustion (ash behaviour at high 
temperature) and biomass gasification (tar cl eaning, sampling and analysis), biochemical route: biomass 
pretreatment, enzymatic hydrolysis and fermentation, biomass and Bio -fuel characterization. Chromatography 
methods development. Laboratory quality and assurance procedures. 
Ms Mercedes Munárriz (F) holds a MSc in Biology by the University of Navarra. As Researcher of the Biomass 
Department since 2003, she works on the Development and Coordination of R&D Projects related to biodiesel 
production from microalgae, microalgae cultivation as well as in upscaling of biochemical processes. She has Ms  
Ms Laura García (F)  holds a MSc in Biology by the University of Navarra, and a master degree in Biomedical 
Investigation. From September 2009 to September 2010, she was research fellow at the Microbiology Dpt. in the 
University of Navarra Clinic. As Researcher of the Biomass Department s ince 2011, she works on the 
Development and Coordination of R&D Projects related to bioethanol production from residues and 
lignocellulosic biomass, syngas fermentation, as well as in microbiological processes for obtaining compounds of 
interest. She has developed his professional career both in laboratory and pilot plant, specializing in processes of 
enzymatic hydrolysis, fermentation as well as characterization of biomass. 
Five relevant publications, patents or products:  
 Alegría, I.; Garcia, L.; Ortigosa, I; Del Campo, I.; Sánchez, D.; Munárriz, M.; Iruretagoyena, J. Development 
of a biorefinery concept design for the Navarre region. 23rd European Biomass Conference. Vienna. June 
2015. 
 Toledano. A. Alegria, I, Labidi, J. Biorefining of olive tree (Olea europea) pruning. Biomass & Bioenergy. 
2013.59 (503-511) 
 I. del Campo; I. Ortigosa; I. Alegria; I. Echeverría. Experimental study of using butanol as an additive for 
reducing the vapor pressure of ethanol -gasoline blends. XIX ISAF - International Symposium of Alcohol 
Fuels. Verona. Italy.(October 2011). 
 Funcia, I. Alegria, F.J. Iruretagoyena, M. Munárriz, M. Piera, F.M. Reyes-Sosa and I. Echeverría. Validation 
of a high throughput analysis of microalgae carbohydrates for bioethanol production “18th European Biomass 
Conference- Visual presentation. Lyon ,May 2010 
 I. del Campo, I. Alegría, M. Zazpe, M. Echeverría and I. Echeverría. “Diluted acid hydrolysis pretreatment of 
agro-food wastes for bioethanol production”. Industrial Crops and Products Vol 26 (2006), 214-221 
 
Five Relevant Projects: 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
BUTANexT. highly efficient production process to 
convert sustainable feedstocks in the next generation of 
H2020 2018 www.butanext.eu 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 70 of 92 
 
biobutanol through and enzymatic hydrolysis and 
fermentation process  
 BIOrescue.  develop and demonstrate a new innovative 
biorefinery concept based on the cascading use of spent 
mushroom  substrate (SMS) supplemented by wheat straw 
and other seasonal underutilised lignocellulosic 
feedstocks. 
H2020 2019 www.iorescue.eu  
AMBITION.  develop a long-term joint European 
Community Research and Innovation Agenda on the 
integration of biofuels production and surplus grid 
electricity valorisation. 
H2020 2019 
Not available yet. 
http://cordis.europa.eu/p
roject/rcn/206587_en.ht
ml 
CYCLAG “A network of technology centers to develop 
an algae-based biorefinery”. develop and validate the 
technological processes to obtain biodiesel from 
cultivating microalgae 
Interreg 2019 hhttp://www.cyclalg.com/
en/presentacion/  
 BIOPEST: Research study on fermentation processes for 
Biopesticides production at lab and pilot scale. 
Regional 
project 
funded by 
the 
Navarra 
Governm
ent 
2016 Not availabe 
Technical equipment: 
 CENER owns a pilot plant for the production of second generation and advanced biofuels and bioproducts. This 
facility is called CB2G (Second Generation Biofuel Center). The general objective of this infraestructure is to 
develop and validate processes and components through R&D projects focused on pilo t scale as an intermediate 
step towards industrial scale-up. The CB2G include several Process Development Units (PDUs) as pre-treatment, 
torrefaction, gasification and biochemical processes units. Some of CB2G capabilities include flexibility to handle 
a wide range of biomass feedstocks, ability to incorporate and test equipment from partners or third -parties into 
whole conversion processes and changing configurations and flexible scaling -up: from pilot to semi -industrial. 
Therefore, by means of this facility, CENER not only intends to produce biofuels but also other biobased products 
that could be interesting for the development of the biorefinery concept. 
 
 
PARTNER 7 
Name: Tbw research GesmbH (TBWR) 
Web page: www.tbwresearch.org/ 
Type: SME 
Country: 
Austria  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 71 of 92 
Brief description of the organization: Tbw research (TBWR) is a R&D SME based in Vienna, founded in Nov. 
2013 as a development spin off company of the IC -group, a highly experienced technical and engineering 
consulting company active in many fields mostly international with more than 400 employees. TBWR`s focus is 
on applied research only especially in cooperation with industry partners. Thematic fields of R&D activities are in 
general mobility, energy & renewables, construction and water management.  Within the energy& renewables field 
TBWR is deeply involved in developing integrated processes for generating value added products and energy - 
biorefineries. There are several ongoing biorefinery R&D projects to develop valorisation pathways for various 
feedstocks (such as waste of food processing, grass, Lucerne or plants extracts for various product applications). 
Lactic acid has been a focus of several projects of TBWR’s  key staff such as developing a downstream processing 
(from lab upto pilot  scale) for recovering LA from complex solutions such as grass silage juice.  Furthermore 
TBWR has inhouse access to a reactive distillation apparatus at pilot’s scale which was designed and integrated in 
cooperation with its sister company CES- Clean energy solutions. There is an ongoing research initiative to develop 
a simultaneous esterification and separation process for Ethyl lactate by means of a reactive distillation device.  
This pilot equipment and background expertise will also be available for the PERCAL project to test and develop 
a customized processing for the organic acids produced. TBWR also coordinates a national biorefinery network to 
enable and optimize interaction between academia and industry actors. Key staff of TBWR represent Austria 
within the international expert group of the IEA Bioenergy Task 42 - Biorefining. 
Role in the Project: Involved in downstream processing of fermentation broth to lactic acid with partner ATB; 
Development and Assessment of a reactive distillation process for producing Ethyl Lactate from the two PERCAL 
intermediates LA and Ethanol. 
Scientific team:  
Michael  G. MANDL, DI (M) , Senior Researcher at TBWR and leader of the Biorefining group; Renewable 
Resources Engineering Graduate at University of Life Science and Renewable Resources (BOKU) Vienna. M. 
Mandl is key scientific staff and project manager of various national R&D projects. He has a comprehensive track 
record and expertise in applied research for more than 17 years. His specific field in biorefining is  in green 
biorefinery e.g. separation of lactic acid and amino acids from grass silage juice.  He joined the TBWR team in 
Aug. 2015, after he had worked for JOANNEUM RESEARCH for more than 17 years in the applied R&D. 
Currently he is also involved in model ling and upscaling a reactive distillation process for ethyl lactate and 
validating process with pilot plant performance data. M. Mandl is Austrian National Leam Leader of the IEA 
Bioenergy Task 42- Biorefinig and has been active within the IEA expert group form more than 6 years so far. 
Dr Patrick J. Walsh BSc. MBA. D.Phil. (M) has worked in many countries, Scotland, Northern Ireland, USA, 
New Zealand, Australia and latterly the Republic of Ireland. His career covers the academic world (Canterbury 
University, NZ and the GMIT and NUIG in the RoI) as well as research institutes Foretry Commission Northern 
Research Station, Scion NZ). Recently he has entered private research and development by founding a company 
to commercialise some of his unpublished work. He is, at present, contracted by TBW to work on Biorefinery 
research and development. Dr Walsh has published widely on subjects dealing with a variety of subjects 
including Forest Health and Protectio, Viruses as species specific biocontrol, Bacterial control Methods, the use 
of plant extracts e. g; Terpenes  and limonene. He represented Ireland at the IEA Task 42 Biorefining from 2007-
2013. He has published over 100 scientific reports and papers and presented at conferences in many countries.  
Ms. Stefanie Wong (F),  Junior Researcher at TBWR; MSc degree in Biology, University of Vienna. Joined 
TBWR Energy and renewables in 2016. 
NN – PhD (M/F) in Chemical Engineering, to be deployed to PERCAL Project  
Related publications, patents or products:  
- TBWR/ CES is currently defining a IPR for reactive distillation and separation process for ethyl lactate 
- S.H. Sharma, M. Mandl, Green Biorefining in Sustainable Bioenergy Production, Edited by Lijun Wang, CRC 
Press 2014, Pages  535–564, Print ISBN: 978 -1-4665-0552-0, e Book ISBN: 978 -1-4665-0556-8, 
DOI: 10.1201/b16764-30 
- De Jong, E, Higson, A, Walsh, P. and Wellisch (2012) Bio -based Chemicals: Value Added Products from 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 72 of 92 
Biorefineries. International Energy Agency 
- De Jong, E, Higson, A, Walsh, P. and Wellisch (2012) Product developments in the 
bio-based chemicals arena. Biofuels, Bioprod. Bioref. Accepted June 2012 
- M.G. Mandl (2010) Status if green biorefining in Europe,  Biofpr-Biofuels, Bioprod. Bioref., 
DOI:10.1002/bbb.219 
Related Projects: 
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End Year Website  
Green Safer Solvent – Esterification of lactic acid 
and ethanol to ethyl lactate by means of reactive 
separation techniques. 
FFG 
Austria 2016  
Demonstration  Green Biorefinery Utzenaich plant 
for the recovery of lactic acid and amino acids from 
grass silage by means of innovative separation 
techniques combined with  an anaerobic digester. 
FFG 
Austria 2012 
//nachhaltigwirtschaften.at/de/fdz
/projekten/demonstrationsanlage-
gruene-bioraffinerie-
utzenaich.php 
GREEN BIOREFINERY - Technical, economic and 
ecological optimisation of value chains by the 
introduction and efficient use of sustainable raw 
materials. 
SUSPRI
SE joint 
call 
2010 
//nachhaltigwirtschaften.at/en/fdz
/projects/susprise/green-
biorefinery-technical-economic-
and-ecological-optimisation-of-
value-chains-by-the-introduction-
and-efficient-use-of-sustainable-
raw-materials.php 
Technical equipment: 
- Pilot scale reactive distillation plant for the production and separation of ethyl lactate, established by national 
funds form the Austrian Research promotion Agency, Grant  
- Strategic cooperations for analytic services with several university departments   
 
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 73 of 92 
 
PARTNER 8 
Full Name: Visum Ltd.(Ex. IRIS Advanced 
Engineerging Limited) (VISUM) /Ireland 
Web page: www.seeingnewdata.com 
Country: Ireland 
Type: SME   
 VISUM is an optical engineering company from Dublin that specializes in the development and commercialization 
of Near Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS) -based portable and inline analyzers and measurement systems for process 
monitoring and quality control application s in the food, pharmaceutical and chemical applications. The company 
was established in 2014 and currently employs 9 staff from its facilities in Nexus UCD (technology park at the 
University College Dublin campus). In 2016, the company launched the VISUMPa lm (a handheld NIR 
measurement instrument) and has secured first sales. An integration platform (VisumNIR) for the inline version is 
currently under development in cooperation with early adopter clients from the food processing industry (dairy, 
meat and ol ive oil) and pharmaceutical industries. VISUM Ltd. is an SME Champion -awarded a Phase 1 and a 
subsequent Phase 2 Grant under H2020’s SME Instrument.  
The optical engineering and smart systems teams at VISUM Ltd. have specialized expertise in sensor integra tion, 
optical engineering, chemometrics, data analytics, cloud infrastructures and data management systems. 
Role in the Project:   
VISUM will lead WP6 where they will develop and test novel advanced sensors for monitoring selected process 
parameters and wi ll design and evaluate the feasibility of a plant level integration of the sensors with a control 
system. They will also collaborate in the study of the relevant parameters to be analysed in order to select the most 
suitable sensor technologies. 
Additionally, VISUM will contribute to WP8 (LCA and techno -economic assessment) and WP9 (Business plan, 
exploitation, dissemination and communication activities). 
Scientific team:  
Dr. Timothy Kehoe. (male) PhD in Engineering, University College Cork, Ireland- developed an IR photometric 
measurement system for thermal diffusivity in anisotropic materials. Masters in Optoelectronics, Queens University 
Belfast. Designed an Echelle spectrometer while based at An dor Technology Ltd. Worked at Tyndall National 
Institute, Cork, and Catalan Institute of Nanotechnology, Barcelona, developing diffractive optical and acousto -
optical metrology techniques for nanotechnology applications, in particular for characterision of  nanoscale 
structures fabricated by nanoimprint lithography and directed self-assembly. Other research activities: quantification 
of ordering in self-assembled structures by image analysis techniques and optical sensors using hydrogel materials. 
Tim is the VISUMPalm Product Manager, as well as the Technical Lead at VISUM Ltd. and he brings vast optical 
integration and device instrumentation expertise.  
Dr. Severine Philippe (female)  graduated with a 1st class Hons. B.Sc. in Applied Sciences (Physics and Ph ysics 
Technology) from Dublin Institute of Technology, Ireland, in 2002 and received her PhD in Physics from Trinity 
College Dublin in 2007, for the study of polarisation effects in semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOA). She went 
on to work on the develop ment and characterization of low noise SOAs, as well as THz generation by multimode 
lasers and their detection using four wave mixing in SOA, both in the Semiconductor Photonics Group, Trinity 
College Dublin, and the School of Electronic Engineering, Dubli n City University. She previously worked as a 
R&D technician for the plastics industry and in quality control for electronic appliances. She joined VISUM in 2014 
as an optical engineer and is currently involved in projects including various microscopy tech niques, planar 
waveguide technologies and MIR spectroscopy. 
Nikolina Mikulcic  (female) User Interface Designer. Nikolina comes from web design and development 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 74 of 92 
background with more than 15 years of experience in this field and she is an expert on UI/UX desi gn strategy and 
front-end development (CSS/HTML). She studied graphic design and she started to learn web design due to her 
deeply interested for digital world. Since joining VISUM in September 2016, she has been creating a new User 
Interface for the VISUM product lines. Prior to VISUM, she has an extensive experience in the online world, having 
worked in companies such as EuroArt93 – digital agency, BlueBOX IT, Biroval. She also was a founder of design 
studio In Love With Blue and she worked as Project Man ager, UI/UX designer and front-end developer. She was 
leader numerous digital projects for different clients as Erste Bank, Unicredit Bank, Telenor Bank, Komb Bank, 
ZAMP etc. 
Chris Dermody  (Male) Software Developer. Bachelor’s degree in Product Design from  Dublin Institute of 
Technology. Chris excels in creative problem -solving, using the latest technologies to transform ideas into real 
opportunities that provide exponential value to business operations. With a keen eye for user experience, Chris 
builds robust, responsive applications that stand the test of time. Since joining VISUM, Chris has been hard at work 
developing both front and backend features that push the VISUM product lines forward. Prior to VISUM, Chris 
enjoyed working across the full spectrum of business, founding startups and overseeing product development 
throughout the lifecycle of many successful businesses. 
Ekaitz Hernandez Troyas (Male) Fullstack Developer at Visum. Bachelor Degree in Computing Science (5 years). 
Ekaitz comes from startup background focusing in web developing. He has 4 years of experience in the web industry. 
He started to work in Dublin for a small startup related with geolocation industry. He had the opportunity to create 
his own startup related with the cosmetic industr y. This experience has given him the opportunity to learn cutting 
edge technologies as well to learn other facets of a company like business development or marketing. Also he 
worked as a freelancer implementing solutions with the Squarespace CMS. Ekaitz al ways wants to face new 
challenges and learn new things that are out his core competency. 
Méabh Garrick (female) Optical Engineer. M.Sc Photonics, Friedrich Schiller Universität, Jena, Germany, B.Sc 
Physics with Medical Physics, National University of Irela nd, Galway she worked as a research scientist at the 
Fraunhofer IOF in Jena, Germany after completing my Master Thesis at the institute. I specialised in the area of 
spectrally resolved laser -induced damage testing using a high -power tunable OPO laser syst em as well as angle 
resolved scattering (ARS) from surfaces and the unique combination of both techniques. My work was presented at 
the OSA Interference Coatings conference (June 2016).She speak Irish, German (and English). Motivated, team -
orientated person with a flair for problem solving. She was awarded a scholarship to study at the Abbe School of 
Photonics, Friedrich Schiller Universität, Jena where she spent almost four years. 
Five relevant publications, patents or products:  
1.  Development and commercialisation of the VISUM instruments- NIR spectroscopy devices- in-pipe, handheld  
2. Publication in relation to Innovation Management: O. Mc Nerney, A. Stachowicz, P. Czuprynski, E. Philpott, 
D. Kolman, D. Martin, E. Herrmann (2010). Strategic Guide to Successful Use and Dissemination of the Results 
of Research and Development Projects. 1st edition, Steinbeis-Edition Stuttgart 2010. ISBN 978-3-941417-27-
4 
3. On 08/02/2016, VISUM was awarded the Seal of Excellence form the European Commission 
 
Five Relevant Projects:  
Project acronym/description. Scope End Year Website  
 PREVIEW- PREdictiVe system to recommend Injection 
mold sEtup in Wireless sensor networks. (Grant Agreement 
number: 636892). VISUM Ltd. is responsible for the 
development of the Data Acquisition System and in in 
developing the Signal Conditioning, its integration with the 
H2020 2017 www.preview-
project.eu/  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 75 of 92 
 
ARM main board, as well as implementing a prototype. 
Phase 1 SME Instrument: An IR -spectroscopy-based 
platform for the rapid integration and customisation of 
affordable, real-time monitoring solutions for the food 
and pharmaceutical industry (Grant Agreement number: 
684767). 
H2020 2017 - 
Phase 2 SME Instrument: Cloud -enabled IR 
spectroscopy platform for the rapid integration and 
customisation of affordable, real -time chemical 
monitoring solutions for food and pharmaceutical 
industries (Grant Agreement number: 731043) 
H2020 - - 
Technical equipment:  
Spectroscopic Laboratory: equipped with several instruments, namely, an FTIR-ATR (Interspectrum), two UV-VIS 
(PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), one Extended-SWIR (StellarNet) and one NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as 
well as a SWIR Hyperspectral imager (Specim-Xenics). The associated staff are trained and skilled in chemometrics 
modelling by using a commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non -commercial 
chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes).  
Electronics, mechanical and optic al workshops: equipped with up -to-date hardware and tools: signal generators, 
wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for programming 
microcontrollers, CNC -milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping , and CAD software 
[SolidWorks], among others. ZEEMAX software for the design of optical systems and design setup by means of 
advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and related 
“opticalware”). 
 
 
PARTNER 9 
Name: SO.F.TER. SPA (SOFTER) 
Web page: www.softergroup.com  
Type: IND 
(Large 
Enterprise) 
Country: Italy  
Brief description of the organization:  
SO.F.TER. SpA (SOFTER) is part of SO.F.TER. GROUP (www.softergroup.com) a privately held multinational 
company active in the development and production of thermoplastic materials for over thirty-five years. Production 
facilities are located in Italy, Mexico, Brazil and USA. 
SOFTER is an Italian large enterprise and one of the major independent compounders of thermoplastics in Europe. 
SOFTER has a great expertise in material design and production of polymers -based materials and is considered 
the ideal technical partner in co-design activities of final products thanks to its high operational flexibility and to 
its tailor-made approach to the design of materials.  
The company currently supplies leading European manufacturing companies active in sectors such as automotive, 
building, household appliances, E&E, consumer goods, interior design goods, mechanical industry, sport&leisure 
items and footwear. 
SOFTER employs over 270 persons and is certified according to ISO 9001 and ISO 14001. Its turnover in 2015 
was about 220 million euros. In its more than thirty-five-years activity as developer and producer of thermoplastics 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 76 of 92 
and hot-melts SOFTER has gained a strong knowledge in the areas of:  
 material formulation and design 
 continuous melt-mixing/compounding processes 
 polymerization processes by polycondensation 
 thermal, rheological, chemical and physical-mechanical characterization of thermoplastic materials 
SOFTER has an established know -how about polymerization, production and characterization of co -polyesters, 
polyamides and co-polyester-based hot melts. This expertise will consent to support the partners in the project.  
Role in the Project:  In the framework of the project SOFTER will act as industrial discussion partner in the 
valorisation route aimed at the produc tion of lactic -acid-based hot -melts. The company will have a 
guiding/advising role and will follow the project activities, evaluating results and giving 
opinions/suggestions/feedback in an industrial perspective.  
Scientific team:  
M.Sc. Raffaella BATTELLI (F) (Contact person ), M.Sc. degree in Chemistry at University of Bologna and 
2nd level European Master in Nanotechnologies of Polymeric Materials at University of Perugia, has been working 
at Softer’s since 2010 as a researcher and project manage r and has been involved in the development of 
thermoplastics for engineering applications. She is in charge of the management of international cooperation 
research projects related to the development & production of thermoplastic materials. In this project  she will 
coordinate SOFTER’s technical team and she will be active also as a researcher. 
M.Sc. Michele PONTEVIVO (M), M.Sc. degree in Chemistry at University of Florence in 1981, has worked 
for Montedison and is co-inventor of three patents about high performance fluorinated polymers. He has been 
working at SOFTER’s since 2004 in several different leading positions up to the present role of Technology 
Manager and Factory Manager. In the project he will be the person in charge for general and technical 
management.  
Mr. Denis Grechi (M), Secondary school diploma as Industrial Expert in Phisics, has been working in the plastic 
sector since 2006 covering different positions (shift supervisor of the polyester polymerization process, analytical 
operator and coordinator of the CQ laboratory) up to the present role of researcher. He has a background in testing 
and analysing polymers and thermoplastic materials and in developing new co-polyester polymers and hot-melts.  
 
Related publications, patents or products:  
 In the last eight years SOFTER has developed the technology and the expertise for the development and 
production of different bio-based thermoplastic materials for multiple applications, with a  focus on their 
technological processability and industrial implementation. 
 SOFTER has developed the technology for converting PHA into high performance  biobased 
thermoplastic materials: “Durable polyhydroxyalkanoate compositions” Ref: WO 2013124361 A1 ” 
 SO.F.TER. GROUP is the third largest co-polyester producer in Europe. SO.F.TER. GROUP is one of the top 
producers of thermoplastics in Europe and its products portfolio is one of the widest in Europe. 
 SOFTER has been producing for more than thirty years a wide array of elastomers  (i.e. thermoplastic  
elastomeric mate rials) and today is one of the top players in the European market with respect to both 
production volumes and variety of its products portfolio. Elastomers marketed worldwide under trend names 
FORPRENE®, PIBIFLEX®, LAPRENE®, SOFPRENE® are currently used for the production of parts supplied 
to several manufacturing sectors such as the automotive, household appliances, electronics, building, footwear, 
interior design goods and sport&leisure items industry 
 The company has been developing,  producing and marketing for more than fifteen years engineering 
thermoplastic materials for high performance applications,  in sectors such as automotive, household 
appliances, E&E, building,  interior design goods  and mechanical industry (e.g. POLYFOR®, 
TECNOPRENE®, PIBITER® and NYLFOR®  technical grades). 
Related Projects:  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 77 of 92 
 
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
TRASH2CASH, «Designed high -value products from zero -
value waste textiles and fibres via design driven technologies», 
H2020 
NMP18 2018 //trash2cashproject.eu/ 
BioGrapPA «Bioplastics from the grapes wastes to the 
package»,  
EIT 
Climate 2016  
GREEN INDUSTRIAL SYMBIOSIS, value chain of 
valorization of the biomasses from agro-industrial waste and 
on its conversion into high-added value materials 
Italian 
project 2015  
MINANO “New high -quality mined nanomaterials mass 
produced for plastic and wood-plastic nanocomposites,  
FP7-
NMP 2013 http://minano.vtt.fi/ 
LOTOTUBO “Development of a new generation of piping for 
construction sector based on nanomaterials, new formulations 
and new processes in order to replicate water -repellence and 
dirt-resistance of lotus leaf 
Italian 
project 2014  
Technical equipment: 
SOFTER’s Technology Centre includes Laboratories and Material Prototyping Facilities dedicated to R&D 
activities. Laboratories are equipped with instruments to perform a wide range of mechanical, thermal and 
rheological analysis of thermoplastic materials. The Material Prototyping Facilities are equipped with continuous 
and batch melt -mixers and with pilot chemical batch reactors that are used for the preparation of experimental 
samples and for scaling-up activities. A CA E service for material flow simulation, mold virtual prototyping and 
predictive structural analysis is also part of the Centre. 
 
PARTNER 10 
Name: Hayat Kimya Sanayi Anonim Sirketi 
(HAYAT) 
Web Page: www.hayat.com.tr 
Type: IND 
Country: Turkey  
 
Brief description of the organization:  
Hayat Kimya was established in 1937 as a textile trading company. Company has entered the FMCG industry in 
1987.  Today, with 5200 employees Hayat Kimya is one of the largest FMCG (household cleaning & personal 
care, baby–care & feminine hygiene, and paper tissue & towels) manufacturers headquartered in Turkey.  
Product portfolio of Hayat Kimya can be classified in three main groups:  
i) Household laundry detergent/surface cleaning products,  
ii) Hygiene products,  
iii) Tissue products, 
Company have several global manufacturing sites including the locations in Bulgaria, Ukraine, Russia, Iran, 
Algeria, Egypt, Nigeria and Turkey. Hayat Hygiene Group is the fifth largest player in global diaper industry and 
works with 8.6 billion baby diaper unit/year production capacity. Hayat also have an overseas distribution network, 
and thus they have sales operations in more than 100 countries in five continents.With its Papia and Familia brands, 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 78 of 92 
as well as its non-home brand Focus and economic brand Teno, the company is the 7th largest tissue producer in 
Europe, and the largest in the Middle East and the Balkans. Hayat’s cellulose and packaging paper plant in Bosnia-
Herzegovina serves both the local market and international market s. Bingo, the favorite detergent of Turkish 
women, is produced in the Algerian market under the brand TEST. 
Even though Hayat Kimya is originally an FMCG manufacturer, also produce several key raw materials and some 
mid products at production sites includi ng Turkey (e.g. SLES and LABSA for detergent industry and flexible 
packaging films, nonwoven material for diapers and sanitary napkins) in commercial quantities that are 
indispensable to the detergent and hygiene industry. 
All of the products of Hayat Kimya are certified by ISO EN 9001. Hayat Kimya has also the certificates of OHSAS 
18001, ISO 14001, ISO 27001 and ISO50001. 
Hayat Kimya has 5411 sqm facility in Turkey for R&D activities. More than 70 researchers are working in R&D 
team including 13 PhD and 1 8 MSc. The main objective of the R&D Center is to develop environment -friendly 
products in the FMCG segment.  
R&D spending in 2015 is nearly 10 million dollar. In 2015 Hayat R&D center was selected the best R&D Center 
in chemical sector by ministry of science, industry and technology of the Republic of Turkey. 
Role in the Project: They will be involved as an end-user in the project for the PERCAL project outputs in three 
different areas: as a solvent replacement in printing, as a surfactant replacement in surface cleaners, and as a white 
oil replacement in cardboard hotmelts. HAYAT also participates in the activities described in WP7 and WP8 related 
to environmental, economical, safety, regulatory, Business plan, IPR, dissemination and technological transfer. 
Scientific team:  
Dr Fatih Mehmet Erguney, PhD, R&D Manager (M). Fatih Mehmet Erguney is responsible for the product and 
raw material research and development of nonwoven and flexible packaging at Hayat R&D Center. He is also 
responsible for innovation management. After receiving his BSc degree in Chemical Engineering at the Bogazici 
University in 2000, Istanbul, he started working for a chemical company as a Process Development Engineer. After 
two years, he decided to pursue his PhD degree and joined the University of Akron, USA in 2003 to study Polymer 
Science. Afterwards, started working for a research oriented SME, called Sampas Nanotechnology. Dr. Erguney 
also has a lot of experience in project management. He is managing 20+ projects at any time at Hayat R&D Center.  
Dr. Ipar Nimet Uzun, PhD, Specialist Researcher (F). Ipar Nimet Uzun studied Chemical Engineering at Yildiz 
Technical University (1998-2002). She carried out her MSc studies (2002-2005). After she got her MSc degree in 
2005 she started her PhD studies (2005 -2011) which are based on preparation of drug contai ning polymeric 
microspheres for controlled drug release using supercritical fluid technology (supercritical assisted and/or anti -
solvent processing). She also worked as a research and teaching assistant (2002-2011) at the Chemical Engineering 
Department of Yildiz Technical University.  
Dr. Sebnem Dogan, PhD, Specialist Researcher (F).  She becomes her BSc degree with honours in Chemical 
Engineering at the Kocaeli University in 2007, Kocaeli, while also during her BSc degree she participate 
academical research studies and straight after the university she began her academic carrier as Research Assistant 
at the Kocaeli University.  She started her PhD in 2009, its aim was to prepare polymer blends PLA / TPU with 
shape memory for a potential usage for biomedical applications. From 2007-2014, her academic carrier as Research 
Assistant in different universities has resulted with 6 projects funded by different national and international 
fundings, 10 publications in popular science journals and about 25 conference pr oceedings in all over the world. 
She joined Hayat authorized R&D Center as a research scientist in 2014 to create huge amount of benefits for the 
future with those new materials.    
Publications: No relevant publications. 
Projects:  No previous relevant projects. 
Technical equipment:  
 Rheometer, Brookfield Viscometer, Tensiometer, High Resolution Optical Microscopy, Microtome 
 FTIR, GC, GPC, HPLC, GC-MS, XRF, Raman-Microscopy, Cary Eclipse Fluorometer 
 Filter Pressure Test, Lab Compounder, Drainage Tester, PFI Mill, Microfluidics M-110EH-30, CT SCanner 
 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 79 of 92 
PARTNER 11 
Name: Covestro Deutschland AG (COVESTRO) 
Web page: www.covestro.com  
Type: IND 
Country: Germany 
 
Brief description of the organization:  
Covestro is a world-leading supplier of high-performance polymer materials for key industries. Business activities 
are focused on the manufacture of high -tech polymer materials and the development of innovative solutions for 
products used in many areas of daily life. The main segments served are the automotive, electrical and electronics, 
construction and the sports and leisure industries.  
Covestro, formerly Bayer MaterialScience, is headquartered in Leverkusen, Germany which is one of its biggest 
sites. It has around 30 sites throughout Europe, Asia and America, eight of which are world -scale production 
facilities. With sales of about €12.1bn in 2015 and 15,800 employees, Covestro is among the world’s largest 
polymer companies.  
As a global leader in polyurethanes, Covestro develops and produces the components for rigid and flexible foams 
as well as for solid materials.  Diverse applications range from mattresses and car seats to insulating materials for 
refrigeration appliances and buildings.  
Covestro is also the leader in the development and production of polycarbonates.  Lightweight, tough and easy to 
shape, these high-performance plastics can be used in a wide variety of ways, and have large-scale use in industries 
such as automotive and construction.  
As a world-leading supplier of raw materials for high-value coatings, adhesives and specialty chemicals, Covestro 
supplies these high-value niche products to protect and enhance the appearance of anything from cars, via furniture 
and flooring, applications in the sports and leisure sector through to cosmetic, textile and medical products.   
Covestro seeks sustainable solutions for the major challenges of our times such as climate change, resource 
scarcity, population change and urbanization – providing the backdrop for favorable industry dynamics and 
opportunities for further growth. 
Role in the Project:  Succinic acid can be a potential bio-based substitute of conventionally applied fossil-based 
adipic acid or other diacids. Covestro could exemplary use succinic acid in polyester -based polyols, resins and 
polyurethane dispersions (PUD). Within this project, Covestro will give meaningful insights into the quality 
requirements for succinic acid and the correlation between product quality and final applicabi lity. Furthermore, 
Covestro will analyze and test the provided succinic acid in various applications. 
Scientific team:  
Mr. Thomas Görgen (M) is heading the Alliance Management function, a part of Covestro Innovation 
Management. He coordinates the external R&D activities including the publicly funded projects. Thomas is a 
polymer chemist by training and experienced in H2020 due to his former appointment as German National Contact 
Point for FP6 (2002-2005) 
Dr. Natalie Rahmen (F) , graduated in Bioengi neering at RWTH Aachen is responsible for scouting of 
bioprocesses relevant to Covestro  
Dr. Raul Pires (M) is responsible for the New Technologies function within the Business Unit Coatings, 
Adhesives, Specialties. He will analyze and test the provided succinic acid in various applications. 
Related publications, patents or products:  
Succininc Acid: 
http://press.covestro.com/news.nsf/id/covestro-and-reverdia-develop-bio-based-tpu 
www.plasticstoday.com/covestro-and-reverdia-partner-development-bio-based-tpu/24790357423530 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 80 of 92 
http://news.bio-based.eu/reverdia-covestro-in-succinic-acid-based-tpu/ 
www.chemanager-online.com/en/news-opinions/markets-companies/covestro-and-reverdia-develop-bio-based-
tpu-foam 
Other Biobased products: 
http://press.covestro.com/news.nsf/id/Bayer-MaterialScience-develops-first-coating-hardener-from-biomass 
www.wageningenur.nl/en/newsarticle/New-insights-in-furanic-intermediates-and-aromatic-derivatives-from-
biomass.htm 
Related Projects:  
 
Project acronym/Title Scope End Year Website  
ThermoBIK- 
Thermoaktivierbare Bio -
Klebstoffe 
Biobased 
adhesives 2017 http://foerderportal.bund.de/foekat/jsp/Suche
Action.do?actionMode=view&fkz=22018212  
    
Technical equipment: 
- Succinic acid will be used as a building block for polyols, resins and polyurethane dispersions (PUD). 
Equipment for polymerization is available. Furthermore, we have test facilities i.e. for urethane formation of 
polyols with isocyanates. 
- All kinds of polymer analytic is available  (GPC, NMR, IR, RAMAN, DMTA,…) 
 
 
PARTNER 12 
Name: Exergy Ltd (EXERGY) 
Web page: http://www.exergy.uk.com/ 
Type: SME 
Country: United 
Kingdom 
 
Brief description of the organization: Exergy is one of the UK's leading renewable energy companies with the 
expertise to provide services, across the globe, to develop, engineer, construct and operate projects that contribute 
to our goal of a low carbon, sustainable future. We have been in the industry for over 10 years, contributing to the 
development of the global renewable energy market. We have helped to move the sustainable energy debate from 
the margin to the mainstream. Operating across a range of innovative low -carbon energy technologie s, our 
capabilities cover everything from project inception to energy generation and operation. Sustainability lies at the 
core of our values; balancing commercial, environmental and social concerns to address the world’s energy 
problems is what makes us different.  
We are unique in our ability to offer vertically integrated skills in a range of sustainable energy technologies. 
Exergy can be involved at every stage: from project design and development, through planning and financing, 
engineering and construction to operation. Exergy ensures schemes are designed and built to generate energy in 
the most economical way and with minimal environmental impact. 
Exergy is also member of SPIRE and BIC. 
Role in the Project:  Exergy will be in charge of the socio-environmental analysis (S-LCA) and LCC as well as 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 81 of 92 
will lead the WP8 where Exergy will undertake the market analysis and the development of the business plans. 
Scientific team:  
Dr. Fernando Centeno, (M): degree in Physics, Master Degree and PhD in Renewable Energies and Energy 
Efficiency. Mr. Centeno has wide experience on the engineering and consultancy field related to the building 
construction & energy sector. Has been involved in two FP7 coordinations focused on the renewable energy sector. 
As Head of the R&D Group, he has participated in more than 38 international R&D project (i.e. H2020, FP7, IEE, 
Life+, Eco-innovation, Eureka, Eurostars, among others). 
MSc.Eng Jose Luis Molto, (M): holds a master in Chemical Engineering by Rey Juan Carlos University. He has 
a strong background in simulation, optimisation and modelling of chemical and biochemical processes (Aspen 
HYSYS, Aspen PLUS and SuperPro) along with the feasibility and economical assessments of them. He is an 
active member of the European Federation of Chemical Engineers (EFCE) since 2013 and he is associate member 
of IChemE since 2016.  
MSc.Eng Rocio Roldan, (F): is Chemical Engineer by Complutense University of Madrid. Her expertise area is 
related to the modelling and simulation of chemical and biochemical processes and unitary operations, especially 
focused on the AspenOne software handling and mathematic modelling. She has been involved in projects related 
to the valorisation of biomass into valuable products and related to circular economy. She is an associate member 
of IChemE. 
MSc.Eng Sreenivaasa R. Pamidi, (M): is a bachelor in Mechanical and Energy Engineering from VIT, India and 
holds a master’s degree in MSc and PhD Renewable Energy and Environmental Modelling from University of 
Dundee, Scotland. He has worked on several European research projects which have focussed on his main area of 
expertise in Energy Harvesting Infrastructure, solar Photovoltaics, solar thermal, Energy Efficiency Optimisation, 
and Modelling in the Area of Renewable Energies. 
Related publications, patents or products:  
i) Simulation of chemical pre -treatment process and Optimisation and scale up of the system based on 
simulation. Liquid and gas Fischer -Tropsch fuel production from olive industry waste: fuel from waste. Exergy 
Ltd, report for the European Commission. 2015. 
ii) Sustainable techno-economic solutions for the agricultural value chain Scale-up and design of an optimised 
algae process for biodiesel and biogas production. Molto Marin, Jose L. Chemical Engineering, Thesis - Madrid, 
2015. 
iii) Scale-up and design of an optimised biomass to liquid process (BtL) for diesel production from 
agroforestal wastes. Roldan Aguayo, Rocio. Chemical Engineering, Thesis. Madrid, 2016 
iv) Reducing the impact of forest plant production - design of a stand-alone PV-hybrid system for powering 
an innovative forestry incubator. Sreenivaasa R Pamidi, Marco Hernández Velasco. (2014) 
Related Projects:  
Project acronym/description. Scope End 
Year Website  
INNOBITE – “Transforming urban and agricultural 
residues into high performance biomaterials for 
green construction”. 
(FP7 ENV 
NO. 308465) 2015 www.innobite.eu 
FFW - “Liquid and gas Fischer-Tropsch fuel 
production from olive industry waste: fuel from 
waste” 
(FP7 ENV, 
No. 308733) 2016 www.fuelfromwaste.eu 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 82 of 92 
 
AGROCYCLE - “Sustainable techno-economic 
solutions for the agricultural value chain” 
H2020 No. 
690142 2019 -  
AgriMax - “Agri and food waste valorisation co-ops 
based on flexible multi -feedstocks biorefinery 
processing technologies for  new high added value 
applications” 
(BBI JU – 
VC3.D5 
2015) 
2020 Not available yet 
CloseWEEE - “Integrated solutions for pre -
processing electronic equipment, closing the loop of 
post-consumer high -grade plastics, and advanced 
recovery of critical raw materials antimony and 
graphite" 
(H2020 
WASTE No 
641747) 
2018 www.closeweee.eu 
Technical equipment: The main office of Exergy is located in Coventry, United Kingdom, within the Technology 
Park where around 70 different business companies are placed. Exergy utilises industry-leading software for the 
simulation and optimisation of chemical processes (AspenOne software engineering), along with the specialised 
software for the measure and evaluation of the potential environmental impacts linked to process es and products 
SimaPro and GaBi.
4.2  THIRD PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE PROJECT (INCLUDING USE OF THIRD PARTY RESOURCES) 
There are no third parties involved in the development of PERCAL project as shown in Table 4.2 from below.  
There are two beneficiaries IMECAL and CENER subcontracting several activities in the project as described in 
the from below.  
The subcontracted activities will also respect the article 13 of the Grant Agreement and the Best Value for Money, 
BIOPOLIS company will be therefore subcontracting by their specialisation and experience in the biotechnology 
sector and in particular in the tasks detailed below:  
 
Table 4.2: Subcontracting and third parties breakdown  
Partner Cost (€) WP Task Description 
Subcontracting 
1.IMECAL 
62,000 
WP1 Task 1.3. 
Characterization of 
MSW samples 
Laboratory analyses to 
determine the chemical 
composition of selected 
substrates 
WP1 Task 1.4. Pre-treatment 
and enzymatic 
hydrolysis improvement 
from PERSEO 
bioethanol® process 
Laboratory analyses for the 
evaluation of pre-treatment 
and Saccharification 
processes 
WP1 Task 1.5. Validation of 
fermentation processes 
Laboratory analyses to 
validate the fermentation 
processes for the production 
of target bioproducts 
(ethanol, LA, SA). 
WP6 
Task 6.1. Study of 
parameters of the pre-
Study for the selection and 
optimization of the relevant 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 83 of 92 
Partner Cost (€) WP Task Description 
treatment and 
fermentation process for 
the production of 
bioethanol, lactic & 
succinic acid and the by-
products stream. 
fermentative parameters for 
the production of 
bioproducts at industrial 
scale. Analysis and control 
of parameters.  
WP6 
Task 6.4. Integration and 
adaptation of processes 
to a biotechnological 
plant configuration 
Study of the integration of 
fermentative parameters 
within the appropriate 
working ranges in the demo 
plant configuration. Analysis 
of parameters. 
Third parties 0 N/A 
Total 62,000    
Subcontracting 
2.AIMPLAS 0 N/A 
Third parties 0 N/A 
Total 0    
Subcontracting 
3.ATB 0 N/A 
Third parties 0 N/A 
Total     
Subcontracting 
4.AUA 0 N/A 
Third parties 0 N/A 
Total     
Subcontracting 
5.CMET 0 N/A 
Third parties 0 N/A 
Total     
Subcontracting 
6. CENER 48,000 
WP3 
Task 3.1.Evaluation of 
MSW as fermentation 
feedstock 
Screening and selection of 
bacterial strain for succinic 
acid production and first 
stage of fermentation media 
optimization assays at lab 
scale according to selected 
strain. 
 
WP4 
Task 4.4.Synthesis of the 
amino-lipid 
biosurfactant 
Consultancy and support for 
the selection of analytical 
techniques to evaluate the 
activity of biosurfactant 
samples produced. 
Third parties 0 N/A 
Total 48,000    
Subcontracting 
7. 
TBWR 0 N/A 
Third parties 0 N/A 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 84 of 92 
Partner Cost (€) WP Task Description 
Total 0    
Subcontracting 
8. VISUM 0 N/A 
Third parties 0 N/A 
Total 0    
Subcontracting 
9.SOFTER 0 N/A 
Third parties 0 N/A 
Total 0    
Subcontracting 
 
0 N/A 
Third parties 0 N/A 
Total 0    
Subcontracting 
11. 
COVESTRO 0 N/A 
Third parties 0 N/A 
Total 0    
Subcontracting 
12. EXERGY 
0 N/A 
Third parties 0 N/A 
Total 0    
 
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 85 of 92 
5: ETHICS AND SECURITY
5.1 ETHICS 
There are no foreseen negative ethical issues associated with the implementation of the project results.  
Appropriate health and safety procedures conforming to relevant local/national guidelines/legislation are followed 
for staff involved in this project. 
 
PERCAL concerns the use of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) as feedstock to develop intermediate chemical products 
of industrial interest. These include lactic acid, ethyl lactate solvents, succinic acid and biosurfactants.  
 
Ethical issues are raised as part of the participation of partner from Turkey: Hayat Kimya San A.S. This applicant 
has confirmed to the BBI that the ethical standards and guidelines of Horizon2020 will be rigorously applied, 
regardless of the country in which the research is carried out. 
The specific authorisations for the import/export of materials will be provided in due time after being provided by 
the relevant authorities. Partner HAYAT will be involved in the validation of the final products therefore they will 
not receive any intermediate product nor MSW. 
Companies have the responsibility of collecting information on the properties and the uses of substances that they 
manufacture or import materials  
Regarding the protection of human health and the environment from the risks that can be posed by chemicals, all 
the substances used in the project will be evaluated to ensure that no risks are involved in their use. And in case 
anyone could have any hazard property, the specific substance will be sent to the destinatary accompanied by a 
document describing the risk management measures to be used to make safe use of it. For partners established 
outside the EU this requirement will apply as for the rest of partners, in this particular project. 
There will be no experimentation on animals, with human cloning, genetic modification or human embryos or stems 
cells as a part of the project. 
 
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 86 of 92
5.2 SECURITY. 
Please indicate if your project will involve: 
 Activities or results raising security issues: NO. 
 'EU-classified information' as background or results: NO. 
Although the self-assessment identified no issues, we want to summarise here how certain aspects of the 
project that could lead to ethical concerns are addressed in the work plan: 
 Regulatory and safety -related activities have bee n incorporated from the outset of the project with the 
intention of gathering data to fuel in a further safe and compliant development phase. In terms of product, 
safety aspects will deal with water and waste regulations similar than other chemical industr ies, where 
disposal of solid and liquid by-products must be safety for workers and environment and best practices and 
security measures must be a priority  to avoid uncontrolled discharges to the environment and fires. In terms 
of possible harm to the environment, the use of a LCA approach, which identifies environmental as well as 
health impact, can help identify where the maximum impact could occur providing the opportunity for 
process or material modifications to minimise these impacts.  
 Finally, the app ropriate health and safety procedures conforming to relevant local/national 
guidelines/legislation will be followed by staff involved in this project. In this sense, all partners follow 
recognized hygiene and safety rules, including chemical regulations such as REACH, and, recommendations 
of good practices for workers safety will be given by ARCHA when checking the pilot processes in WP7. 
An Ethical & societal assessment covering those as well as further aspects is also included in WP7. 
All in all, the developed bio based products from biogenic faction of MSW are in fact expected to be safer for 
both the consumer and environment (products with less toxicity) and ethically more acceptable than their 
standard (synthetic) counterparts or even than some of their bio-based relatives, often agriculture land competing 
(sugars and oils), which ethics are questionable, leading to fulfilling the will of consumer to make responsible 
choice not jeoparzing our future generation’s ability to access resources and to a clean environment.   
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 87 of 92 
 
ANNEX I- PERSEO® BIOETHANOL Technology 
Bioethanol production.  Following the pre -treatment, the PERSEO Bioethanol® Technology developed by 
IMECAL and CIEMAT for producing bioethanol will be demonstrated on a real -life environment with different 
organic fraction of municipal solid waste (OFMSW). The demonstration plant is equipped with all the reactors, 
fermenters, and separation and distillation units needed for transforming the OFMSW to bioethanol. The 
typical ethanol yields obtained vary from 100 – 130 liters of bioethanol per tonne of organic waste in dry bases. 
The bioethanol production involves several steps:  
A. The raw material is subjected to a pre-treatment which aims to eliminate the inserts contained in the organic 
matter (stones, plastics, metals, glass, etc.).  
B. A thermochemical dilute acid hydrolysis of the raw material will be done in order to produce a solubilizing 
of the cellulose and hemicellulose contained in the MSW.  
C. After the feedstock is hydrolysed, a simultaneous saccharification and fermentation process is done. The 
cellulose saccharification and fermentation of glucose to ethanol is produced in the same fermenter, adding 
the enzymes, yeast and nutrients suitable for efficient conversion of sugars to ethanol.  
D. The fermentation sludge obtained is subjected to a distillation process in order to concentrate the ethanol 
produced in the fermentation of the organic fraction of MSW.  
E. Dehydration process is carried out of the mixture by passing through a molecular sieve to achieve 
dehydration required for ethanol (> 99.5%) as a final product.  
Bioethanol production 
State of the art : PERCAL will use an 
innovative patented process based on a 
thermochemical pre -treatment and a 
Simultaneous Sacharification and 
Fermentation (PERSEO Bioethanol® 
technology) to produce biofuels from 
municipal solid waste.  
Second generation bioethanol can be 
produced by two main production 
routes, the thermochemical and 
biochemical. 
In thermal process, bioethanol can be produced via gasification of the lignocellulosic feedst ock at a high pressure 
and in absence of inert gases and further conversion of the syngas into bioethanol. In the biochemical pathways, the 
lignocellulosic feedstock is firstly pre ‐treated in order to make the cellulosic component more accessible to the 
cellulases for the subsequent enzymatic saccharification step. During the pre ‐treatment a significant portion of 
hemicelluloses is converted into monosaccharides, mostly xylose (a C5 sugar). C6 sugars – mainly glucose is released 
after the enzymatic hydrolys is step and is then fermented with or without the C5 sugars depending on the design 
options.  Several technology options are under development including separate hydrolysis and fermentation (SHF) 
or simultaneous saccharification and co‐fermentation (SSCF) of C5 and C6 sugars with or without onsite production 
of the cellulases. 
The main challenges of the biochemical route concern the integration of the system which requires a coordinated 
effort in improving each step to achieve an overall higher efficiency and a decreased production cost of bioethanol. 
In that sense, a particular attention should be paid to the feedstock cost. One of the strong assumptions in developing 
second generation bioethanol is the possibility to process low ‐cost feedstock. The concept  of the process for 
enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose and simultaneous fermentation, so -called Simultaneous Saccharification and 
Fermentation (SSF) is a promising technology. It was introduced by Gulf Oil Company, US and the University of 
Arkansas (Gauss e t al. 1976; Huff et al. 1976) and various reports on bioethanol production have mentioned the 
Figure A1. The PERSEO Bioethanol® Technology plant 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 88 of 92 
superiority of ethanol yield and productivity using the SSF process75,76.The sequence of steps for the SSF is virtually 
the same as for the separate process, except that saccharification and fermentation steps are combined in one vessel, 
however, the presence of yeast or bacteria along with enzymes minimizes the sugar accumulation in the vessel, 
consequently higher rates, yields and concentrations of ethanol are poss ible using SSF at lower enzyme loading. 
Additionally, the presence of ethanol makes the mixture less vulnerable to contamination by unwanted 
microorganisms77,78.  
Linked National and International R&D Activities. 
With regards to the production of bioethanol from MSW, there are some examples of industrial and pilot plants but 
none of these projects has validated a whole process able to transform the Stabilized Organic Fraction (SOF) available 
in MSW into not only bi ofuels (bioethanol and biomethane) but also other value -added co -products such as 
biofertilisers. There are a few industrial plants for conversion of MSW to bioethanol. The first international waste to 
bioethanol demonstration plant was built by IMECAL – CIEMAT in 2007, based in the biotechnological process 
PERSEO® Bioethanol. The PERSEO project in Valencia (Spain) started to obtain bioethanol from the organic 
fraction of the municipal solid waste. Another demonstration plant was inaugurated by Abengoa in 2013. Located 
in Spain, the organic matter is pre-treated to produce organic fibre, which is subsequently converted into bioethanol 
by using a fermentation and enzymatic hydrolysis of SOF from MSW. However, their strategy is not focused on the 
study of the most appropriate pre - treatment. Since pre -treatment has been viewed as one of the most expensive 
processing steps in cellulosic biomass-to-fermentable sugars conversion.  
In Sweden, St1 Biofuels Oy has completed a waste-to-ethanol project (Etanolix) which recycles feedstock such 
as biowaste and process residue from local bakeries and bread from shops that is past its sell-by date into ethanol for 
transport fuel. In Finland, there is another plant (Bionolix) that produces ethanol from biowaste from shops and 
households.  
Outside Europe, the first industrial-scale municipal solid waste to biofuel facility was opened in Canada in 2014 by 
Enerkem. Despite being the first industrial scale waste-to-biofuels facility of its kind to turn household garbage into 
biofuels and biochemical, their technology is based on gasification and subsequent catalytic synthesis, differing 
from the novel configuration of BIOWASTE where bio-ethanol will be produced more efficiently through alcoholic 
fermentation. Another example is Co skata a semi -Commercial Facility in Illinois (USA) which produces ethanol 
from both biomass feedstock and natural gas. In July 2014, ANDRITZ received an order to supply services for 
Fiberight’s cellulosic ethanol plant in Iowa, USA. ANDRITZ Group´s biorefinery is focused on the transformation 
of municipal solid waste (MSW) and other organic materials into cellulosic ethanol as the primary product. 
Linked plants 
                                                             
75 Söderström J, Galbe M, Zacchi G. Separate versus simultaneous saccharification and fermentation of two -step pretreated softwood for ethanol production. J 
Wood Chem Technol. 2005;25:187 –202. 
76 Neves, M. A. D., Kimura, T., Shimizu, N., & Shiiba, K. (2006). Production of alcohol by simultaneous saccharification and fermentation of low -grade wheat 
flour. Brazilian Archives of Biology and Technology, 49(3), 481 -490. 
77 Roble ND, Ogbonna JC, Tanaka H. A novel circulating loop bioreactor with cells immobilized in loofa (Luffa cylindrica) sponge for the bioconversion of raw 
cassava starch to ethanol. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2003 Feb;60(6):671 -8. Epub 2002 Dec 19. 
78 T. Montesinos et al., Production of alcohol from raw wheat flour by Amyloglucosidase and Saccharomy ces cerevisiae, Enzyme and Microbial Technology, 
27, 2000, 362-370 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 89 of 92 
 
 
ANNEX II. Support letters. 
Project               
(Start/E nd date) Main Observations/ Advantages of BIOWASTE  compared to these projects
Fiberight                    
(2105 - In operation)
ANDRITZ’s technology utilizes a steam heating concept to continuously preheat and cook the feedstock at elevated
temperatures. BIOWASTE employs an innovative pre-treatment process at low temperature in order to avoid dioxins
formation and reduce the production costs
Enerkem                     
(2014 - In operation)
Their technology is based on gasification, a thermochemical process at high temperature. Gasification presents several 
disadvantagesin comparisonwith fermentation: refuelling is often required for continuous running of the system and,
in addition it handles with residues such as ash or tarry condensates. 
Etanolix                      
(2015 - In operation)
The ethanol plant is fully integrated into the functions and logistics of St1 oil refinery in Gothenburg and has an annual
production capacity of 5 million litres of advanced bioethanol.
Abengoa (Babilafuente) 
(2013 - In operation)
Demonstration plant which has a capacity to treat 25,000tons of municipal solid waste (MSW) from which it willobtain
up to 1.5 million litres of bioethanol for use as fuel.
Bionolix                      
(2013 - In operation)
The products of the Bionolixprocess are ethanol and solid biofuel which is used to produce energy part of which is
used in the plant and waste water.
Coskata                       
(2011 - In operation)
Semi-CommercialFacility Thermochemical / Biotechnical process: Pre-treatment, gasification to syngas, fermentation
and separation. Gasification involves high temperature and pollutants in contrast with the BIOWASTE
biological/chemical process. 
IMECAL S.A.     
(PERSEO Bioethanol®)        
(2007 - In operation)
Demonstration plant based in biotechnological process to treat the organic fraction of MSW. Has a capacity to treat 25
t/d in fermentation to produce bioethanol and a solid fuel.
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 90 of 92 
 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 91 of 92 
 
 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
BBI-2016. R8 
745828 – PERCAL – Part B  Page 92 of 92 
 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
Grant Agreement number: 745828 — PERCAL — H2020-BBI-JTI-2016/H2020-BBI-JTI-2016
ESTIMATED BUDGET FOR THE ACTION (page 1 of 2)
1
Estimated eligible1 costs (per budget category) EU contribution Additional information
A. Direct personnel costs B. Direct costs of
subcontracting
C. Direct costs of
fin. support
D. Other direct
costs
E. Indirect costs2 Total costs Reimbursement
rate %
Maximum EU
contribution3
Maximum
grant amount4
Information for
indirect costs
Information
for auditors
Other
information:
A.1 Employees (or equivalent)
A.2 Natural persons under direct
contract
A.3 Seconded persons
[A.6 Personnel for providing access to
research infrastructure]
A.4 SME owners without salary
A.5 Beneficiaries that are natural
persons without salary
D.1 Travel
D.2
Equipment
D.3 Other goods
and services
D.4 Costs of
large research
infrastructure
Actual Unit7 Unit8 Actual Actual Actual Flat-rate9Form of costs6
25%
Estimated
costs of in-kind
contributions not
used on premises
Declaration
of costs under
Point D.4
Estimated costs
of beneficiaries/
linked third
parties not
receiving
EU funding
(a) Total (b) No hours Total (c) (d) (e) (f)
(g)=0,25x
((a)+(b)+
(c)+(f)
+[(h1)+(h2)]-
(m))
(i)=
(a)+(b)+(c)+
(d)+(e)+(f)+
(g)+(h1)+(h2)+(h3)
(j) (k) (l) (m) Yes/No
1. IMECAL 295504.00 0.00 0 0.00 62000.00 0.00 69966.74 91367.69 518838.43 100.00 518838.43 404693.98 0.00 No
2. AIMPLAS 203931.00 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 66700.00 67657.75 338288.75 100.00 338288.75 263865.23 0.00 No
3. ATB 227796.00 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 60500.00 72074.00 360370.00 100.00 360370.00 281088.60 0.00 No
4. AUA 259700.00 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 35500.00 73800.00 369000.00 100.00 369000.00 287820.00 0.00 No
5. UGent 184842.00 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 77540.00 65595.50 327977.50 100.00 327977.50 255822.45 0.00 No
6. CENER 163215.00 0.00 0 0.00 48000.00 0.00 17355.26 45142.57 273712.83 100.00 273712.83 213496.00 0.00 No
7. TBWR 221195.00 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 65500.00 71673.75 358368.75 100.00 358368.75 279527.63 0.00 No
8. VISUM 172800.00 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 139400.00 78050.00 390250.00 100.00 390250.00 304395.00 0.00 No
9. SOFTER 3685.00 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 1415.00 1275.00 6375.00 100.00 6375.00 0.00 0.00 No
10. HAYAT 25650.00 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 10500.00 9037.50 45187.50 100.00 45187.50 0.00 0.00 No
11. COVESTRO 80000.00 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 11000.00 22750.00 113750.00 100.00 113750.00 0.00 0.00 No
12. EXERGY 188340.00 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 45310.00 58412.50 292062.50 100.00 292062.50 227808.75 0.00 No
Total consortium 2026658.00 0.00 0.00 110000.00 0.00 600687.00 656836.26 3394181.26 3394181.26 2518517.64 0.00 0.00
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017
Grant Agreement number: 745828 — PERCAL — H2020-BBI-JTI-2016/H2020-BBI-JTI-2016
ESTIMATED BUDGET FOR THE ACTION (page 2 of 2)
2
(1) See Article 6 for the eligibility conditions
(2) The indirect costs covered by the operating grant (received under any EU or Euratom funding programme; see Article 6.5.(b)) are ineligible under the GA. Therefore, a beneficiary that receives an operating grant during the action's duration cannot declare indirect costs for the year(s)/reporting period(s) covered by the operating
grant (see Article 6.2.E).
(3) This is the theoretical amount of EU contribution that the system calculates automatically (by multiplying all the budgeted costs by the reimbursement rate). This theoretical amount is capped by the 'maximum grant amount' (that the Commission/Agency decided to grant for the action) (see Article 5.1).
(4) The 'maximum grant amount' is the maximum grant amount decided by the Commission/Agency. It normally corresponds to the requested grant, but may be lower.
(5) Depending on its type, this specific cost category will or will not cover indirect costs. Specific unit costs that include indirect costs are: costs for energy efficiency measures in buildings, access costs for providing trans-national access to research infrastructure and costs for clinical studies.
(6) See Article 5 for the forms of costs
(7) Unit : hours worked on the action; costs per unit (hourly rate) : calculated according to beneficiary's usual accounting practice
(8) See Annex 2a 'Additional information on the estimated budget' for the details (costs per hour (hourly rate)).
(9) Flat rate : 25% of eligible direct costs, from which are excluded: direct costs of subcontracting, costs of in-kind contributions not used on premises, direct costs of financial support, and unit costs declared under budget category F if they include indirect costs
(10) See Annex 2a 'Additional information on the estimated budget' for the details (units, costs per unit).
(11) See Annex 2a 'Additional information on the estimated budget' for the details (units, costs per unit, estimated number of units, etc)
(12) Only specific unit costs that do not include indirect costs
(13) See Article 9 for beneficiaries not receiving EU funding
(14) Only for linked third parties that receive EU funding
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)2198069 - 28/04/2017