1.4 Ambition 
 
Ground-breaking nature of concept and approach: The PHOTONFOOD advances beyond the state of the 
art are summarized in Fig. 7. The PHOTONFOOD project will develop and demonstrate a photonic solution 
for monitoring and reference analysis of chemical and microbial food contamination. Today, monitoring and 
accredited analysis is done in reference laboratories  such as  represented by our partner NEBIH. On -site 
monitoring and reference analysis are not possible today. Moreover, there is no accredited reference analysis 
for on-site food analysis today. PHOTONFOOD will perform ground-breaking research and develop the most 
advanced photonic devices for precise chemical analysis in the chemically most sensitive region of the 
electromagnetic spectrum and provide a handheld solution for detecting chemical and microbial contamination 
in the food chain.  
PHOTONFOOD 
 
21 
 
To offer a maximum of flexibility of the solution, PHOTONFOOD will provide two devices. ( i) A cheap 
solution for on-site monitoring in daily routine work. The MI-FI device will have the size of a mobile phone 
and will be a handheld low-cost (2-4k€) medium-precision/resolution MIR photonic solutions for the detection 
of contaminants in food matrices . Today, no handheld MIR spectrometer in the size of a mobile phone or 
comparable exists . While portable de vice for the near -infrared sensing with limited spectral resolution  is 
offered already by Consumer Physics (see section 1.4.1.6), this spectral region does by far not provide the 
detection level of the contamination and the discriminative ability of the contaminants that are required for 
food analysis. (ii) PHOTONFOOD will provide a portable HI-FI device delivering a spectral quality that will 
be sufficient for accrediting the technology after the PHOTONFOOD project for detecting chemical and 
microbial contamination in food. The HI-FI device will combine advanced MIR ICL/QCL laser light sources 
with novel thin -film waveguide chips for label -free detection of chemical and microbial contaminations in 
food sampled via low-cost paper-based sample handling. Up to know, no solution exists that can be  broadly 
applied for performing reference analysis of food contaminants on site. The advantage of MIR spectroscopic 
methods is that they can be broadly adapted to many microorganisms and chemical contaminants. MIR 
spectroscopy delivers a precise chemical fingerprint of any chemical and b iological sample that can be 
presented to the measurement zone of a MIR waveguide. In order to empower spectroscopic methods to 
perform analysis of the tiniest amounts of contaminants, PHOTONFOOD will provide a ground -breaking 
paper-based microfluidics tec hnology for sample preconcentration and separation that will be adopted to 
measurements of the photonic waveguide technologies developed in the project. Today, sampling, extraction, 
purification and enrichment are all done manually and by trained personnel. Current “portable” solutions still 
rely on lab-based equipment, and liquid extracts. There is no “easy” way to get purified contaminants from a 
complex, solid sample. PHOTONFOOD will provide the first miniaturized handheld device that allows non-
experts to process food samples and test for trace chemical and microbial contamination through  MIR 
spectroscopy. The PHOTONFOOD solution combines paper-based sample preparation and preconcentration 
and opens thereby for a broad spectrum of applications of spectroscopy in cases where today the level of 
contamination was by far too low to allow spectroscopic detection in the food matrix. 
 
For the MI -FI device low -cost powerful lig ht sources, such as LEDs,  in the MIR fingerprint region are 
needed. Today, high performance IC-LEDs are only available for the ranges 2500-3333 cm-1. For detection of 
chemical and microbial contaminants in food other ranges in the fingerprint region (700-1800 cm-1) of the MIR 
spectrum need to be covered. The PHOTONFOOD project will develop novel integrated MIR IC-LEDs with 
300 cm-1 wavelength coverage (1µm spectral width)  in the 1500 -1800 cm-1 range for cost -effective on-site 
measurements with the MI-FI device. The HI-FI device requires excellent light sources to obtain a high-quality 
spectra. Portable high-precision/high-resolution MIR photonic solutions for the detection of contaminants in 
food matrices do not exist. Today, only distributed feedback (DFB) ICL/QCLs with limited turnability  and 
 
Figure 7: Summary of the PHOTONFOOD main contributions beyond the state of the art. 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
22 
 
external cavity (EC -QCLs) are available . PHOTONFOOD will develop the brighte st monolithic widely 
tunable lasers based on cascaded laser structures for the 1500-1800 cm-1 range for high precision measurements 
with the HI-FI device. Model-building and accreditation for the HI-FI technology will be necessary for each 
contaminant separately, since spectroscopic methods are based on calibration . For prototyping and 
demonstration, PHOTONFOOD will develop a software platform exploiting the experience from the software 
platform established in the MIRACLE project (see Table 4). The MIRACLE software platform is developed 
for a probe utilizing seven QCL-laser wavelengths in the MIR for diagnosis of degenerative joint diseases . 
Since the portable PHOTONFOOD solution will cover a narrow MIR region, current calibration approaches 
cannot be transferred without further modification. Today, no specific calibration models and data pre -
treatment tools for MI-FI and HI-FI solutions exist. PHOTONFOOD will use the most advanced data analysis 
approaches and develop them further to address specifically the problem of narrow spectral ranges that will be 
required for spectral standardization and model building. A web-accessible platform with advanced machine 
learning models will be implemented to provide support decision tools for contamination management. 
 
1.4.1 State of the art and beyond state of the art 
 
1.4.1.1 Paper microfluidic devices and 3D-printed interface 
 
State of the art 
The field of paper microfluidics, which is based on decades worth of knowledge about paper chromatography 
and other applications of porous cellulose30, has grown rapidly since the original Whitesides paper from 200731. 
In this field, paper is used as the substrate for the development of miniaturized total analysis systems (µTAS), 
which is a concept that goes back to the late 80’s. The reason why this branch of microfluidics opted for the 
use of paper, rather than high -quality chips made in a clean room , is simple: there is a n urgent  need for 
affordable and deployable analytical solutions32,33. The high availability, low-cost and superior portability of 
such paper-based devices make them ideal choices for easy, quick and on-site sample treatment and analysis. 
Moreover, paper can be readily used for sampling directly from surfaces and liquids alike. 
In paper microfluidics, liquids are passively moved by capillary action 34, and guided by application of 
hydrophobic patterns on paper, to confine movement of fluids  (Figs. 8a and 8b ). The combination of 
hydrophobic patterning and the stacking of different layers of paper (3D paper microfluidics) enables 
researchers to design and develop compact systems with a multitude of branching channels through which 
 
30 R. H. Muller and D. L. Clegg, Anal. Chem., 1949, vol. 21(9), pp. 1123–1125. 
31 A. W. Martinez, S. T. Phillips, M. J. Butte, and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed., 2007, vol. 46(8), pp. 1318–1320. 
32 G. IJ. Salentijn, M. Grajewski, and E. Verpoorte, Anal. Chem., 2018, vol. 90, pp. 13815–13825. 
33 P. Yager et al., Nature, 2006, vol. 442(7101), pp. 412–418. 
34 E. W. Washburn, Phys. Rev., 1921, vol. 17(3), pp. 273–283. 
 
 
 
Figure 8: (a) 3D-printed polymer scaffolding used for the fabrication of alkyl ketene dimer (AKD) patterned paper microfluidic 
device42. (b) Paper device with untreated (hydrophilic) and AKD-coated (hydrophobic) domains. An aqueous blue dye solution was 
applied to both domains to demonstrate wettability by water, creating wett ed hydrophilic domain and droplets on top of the 
hydrophobic domain 42. (c) Demonstration of 3D paper microfluidic device with two -phase countercur rent flow of water (with 
hydrophilic yellow dye) and octanol (with hydrophobic blue dye) 43. (d) Illustration of 3D paper network with integrated electrode 
sensor44. (e) Fully integrated 3D-printed system, containing 3D printed microfluidics and paper-based testing (to be published soon).  

PHOTONFOOD 
 
23 
 
fluids are moved without the need of pumps 35 (Fig 8c) . Moreover, through the integration of electrodes, 
plasmonic nanoparticles, and other modifications, a plethora of detection schemes can be applied to such  
devices (Figs. 8d and 8e). Recently, the field has expanded towards the implementation of sophisticated device 
functionality, and proof-of-concepts of on paper-based liquid-liquid extraction19, on-paper preconcentration36 
and several types of flow control mechanisms have been published 37. However, those functionalities are 
modules that remain to be integrated in fully operational systems and need further development to allow (semi) 
automated operation in a user-friendly device that can be used in an on-site setting. 
Paper microfluidic devices can accommodate many functionalities and even include a framework for read-
out/detection. However, they lack physical strength, and a user-friendly interface. Thus, 3D printing has been 
applied to create cartridges, adapters and even fluidic devices via rapid prototyping, thereby revolutionizing 
the way and speed with which device development is carried out38,39. Different types of 3D printing have been 
employed, but the main strategy seems to be using fused deposition modelling for larger components, such as 
casings and adaptors, whereas techniques with higher resolution, such as stereolithography are used for making 
more functional components, such as f luidic channels and smaller parts. The combination of paper 
microfluidics with 3D -printing is very powerful 40, as it combines the broad range of functionalities and 
possibilities from the first, with physical strength, and adaptability of the latter.  
 
PHOTONFOOD going beyond the state of the art 
Paper microfluidics is a field with many possibilities and aspects to be explored. Applying multi -layered 
approaches (3D paper microfluidics) and building 3D-printed cartridges to house, protect and add functionality 
to such devices is especially interesting 41 (see Fig. 842,43,44). Existing solutions and functionalities, such as 
described under state of the art, mainly remain limited to proof -of-concept demonstration. Examples of 
integration of such modular approaches and application to real-life challenges, such as our recently developed 
total analysis system for paper-based allergen detection (Fig. 8), remain rare. Therefore, applications that have 
arisen thus far from the field are limited. PHOTONFOOD will take up the challenge of taking several 
fundamental concepts that have been established by scientists at WU  and develop those to reach a higher 
technology readiness level, with special focus on integration, (semi -) automation and user-friendliness. The 
foreseen outcome of the project will serve as a demonstrator to the paper microfluidics community on how 
this technology can be adapted to reach end -users, and to the food safety community on the advanced tools 
that are at our disposal for really getting analyses out of the lab and into the field.  
More specifically, PHOTONFOOD will move beyond the state of the art by (i) the use of surface chemistry 
to provide selectivity in paper microfluidics, as a way to purify and enrich specific analytes, which has not 
been reported to date; (2) performing subsequent, or multi -stage liquid -liquid extractions in a continuous 
fashion (rather than a batch approach), which is possible due to the layered nature of 3D paper microfluidics; 
(3) using existing (immunochemistry) and innovative approaches to concentrate sample on specific regions of 
paper that can be coupled directly to MIR spectroscopic detection. 
 
1.4.1.2 Tailored light sources 
 
State of the art 
In the past two decades, semiconductor lasers based on interband and quantum cascade laser technology have 
emerged as important light sources for miniaturized MIR analyser and sensing devices. Both technologies offer 
the advantage of providing high out -put powers tailorable to specific MIR spectral bands, small dimensi ons 
and long lifetimes. Since the experimental proof of QCLs in 199445 (1) and in 199746 (2) for ICLs respectively, 
a rapid technological development, in particular for QCLs, has resulted in a variety of commercially available 
 
35 A. W. Martinez, S. T. Phillips, and G. M. Whitesides, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2008, vol. 105(50), pp. 19606–19611. 
36 G. IJ. Salentijn and M. H. Hoekstra, “Sensor Cartridge for chemical assays of a liquid sample containing analyte molecules,” 2018 
37 R. B. Channon et al., Lab Chip, 2018, vol. 18(5), pp. 793–802. 
38 D. Pranzo, P. Larizza, D. Filippini, and G. Percoco, Micromachines, 2018, vol. 9, pp. 1–27. 
39 G. IJ. Salentijn, P. E. Oomen, M. Grajewski, and E. Verpoorte, Anal. Chem., 2017, vol. 89(13), pp. 7053–7061. 
40 G. IJ. Salentijn, H. P. Permentier, and E. Verpoorte, Anal. Chem., 2014, vol. 86(23), pp. 11657–65. 
41 Ross GMS, Filippini D, Nielen MWF , Salentijn GIJ (2020) 3D -Printed Micro Total Analysis System for Integrated Multiplex 
Immunosensing, submitted. 
42 G. IJ. Salentijn, N. N. Hamidon and  E. Verpoorte. Lab on a Chip, 2016, vol. 16, pp. 1013-1021. 
43 G. IJ. Salentijn, M. Grajewski and E. Verpoorte. Lab Chip, 2017, vol. 17, pp. 3401-3404. 
44 R.B. Channon et al. Lab Chip, 2018, vol. 18, pp. 793-802. 
45 Faist J, et al. Quantum cascade laser, Science, 1994, vol. 264, pp. 553-556. 
46 Yang RQ et al., Appl Phys Lett, 1997, vol. 71, pp.2409. 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
24 
 
QCLs and ICLs. Single mode di stributed feedback (DFB) interband cascade lasers in the 1800-3500 cm-1(3-
5 µm) range were commercialized by NP starting from 2013.  
To date, these single mode ICL and QCL based DFB lasers dominate the market with inherently very 
limited tuning ranges in the order of 10  cm-1 range. Recently, external cavity EC -QCLs with a wide tuning 
range have become commercially available for laboratory-based operation, covering up to 200 wavenumbers 
or more. In an EC -QCL the laser gain chip is part of an external cavity that can be mechanically tuned. The 
latter strongly hinders their application outside the controlled environment of the laboratory du e to their lack 
of robustness, rather large size and exceptionally high costs.  
Thus, the currently available technology for the MIR of mycotoxin detection is limited in twofold: The 
tuning range is limited, and the cost of the technology is very high  and technically not rugged enough for 
out-of-lab applications. The PHOTONFOOD project requires two different kinds of light sources for the MIR, 
both suitable for on-site and outside-laboratory applications in the field , one source being cost-effective and 
easy to operate and another one that allows for high precision measurements. There are two promising 
technologies emerging to realize the two required light sources. Cost-effective, easy to operate incoherent light 
emitting diodes based on ICL material46,4748,49 on one hand and high performance monolithically and widely 
tunable light sources based on the Vernier effect for the high-fidelity device of contamination detection on the 
other hand.  
However, neither of these two emerging technologies has yet been pursued for the technologically much 
more challenging 1500-1800 cm-1 spectral region for which specific epitaxial structures based on a cascaded 
band diagram and specific chip technologies as well as the corresponding designs have to be developed to full-
fill the requirements for the PHOTONFOOD project. 
Up till now interband cascade light emitting diodes (IC-LEDs) have been realized by project partner NP in 
the 2500-3333 cm-1 wavelength region operating at room temperature with up to several mW of optical output 
power50. However, the devices have not yet been fully commercialized due to the challenges with respect to 
thermal management and flip chip bonding as an efficient device requires the out-coupling of the light through 
the semi-transparent substrate. Moreover, the spectral coverage is limited to a range of approximately 500 cm-
1.  Many realizations of widely tunable single mode semiconductor lasers exist whose tuning principle is based 
on the Vernier effect. In order to be cost -effective, for industrial applications it is h ighly desirable that these 
semiconductor lasers are monolithic devices that are controlled only by the chip temperature and current levels. 
An intrinsic impediment in any Vernier-based 
tuning approach is the high dimensional 
parameter space and the relativ ely high 
sensitivity of the tuning of the laser to even 
small changes in temperature and current 
levels to enable cost-effective and practicable 
test procedures . This feature is achieved by 
novel design based on individually heated 
coupled cavities with an electric heater on heat 
spreader. These lasers possess a six -
dimensional parameter space (chip 
temperature, two laser currents and three 
heater currents), but the tuning principle is 
simple eno ugh, so a characterization of the 
devices is possible by only measuring a small 
number of tuning parameters. NP fabricated 
and characterized lasers based on this 
principle in the spectral region around 5000 
cm-1 and achieved a tunability of the devices 
over a range of up to 500 cm-1 around a central 
emission wavelength of 4300 cm-1. 
 
47 N. Schäfer, et al. Optical Engineering 58(11), 117106 (2019). 
48 NC. Das et al. Applied Physics Letters, 2005, vol. 87(4). 
49 J.Abell et al. Applied Physics Letters, 2014, vol. 104(26). 
50 Schaefer N et al., Optical Engineering, 2019, vol. 58(11). 
 
Figure 9 : Light sources for the MI -FI and HI -FI instruments.  (a) 
Photos of IC-LED chips mounted into SMD (surface mountable device) 
packages based on AlN for excellent heat removal. (b) CAD model of an 
AlN package with an IC -LED chip soldered onto a metal PCB, e.g. for 
integration into a measurement set -up or high -power optical 
characterization (c) TO3 housings for QCL chips with and without 
collimation lens. (d) The likely format of tunable laser package; 5 -6 
electrical drive currents might be used to achieve the required wavelength. 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
PHOTONFOOD going beyond the state of the art 
Within PHOTONFOOD we will realize two kind s of novel light sources that are tailor -made for the specific 
requirements of contamination detection in a Medium (MI-FI) and a High (HI-FI) fidelity device (see Fig. 9). 
For the MI-FI device we will realize the first long wavelength IC-LED for the 1500-1800 cm-1 spectral region 
operating at room temperature with optical output powers in the mW range. Due to the nature of the technology, 
MIR IC-LEDs are much more cost-effective than the fabrication of high precision single wavelength or tunable 
laser devices. Despite the chip technology itself we will realize a surface mountable device (SMD) as it is 
nowadays standard for LEDs in the visible to NIR spectral region in low-cost applications. The latter is quite 
challenging as the substrate mater ial GaSb is thermomechanically more challenging with respect to CTE -
matching to standard SMD packages used for LEDs such as Cu based lead  frame packages integrated into 
QFNs (Quad-flat no-leads) or electro-plated AlN or Al 203 based ceramics with electrical vias. For the H I-FI 
device a widely tunable cascaded laser with emission wavelengths at approximately 1500 -1800 cm-1 will be 
developed based on a specific laser device design based on the Vernier effect. Great care is taken to allow for 
a precise control of the parameter space required for laser operation to keep its operation simple and rugged. 
This feature is achieved by novel design based on individually heated coupled cavities with an electric heater 
on heat spreader  approach. These lasers possess a six -dimensional parameter space (chip temperature, two 
laser currents and three heater currents), but the tuning principle is simple enough, so a characterization of the 
devices is possible by only measuring a small number of tuning parameters. The proposed widely tunable light 
source will provide essential advantages with respect to ruggedness, compactness, speed and costs compared 
to tunable external cavity QCL systems currently available on the market.  NP’s expertise in the d esign and 
realization of novel light sources based on interband cascade and QCL technology is vital to the successful 
realization of the project.  
 
1.4.1.3 MIR sensing solution  
 
State of the art 
UULM along with partners NP, NMBU, BOKU, and IRIS have shown and continue to show in multiple EU-
projects (MIRACLE, MYCOSPEC, TROPSENS, VOGAS, see Table 4) the utility and molecular specificity 
of MIR spectroscopy, sensing, and diagnostic concepts 28,51,52,53,54,55,56,57. In particular, using tunable  quantum 
cascade lasers (QCLs) enable recording high -fidelity/high-precision MIR spectra with sufficient signal 
strength and spectral resolution for identifying individual components even in complex matrices 58,59. Next to 
the light source, a frequency -matched sampling interface is required for ensuring maximum sensitivity  and 
reproducibility during the measurement. The most efficient, and least lossy approach to interact photons with 
sample molecules is by using an evanescent field generated at the interface between a high -refractive index 
waveguide and the usually lower refractive index sample, independent of its physical state (i.e., liquid or solid). 
UULM and partners have pio neered generic single-mode thin -film waveguide technologies that ideally 
combine with MIR laser light sources such as QCLs providing a homogeneous evanescent field for maximizing 
the interaction between MIR radiation and the sample molecules. They have already demonstrated their utility 
for mycotoxin analysis22. However, established semiconductor (i.e., GaAs/AlGaAs and HgCdTe) waveguides 
are of limited stability in real -world environments. Hence, in preparation of this project partner UULM has 
established the foundation of an entirely new generation of thin -film waveguides that fulfil the requirements 
of extreme robustness, resistance against chemic al stress, and utmost mechanical stability, i.e., thin-film 
 
51 Sieger, Markus et al. (2018). Open Access Repositorium der Universität Ulm. http://dx.doi.org/10.18725/OPARU-6027 
52 G. Kos, et al. Food Additives & Contaminants: Part A, 2016, vol. 33(10), pp. 1596-1607, 
53 J. Haas, et al. Opt. Express 2019, vol. 27, pp. 23059-66. 
54 López-Lorente, Á. I., et al. Physica Status Solidi (A) Applications and Materials Science, 2016, vol. 213(8), pp. 2117-2123 
55 J. Haas, EV Catalán, P. Piron, M. Karlsson, B. Mizaikoff. Analyst. 2018, vol.143(21), pp. 5112-19. 
56 J. Haas et al. ACS Omega 2018, vol. 3 (6), pp. 6190-6198. 
57 J. Glöckler, et al. ACS Sensors, 2020, vol. 5, 4, pp. 1033–1039. 
58 Padilla-Jiménez, Amira C. Vibrational spectroscopy studies of biomolecular systems: from amino acids to microorganisms . Diss. 
2014 
59 Zhang, Zhe. Evaluation of infrared QCL, Synchrotron and bench-top sources for cell imaging in aqueous media. Diss. The University 
of Manchester (United Kingdom), 2017. 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
26 
 
waveguides made from nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) 55,56,60 . While being transparent in the MIR, such 
waveguides are chemical- and wear-resistant, and may be used for solid as well as liquid analysis61,62 .  
The proposed MI -FI device technology taking advantage of MIR  IC-LED technology instead of high -end 
QCLs does not exist to date and is one of the pioneering innovations of this project, s imilar low-cost near-
infrared (NIR) spectrometers (e.g., ConsumerPhysics SCIO) already exist on the market . However, the NIR 
region of the electromagnetic spectrum is not specific enough to detect contamination at levels that appear in 
food contamination. In addition, the spectral information produced by such devices has to be considered of 
very low fidelity22. We will indeed attempt developing the lowest-cost MIR analyzer on the market to date in 
the 2-4 k€ price segment. Given the significantly higher information content of MIR vs. NIR spectra (i. e., 
fundamental vibrations vs. overtone bands of liquid and solid samples), it is inherent to this spectral range that 
better and more information will be provided by any MIR device in contrast to its NIR siblings.  
 
PHOTONFOOD going beyond the state of the art 
PHOTONFOOD will go beyond the state-of-the-art in several ways. There is no high-precision portable, label-
free, direct detection MIR device for chemical and microbial contamination analysis in foo d and food 
commodities currently available – neither at the research stage nor at the market – that allows generating high 
precision molecular signatures of microbial and chemical contaminants in the whole fingerprint MIR region 
(1800-900 cm-1) without an expert user. Fig. 10a illustrates the key components of such a device that will be 
brought together for the first time by PHOTONFOOD in a suitcase -style portable dimension, i.e., (i) novel 
tunable EC-QCL, (ii) thin -film waveguide assembly with direct micro fluidic paper-strip readout, and (iii) a 
single IR detector, whereby (i) and (ii) are innovative key developments of PHOTONFOOD. Fig. 10b 
illustrates the breakthrough concept of a low-cost, hand-held MIR IC-LED based analyzer combining as key 
components (i) an MIR IC-LED with (ii) a sampling interface accommodating the same microfluidic paper -
strip readout as the analyzer shown in Fig. 10a, and (iii) an IR line detector array. Again, (i) and (ii) are 
innovative key developments of PHOTONFOOD, as is for the first packaging a MIR spectrometer into such a 
small and low -cost package.  The combination of advanced MIR ICL/QCL technology with unique, 
exchangeable, on-chip microfabricated, thin -film NCD waveguides packaged into a user -friendly sampling 
interface will yield the first field -deployable HI-FI photonic devices ready for field testing along the entire 
food processing value chain and for all levels of stakeholders. As this technology will be augmented by low -
cost paper-based sampling strategies, the cost per analysis will remain at a low and market -compatible level. 
While presenting a breakthrough technology, on-chip NCD waveguides have to date not been batch-fabrication 
at a wafer-scale, and have not been packaged into an end-user-friendly sampling interface such as the MIRa-
GuideTM platform, as proposed within PHOTONFOOD .  The waveguides have been commercialized by 
UULM and partners as an outcome of the MYCOSPEC project  (see Table 4) 22. However, for detection of 
contaminations in food matrixes, they need to be adapted to work in concert with low -cost, paper -based 
sampling strategies as a label-free direct photonic read-out tool (Fig. 10a). 
 
60 X. Wang, Anal. Chem. 2014, vol. 86(16), pp. 8136–8141. 
61 J. Haas, P. Artmann and B. Mizaikoff, RSC Adv., 2019, vol.9, pp. 8594-8599. 
62 X. Wang, Anal. Chem. 2013, vol. 85(22), pp. 10648–52. 
 
Figure 10: Simplified scheme of the working principles of the HI-FI (a) and MI-FI (b) devices are illustrated focusing on the key 
innovative components developed within PHOTONFOOD and omitting additional optics/electronics. The HI-FI device is based on 
an ICL/QCL laser, while the MI-FI device is based on low-cost MIR-LEDs. 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
27 
 
To date, also no low -cost, monolithic, hand -held MIR IC-LED based MIR devices without any moving 
parts operating in the 1500 -1800 cm-1 spectral window (i.e., the same spectral window as the HI -FI device) 
have been developed that allow colle cting medium precision molecular signature s of fungal/mycotoxin 
contaminants. MIR radiation emitted from MIR-LEDs will be coupled to a single-bounce diamond hemisphere 
serving as a total internal reflection element producing a localized evanescent field, which constitutes the actual 
sample/photon interface (Fig. 10b). The essential sensing principle is equivalent to the HI-FI device, yet, using 
a single-bounce waveguide results in reduced sensitivity. The radiation will then be projected onto a line-array 
detector. It is anticipated that entire device will be largely manufactured from plastic to ensure low fabrication 
cost, yielding a MI-FI device targeting the 2-4 k€ price segment. The MI-FI device will interface with the same 
low-cost paper-based sampling strategies, thus even further reducing the cost per analysis. 
 
1.4.1.4 Advanced data analysis for HI-FI and MI-FI solutions 
 
State of the art 
MIR spectra of multi-constituent samples are highly complex due the superposition of the spectral features in 
biological samples. Paper-based pre-concentration and separation will allow to reduce complexity 
considerably. Therefore, we expect that the commodit y which is usually influencing a spectral signature in 
spectroscopy will be less interfering with the analyte signal because of the unique paper -based approach 
suggested by PHOTONFOOD. However, it is still expected that the obtained signal will contain int erferent 
signals from the food matrix. A prerequisite for multivariate classification of spectral data is a separation of 
the corresponding chemical absorbance signals from unwanted interferences due to variations in sample 
thickness, noise, and scattering  effects. Therefore, s pectra need to be standardized , instrumental variability, 
atmospheric interference signals need to be removed and baseline variations need to be corrected. Therefore, 
the data pre-processing entails several essential steps: (i) estima tion of the baseline; (ii) signal enhancement 
and noise suppression; and (iii) normalization 63. Most spectral pre-processing procedures are based on using 
the whole spectral MIR range as it allows to estimate baselines and scaling effects in a reliable way.  
Thermal broadband emitters require spacious components for wavelength selection which is in stark 
contrast to any size reduction approach. Hence miniaturized narrow emitters are suitable candidates to 
overcome this issue. In the MIRACLE project (see Table 4) NMBU is currently in collaboration with IRIS and 
UULM developing strategies for spectral standardization, when only a few (seven) wavenumbers are available. 
This has been solved by carefully selecting the seven single wavelength lasers in the MIR range to allow for a 
maximum of reliable standardization.  
After the pre-processing step, MIR spectra need to be calibrated for chemical and microbial contamination 
levels. MIR spectroscopy has been used since the 90ies as a lab-based technique in combination with machine 
learning algorithms for the detection of microorganisms64,65,66. In combination with reference databases and 
powerful machine learning tools, microorganisms can be identified via their unique MIR molecular signature. 
The developed methods are in use as lab -based methods in clinical environments and for applications in the 
food sector,  However, all established approaches are based on pure cultures  of microorganisms, i.e. 
microorganisms need to be grown in pure cultures  for 24-48 hours before they can be identified . No method 
exists for the detection of microorganisms or chemical contaminants that can be used on -site. Moving from 
state-of-the-art lab applications to field measurements in the food chain requires two main changes: (i) In order 
to be able to measure tiny amounts at ppm level, contaminant preconcentration and separation is required. (ii) 
for portable and handheld solutions, a narrow spectral range needs to be selected to realize a cost-effective and 
compact device for obtaining powerful light sources in the MIR fingerprint region. The project will have two 
spectral ranges available. The range 2500-3333 cm -1 is developed and the range 1 500-1800 cm-1 will be 
developed in the PHOTONFOOD project . These spectral ranges will be used for establishing calibration 
models. NMBU has an extensive toolbox of calibration methods ranging from chemometric tools such as 
partial least squares regression, tree methods such as random forest to machine learning and deep learning 
tools. Deep Learning nets have been recently used for the  spectroscopic data and showed to be powerful in 
discrimination6768. The use of augmentation combined with deep learning methods has shown excellent 
 
63 A.Kohler, et al. in Comprehensive Chemometrics: Chemical and Biochemical Data Analysis, 2009, pp.139-162. 
64 D.Naumann, in Int. Society for Optics and Photonics, 1985, pp.268 -269.  
65 D.Naumann, D.Helm, H.Labischinski, Nature, 1991, vol. 351, pp.81-82. 
66 D.Helm, H.Labischinski, D.Naumann, J. of Microbiological Methods, 1991, vol. 14(2), pp.127 -142. 
67 Acquarelli, Jacopo, et al. Analytica chimica acta, 2017, vol. 954, pp. 22 -31. 
68 Zhang, Xiaolei, et al. Analytica chimica acta, 2019, vol. 1058, pp. 48-57. 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
28 
 
results69. The use of  data based on few wavelength s only , has also been shown to be promising 70. The 
experience of MIRACLE project (see Table 4) supports these observations.  
 
PHOTONFOOD going beyond the state of the art 
The data analysis strategy of PHOTONFOOD is illustrated in Fig. 11. Laboratory based detection of 
mycotoxins and fungal contamination are based on broadband spectra with high quality and high spectral 
resolution. Pre-processing tools that deal with interfe rents in broadband spectra are readily available and 
developed by NMBU 71. These methods have been further developed for dealing with a very low number of 
wavelengths (for example, seven wavelengths in the MIRACLE, see Table 4) The PHOTONFOOD solution 
will provide two spectral qualities (MI-FI and HI-FI) with a short spectra bandwidth in the range 1500-1800cm-
1. As opposed to a laboratory setting, the application of the ATR (MI -FI) and waveguide-based (HI-FI) MIR 
spectral signals will require new preprocessing tools. The application of extraction combined with paper-based 
microfluidics leads to interferent signals from solutions and substrates. In addition, light sources covering a 
narrow wavelength range (as opposed to full spectra covering the whole MIR region) will require adaption of 
existing preprocessing algorithms. NMBU will further develop and refine the current models focusing on 
signal enhancement and interferent removal via optimization of prepro cessing parameters for 
PHOTONFOOD.  
PHOTONFOOD will build classification and calibration models. In the classification model, standard 
thresholds for contaminants are used in the classifier training and the result of prediction will be contamination 
or no contamination in a sample. In calibration models, the exact level of a respective contaminant is estimated. 
Benchmark calibration and classification models for predicting levels of fungal and mycotoxin contamination 
will be established using benchmark instrumentation at NMBU and UULM. Multivariate methods based on 
latent variables such as partial least-squares regression and partial least-squares discriminant analysis (PLSR 
and PLS-DA) are powerful methods that allow interpretation of their decisions looking at molecular spectral 
signatures. Thus, PLSR and PLS-DA will help to understand the rationale of the model, i.e. if detection is done 
based on specific molecular spectral signatures from the contaminants or due to matrix changes. This is an 
important information to be obtained in order to decide about the generality of a developed calibration or 
classification model.  
For final calibration and classification model  
building, state of the art techniques such as deep 
learning approaches and random forests will be 
applied. The size of the data sets for calibration 
and classification model establishment is in all 
practical situations limited. Therefore, 
PHOTONFOOD will use two inn ovative 
techniques for augmentation of the data set s for 
calibration and classification: (i) Data sets will be 
augmented by mixing samples with known 
contamination content as described in the WP6 in 
different concentrations in order to obtain a high 
number of samples for HI -FI and MI -FI 
measurements. The advantage is that the datasets 
can be augmented considerably without requiring 
additional reference analyses. (ii) Recent research 
performed by NMBU in the MIRACLE project 
(see Table 4), showed that augmentation of data 
sets by interferent effects could improve the 
performance of classifiers considerably. 
PHOTONFOOD will use this brand-new research 
to develop powerful and robust classifiers for detection of contaminants in all validation and demonstration 
cases in the project. The developed strategies for augmentation combined with deep learning will be available 
as a general strategy for adaption of the technology for new cases to which the PHOTONFOOD technology 
will be adapted.  The developed calibration /classification models and preprocessing methods will be 
 
69 EJ.Bjerrum, M.Glahder, and T.Skov, arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.01927 (2017). 
70 R.Kasahara, et al. J. Biomedical optics express, 2018, vol. 9(1), pp.289-302. 
71 A.Kohler, et al. Comprehensive Chemometrics: Chemical and Biochemical Data Analysis, 2020, pp.83-100. 
 
 
Figure 11: The data analysis consists of several important steps: (i) 
spectral pre-processing, (ii) calibration model building for 
contaminants and spoilers, (iii) and data integration for food safety 
improvement and waste reduction.  

PHOTONFOOD 
 
29 
 
implemented in an easy -to- use interface software facilitating the use of it in a food supply chain. While 
PHOTONFOOD will develop specific models for the PHOTONFOOD cases, the developed strategies are 
easily transferrable for other types of microbial and chemical contamination.  
A software platform will be designed and developed to analyse and readout the sensor measurements.  In 
this way, the software platform will perform the digitalization of the data, integrating the models developed in 
the project, and providing a friendly user interface to facilitate the daily operations and decisions of the end -
users involved. PHOTONFOOD will also assemble the results of detections in a mobi le and web accessible 
interactive platform to provide multiple information to support decision-making in mycotoxin management by 
all actors in the food supply chain, including farmers, processors, manufacturers and retailers. A user-friendly 
decision support system (DSS) will be developed to reduce contamination in the food and feed supply chain, 
taking into account user requirements and the desired user experience of the target end -users (farmers, food 
and feed productions managers, among other stakeholders).  
Our advisory partner IBM will, together with the consortium, develop a strategy for data integration along 
the food supply chain to analyze and utilize large amounts of data about food safety. The aim will be to detect 
critical points with respect to food safety and to improve food safety along the food supply chain (Fig. 7).  The 
mobile and laptop application for contamination management to be designed and built in PHOTONFOOD, 
will take advantage of the software concept developed in the previous project MIRACLE (see Table 4), which 
main unit is composed of a local software application managing all the connected devices, and a local -cloud 
software to perform data synchronization with existing cloud/ERP infrastr uctures and allowing continuous 
updating and accessibility. It will be used an adapted version of its structured data of the API, based on unique 
URL, fast linking and readiness for future integration with ERP and business intelligence models. 
 
1.4.1.5 Ambition in innovative case studies 
 
By month 24 (milestone MS 4.1) the MI -FI and by month 30 (milestone MS 4. 21) HI-FI devices will be 
validated at lab scale. KPIs are defined to assess the performance of the photonic devices in real settings, which 
will be done from month 36. The ultimate result of PHOTONFOOD are the final prototypes of the developed 
devices. We will provide detailed documentation concerning the development and the feedback from 
stakeholders. In order to define  and calculate the KPIs and the suitability of the methods, we will take 
advantage of our end user and stakeholder involvement as these groups are to use the developed technology. 
The degree of accomplishment during demonstration will be described by utilizing adequate quantitative and 
qualitative indicators. 
 
Case Study 1: Detection of contamination with Fusarium/Deoxynivalenol in wheat 
Lead partner Participant partners 
NEBIH BOKU having own wheat fields as part of its Fusarium resistance breeding 
programme in cooperation with farmers from Europe 
Motivation 
The occurrence of fungal and subsequently mycotoxin contamination in various crops is one of the major 
concerns in the field of cereals since it has significant implications for food and feed safety, food security 
and international trade. The EU produces yearly approximately 133 million tons (MT) wheat (~M€ 29038), 
68 MT maize (~M€ 13571) and 8 MT oats (~M€ 1543). The annual loss due to mycotoxins is estimated at 
5-10%, which equates to €1.2 -2.4 billion (Bn) lost income for wheat alone. The reduction of these losses 
with only 1% would save €12 -24 M io. Grain and grain-based food products  (e.g. pasta, bread, pastry) 
account for the largest contribution to mycotoxin exposure in all age classes of the EU population, in 
particular, due to the mycotoxins produced by Fusarium spp. and their most prevalent mycotoxin 
Deoxynivalenol (DON).  
Pesticides, in particular, insecticides, fungicides and herbicides are sp read on wheat plantations. Residual 
of pesticides may remain being harmful for food safety. The control is based on food tolerances defined as 
the maximum residual limits (MRLs) established by European Union (EU), Codex Alimentarius (CA) and 
other organizations (EU Pesticides Database 2012). As a model pesticide we will use chlorpyrifos und 
chlorpyrifos-methyl  which are widely used insecticides banned in the EU as of 2020. 
Challenges 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
30 
 
Despite huge research investments, the prevention and control of these toxic secondary metabolites have 
remained challenging . Further, contamination with pesticides residues increase d last years due to the 
extensive use of different pesti cides in wheat production.  The agriculture and food industries are still 
vulnerable to problems of these contamination. While analytical techniques for mycotoxins and pesticides 
are improving and several commercial laboratories are available that provide screens for an array of 
mycotoxins and pesticides, the cost of analyses has been a constraint, in particular for SMEs. However, 
these costs may be insignificant compared with the economic consequences of production and health losses 
related to mycotoxin and pesticides residuals contamination. While newer immunoassays and wet chemistry 
technologies have reduced the cost of analyses, they frequently lack sensitivity in case of complex food 
matrices compared to laboratory chromatographic methods and may lead to false negatives. In addition, 
cross-reactivity of compounds can result in false positives. Comparatively long turnover times due to 
accurate, but laborious and expensive laboratory procedures decrease throughput and put additional financial 
burdens on producers demonstrating the safety of their products. 
Technologies to be tested/validated 
The PHOTONFOOD paper-based microfluidics, MI-FI and HI -FI devices and calibrations for fungi and 
DON mycoto xin contamination  will be applied to measure Fusarium spp. fungi and DON mycotoxin 
contamination in wheat. The presence of fungi and DON will be detected by the MI -FI and HI-FI devices, 
which will be validated by microbiological culture methods for fungi and HPLC-UV/FLD and LC-MS/MS 
for DON mycotoxin.  
In addition, HI-FI and MI-FI device and calibrations for pesticides will be applied for detecting presence o 
chlorpyrifos und chlorpyrifos-methyl. It is anticipated that the reference measurements via the HI-FI device 
will augment the low -resolution data provided by the MI -FI devices facilitating a multi -tier approach 
applicable to the entire food value chain. 
Innovative approach, objectives, and contributions to the project 
As an innovative approach, the novel handheld photonic MI-FI device will provide a cheap tool for 
monitoring fungal and mycotoxin contamination and detection of pesticides residues  on a farm level. The 
objective of this case study is to demonstrate the applicability of the MI-Fi device for daily screening-based 
monitoring and the HI -FI device for on -farm reference analysis as  tools for grain producers to prevent 
contaminated batches to be supplied into the food chain by implementing early monitoring and detection. 
Using the PHOTONFOOD solution , a big land area can be sectioned, and sub -batches can be monitored 
separately for mycotoxin contamination  and presence of pesticides residues . The presence of fungi and 
mycotoxin contamination is extremely heterogeneous in grain production. Therefore, special attention will 
be given to define the size of sub-batches and the elaboration of a reliable sectioning between them during 
the application of a handheld photonic MI-FI device. It is important to validated that  the technology is 
prepared to be operated under extreme weather conditions, especially heat, dust and humidity. When routine 
monitoring with the MI-FI device detects fungal contamination, precise measurements with the HI-FI device 
can be performed on the same sample as reference analysis. By eliminating the problematic sub-batches, the 
contamination of the whole batch can be prevented.  
Sustainability and applicability in other areas 
The amount of food waste could be effectively reduced throughout the whole food chain, the income loss 
of the farmers and food processors could be minimized, and the consumers could enjoy a higher level of 
food safety. Cost effectiveness will be high. The MI-FI device for monitoring will be held under a price of 
€2,500- €3,000, the HI-FI device will be designed under €25,000- €30,000 as a market price (this is a highly 
competitive price, which is cheaper than a cheap FT-IR option). As will be seen, a significant means of 
keeping the costs of the technology affordable and competitively priced  will be derived from the novel 
photonics technology that will be used in the system design, which can be batch-fabricated on a wafer scale, 
thus providing the pote ntial for mass fabrication at reasonable cost. As more analysers are produced and 
more such devices will be needed significant price drops are expected. 
Key performance indicators (KPIs) for the case study 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
31 
 
 100 samples of wheat will be measured for detecting Fusarium contamination by HI -FI and 500 
samples by MI-FI; 
 100 samples wheat will be measured for detecting DON contamination by HI -FI and 500 samples 
by MI-FI; 
 Fusarium contamination will be detected at t he detection limit of 10 colony forming units per g 
(CFU/g) by HI-FI and 100 CFU/g by MI-FI; 
 DON contamination will be detected within the detection limit of 1000 ppb by HI-FI; 
 DON contamination will be detected within the detection limit of 2000 ppb by MI-FI; 
 Pesticides residues of chlorpyrifos und chlorpyrifos-methyl   will be detected in 100 wheat samples 
at the relevant maximum residual limits (MRLs) by HI-FI and MI-FI; 
 
Case Study 2: Contamination of nuts with mycotoxins at distributer/EU entry point 
Lead partner Participant partners 
BOKU 
NEBIH, Seeberger, BAMA  and peanut producers from China Hualong  
Foodstuffs Enterprise facilitated through the MyToolBox EU-China-Mycotoxin 
Forum and ROMER, a supplier of official control laboratories. 
Motivation 
Peanuts are one of the most commonly consumed snacks in the European households: In Europe, about 550k 
tons of peanuts (groundnuts) are consumed each year. The Netherlands, Germany, the United Kingdom, 
Spain, Poland and Italy have a significant importing and consuming role in Europe.  The European Food 
Safety Authority has reported  that peanuts are one of the commodities that are mostly jeopardized by 
mycotoxin contamination. The occurrence of mycotoxins in the peanut supply chain and the occurrence of 
in particular aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) in the case of o ther nuts, such as pistachio, is a significant problem.  
Notifications of over 400 border rejections  by EU´s Rapid Alert System of Food and Feed (RASFF) have 
been reported since 2011 (RASFF database, accessed Jan 6 2019), thus the border inspection points and 
laboratories of the authorities should be reinforced by a mycotoxin monitoring device. 
Challenges 
An EC DG Health report (DG SANTE, 2017-6079) recommends that official controls of peanuts have to be 
carried out at all stages of production, processing and export. However, the analytical methods available 
today are tedious and the turnaround time for mycotoxin analysis is usually from 3 to 5 days. 
Technologies to be tested/validated 
The PHOTONFOOD paper-based microfluidics, the MI-FI device for screening and the HI -Fi device for 
reference analysis will be tested at the EU entry point  (Seeberger), at wholesale (BAMA) and at a retailer 
(through BAMA). The sample preparation of oily seeds and nuts will be carefully planned and a reliable 
protocol will be elaborated. The MI-FI device will be used to screen a large number of batches and products 
over a period of 4 weeks. The developed paper-based microfluidics  will be tested by the target users. 
Moreover, MI-FI and HI-FI devices will be validated by comparing the perfor mance characteristics of the 
innovative photonic device with the reference methods (based on LC-MS/MS and HPLC-UV/FLD). 
Innovative approach, objectives, and contributions to the project 
PHOTONFOOD will allow the food chain actors, including authorities to carry out cost-effective and rapid 
testing, which is particular of relevance for heterogeneous aflatoxin contamination as encountered in peanut 
batches.  
Sustainability, replicability and potential use in other areas 
The experience of the peanut case study can be generalized to similar products such as almond, pistachio, 
hazelnut, walnut etc. The photonic-based solution can also be explored and applied in the future within EU-
China-cooperations to control and detect aflatoxin levels in the peanut -supply chain as demanded by DG 
Health recently. The developments PHOTONFOOD can also serve as the basis for the advancement of the 
real-time post-harvest environmental monitoring system for storage of peanuts and especially in China. 
Key performance indicators (KPIs) for the case study 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
32 
 
 100 samples of peanuts and any other types of nuts products will be measured for detecting 
Aspergillus contamination by HI-FI and 500 samples f MI-FI; 
 100 samples of peanuts and any other type of nuts products will be measured for detecting AFB1 
contamination by HI-FI and 500 samples by MI-FI; 
 Aspergillus contamination will be detected at the detection limit of 10 colony forming units per g 
(CFU/g) by HI-FI and 100 CFU/g by MI-FI; 
 AFB1 contamination will be detected within the detection limit of 2 ppb by HI-FI; 
 AFB1 contamination will be detected within the detection limit of 82000 ppb by MI-FI; 
 
Case Study 3:  Aquaponics – Presence of fungi monitoring in herbs production 
Lead partner Participant partners 
BOKU BOKU, BIGH 
Motivation 
Aquaponics is a sustainable method for producing fish and vegetables simultaneously, as it requires less 
water, land and labour than traditional agriculture. The introduction of these kind of innovative production 
systems (e.g. aquaponics) is fostered by t he European Green Deal, societal expectations and consumer 
needs. Although the idea of aquaponics goes back to ancient times, it became an innovative production 
technology during the last decades, used by commercial farms as well. The market value of aquap onics is 
constantly increasing year by year. As it is becoming a widely used production technology, specialized 
controlling methods are needed to maintain food safety and quality at the farms’ level.  
Challenges 
Particular challenges include the control of fungal (Oomycetes) contamination in the production of herbs 
and tomatoes and controlled usage of antibiotics and pesticides. During this case study, special aspects of 
aquaponics will be examined, providing safe, reliable and affordable monitoring solution for producers. As 
aquaponics is a relatively new and a constantly evolving agricultural system, producers have reported some 
typical challenges, such as the appearance of different types of moulds in the plant culture, including some 
mycotoxin-producing species. The early detection of fungal contamination is also challenging, especially 
for organic producers, such as our partner, BIGH.  
In addition, we will monitor antibiotics residues by using a model antibiotic polymyxin. Europe’s animals 
consume more antibiotics than humans on average, often via livestock feeds on factory farms, where farmers 
routinely use them as a prophylactic against the occurrence or spread of disease. At least 25,000 people are 
dying annually in Europe from antimicrobial-resistant infections, and scientists have warned that without 
reform, routine medical interventions could soon become impossible. The new legislation, which will 
become law by 2022, bans the use of human reserve antibiotics in veterina ry medicine and the use of 
unprescribed animal antimicrobials. 
Technologies to be tested/validated 
During this case study, the presence of fungi and mycotoxin will be measured by the MI-FI device combined 
with the paper -based microfluidics on a large number of samples in routine monitoring and paper-based 
microfluidics in combination with HI-FI devices for reference analysis. The accuracy of the two devices 
will be validated by reference methods: microbiological culture methods for fungi; HPLC -UV/FLD, LC-
MS/MS for antibiotic and pesticide residues. In addition to aquaponics production, BIGH provides the 
opportunity to test the technology in on site processing and in vending on local supermarkets and grocery 
stores. 
Innovative approach, objectives, and contributions to the project 
Consequently, PHOTONFOOD will build on and further develop a MIR based testing platform, which will 
allow the food chain actors, including authorities to carry out cost -effective and rapid testing, which is 
particular of relevance for fungal, pesticides and antibiotics  contamination  encountered in aquaponic 
vegetable/herbs production peanut batches. 
Sustainability, replicability and potential use in other areas 
The results of this case study will be relevant for other innovative, complex production technologies, 
especially in urban agriculture, which is an important element of smart city programs. 
Key performance indicators (KPIs) for the case study 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
33 
 
 100 pots of tomato and herbs and 100 water samples will be examined for detecting fungal 
Oomycetes contamination by HI-F and MI-FI; 
 Oomycetes contamination will be detected at the detection limit of 10 colony forming units per g 
(CFU/g) by HI-FI and 100 CFU/g by MI-FI; 
 100 water samples from fish tanks will be examined for detection of polymyxin by HI-FI and MI-
FI; 
 100 water samples from the hydroponics part will be examined for the presence of pesticides 
chlorpyrifos und chlorpyrifos-methyl by HI-FI and MI-FI; 
 
 
1.4.1.6 Innovation potential  
 
The PHOTONFOOD project will develop six innovations: 
 
1) PHOTONFOOD will develop 3D paper microfluidics for purifications, enrichment, multi -stage 
liquid-liquid extractions of specific analytes for MIR spectroscopy. Such technology does not exist today 
and will enable the use of spectroscopic techniques for dete ction and quantification of analytes at 
concentration that have been far outside reach until now. 
2) PHOTONFOOD will develop widely tuneable (multi -wavelengths), monolithic single mode 
semiconductor lasers in the 1500 -1800 cm-1 spectral range  that are highly suitable for MIR 
spectroscopy of biomaterials. Currently only single -mode, one-wavelength DFBs based on QCL or ICL 
Technology are available (QCL: https://www.alpeslasers.ch/, ICL: https://www.nanoplus.com). 
3) PHOTONFOOD will develop LEDs with high output-power and low power consumption devices with 
a broad spectral range as low-cost MIR sources. Currently there are no LED-like products are for this 
wavelength range on the market. 
4) PHOTONFOOD will develop portable and field deployable handheld photonic devices including 
bright laser sources tunable via novel concepts, advanced optical transducers uniquely compatiblae 
with paper -based microfluidic st rips, and the first MIR -LEDs. Currently available  products with 
overlapping capabilities include ChemDetect™ Analyzer, 
(https://www.daylightsolutions.com/product/chemdetect/; weaknesses: n o sampling interface provided, 
has to be developed by end-user; just light-source and detector packaged into an instrument); Agilent 4300 
Handheld FTIR, https://www.agilent.com/en/products/ftir/ftir-compact-portable-systems/4300-handheld-
ftir (weaknesses: has moving parts , reduced SNR, cannot be used with thin -film waveguides); MIRa-
GuideR (https://www.mgopticalsolutions.com/produkte/mira-guide-atr-wellenleiter/; developed by 
UULM and MGOS in EU -project MYCOSPEC; will serve as a base component in PHOTONFOOD for 
HI-FI analyser; weaknesses: no thin-film NCD waveguides integrated, no paper-based microfluidic strip 
sampling interface ), IRsweep IRis -F1 (https://irsweep.com/products/iris-
f1/?gclid=EAIaIQobChMIuKuS4p_q6QIVieFRCh02rg1_EAAYAyAAEgLQrvD_BwE; weaknesses: 
cannot be used portable or in the field; no sampling interface provided) 
5) PHOTONFOOD will develop a MIFI MIR device with superior spectral quality addressing the MIR 
range needed for chemical analysis of food contaminants. Currently there is only a comparable device 
available for the near-infrared region with low spectral quality and which does not cover the MIR range. 
The price level is comparable to the MI-FI device envisioned by PHOTONFOOD. 
6) The PHOTONFOOD software application will integrate specific calibration models and comprise 
intuitive decision support tools and friendly user-interface to facilitate user acceptance and on -site 
tests which are ready for future integration with ERP and business intelligence models . There are 
currently no software applications for MI-FI and HI-FI contamination detection on the market with specific 
calibration models. 
 
Prior to the project planning, a patent search was performed using WIPO PATENTSCOPE. The closest prior 
art identified included  EP3634631A1 (pending), US8921118B2 and CN102016595B for the 3D paper 
microfluidics; and US8320728B2, US20170163001A1 (pending) and US20180329269A1 (pending) for the 
semiconductor laser. In both cases, the technologies developed by PHOTONFOOD may constitute novel, 
patentable subject matter and can therefore be regarded as breakthrough innovations on the technical side. The 
other PHOTONFOOD developments constitute product innovations . They will require the purchase of 
components and/or licensing of technology and may not necessarily be patentable in their own right. Due to 
exceptionally low price position , the system solution ( portable and field -deployable handheld photonic 
devices…) can be regarded as a breakthrough innovation on the product development side.      
PHOTONFOOD 
 
34 
 
2. Impact