1.2 Methodology

Overall methodology. Underpinning concepts, Models & Assumptions: Our methodology centres on three tracks (figure 3): 1) sensor development and scaling- both photonic and non-optical (to TRL7), 2) multimodal integration designed around 3 industrial use cases (TRL4-5), and 3) readiness for future industrial deployment (productisation roadmaps, training, business case development, securing IP assets and standardisation).
Track 1 centres on scaling the technology: on one side, the advanced photonic sensors (i.e. compact inline ICL/QCL MIR analyser, intelligent SERS sensing platform, fully integrated indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs) single-photon avalanche diode (SPAD) sensor with on-chip photon count accumulation) and non-optical chemical sensing array platform will each be matured to TRL7 as standalone technologies. On the other side, the current multirange spectroscopy, hybrid ensembling enabled test bed platform will be scaled into an industrial multimodal integration platform, prepared for enabling the TRL4-5 demonstrations.
Track 2 involves working with the use cases (pharmaceuticals bioprocessing, plastics recycling and steelmaking) in early mapping of the multimodal sensing solutions against the complex monitoring requirements to define the specifications and contexts of each case. These will inform the designs for the multimodal configurations to be implemented once the sensing modules (photonic and non-optical) are ready. The multimodal integration platform will then be leveraged for configuring, integrating, testing and validating the multimodal solutions over 2 iterative loops: one at lab scale (TRL4) and, based on the results, we will deploy and validate the multimodal solutions in industrially relevant environments (TRL5) at the facilities of each UC owner.
Track 3 will ensure that the frameworks are in place for a post-project scale up and productisation, skills development, business planning, IP protection and compliance. This will support a competitive time-to-market (TTM) and readiness for industrial adoption, while contributing to standardisation and wider ecosystem uptake.
TRACK ONE: DEVELOPMENT OF THE SENSOR TECHNOLOGIES & INTEGRATION PLATFORM (TO TRL7)
Advanced photonic sensor developments
QCL/ICL MIR: ALPES has developed in-house and produces the “GLIDER”(https://www.alpeslasers.ch/glider/). The current version of the GLIDER is designed for multi-laser operation with wide spectral tuneability. It has a modular design and consists of a QCL gain chip, a grating-tuned extended optical cavity in Littrow configuration, laser drive electronics, a temperature controller, and a graphical user interface software. The GLIDER aims compatibility with the ALPES line of Broad Gain QCLs which tune over up to 25% of their central wavelength. The QCL /ICL – GLIDER will be designed to maximize the tuning range of the assembly. However, it is not currently optimised for ICL broadgain devices. The key challenge here will be the difference in polarization between QCLs and ICLs. An optical assembly will be required to overcome this issue. A set of 1 ICL and 3 QCLs will be integrated in the GLIDER, in order to produce an ultra-wide spectral tuning device, capable of a tuning range of over 1200 cm-1 in total. The multi-laser setup is selected in order to reduce device complexity, cost & size. Further to the development of the laser assembly, ALPES will develop the custom-designed driving electronics for its devices, designed to work with the MIR sensing tool. Regarding the sensing modality, the proposed technical approach integrates advanced mid-infrared (MIR) sources, substrate-integrated hollow waveguides (iHWGs), and data fusion into a single sensing platform. At the photonic level, iHWGs will act as miniaturised gas cells and optical conduits. Tailored iHWG geometries will be developed to ensure durability and sensitivity under corrosive atmospheres, high humidity, and high temperatures.
Complementarily, the MIR optical architecture will incorporate with with chemical sensor arrays in a shared manifold, guaranteeing correlated and orthogonal data streams. Preprocessing and chemometric pipelines will provide real-time baseline correction, drift compensation, and predictive analytics, enabling robust operation across complex industrial matrices.
SERS: The proposed technical approach integrates next-generation SERS substrates, advanced optical modules, and AI-driven analytics into a single industrial sensing platform. On the substrates side, we will develop SHINERS core-shell nanoparticles and/or hybrid plasmonic–dielectric meta surfaces to achieve reproducible, high-intensity electromagnetic hotspots with enhanced durability under thermal, chemical, and mechanical stress. Complementarily, the optical architecture will incorporate dual-wavelength excitation, confocal fibre-coupled probes, time gated and high-sensitivity cooled detectors, ensuring¡ robust signal collection and effective fluorescence suppression in complex industrial matrices.
These innovations will be integrated into modular, ruggedized systems suitable for in-line monitoring of steel, bioreactor, and recycled plastic streams. An edge AI analytical layer will perform real-time spectral unmixing, baseline correction and predictive process control, delivering quantitative, reproducible, and actionable molecular fingerprints. This convergent strategy advances SERS from sensitive laboratory demonstrations to industrial-grade, TRL6–7 deployable systems, setting a new benchmark for high-performance, reliable, and scalable optical sensing in harsh environments.
InGaAs SPAD camera module with on-chip processing: The project applies an integrated approach combining  pixel and sensor array design and fabrication, electronics design, packaging, process development, and experimental validation.
Pixel design and fabrication: Individual InGaAs SPAD pixels will be optimized for low dark count rate (DCR), i.e. noise, and high photon detection efficiency (PDE) via numerical simulations. Pixel contact metallizations will be performed after receiving wafers. Assumption: validated pixel structures and fabrication recipes from prior prototypes can be adapted. Challenge: balancing sensitivity, noise, and afterpulsing while maintaining manufacturability. Pixel array architecture: A 192×128-pixel array with 25 µm pitch will be developed. Assumption: array scaling does not introduce prohibitive crosstalk or afterpulsing. Challenge: managing uniformity, yield, and power distribution across the full array. Electronics & software: Printed circuit board (PCB), firmware, and user interface (UI) will be developed with modular design and standard electronics design automation (EDA) tools. Assumption: ROIC specifications are stable. Challenge: combining high-speed data acquisition with a user-friendly interface. Packaging: A thermo-electric cooled, hermetically sealed package will be built using thermal and vacuum simulations before prototyping. Assumption: commercial thermo-electric cooling (TEC)/sealing solutions can be adapted. Challenge: ensuring compactness while maintaining thermal stability. ROIC testing: ROICs will be diced, bonded, powered up, and validated with emulated SPAD signals. Assumption: foundry ROICs have an acceptable baseline yield. Challenge: minimizing die loss and resolving functional issues early. 3D integration: Under bump metallization (UBM), indium bumping, and flip-chip bonding will be optimized iteratively on dummy wafers before transfer to real devices. Assumption: process scalability is achievable. Challenge: precise alignment and yield reproducibility. Hybridization & characterization: Final ROIC–SPAD bonding will create hybridized chips, followed by camera tests under controlled illumination to measure DCR, PDE, and resolution, and secondary noise mechanisms such as afterpulsing. Assumption: standard calibration methods are sufficient. Challenge: achieving uniform array performance in hybridized chips.
Non-optical sensing developments
Chemical sensor arrays: In PhotonX, gas sensor arrays are introduced as a complementary modality that expands the scope and applicability of the advanced photonic sensors in a multimodal approach. While MIR, Raman SERS and SPAD provide high-resolution, molecule-specific and time-resolved measurements, each technology has intrinsic limits in terms of selectivity, coverage or sensitivity to complex mixtures. Chemosensors address this gap by offering broad, pattern-based detection of volatile organic compounds and trace gases that cannot be fully resolved by photonic approaches alone.
With MIR spectroscopy, chemosensors enables multi-dimensional monitoring of the gas headspace by adding sensitivity to trace-level VOC mixtures in the ppb–low ppm range, which often fall below MIR quantification thresholds or lack strong IR activity. MIR delivers molecule-specific, quantitative information for well-defined analytes such as CO, CO₂, H₂O and selected VOC markers, as well as environmental parameters (temperature and humidity). These parameters can be used in real time to stabilise chemosensors performance, compensating for baseline drift, cross-sensitivities, and ageing effects. In turn, the pattern-based detection of chemosensors arrays captures low-level and complex mixtures not quantifiable by MIR alone. Fusing both datasets increases robustness and improves effective limits of detection by an estimated 20–30% over stand-alone spectroscopic sensors, while enhancing classification accuracy under dynamic process conditions.
With Raman SERS, the chemosensors extend detection beyond the targeted fingerprints retrieved by advanced substrates (e.g. SHINERS, metasurfaces). While SERS offers selective, quantitative identification of contaminants or process markers, chemosensors and, particularly MOX sensors, contributes a global chemical profile at sub-ppm levels. This dual layer ensures that Raman’s precision is contextualized within a broader view of the gas-phase environment, reducing false negatives and enabling early anomaly detection in complex bioreactors, recycling or steelmaking contexts.
Figure 5: Different sensor modules available at JLM a,b) module with research level triple MOX sensor, c,d) sensor modules with commercial gas sensors.
Multimodal integration platform
IRIS will scale up its AI-driven multirange spectroscopic testbed platform (known as the VISUM Fusion) and extend it to an industrial multimodal integration platform.
Fig 6- High level schematic of the multimodal integration full stack: 1) Multimodal configurator to design the sensing modality templates for the 2) industrial multimodal devices, which is supported by 3) AI-driven Data Fusion (Hybrid Emsembling Machine Learning) and 4) AI analytics tools (predictive engine)
From figure 6, it can be seen that this framework consists of the multimodal configurator all the common elements (power supply, embedded computer, dedicated software, user interface, communication module), plus a ‘shared suite’ of the specific sensors/spectrometers, the respective light sources, and the suitable probes, capable of delivering the following sensing techniques: VIS; NIR; SWIR; MWIR; Raman; LIBS; Fluorescence; and MV. It is also ready with the readout electronics for non-optical probes. The platform also enables seamless data fusion, to obtain dramatic improvements in precision, accuracy, and limit of detection, and it does so based on a new Hybrid Ensemble paradigm. This setup is the ideal framework to be scaled up in PhotonX and will integrate into its spectroscopic sensing modalities the necessary hardware components for the Novel QLC MIR, the SERs and the InGaAs SPAD camera module with on-chip photon count accumulation, along with e-noses non-optical elements.
It will act as a Multimodal Configurator that essentially capitalises on opportunities for hardware-level fusion of sensing modalities (sharing optical paths, illumination sources, detectors, and housing where feasible) to reduce system footprint, enhance robustness, and lower costs while maintaining or improving measurement performance. This flexible configurator manages the selection and configuration of complementary optical and non-optical techniques to deliver the required sensing capabilities for a given use case.  It will be used and validated in the 3 Use Cases for allowing rapid testing with a variety of sensing techniques to save time in the experimental phase, and to allow the most suitable fusion of techniques to be identified. This will provide the template for ‘downscaling’ (figure 7) to a compact and affordable industrial inline analytical device that benefits from the common hardware compatible (‘Fusion Core’) of the Visum Fusion. To further extend the monitoring capabilities, data provided by off-the-shelf compatible univariate sensors can be fused with the spectroscopy and imaging data and relating them to quality parameters of the production and product performance to provide a more robust mathematical model, automatic control of processes, reducing defects and improving yields, reducing time, waste and energy consumption, and for predictive maintenance.
The multivariate data from the final downscaled analytical device, and from any other relevant data source will be collected in the Scadalytics Data Management Platform (developed by IRIS and which will be adapted and scaled as the intelligent software for the multimodal stack). It consists of the following layers: Communication Interfaces and APIs layer: designed for data integration and interoperability not only within the frame of the multimodal sensing platform, but can also receive data from SCADA/ERP, PLC, from other analysers, Industrial IoT devices, whereby API-ready interfaces to ensure seamless integration with existing plant information and control systems, supporting interoperability and adherence to industrial standards. A data processing layer performs data conditioning prior to its use by the data fusion layer. It manages, fuses, and analyses heterogeneous data streams through hybrid AI and enabling interoperability with industrial systems (SCADA, etc) and other external information systems (such as Digital Product Passports). Likewise, the data processing layer allows the integration of third parties algorithms and signal quality criteria for dedicated tasks linked to specific sensors (for example, base-line corrections, noise suppression or sensor response calibrations) to take advantage of available prior knowledge, either empirical or first-principle-based.
At the core of the data fusion layer, a groundbreaking advancement is the hybrid-ensemble modelling for implementing data fusion (it is noteworthy that Scadalytics and VisumFusion share a common architecture in relation to the data processing tools, while they have different roles in the application development and implementation road map). The most straightforward approach for implementing data fusion through hybrid ensembling involves identifying optimal pairings or tuples of instruments and machine learning methods within a specific ensemble architecture, in order to achieve both the most robust and accurate predictive algorithm. An instant evident advantage is a reduction in the number of observations (samples) required for developing models that are not prone to undergo overfitting. In fact, the lack of sufficient numbers of different samples (as many as required for building useful models) is the most frequent barrier to the wide use of machine-learning-based spectroscopic analysers. The hybrid ensembling concept addresses the limitation of two extreme approaches: on the one hand, modelling the merged data by means of just one weakly optimal algorithm and, on the other hand, applying the machine learning ensemble approach to a dataset that involves limited information provided by just one type of spectroscopic analyser. The outputs from this layer can be either sent directly to the Scada, can be interfaced through a self-contained User Interface (providing information for improved decision making, sending alerts to operators, as well as using data historian about the process for improved process understanding, optimisation, predictions, & anomaly detection), or can be sent up to an upper layer of intelligence for use by predictive models.  The Decision Layer focuses on delivering actionable intelligence back to operators and control systems, enabling informed, human-centric decision-making and, where appropriate, closed-loop control. It leverages AI-driven predictions and simulations to support methodologies such as Quality by Design (QbD), SSbD, and Model Predictive Control (MPC). In cases where higher-fidelity process simulations are valuable, the Decision Layer can be implemented within a Digital Twin framework, providing dynamic, real-time synchronisation between the physical process and its virtual counterpart for scenario planning, optimisation, and resilience.
We will ensure that the AI developments comply with EU Artificial Intelligence Act, upholding the principles of transparency, accountability, and human oversight. Our AI systems will be: Lawful, in full compliance with applicable EU legislation; Ethical, following the Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI, with attention to data privacy, transparency, fairness, and bias mitigation; Robust and reliable, through rigorous scenario testing, monitoring for unexpected behaviours, and incorporation of hybrid human-AI oversight where needed; Explainable, using interpretable models and providing context, limitations, and access to relevant training data to support user understanding and trust.
TRACK 2: MULTIMODAL INTEGRATION DESIGNED AROUND INDUSTRIAL USE CASES (TRL4-5)
Design of multimodal solutions for Use Cases: Track 2 focuses on translating the scaled sensing technologies into multimodal configurations designed around three industrial use cases: pharmaceuticals bioprocessing, plastics recycling, and steelmaking. As such building on the sensor developments and the integration framework from Track 1, we will undertake a structured design process to configure multimodal solutions tailored to the monitoring challenges in the three UCs. This involves early co-definition of requirements with UC owners (process parameters, contaminants, dynamic ranges, environmental constraints), mapping them against the capabilities of the photonic and non-optical sensing modalities, to identify the most effective combinations of photonic and non-optical sensing, ensuring that the platform addresses complexity, variability, and reliability under industrial conditions. The designs will define the specific multimodal sensor pairings, hardware interfaces, and AI-driven data fusion pipelines that will then be implemented and validated in the UCs at TRL4–5. This track will leverage the Industrial Multimodal Integration Platform (physics + signal + data fusion) for configuring, deploying, and operating the multimodal solutions. Prototypes from each of the sensing modalities will be temporarily ‘emsembled’ (like a ‘mecano’)- for servicing the distinct multimodal configurations of the different UCs. It will deliver specifications and KPIs, guide the design of the multimodal configurations, and validate them through an iterative loop of laboratory testing (TRL4) followed by installation and operation in industrial environments (TRL5). This iterative TRL4 to TRL5 validation loop reduces technical and adoption risks by first derisking performance in controlled lab conditions before demonstrating robustness, reliability, and value under real industrial operating environments. These UCs will serve to validate both the intrinsic performance metrics (e.g., resolution, sensitivity, stability, signal-to-noise ratio) and extrinsic metrics (e.g., robustness, cross-sensitivity, environmental stability) of the technological innovations, as well as to demonstrate the business, efficiency, sustainability, and societal benefits in each case. Design of multimodal solutions for Use Cases
The three Use Case demonstrators are discussed in turn:
Use Case 1- Pharmaceutical Bioprocessing (MyBiotech and USAAR): MyBiotech is a CDMO (Contract Development and Manufacturing Organization) providing end-to-end development and manufacturing services for biotech and pharma. It specialises in nanopharmaceutical development, production, and characterisation, supported by proprietary continuous manufacturing technologies (flow reactors, impinging jets, top-down size reduction) and a GMP-compliant facility. MyB also works on downprocessing of microorganisms and the optimisation of key enabling technologies. USAAR is pioneering advanced biocatalysts and bioprocesses and performs cutting-edge research in metabolic engineering, systems biology, and bioprocess development and optimization, driving innovations in the sustainable production of chemicals, materials, food, drugs, and therapeutics, with a focus on valorising renewable resources, industrial side streams, and waste, supported by state-of-the-art bioanalytical platforms and fermentation systems ranging from microreactors to 15 L bioreactors.
Soil bacteria of the genus Streptomyces synthesize a rich spectrum of natural products, including more than 75% of all industrial antibiotics. Streptomyces rimosus and Streptomyces albus are established hosts for the heterologous production of oxytetracycline (OTC), a broad-spectrum antibiotic of the tetracycline family and among the most prescribed antibiotics in the world (Beganovic et al, 2023). The compound inhibits pathogenic gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Meanwhile, it is also the precursor for the synthesis of Doxycycline which is in the EMAs list of critical medicines (https://www.ema.europa.eu/). Typically, the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites is highly complex and tightly regulated by the microbe, which makes their economic production challenging. Additionally, the fermentation process is dependent on costly nutrients that unfavourably compete with human nutrition (e.g. glucose, starch). For PhotonX, we envision a more sustainable, nutrient-limited fed-batch or semi-continuous process based on renewable feedstocks (i.e. lignocellulosic biomass, lignin and/or seaweed) in which critical metabolic and process parameters are monitored online and integrated into a comprehensive process model.
The use of complex and often inhibitory biomass waste streams as carbon source necessitates careful monitoring and dosing of the contained compounds, especially in biopharmaceutical applications. Likewise, the accumulation of the target antibiotic during production poses an increasing metabolic burden to the cell eventually leading to growth arrest and production limitations. Therefore, critical metabolic and process parameters i.e. carbon substrate concentrations, intracellular metabolite levels (e.g. Acetyl-CoA, ATP or NADPH), anorganic ions and other trace elements (ammonium, phosphate, vitamins, trace metals), cell density, pH and dissolved oxygen levels, as well as secreted by-product and OTC titers are continuously monitored. The collected sensor data is integrated into a quantitative online process model that allows for the control and automatisation of the production process based on nutrient availability and cell fitness. Sensor calibration and process integration will be first established by USAAR at lab-scale (1 L) and later transferred to project partner MyBiotech for scale-up to pilot-scale production (15 L). Integration of advanced photonics and sensing technology in combination with AI at the academic and industrial level will demonstrate, facilitate and smoothen the transfer from R&D level to industrial environment of biopharmaceutical manufacturing.
Today higher OTC levels are achieved by cultivating mutagenized Streptomyces producer strains in simple batch processes using pure sugars as carbon source and nutrient limitations. Process parameters like temperature, pH and dissolved oxygen concentration are monitored using suitable electrodes. Broth from the process is regularly sampled and the obtained supernatants are analysed for relevant substrate and (by-)product concentrations to follow the process’ progress by labour intensive techniques like HPLC. Process control or automatization based on online monitored compound levels or biochemical parameters is not common.
BSOTA: We estimate the following potential: +50% titer, 25% rate and +10% yield compared to the SOTA at lab-scale (Reference: 100 mg/L, 1 mg/L/h, and 10 mg/g, respectively), an overall reduction of process costs by -10% with use of agricultural and forest-industry side streams, a general improved process control and robustness, buffering batch-to-batch variations in raw material supply thereby enabling the use of cheaper and more complex feedstocks.
Features of the novel approach: Competitive European production of antibiotics from local biobased feedstocks. Lower dependency on imports to avoid medicine shortages. Sustainable production from renewables, with lower carbon footprint and less contaminated wastewater. Contribute to Critical Medicines Act, especially in enabling antibiotic production in Europe by supporting fermentative production, ensuring the availability of antibiotics. Contribute to Strategic approach to pharmaceuticals in the environment, if technology can be used to monitor oxytetracycline in wastewater. EMAs list of critical medicines.
Bioprocessing Monitoring: Chemical Sensor Array (CSA) + SERS + SPAD:
MIR (ATR probe) will provide reliable detection/quantification of low‑level process major metabolites, nutrients and by-product  markers in the liquid/solid phase (e.g., glucose, organic acids, proteins (H₂S exemplar) with improves accuracy and stable operation.
Chemical Sensor Array (CSA) allows monitoring of the headspace of the bioreactors, detecting volatile organic compounds (VOCs) from microbial metabolism, as an early-warning system for contamination or microbial stress.
SERS will add ultra-sensitive detection of the final product; oxytetracycline (down to µM or nM levels), even in early formation stages, via tailored substrates (i.e. silver nanostructures).
SPAD camera enables visual inspection in the water spectral window (around 1100 nm) because SWIR is less prone to scattering in turbid environments as well as to pass through thin biofilms. Suitable for detecting macroscopic heterogeneities that could result from growing milieu artefacts.
SERS will add ultra-sensitive detection of the final product; oxytetracycline (down to µM or nM levels), even in early formation stages, via tailored substrates (i.e. silver nanostructures).
SPAD camera enables time-resolved fluorescence for live monitoring of the microbial metabolic state, detecting the fluorescence of specific metabolites (i.e.NAD/FAD) in the cell culture.
The multimodal solution will be coupled with already existing sensors in bioreactors (i.e. temperature probes, electrochemical and pH sensors) for enriching the data fusion layer.
Use Case 2 –Plastics Recycling (Van Werven): Van Werven Plastic Recycling recycles 180,000 tonnes rigid plastic across 7 European locations. The location in Biddinghuizen is the largest location, recycling 80,000 tonnes of rigid plastics per year. At this facility, building and demolition plastic waste and mixed plastics from recycling centres are collected and sorted in more than 20 categories, based on polymer type, colour, additive content and properties. The sorted plastics are grinded, washed, dried and packaged, so they can be used in plastic conversion processes.
During the sorting process for mixed plastic waste, 6-8 workers manually pick different types of plastic from a transport belt.
Plastics contain a wide range of additives, such as flame retardants, coloring agents with a certain chemical composition, plasticizers, antioxidants, UV- stabilizers and so on. These additives have been used for years, but regulations, based on the current knowledge on how damaging additives can be for human health and the environment, now prohibit the use in plastics. Since recycled plastics are used to make new products, they recycled plastics have to comply to current regulation  (e.g. REACH and POP). Therefore, one needs to remove plastics that contain prohibited additives (‘legacy additives’) as soon as possible.
In the Van Werven recycling process, removal should happen in the first step: the sorting of plastics. Currently, this is done by human operators (see the picture above). Human eyes can differentiate between some types of plastic, but it is very difficult to detect additives. The technology used in this project may help to differentiate between the desired plastics to be recycled, and undesired ones containing legacy additives. In the table below, examples of legacy additives are shown, with the level that is currently allowed in plastic raw materials.

Table 5- Examples of legacy additives, with current permitted levels, in plastic raw material
Off-line measurements are done at the end of the process, by means of quality control using slow and expensive techniques, such as XRF (X-Ray Fluorescence) or GC-MS (Gas chromatography). When the additives are present above the permitted level, the products have to be discarded or can only be used in applications that have a derogation in the REACH regulations.
The Photon-X solution will be tested on samples prepared and provided by VW having a certain, known concentration of the legacy additive. The Photon-X solution could also be tested in VW’s laboratory (TRL4) in Biddinghuizen (the Netherlands), and, when certain criteria are met to ensure worker safety, in the industrial scale sorting process (TRL5).
Proposed multimodal integration for UC2 (Plastics Recycling): Improved classification/flagging of legacy additives contamination levels through fused MIR+CSA+SERS+LIBS features.
MIR combined with QCLs provides molecular fingerprinting for organic additives such as antioxidants or stabilizers.
CSA will detect volatile organic compounds (VOCs) released during heating or processing, providing indirect markers of phthalates.
SERS will enable trace detection of PFAS and aromatic stabilizers.
Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) (as part of IRIS’ Fusion Platform) will allow the detection/quantification of heavy metals such as Lead, or Bromine flame retardants (BDE) and colorants based on Cadmium.
Use Case 3- Electric Arc Furnace long-products steelmaking (CELSA): CELSA Group is a vertically integrated long-products steelmaker based on Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) technology. The group comprises >20 scrap processing yards (4 with large-scale shredders), 5 meltshops (7 EAF + 7 ladle furnaces) with continuous casting, 10 rolling mills and 30+ final transformation plants (cut & bend, mesh, drawing mills). CELSA supplies construction and automotive markets and targets full decarbonisation and circularity by 2050, embedding Industry 5.0 principles in its innovation strategy.
Steelmaking processes, particularly scrap-based EAFs, face challenges in monitoring and controlling variable scrap quality, combustion efficiency, and contaminant content. Current monitoring approaches rely on offline chemical analyses of slag and dust, delayed gas measurements, and indirect process proxies (e.g., temperature, energy consumption). This creates blind spots in detecting contaminants such as sulphur, halogens, and heavy metals from scrap coatings and residues, which can compromise steel quality, increase emissions, and damage furnace linings.
PhotonX will address these gaps by deploying multimodal sensing solutions for inline monitoring of furnace off-gases, slag vapours, and particulate emissions:
Chemical sensing arrays will provide fast-response screening of CO and CO₂ (combustion efficiency, decarburisation), H₂ (moisture in scrap, hydrogen pickup), SO₂ (sulfur impurities from scrap oils/rubber/paints), and HCl (from PVC or any other halogenated contaminant).
Raman/, to detect and quantify (whenever feasible) Zn, Pb, Cd from galvanized/painted scrap and Cr, Mn, Ni, Cu oxides linked to alloy composition and slag chemistry by inspecting vapours and particulates previously condensed on dedicated sampling plates.
MIR spectroscopy (to be detailed further) can provide quantitative measurement of combustion gases and additional volatiles, complementing chemical sensor arrays.
SPAD imaging offers potential for fast detection of anomalies in the melted material dynamics when properly processed by means of anomaly-detection algorithms, particularly in the case of alloy charge control.
Through hybrid ensemble fusion, the combination of these modalities will enable: ■Real-time (sub-second) monitoring of furnace atmosphere and slag vapours. ■Early warning of contaminant loads (e.g., halogens, sulfur, heavy metals) before they impact furnace integrity or steel quality; ■Improved process efficiency by correlating gas ratios with combustion/oxidation conditions.
This is expected to deliver the following impacts: a reduction in off-spec steel batches through early detection of contaminants; improved furnace operation efficiency with CO/CO₂/O₂ balance monitoring; enhanced compliance with environmental standards by quantifying SO₂, HCl, and heavy metal vapours; safer working conditions and reduced manual sampling. The table below provides an overview of the monitoring requirements, the current gap that will be filled by the prospective multimodal demonstrators that will be cocreated, laboratory tested and eventually validated in CELSA’s facilities.
Table 6- Steel use case summary and proposed multimodal integration
Transferability to other application domains: Beyond these initial applications, the project lays the groundwork for extension into additional domains highlighted in the call, including healthcare (e.g., improved diagnostic imaging and treatment monitoring), transportation safety (e.g., real-time sensing for collision avoidance), security (e.g., chemical and gas sensing for explosive detection), critical infrastructure resilience (e.g., structural health monitoring of bridges, tunnels, buildings), and optical communications (e.g., safeguarding data integrity and detecting anomalies in high-speed fibre networks). This positions PhotonX as a scalable, cross-sectoral solution addressing Europe’s strategic challenges while supporting technological sovereignty and competitiveness.
The table below provides a summary of the PhotonX Modalities and Fusion Pairings, along with possible measurable parameters across the targeted Use Cases and extended application domains. This demonstrates both coverage of the required use cases and the broader applicability of the technology beyond the demonstrators and will form part of the post project exploitation pathways.
Table 7- PhotonX Application Transferability Matrix
TRACK 3: READINESS FOR FUTURE INDUSTRIAL DEPLOYMENT: Track 3 ensures that PhotonX innovations are prepared for post-project scale-up and industrial adoption. While Tracks 1 and 2 focus on technology and validation, Track 3 builds the frameworks that will enable a competitive time-to-market. This includes productisation roadmaps to reduce cost and footprint, training and skills development to prepare the workforce, business case development to engage investors and early adopters, and securing IP assets to protect and exploit results. Standardisation and interoperability actions will further align PhotonX with European and international markets, ensuring long-term impact and uptake.
Approach to Business scenario and exploitation strategy development: A robust, impact-oriented business case and exploitation strategy will ensure that PhotonX delivers lasting value beyond the project’s duration. It will identify target customers and market segments for PhotonX in each of the validated application domains, engaging with industrial and societal stakeholders early through pilots and demonstrators to derisk adoption and validate the business model. Efforts will focus on scaling the platform through modular offerings and service models that fit diverse sectors and budgets, supporting a sustainable 'Made in Europe' technology stack.
The preliminary Exploitation strategy presented in Section 2.2 will be further developed in the project, whereby we have designed a structured work package (WP4) dedicated to exploitation, business case development, and IPR management, which will run in parallel to the technical work packages and interact closely with the use case demonstrations and stakeholder engagement activities. Our methodology includes:
Stakeholder and market analysis: mapping relevant application domains, user needs, regulatory requirements, and competitive landscape in the sectors validated by our use cases (food, industrial efficiency & sustainability, environmental monitoring) and beyond.
Value proposition definition: capturing and quantifying the economic, environmental, and operational benefits demonstrated during the pilots to articulate compelling business cases tailored to each target domain.
Business model and roadmap development: defining scalable exploitation pathways (e.g., direct sales, licensing, service-based models) and identifying go-to-market strategies, early adopters, and potential partners.
Intellectual Property management: identifying protectable innovations and securing them via patents, copyrights, or know-how, while ensuring freedom to operate. Intellectual Property will be secured for the novel innovations, and knowledge and expertise will also be encapsulated in models and code.
Standardisation and interoperability contributions: aligning with European and international standards and engaging with standardisation bodies to maximise uptake. PhotonX will build on established standards across spectroscopy, gas sensing, and AI, while addressing the current gaps around multimodal fusion. For spectroscopy, ISO/TC 201 (surface chemical analysis, Raman), ISO/TC 334 (optics and photonics), and ASTM guides (e.g. E1840 for Raman shift standards) provide the baseline. For gas and VOC sensing, relevant frameworks include ISO/TC 158 (analysis of gases), ISO 21258 (optical gas detectors), IEC 60079-29 (gas detection in explosive atmospheres), and CEN/TC 264 (air quality, odour/VOC measurement). For calibration and traceability, ISO 17025 and OIML guidelines apply. On data fusion and AI, PhotonX aligns with ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 42 (AI), CEN-CENELEC JTC 21 (AI in Europe), and ETSI guidelines on securing AI. Interoperability for data sharing will be addressed through alignment with ISO/IEC 19941 (cloud interoperability), FIWARE/IDS data space models, and semantic frameworks to ensure that multimodal outputs can be exchanged across digital platforms, industrial systems, and Digital Twins. Current standards address these modalities separately, but none provide protocols for physics-level or multimodal integration. PhotonX will contribute calibration methods, reference datasets, interoperability models, and validation protocols across MIR, Raman, eNose, SPAD, and multimodal configurations. Through UNE, results will be channelled to ISO, IEC, CEN, and ETSI committees, ensuring interoperability, supporting standardisation of multimodal sensing, and derisking adoption in industrial and societal applications. Activities will prepare for certification, standardisation contributions, as well as compliance pathways to ensure PhotonX is market-ready and competitive in the global landscape.
How the methodology complies with the ‘do no significant harm’ principle: Our project is firmly rooted in the 'do no significant harm' (DNSH) principle, which aims to ensure that projects, innovations, technologies and their deployment do not cause significant harm to the environment, society, or economy. In the face of accelerating climate pressures, societal challenges, and the demands of Europe’s sustainability and digitalisation agendas, PhotonX delivers a configurable, AI-enabled multimodal sensing platform with multi-sector applicability. However, scaling advanced sensing systems does carry environmental and societal risks, such as increased use of rare materials or energy during production. We will explicitly address these risks by designing for energy-efficiency, miniaturisation, and durability to minimise lifecycle impact, as well as exploring circularity and sustainable material sourcing during the project, in full alignment with the DNSH principle. Safe-and-Sustainable-by-Design (SSbD) principles will be used in the development of the photonic and non-optical sensors (WP1) across design, materials selection, energy use, modularity/repairability, and end-of-life, and the multimodal integrations (WP2, WP3) will give opportunities for ‘greater than the sum of the parts’ effects through co-optimisation of modalities.
Feed in from national or international research and innovation activities: PhotonX will mobilise an ecosystem approach (with partner EPIC providing a credible platform) to ensure alignment and long-term impact. The project will actively connect with existing Horizon Europe and Photonics Partnership projects in sensing, multimodal integration, and AI, to exchange knowledge and avoid duplication. Links will be developed with relevant Digital Europe Programme (DEP) initiatives, especially those building European data spaces, AI testing and experimentation facilities, and cybersecurity frameworks, to ensure PhotonX outputs are interoperable and feed directly into Europe’s digital infrastructures. At the national and regional level, partners will leverage ongoing initiatives in photonics, AI, and Industry 4.0 testbeds, as well as clusters and Digital Innovation Hubs, to accelerate exploitation and regional uptake, and ensure PhotonX results are embedded in the broader European strategy for digital transformation, industrial leadership, and technological sovereignty. PhotonX will also seek collaboration with European Technology Platforms (Photonics21, AI, SPIRE/Processes4Planet) and sector-specific alliances (steel, circular plastics, biopharma) to anchor results in industrial roadmaps. Table 8 summarizes a selection of key EU/national/regional R&I activities feeding knowhow, knowledge and results (background) into PhotonX (Task 5.3 will map all relevant projects).
Table 8- Relevant projects and the link with PhotonX
Interdisciplinarity, including the integration of social sciences and humanities: PhotonX is designed as an interdisciplinary effort that combines advanced photonics (ICL/QCL MIR, SERS, SPAD), complementary chemical array sensing, Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, and Information Technologies. Beyond the core technical domains, the project integrates process engineering expertise, standardisation, cocreation facilitation, upskilling, and change management, business development, intellectual property, as well as communication. The integration of social science and humanities (SSH) is critical for ensuring that PhotonX is not only a technical innovation but delivers a technology stake that can be adopted, scaled, and used effectively in real operational environments, addressing barriers that frequently limit digital transformation in industry: workforce readiness, cultural acceptance, process adaptation, and alignment of innovation with operator needs.
The project’s governance model ensures cross-disciplinary cohesion, whereby an experienced Technical Manager (Prof. Dr. Boris Mizaikoff from UULM)  will support the Project Coordinator in integration across WPs, with WP leaders forming a Technical Steering Group that meets quarterly. This is reinforced by regular WP meetings, milestone-based workshops, and shared collaboration tools.
Gender dimension: Human operators of sensing and monitoring systems come from diverse backgrounds and genders. We will ensure that the human–machine interfaces and decision-support tools are designed to be inclusive and accessible to all users. Furthermore, the consortium is committed to fostering gender balance and diversity in the project team, ensuring equal opportunities in participation and leadership. Moreover, we will create inspiring public-facing content to highlight the growing role of women in STEM, photonics, and business, showcasing female leadership within the PhotonX consortium as a visible example of diversity and inclusion driving innovation forward.
Open Science Practices: Open science practices (i.e., an approach based on open cooperative work and systematic sharing of knowledge and tools as early and widely as possible in the process) will be implemented as an integral part of our proposed methodology and for increasing our chances of delivering our objectives, as follows:
Early and open sharing of research: As per Horizon Europe requirements, all publications will be made in open access journals, and we will ensure early sharing of publications (pre-prints) to satisfy open access requirements and to enable a faster way of sharing knowledge via deposit in repositories.
Open access to research data and other related research outputs will be promoted following the principle 'as open as possible, as closed as necessary' and operated in parallel with a robust strategy for ensuring commercial exploitation, protection of personal data or confidentiality/security are not jeopardized.
Research output management: use of lab books and effective (and digitized where possible) documentation procedures and effective packaging of research results.
Measures to ensure reproducibility of research outputs: Mandatory technical standards will be adhered to in order to ensure that scientific information, publications, data and other outputs from our project, as well as the metadata about them, is available for re-use in the long term. This will involve the use of persistent and unique identifiers, of certified repositories that are compliant to the standards of the European Open Science Cloud and in compliance with the FAIR principles for the management of research data produced by projects.
Involving all relevant knowledge actors (including citizens, civil society, and end users) is central to our dissemination and engagement strategy. We aim to raise awareness about the strategic importance of European technological sovereignty and the opportunities that the European Photonics Industry can offer industry, society and our quality of life, and how and cutting-edge photonics, AI, and sensing innovations can benefit industrial efficiency and sustainability, environmental monitoring, food safety, and beyond- supporting the green transition, decarbonisation, reducing waste, creating local jobs, and contributing to economic growth and societal wellbeing.
Data Management and management of other research outputs: Data management is a strategic and enabling element of the PhotonX project, embedded both in the research process and as a critical component of the platform’s architecture. Table 9 provides an overview of how data/research outputs will be managed in line with FAIR principles (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable). A full Data Management Plan (DMP) will be ready by M6 (and be updated as project implementation progresses and when significant changes occur). It will specify what data is generated by the project (purpose of the data collection/generation and its relation to the objectives of the project), whether and how it will be exploited or made accessible for verification and re-use, and how it will be curated and preserved to ensure our data/research outputs are findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable. Beyond compliance, the PhotonX platform will incorporates a dedicated Data Management Framework (DMF) as part of its Data Layer. The DMF governs acquisition, curation, storage, privacy, interoperability, and sharing of heterogeneous multimodal sensing data streams. It ensures that data is trustworthy, high-quality, and ready for hybrid data fusion and intelligent analytics- enabling the actionable insights and real-time decision-making that underpin the platform’s impact. Consistent with FAIR principles, our DMP and DMF will also address other research outputs (e.g., algorithms, software, models), resource allocation, data security, privacy (including GDPR compliance), and ethical considerations. Together, the DMP and DMF ensure that PhotonX not only generates high-value research outcomes but also delivers operational excellence and trustworthiness in real-world deployments.
Table 9- Summary of data management and management of other research outputs
#@CON-MET-CM@# #@COM-PLE-CP@#

2. Impact #@IMP-ACT-IA@#