3.1  Work plan — Work packages, deliverables  
3.1.1. Overall structure of the work plan 
The PHOTONFOOD project 
will be implemented by an 
interdisciplinary consortium of 
academic, authority and 
industry partners covering 1 4 
organizations from eight 
European countries. The 
project duration will be 48 
months and the breakdown of 
the planned work into work 
packages (WPs) is based on 
accomplishing related work, 
rather than on single tasks that 
occur at the same time. 
Therefore, several WPs are 
executed in parallel throughout 
the project. The project consists 
of eight work packages (WPs) (see Fig. 15), where the first WP1 is related to the evaluation of the technology 
acceptance and techno-economical evaluation, four WPs (WP2 – WP5) focused on the photonic technology 
developments and developing advanced data analysis tools and software applications, WP6 will perform 
validation and demonstration of PHOTONFOOD technology , WP7 and WP8 are related to dissemination, 
communication, exploitation and management activities, respectively (Fig. 15). 
The general overview of WPs is provided below, the list of the WPs and a detailed description of each WP are 
provided in Table 3.1a and 3.1b, respectively.  
Assisting WPs: WP1 “Technology acceptance and techno-economical evaluation ” will conduct 
comprehensive study on evaluating of user expectations, experience and technology acceptance of photonic -
based technologies for identifying microbiological and chemical contaminations. WP1 will ensure that 
PHOTONFOOD technology is developed in accordance with user requirements. WP7 “Communication, 
dissemination and exploitation” will perform adequate dissemination and exploitation of PHOTONFOOD 
technology and will be responsible for the communication with the relevant audience. WP8 “Coordination and 
Management” will be responsible for the project coordination and management for the successful 
implementation of all project work activities.  
Technological WPs: Four technological WPs will be responsible for the successful development of 
PHOTONFOOD technology. WP2 “Paper Microfluidics” focuses on the development of extraction /separation 
/ up -concentration technology for separation of analyte markers of microbial and chemical contamination. 
WP2 will be strongly connected to photon-based device developing WPs, WP3 and WP4. WP3 “Novel MIR 
light sources” will focus on the development of cascaded gain materials forming the basis for advanced light 
emitting diode (IC-LEDs) and monolithically tunable laser light sources. WP4 “Modular sensor platform” will 
implement the results of WP3 and will perform development of portable and field-deployable (prototype) MI-
FI and HI-FI analyzers. WP5 “Data analysis and software development” will focus on developing and utilizing 
advanced data analysis tools for the spectral-based detection and identification of microbiological and chemical 
contamination in different food matrices. In addition, WP5 will be focused on developing software application. 
 
Figure 15: Overall structure of the workplan 
 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
48 
 
 
Demonstration WP: WP6 “Demonstration and validation” will focus on demonstrating and validating the 
developed PHOTONFOOD technology and a vision for farm-to-fork sensing in three case studies. In each case 
study, monitoring data acquired by portable photonics-based devices will enable quick on-site risk assessment 
by the end-users at different entry points of the food chains.  
The GANTT chart in Fig. 16 provides an overview of all work package’s tasks and includes the milestones, 
validation phases and meetings (Table 3.2a). 
Table 3.1a: List of work packages (WPs) 
WP WP Title Lead Part. 
No 
Lead Participant 
Short Name 
Person-
Months 
Start 
Month 
End 
Month 
1 Technology acceptance and technical-economic 
evaluation 5 NEBIH 56.5 1 46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16: GANTT chart providing an overview over the timing of the project 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
49 
 
2 Paper microfluids 4 WU 75 1 48 
3 Novel MIR light sources 6 NP 81 1 30 
4 Modular MIR sensing platform  2 UULM 75 1 30 
5 Data analysis and software development 1 NMBU 71 1 48 
6 Demonstration and validation  3 BOKU 94.5 1 48 
7 Communication, dissemination and exploitation  9 accelCH 54 1 48 
8 Coordination and management 1 NMBU 28 1 48 
  Total person- months 535   
  
Table 3.1b: Work package description.  
WP number 1 Start M1 – End M48 NEBIH 
WP title Technology acceptance and techno-economic evaluation 
Participant no. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name of 
participant 
NMBU 
UULM 
  BOKU 
WU 
NEBIH 
NP 
ROMER 
IRIS 
accelCH 
BIGH 
Seeberger 
BAMA 
HS 
Person-months 13 2 3 3 31 2 0.5 1 - - 0.5. 0.5 - 
Objective: To conduct comprehensive research on user expectations, user experience and technology 
acceptance for a portable, easy-to-use, broadly adaptable photonics device. The specific objectives are:  
• Identify relevant stakeholders, explore user requirements and expectations towards the innovative multi -
purpose photonic sensor solution. 
• Organize the collection of user experience during the validation and demonstration process in WP6.  
• Conduct comparative cost assessment for the MI-FI and HI-FI devices and reference methods considering 
realistic conditions. 
• Assess user experience and technology acceptance among target users and stakeholders. 
Task 1.1 Stakeholder expectations and user requirements survey  (M1-M42) (lead partner: NMBU; 
participants: BOKU, ROMER, NEBIH, Seeberger, BAMA, WU). Since the exact apparatus of the portable 
PHOTONFOOD platform cannot be fully defined before the beginning of the project, we will follow an agile 
approach to user requirements. A kick-off workshop involving (a) the PHOTONFOOD WP leaders and (b) 
representatives of the prospective user organisations involved in the project ( ROMER, NEBIH, Seeberger) 
will be organised at the beginning of the project (M1) to define a questionnaire for a stakeholder survey. The 
stakeholder survey will consist of an online questionnaire and a structured follow-up telephone interview. It 
will be conducted in Austria, Germany, Hungary, the Netherlands and Norway, covering 15 organisations 
per country from different levels of the food chain (3 from agriculture, 3 processors, 3 retailers, 4 labs and 2 
border inspection points). At the project kick-off meeting, the PHOTONFOOD task leaders will develop an 
initial architecture envisioning. The process will then be iterated throughout the lifetime of the project on an 
annual basis. The component-specific requirements will be continuously updated within the tasks responsible 
for component development (WP2 to WP5). The system -level and platform -level requirements will be 
updated at workshops held during the annual project meetings in M8, M18, M25 and M35. Based on the 
stakeholder and user requirements, deliverable D1.1: Report on stakeholder and user requirements (M24) 
will be compiled. 
Task 1.2 Collection and analysis of technical and user experience during validation and demonstration 
(M24-M34) (lead partner: NEBIH; participants: BOKU, NMBU, ROMER, Seeberger, BAMA). During the 
demonstration phase (when WP6 is active), system -level and platform -level requirements and actual 
experience will be collected on a continuous basis in close collaboration between the members of the WP6 
team and the users and stakeholders involved in the testing and validation. The parameters measured in WP1 
during the validation phase of the innovative photonic device (and in parallel with the reference methods ) 
will include: time requirements, cost requirements, level of skill needed for operation, ergonomics, and user 
experience. User experience data will be gathered from the three main user groups involved in the 
demonstration activities (industry, retail and food inspectio n services), using qualitative (observations and 
interviews) and quantitative methods (user surveys). A standard usability framework model will be adopted 
(UTAUT: Unified theory of acceptance and use of technology) which allows a highly structured analysis of 
such mixed -methods data. The experiences will be analysed in a systematic way, presented to the WPs 
engaged in technology development (WP2 to WP5). 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
50 
 
Task 1.3 Cost assessment (M24-M34) (lead partner: ROMER; participants: BOKU, NEBIH, NMBU, 
Seeberger). Based on the analysis of the cost elements recorded during the demonstration phase in Task 1.2, 
a comparative unit cost assessment will be conducted against the currently available reference methods. This 
part is of critical importance for the feasibility of the whole technology development. Historical data will be 
used to judge cost reduction effect of production scaling up, but the initial costs should remain within a 
reasonable threshold (the unit cost of one sample should remain under 3 € for mycotoxin testing even with 
the prototype). The calculation will include a Monte Carlo simulation of cost schemes for the IPD and the 
best available reference method. Results of this task will be discussed with the WP leaders dealing with 
technology development (WP2 to WP5).  
Task 1.4 Technology acceptance and market potential (M36-M48) (lead partner: NMBU; participants: 
NEBIH, ROMER, WU). In the final task of WP1, the technology acceptance and future market potential will 
be assessed in key customer segments. Like in the previous tasks, a combination of online questionnaires and 
telephone follow-up interviews will be used for data collection. The target respondents will include: (a) senior 
executives in the industry, commodity distribution and retail who have overall responsibility for quality and 
safety in their respective organizations, and (b) senior representatives of food safety authorities with overall 
responsibility for standards and detection methods. The target sectors will not only include the value chains 
covered in the demonstration in WP6 but also other value chains where related quality and safety assessment 
problems occur. This will enable us to assess the further market and business development potential of the 
PHOTONFOOD technologies in other value chains . Key assessment indicators will include technology 
acceptance, customer expectations, upskilling/training requirements, probability of adoption and willingness 
to pay. Again, we will combine qualitative and quantitative methodologies in the assessment.  
Role of partners: NEBIH will be leading this WP and is responsible for conducting a stakeholder survey in 
Hungary, collecting and analysing user experience, supporting the cost assessment and contributing to the 
assessment of technology acceptance. NMBU will be responsible for conducting the same activ ities in 
Norway, and will lead the assessment of technology acceptance and market potential. ROMER will be 
responsible for leading the cost assessment and will contribute to the collection of user requirements and 
experience and will support the assessment of market potential. BOKU will be responsible for conducting a 
stakeholder survey in Austria and will contribute to the collection of user requirements and experience, also 
to the cost assessment task. Seeberger and BAMA will contribute to the collection of user requirements and 
experience, and Seeberger will also play a part in the cost assessment task. NP, IRIS, WU and UULM will 
provide technical and cost related information on the photonic devices, as well as ensuring the efficient 
information flow and feedback loop between WP1 and the technology WPs (WP2 to WP5) through the whole 
project. Furthermore, UULM will be responsible for conducting a stakeholder survey in Germany, and WU 
in the Netherlands. 
Deliverables: D1.1 Report on stakeholder and user requirements (NMBU, M24) ; D1.2 Overview on 
technical and user experiences ( NEBIH, M40) ; D1.3 Report on cost assessment ( ROMER, M36) ; D1.4 
Overview on final user requirements, technology acceptance and market potential (NMBU, M48) 
 
WP number 2 Start M1 – End M48 WU 
WP title Paper microfluids 
Participant no. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name of 
participant 
NMBU 
UULM 
BOKU 
WU 
NEBIH 
NP 
ROMER 
IRIS 
accelCH 
BIGH 
 
Seeberger 
BAMA 
HS 
Person-months 4 8 3 55 3 - - 2 - - - - - 
Objective: To develop an integrated sample handling tool that will allow the user-friendly analysis of food 
contaminants using MIR detection. The specific objectives are:  
• To develop paper microfluidic sampling, extraction and pre-treatment for food contaminants from hard 
and soft commodities.  
• To develop a functionalized cartridge for the paper microfluidic devices that allows robust and user -
friendly interfacing with spectroscopic detection. 
Task 2.1 Paper microfluidic sampling and extraction (M1-M34) (lead partner: WU, participants: NMBU, 
UULM, BOKU, NEBIH, IRIS ). In this task, solutions will be developed for allowing the entire sample -
handling chain to be executed not only on-site, but by non-experts as well. This requires first of all a strategy 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
51 
 
towards the acquisition of sample. In the case of hard samples, such as nuts, an extract needs to be prepared. 
In previous work (FoodSmartphone), an extraction module was developed for consumer testing in a cookie 
matrix. Further development in this WP wil l be required to adapt such a strategy towards different 
commodities. A dip -stick type sampler will then be developed to bring the sample onto the paper 
microfluidic device. On the other hand, when soft or liquid samples are tested, a different sampling strategy 
is required, where a swab type sampler can be used, which then directly feeds into the paper microfluidic 
device. To improve the extraction efficiency of the contaminants, while reducing the co -extraction of 
unwanted matrix constituents, the cellulo se fibers can be chemically modified to allow specific chemical 
interaction with those contaminants. 
Task 2.2 Paper microfluidic pre-treatment/preconcentration (M9-M48) (lead partner: WU, participants: 
NMBU, UULM, BOKU, NEBIH, IRIS). Once the contaminants are extracted from their matrix through the 
approaches in task 2.1, further purification and concentration will be required before MIR spectroscopic 
analysis. In order to achieve selective purification, several routes will be considered. First ly, the use of 
immunochemistry will be explored.  Combining immunocapture with paper microfluidic functionality is an 
attractive approach, as the location for the preconcentration can be precisely chosen to match the required 
dimensions for readout. Secondly, the use of chemical surface modification will be further explored. Paper 
can readily be modified with a plethora of functional groups, which allows for solid -phase extraction on 
paper. While this is less specific than immunocapture, it does allow for the devices to be more easily adapted 
for different applications. Thirdly, an innovative method in paper microfluidics will be developed through 
adapting a liquid-liquid extraction on a paper-based platform, as demonstrated in the initial work published 
by members of the consortium43. Through application of multilayered paper microfluidic devices, which are 
specifically modified, immiscible solvents can be preferentially retained in selected layers, which allows for 
the construction of a multilayered liquid -liquid extra ction system 43. At the end of this task, the most 
appropriate strategy will be selected for further developments in PHOTONFOOD.  
Task 2.3 Integration and interfacing with 3D printing (M17-M48) (lead partner: WU, participants: 
NMBU, UULM, BOKU, NEBIH, IRI S). While it is crucial for any truly user -friendly on-site analysis to 
address both sample extraction and enrichment, it is equally important to consider operational simplicity 
and system integration. Therefore, this task focuses on the design and development of a cartridge that will 
contain all the elements developed in tasks 2.1 and 2.2. Here, 3D printing is exceptionally useful since it 
allows very fast prototyping, leading to iterative design of devices in a short period of time. Moreover, it 
will facilitate complex paper microfluidic device layout, such as stacking of several layers for the multilayer 
liquid-liquid extraction. In addition, t he cartridge will shield vulnerable parts of the device, by exposing 
only the sample acquisition and read-out parts of the device. This is beneficial since it designates these parts 
as such for the end-users. Finally, protocols for operational simplicity and clarity will be delivered. 
Role of partners:  WU will be leading this work package and is responsible for the realization of the 
integrated sample handling tool. BOKU will provide assistance for developing appropriate sample pre -
treatment. NMBU and IRIS will support the data acquisition and analysis. UULM will support the coupling 
of the sampling device with spectroscopic analysis.  NEBIH will participate in the evaluation of the user 
acceptance of the paper-based microfluidics.  
Deliverables: D 2.1 Deliverable report on paper microfluidic sampling, extraction and selective purification 
approaches for one target contaminant (DON) in a target commodity (wheat) (WU, M24); D 2.2 Deliverable 
report on the development of an interface between a fully integrated paper  microfluidic device and optical 
components (WU, M42 ); D 2.3 Diversification of approach to at least a second target contaminant in a 
second soft sample commodity finalized (WU, M48). 
 
WP number 3 Start M1 – End M30 NP 
WP title Novel MIR light sources 
Participant no. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name of 
participant 
NMBU 
UULM 
BOKU 
WU 
NEBIH 
NP 
ROMER 
IRIS 
accelCH 
BIGH 
Seeberger 
BAMA 
HS 
Person-months 4 10 - - - 65 - 2 - - - - - 
Objective: To develop dedicated interband cascade (IC) and quantum cascade (QC) gain materials forming 
the basis for advanced light emitting diode ( IC-LEDs) and monolithically tunable laser light sources. 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
52 
 
Specifically, low-cost MIR LEDs will be developed emitting in the 1500 -1800 cm-1 spectral window for 
detecting bio contaminants in a medium-fidelity (MI-FI) sensing device, whereas monolithic widely tunable 
lasers will be implemented in a high-fidelity (HI-FI) analyzer based on the same spectral range. The specific 
objectives are:  
• To develop tunable ICL/QCL MIR lasers for high precision measurements.  
• To develop IC-LED light sources for low cost contamination detection. 
Task 3.1 Growth of cascaded epitaxy for low cost MIR ILEDs and high-performance tunable lasers 
(M1-M24) (lead partner: NP, participants: UULM, IRIS) 
In this task , the required cascaded layer structures for IC-LEDs and cascaded tunable MIR lasers will be 
realized. In this context, dedicated band structure engineering is performed by means of specialized solvers 
of the Schrödinger equation using e.g. k∙p methods. This band structure design is complemented by means 
of optical simulations of the resulting layer stacks with respect to the actual devices performance. Based on 
these simulations, and based on the input from WP1 and WP4, it will be decided if either interband cascade 
(ICL) or quantum cascade laser (QCL) structures are more suitable for the realization of the high performance 
monolithic tunable laser devices. The epitaxially grown multilayer structures will be routinely characterized 
by high-resolution X-ray diffraction, secondary ion mass spectroscopy and secondary electron microscopy 
images. Based on this analysis, the growth parameters will  be optimized to fabricate high quality material 
that is required for the cascaded devices. In order to aid the design and to achieve the required broad band 
emission in the 1500-1800 cm-1 spectral range, gain measurements will be performed to iteratively optimize 
the performance of the epitaxy. Broad area lasers and related test structures will be processed to be able to 
rapidly forecast the device performance. One of the main objectives in this context will be the detailed band 
structure analysis versus the layer structure modifications to achieve fast progress.  
Task 3.2 MIR IC-LED fabrication for MI-FI analyzers (M1-28) (lead partner: NP, participants: UULM, 
NMBU) 
Task 3.2 is dedicated to the design and realization of low-cost IC-LEDs in the 1500-1800 cm-1 spectral region. 
This task  is the main focus within this work  package due to the intrinsic capabilities of scaling up the 
technology to the consumer market. Based on the results and layer structures from Task 3.1, optical 
simulations will be performed to investigate an optimal chip design and the simulations will be iteratively 
up-dated according to the obtained results. One key challenge will be to maximize the out -coupling of the 
light generated in the active zone which is confined to the ch ip by total internal reflection due to the high 
refractive index of the semiconductor material. In this context, specific out -coupling structures such as 
coatings, micro lenses and surface treatment schemes will be investigated and iteratively optimized. The chip 
layout will be transferred into the epitaxial material by means of suitable lithography, dielectric - and metal-
layer deposition and removal steps. The readily processed chips will be pre-characterized on wafer level prior 
to singulation. In order t o be used in a sensor, the IC -LED chips have to be appropriately packaged in a 
housing suitable for low-cost, high volume applications. Therefore, a SMD type of package is the first choice. 
Thermal simulations will be made for ensuring the best possible heat management of the chips and the SMD 
package to en able superior performance under application conditions. Application grade IC-LEDs will be 
characterized and delivered to WP4 for the integration into the MI-FI sensor. Special care will be taken with 
respect to the scalability of all steps, in particular the device characterization to ensure low cost devices. 
Lifetime and environmental tests that proof the robustness under operation conditions will complete the task. 
Task 3.3 MIR tunable laser fabrication for HI -FI analyzers (M4-M30) (lead partner: NP , participants: 
UULM, NMBU). The initial simulations results and the decision regarding the optimal epitaxy structure 
(interband or quantum cascade respectively) from Task 3.1 will be the sta rting point of this task. Further 
optical simulations will be performed to define the initial chip design that enables the required tuning range 
in the 1500-1800 cm-1 spectral range. Suitable semiconductor structuring processes, such as optical and high 
precision electron beam lithography processing steps, will be investigated and iteratively optimized to realize 
the tunable monolithic lasers in combination with dielectric - and metal-layer deposition and removal steps. 
An extremely th orough optical characte rization with respect to the achievable wavelength and side -mode 
suppression ratios at the pre-defined operation points will be required. This is due to the nature of the device 
design, based on the Vernier effect, that leads to a high degree of freedom in terms of laser operation. Those 
data will be analyzed in depth and fed back to the next iteration of chip design and processing. The integration 
of the lasers in a suitable housing and the definition of suitable electronics will complete the task.  
Role of partners: NP will be leading this work package and is responsible for the realization of the IC-LED 
light source of the MI-FI device as well as the monolithic tunable MIR laser based on a cascaded laser scheme 
for the HI-FI device. UULM will contribute to the specifications and the assessment of the performance data 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
53 
 
of the light sources. NMBU will participate in the evaluation of the signal achieved by the light sources with 
respect to the signal to noise ratio required. 
Deliverables: D3.1 Advanced IC-LEDs hardware ready for MI-FI integration (hardware, report) (NP, 
M18); D3.2 Monolithic tunable hardware ready for HI-FI integration (hardware, report) (NP, M26)  
 
WP number 4 Start M1 – End M30 UULM 
WP title Modular sensor solution 
Participant no. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name of 
participant 
NMBU 
UULM 
BOKU 
WU 
NEBIH 
NP 
ROMER 
IRIS 
accelCH 
BIGH 
Seeberger 
BAMA 
HS 
Person-months 10 33 3 12 5 5 - 7 - - - - - 
Objectives: To develop a portable and field-deployable (prototype) MI-FI and HI-FI analyzers combining 
the MIR LEDs developed in WP 3 with single -bounce diamond ATR elements, a grating, and a line array 
detector (MI -FI device), and the ICL/QCL light source developed in  WP3 with advanced thin -film 
nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) waveguides and a single-element detector (HI-FI device) for in-field fungal 
infection analysis. The specific objectives are:  
• To prototype a HI-FI MIR photonic sensing device and integrate ICL/QCL light sources.  
• To prototype MI-FI MIR photonic sensing devices and integrate MIR IC-LED light sources. 
Task 4.1 Thin-film nanocrystalline diamond waveguides (M1-M18) (lead partner: UULM; participants: 
NP). Task 4.1. is focused on the development of thin -film NCD chips (5x10  mm; actual waveguide 
thickness: 10-25 µm) readily fitting the MIR-GuideR ATR sensing system. The chips will be characterized 
and optimized in iterative cycles for maximum performance (i.e., MIR radiation throughput and intensity of 
the evanescent field). In addition, the MIR-GuideR system will be adapted to accommodate the smart paper 
strip developed in WP 2 for analyzing enriched/separated samples (i.e., ATR clip -on system pressing the 
detection zone of the paper strip (i.e., few mm2) onto the surface of the NCD chip). 
Task 4.2 MI-FI analyzer based on MIR LEDs (M1-M30) (lead partner: UULM; participants: NP, NMBU, 
IRIS, BOKU, WU, NEBIH). In Task 4.2, the hand-held low-cost MI-FI analyzer platform will be designed, 
developed, and prototyped, The device will comprise a 3D -printed housing accommodating the MIR  IC-
LED developed in W P 3, a dispersion grating (plastic w/gold coating; potentially 3D printed), and a line 
array detector. If a line array detector with a surface-deposited gradient filter will be used (e.g., Pyreos), the 
dispersion grating will be replaced with appropriate beam-shaping optics (3D printed; gold -coated plastic 
optics). The sensing interface will be  established via a hemispherical or prismatic diamond ATR crystal. 
Using MIR spectral ray tracing (via software packages SPRAY and SCOUT, M. Theiss Softw are), an 
optimized MI-FI analyzer prototype will be built and tested according to its analytical figures-of-merit and 
via spiked test samples. After optimization, five hand-held MI-FI prototype systems will be fabricated ready 
for field testing during the case studies lined out in WP6, and together with end users. The performance of 
the MI-FI device will also be benchmarked against commercially available near -infrared LED-based low-
cost analyzers (e.g., Consumer Physics) and evaluated for its utility addres sing additional quick -test 
application scenarios. 
Task 4.3 HI -FI analyzer based on tunable MIR QCLs (M1-M24) (lead partner: UULM; participants: 
NP, NMBU, IRIS, BOKU, WU, NEBIH). Task 4.3. is focused on the design, development and optimization 
of a high-resolution HI-FI analyzer integrating tunable monolithic MIR ICL/QCL technology developed in 
WP3, a single element thermoelectrically cooled MCT detector (e.g., Vigo), and the MIR -GuideR ATR 
sensing interface with NCD waveguide chip for direct liquid (extract) analysis or for analyzing smart paper 
strips developed in WP 2. The HI-FI analyzer will be prototyped and performance optimized (i.e., analytical 
figures-of-merit, spiked test samples, etc.). As a final outcome, one portable prototype systems will be made 
available for field testing during the case studies specified in WP 6, and together with end users. 
Role of partners: 
UULM will be leading this work  package and is responsible for the realization of the MI-FI and HI -FI 
devices. NP will provide the light sources. NP will further support the design of the MI-FI and HI-FI devices 
to ensure optimal integration of the light sources and help with the tunable  laser operation. NMBU will 
evaluate the s olutions with respect to data quality. IRIS will support the implementation of the software 
application. WU will help to optimize the photonic solutions for the interface with the microfluidics. NEBIH 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
54 
 
and BOKU will provide the necessary input for ensuring that the photonics solution is prepared for the end 
user.   
Deliverables: D 4.1 Thin-film waveguide-based sensing interface for HI-FI analyzer (UULM, M18); D
4.2 Performance test report for portable HI-FI analyzer (UULM, M30); D 4.3 Performance test report for 
handheld MI-FI analyzer (UULM, M24). 
 
WP number 5 Start M1 – End M48 NMBU 
WP title Data analysis and software development 
Participant no. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name of 
participant 
NMBU 
UULM 
BOKU 
WU 
NEBIH 
NP 
ROMER 
IRIS 
accelCH 
BIGH 
Seeberger 
BAMA 
HS 
Person-months 31 4 2 1 5 - - 28 - - - - - 
Objective: To develop a data analysis strategy for short wavelength range data from MI -FI and HI-FI data 
and to establish a software interface for mobile and laptop for field use. The specific objectives are:  
• To use advanced data analysis to pre-process spectral data and calibrate MI-FI and HI -FI solution for 
detection of microbial and chemical contaminants in food.  
• To provide a user-friendly interface, intuitive decision support tools , data management  and data 
integration strategy. 
Task 5.1 Spectral pre-processing of HI-FI and MI-FI data (M1-M24) (lead partner: NMBU, 
participants: UULM) 
Existing methods for spectral pre-processing take advantage of the availability of a broad spectral range for 
the estimation of baselines and multiplicative effects. Since IC-LED and ICL/QCL sources provide a limited 
bandwidth, the existing methods for the pre-processing have to be further developed and adapted. Our general 
spectral pre-processing strategy consists of the following steps: 1) baseline correction and normalization; 2) 
interferant removal and 3) signal enhancement . The p re-processing reduces c omplexity of classification 
models and results therefore often in more robust models. Model-based pre-processing toolbox developed in 
BioSpec based on Extended Multiplicative Signal Correction (EMSC) will be used for implementing all steps 
including removal of interferant signals from paper-based microfluidics and solvents used for extraction. As 
an alternative route, we will evaluate augmentation of data in combination with deep learning approaches. In 
the on -going MIRACLE project  (see Table 4) , where only a few laser wavelength s are available for 
calibration this approach has turned out to be very powerful. Especially, in cases where limited data sets are 
available, augmentation has turned out to be a powerful approach for calibration when it is used i n 
combination with deep learning approaches developed for spectral data69 
Task 5.2 Classification and calibration models for benchmark data, HI-FI and MI-FI data (M12-M36) 
(lead partner: NMBU, participants: WU, BOKU, UULM).  
At the beginning of the project, broadband MIR spectrum benchmark instrumentation at NMBU and UULM 
will be used to establish benchmark data for calibration and classification model building (Task 6.1). Models 
will be built on the full available spectral range (4000-500 cm-1) and the short spectral range (1800-1500 cm-
1) of the PHOTONFOOD solution. For calibration, samples will be prepared, MIR and reference data will be 
obtained for 100+100 (clean+contaminated) samples for each contaminant. All samples will be measured by 
benchmark MIR instrumentation at NMBU and UULM, and reference analysis will be performed at BOKU 
and NEBIH. Data sets will be augmented by techniques from the field of deep learning according to the same 
lines as in the on-going MIRACLE project (see Table 4). Calibration models using our BioSpec toolbox of 
machine learning techniques involving a broad range of methods such as PLS -DA, RF, SVM, ANN and 
DCNN will be established to calibrate against threshold values used for contaminants , while PLS-R, RF, 
ANN and DCNN will be used to calibrate  against the exact values to detect the amount of contamination . 
The obtained data will be used as a benchmark in the development of the HI -FI and MI-FI data. When the 
HI-FI and MI-FI instrumentation is ready, the same samples that were used to establish benchmark data and 
calibration models will be probed by HI -FI and MI -FI instrumentation. The obtained data will be used to 
establish calibration and classification models for HI -FI and MI -FI data, and to compare with benchmark  
data. 
Task 5.3 Model validation and demonstration (M36-M48) (lead partner: NMBU, participants: BOKU, 
UULM, NEBIH). Models from Task 5.2 established on the short wavelength range will be validated in the 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
55 
 
field demonstration involving relevant stakeholders. The models will also be validated by a blind test set and 
further refined and optimized in order to accommodate the use of the IC-LED and ICL/QCL spectral data.  
Task 5.4 Software application development and data management  (M12-M48) (lead partner: IRIS, 
participants: NMBU, WU, BOKU, UULM). During this task, IRIS will design and build a digital Global 
Control System (GCS) to allow the processing of the data from th e sensors and its integration with the data 
analysis models developed in the first part of this WP. Early in the project a data management plan will be 
developed (D8.7 M6). The GCS will centralize the data management. It will comprise the hardware to host 
data acquisition, data processing and data management, and a friendly user interface to easily manage the 
PHOTONFOOD platform. A decision support tool, with specific user-oriented modules to support decisions 
on-site will be developed. It will be accessible over the web and mobile devices, such as smartphones and 
tablets. The hardware will consist of two main layers: an upper layer containing the processors and all the 
necessary peripherals (data storage units, terminals, external connectivity), and a lower layer comprising the 
communication with the analyser modules. Communications will take place through data buses. These will 
be mainly wireless whenever possible and wired when necessary. The GCS will have real -time capabilities 
and will be able t o manage huge amounts of data. It will be able to integrate data delivered in standard 
industrial format s. The GCS will have a layered structure, and each layer will be accessible from the 
Graphical User Interface through the terminals. Firstly, Data Acqui sition layer, which is the closest to the 
hardware, will manage the acquisition of data, as well as protocols, fault detection and hardware 
compatibilities. The valid acquired data will be stored in the general database to be accessible for higher 
layers. Secondly, the Data Processing Layer, which will convert the raw data into calibrated and filtered valid 
data to feed the calibration models developed in previous tasks. Finally, the Data Mining Layer, the highest 
data management layer, will produce the results of data analysis and provide decision support. The General 
Database will be designed and built to be as flexible and robust as possible, as compatible with multivariate 
nature of the data and real -time access as possible. The calibration models will h ave the capability to be 
updated with the feedback provided by the advanced AI algorithm executed in the cloud platform. The cloud 
application will be accessible over the web and mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets. For the local 
application, there will be two versions: computer and mobile. 
Task 5.5 Definition of the Cloud Architecture and communication with Food Trust™ (M36-M48) (lead 
partner: IRIS, participants: NMBU, UULM, advisory role for IBM). User requirements for the cloud platform 
will be defined. Different methodologies will be applied to set the user requirements, specifications, features, 
functionalities and the desired user experience. An in-depth analysis of existing technologies will be carried 
out to assess which are the most suitable ones to match the defined requirements. The in -depth architecture 
will be defined: backend, middleware, database, intelligent layer structures, etc. It will be a priority for the 
architecture to be flexibl e in terms of single -tenant or multi -tenant deployments, to guarantee its high 
performance to run intelligence layers. For that purpose, it will be designed how to tackle the envisaged 
computational workload and the interactions of the different modules. A Quality Analysis (QA) methodology 
will be in place (in keeping with software quality management: ISO 9126 -3 and the subsequent ISO 
25000:2005 quality model) to ensure consistent and standardized implementation. Communication with Food 
Trust™ platform for data integration will be ensured.  
Role of partners:  NMBU will be leading this work package and will be responsible for the algorithm 
development for the data pre -processing and the model building. IRIS will be responsible for the software 
development. BOKU and NEBIH will be involved providing reference analysis. IBM be involved in the 
development a strategy for transferring data into platforms such as the block chain-based IBM Food Trust™ 
data platform . UULM will assist in the interpretation of instrumental effects in the spectra and will be 
involved in activities related to data modelling and validation. WU will be participating in model 
development and software development by providing their feedback. 
Deliverables: D 5.1 Pre-processing algorithms for HI-FI and MI-FI spectra established. (NMBU, M36); D
5.2 Classification and calibration models for MI-FI and HI-FI instruments ready for fungi and mycotoxins in 
all matrices (NMBU, M36); D 5.3 MI-FI and HI-FI calibration models established and validated (NMBU, 
M48); D5.4 Digital GCS technical manual report describing the installation at hardware level and architecture 
used to develop the software  (IRIS, M36) ; D5.5 Digital GCS user manual report analysing the overall 
functionalities of the software platform, capabilities, buttons, user interfaces, etc. (IRIS, M40) 
 
WP number 6 Start M1 – End M48 BOKU 
WP title Demonstration and validation 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
56 
 
Participant no. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name of 
participant 
NMBU 
UULM 
BOKU 
WU 
NEBIH 
NP 
ROMER 
IRIS 
accelCH 
BIGH 
Seeberger 
BAMA 
HS 
Person-months 19 12 24 1 22 - 0.5 7 - 8 0.5 0.5 - 
Objective: To conduct 3 case studies where the project concept and vision for farm -to-fork sensing are 
implemented and demonstrated. In each case study, monitoring data acquired by portable photonics -based 
devices will enable quick on-site risk assessment by the end-users at different entry points of the food chains. 
The specific objectives are:  
• Validation: Validate the developed solution considering the user -expectations explored in WP1 by 
comparing the performance characteristics of the innovative photonic devices to reference methods.  
• Demonstration: Test the innovative photonic solution via on-site operation through the 3 case studies, 
which includes the measurement of mycotoxins and presence of fungi in (i) wheat and (ii) peanuts, also 
the examination of (iii) levels of pesticide, antibiotics and fungi in products from aquaponics. 
• Give feedback to WP1 about the usability of the IPD in real settings and to the technology developers 
(WP2-5) about the modifications that are possibly needed based on the demonstration activities. 
Task 6.1 Building the spectral database (M1-24) (lead partner: NMBU, BOKU, participants: NEBIH, 
Seeberger, BIGH, WU). A database of spectra will be built for input to the model described in Task 5.1 and 
5.2. In order to feed the spectral library with data and to validate our methods in a laboratory -based 
environment, well defined commodities will be provided by NEBIH, Seeberger and BIGH. It is important 
to note that separate sets of spectra are necessary for each specific matrix since MIR spectra of the latter are 
significantly different. Separate spectral databases for contaminated and clean samples are available for each 
matrix composed of nuts (such as peanuts, hazelnuts, and almonds), dried fruits, wheat and vegetables. It is 
critical that the ensemble of spectra is representative of the matrix and contamination. It is also critical that 
a large enough data set of clean and contaminated samples is available for training and testing of the 
chemometric model. An estimated 100+100 (clean + contaminated) samples need to be available for the 
creation of training and test sets in each matrix. With three measurement replicates, we will acquire approx. 
600+600 spectra for each instrument (HI -FI, MI-FI, and benchtop benchmark instrumentation at NMBU 
and UULM). The final number depends on the repeatability of spectral measurements.  
Task 6.2 Acquisition of reference data (M24-30) (lead partner: BOKU, participants: NEBIH, Seeberger, 
BIGH). For optimization and validation purposes, as well as for the preparation of matrix -calibrants of the 
developed flexible spectroscopic assays, 50 naturally contaminated samples for each matrix group will be 
analyzed by fully validated LC and LC -MS/MS methods developed by NEBIH and BOKU, respectively. 
These reference measures will be complemented by the determination of the concentration-related scope of 
the method. Therefore, an additional amount of 1 00 inoculated samples will be blended with non -
contaminated sample material in order to prepare 10 different concentration levels. As non -contaminated 
sample material, bulk samples of 5-10 kg each of 3 different lots of the commodities wheat and peanuts will 
be used and mixed with the contaminated material to the appropriate concentration levels. Naturally 
contaminated, inoculated and non -contaminated sample material including different lots will be provided 
by NEBIH, Seeberger and BIGH. 
Task 6.3 Performance and evaluation of a ring trial (interlaboratory comparison study) (M1-42) (lead 
partner: BOKU, participants: NEBIH, ROMER, UULM, NMBU ). The trueness and the comparability of 
the measurement results obtained for mycotoxins in the naturally contaminated materials will additionally 
be ensured through the conduction of a ring -trial (interlaboratory comparison study) organized by BOKU. 
Natural contaminated sample material for each commodity will be tested by 8 different laboratories (BOKU, 
NEBIH, ROMER, UULM, NMBU) and finally subjected to a statistical evaluation. By comparing identical 
sample materials with different methods, a more accurate evaluation will be obtained regarding the 
measurement uncertainty in general , as well as  the measurement quality of the new developed flexible 
spectroscopic assay in detail. 
Task 6.4 On-site demonstration exercise at the end user level (M36-42) (lead partne r: NEBIH , 
participants: BOKU, Seeberger, BIGH, BAMA). In order to  test the applicability of the innovative and 
cross-validated spectroscopic approaches at end user level, for both farmers and official test laboratories, 
on-site measurements will be conducted. A prototype innovative photonic solution will be deployed to 
NEBIH, Seeberger, BIGH an BAMA. 1) At least 50 naturally contaminated samples for each commodity at 
different contamination levels from different sectors of the food chain (wheat producing farms, food 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
57 
 
processors and retailers), will be collected by NEBIH a nd will be simultaneously examined by innovative 
photonic solution and the reference method used for official inspections under normal laboratory conditions 
at the authority. 2) Seeberger and BAMA will use the device for mycotoxin monitoring trial in a variety of 
nuts (peanut, walnut and almond). In addition, BAMA will use the device for monitoring trial in a variety 
of vegetables. 3) The objective of the demonstration at BIGH is to develop an easy -to-use, flexible, and 
broadly adaptable versatile analytic tool for mycotoxin, fungi and oomycetes detection that is also capable 
to analyse antibiotics and pesticide residues in end products. Technical supervision of the demonstration 
procedures will be provided by BOKU. Reference analyses for the collected samples will be carried out by 
BOKU and NEBIH. 
Task 6.5 Customers feedback (M42-48) (lead partner: BOKU, participants: NEBIH, ROMER, Seeberger, 
BAMA). After the devices have undergone a practicability test by the end users, this knowledge will be  
incorporated in order to improve the terminal devices. Feedback about the technological feasibility will be 
obtained in form of a questionnaire and in form of direct communication with the end users. The best suited 
approach, including a full validation r eport (or a combination of approaches) and suitable analytical 
protocols, will be brought to the attention of various end users along the different food chains and to official 
control labs throughout the EU via seminars, on -site customer exercises, publica tions and direct 
communication with DG Health.  
 
Role of partners:  The spectral database for the contaminant/commodities combinations will be built by 
NMBU in cooperation with NEBIH and Seeberger. BOKU will organize the validation studies. NEBIH will 
take care of the demonstration exercise assisted by Seeberger, BIGH  and BAMA, and will be responsible 
for the acquisition of reference data as integral part for the validation of the flexible spectroscopic assays. 
BOKU, NMBU and associated partner ROMER will assist NEBIH and will coordinate the conduction of a 
ring trial (interlaboratory comparison study) in order to verify the comparability of the measurement results. 
BOKU will additionally provide LC -MS/MS reference data and participate in on -site demonstration 
exercises. NEBIH will finally initiate and coordinate a feedback loop between customers and producer in 
cooperation with ROMER, Seeberger and BAMA. UULM, WU and IRIS will participate in the validation 
and demonstration to make sure that possible technical issues can be solved on site.    
Deliverables: D6.1 Report on preliminary comparability study (BOKU,M12); D6.2 Report on completed 
validation studies (BOKU, M42); D6.3 Report on completed demonstration exercises (NEBIH, M46); D6.4 
Evaluation of collected feedback data (report) (NEBIH, M4 8); D6.5 Report on ring trial  (interlaboratory 
comparison study) (BOKU, M42) 
 
WP number 7 Start M1 – End M48 accelCH 
WP title Communication, dissemination and exploitation 
Participant no. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name of 
participant 
NMBU 
UULM 
BOKU 
WU 
NEBIH 
NP 
ROMER 
IRIS 
accelCH 
BIGH 
Seeberger 
BAMA 
HS 
Person-months 7 1 1 1 9 3 0.5 2 20 0.5 0.5 0.5 8 
Objective: To communicate about the project, raise awareness on food safety, and to disseminate results 
through publications, presentations and focused training. The specific objectives are:  
• Define and plan strategy and measures in multi-stakeholders communication and dissemination plan.  
• Deliver cross-media communication and public engagement activities to raise awareness about 
PHOTONFOOD and food safety in society.  
• Disseminate the research and study results to the scientific community and the food industry.  
• Provide guidelines and recommendations to decision- and policy-makers regarding food safety.  
• Develop a plan for the future use of the PHOTONFOOD platform and the individual technologies and a 
roadmap for exploitation. 
Task 7.1 Communication and Dissemination plan (M1-M12) (lead partner: accelCH, participants: all). 
The task will focus on setting up a communication and dissem ination plan (CDP) with the support of all 
partners. The CDP will be also discussed with members of the advisory board. We will develop an outline 
key strategy for project dissemination and communications, for both internal (project partners) and external 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
58 
 
stakeholders. Further, we will identify dissemination tools and channels, defin e the target audience and 
evaluate the implementation and impact of activities and update the CDP. 
Task 7.2 Cross-media communication to raise awareness in society (M1-M48) (lead partner: accelCH, 
participants: all). The following communication activities will be performed: (1). Project website: Set up 
and maintain the PHOTONFOOD website including 1) a web -based information resource for different 
target-groups, 2) integrated use of different media (e.g. blog, infographic) to enhance the outreach to society 
and, 3) an exhaustive list of the project results including all publications and presentation contributions. (2) 
Communication material: Digital and print material to support the outreach of the PHOTONFOOD project 
through existing and newly established networks will be developed. This will inclu de a project flyer 
providing basic information (print and digital version), a poster and a roll-up for use at events organised by 
the partners or hosted by other relevant organisations to promote the project. All materials will follow the 
PHOTONFOOD design  guidelines including the logo and visual elements to ensure a coherent style 
throughout all materials and channels. (3) Audio/visual material: Create interactive digital audio/visual 
material for is easy use and re -sharing through social media channels. T his will include infographics to 
present complex information in a simple way to the general public as well as videos presenting the project 
activities and results including interviews with key partners will be created and distributed via the project 
website, social media channels and existing partner networks. (4) Press releases and articles: Publish press 
releases oriented towards the food industry and for mass media (general public) on outcomes from the 
project. In close collaboration with partner’s media  groups monitor and manage public relations related to 
the project and organise any requests for further information, statements and interviews.  
Task 7.3 Disseminate research results to expert stakeholder groups (M13-M48) (lead partner: NMBU, 
participants: academic partners). The dissemination of the research results will be performed by using the 
following dissemination instruments: (1) Peer-reviewed publications:  PHOTONFOOD partners will 
publish their findings and research advancements in high impact peer-reviewed journals, such as Journal of 
Biophotonics, Applied Spectroscopy , and Food Control. All partners are committed to following the 
Guidelines on Open Access to Scientific Publications and Research Data in Horizon 2020  that are in line 
with current trends in IP management and publication, and will establish a database of relevant journals for 
scientific dissemination. (2) Scientific conferences and presentations:  All partners will present their 
findings through oral presentations, posters and conference papers at European and international scientific 
conferences, such as SciX, SPEC, Food Safety, PITTCON, and SPIE Photonics Europe. (3) Cluster event: 
accelCH will organise a cluster event in the first project year together with other projects funded under the 
ICT-37-2020 call to exchange knowledge and create synergies on how to handle key issues relevant for all 
projects to coordinate research developments. (4) Training: NEBIH, NP, WU and BOKU will integrate 
PHOTONFOOD results into training materials for already established training events that they organise for 
students on safety in the food chain  and photonic technology. This will include training through summer 
and winter schools, lab settings and integration into established bachelor and master programmes. (5) Policy 
brief: NEBIH will create a short, to the point policy brief based on outcomes from WP6 (validation). These 
will be directed towards policy makers or stakeholders who can influence policy. The aim is to highlight the 
relevance and benefits of the new PHOTONFOOD approach and its related research as well as offer 
recommendations for change to reduce regulatory barriers and identify drivers for the uptake of the 
PHOTONFOOD solutions to improve food safety.(6) White paper: NEBIH will develop a white paper in 
the final year on “photonics -based novel technologies for food safety applications’’ in the final year to 
provide recommendations to be considered for future guidelines and international regulations based on 
results from the validation WP (WP6). (7) Local demonstrations: NP will organise live local demonstration 
of the PHOTONFOOD platform, solutions and initial results derived from the validation in a realistic setting 
(WP6) to stakeholders along the food value at tradeshows, such as Analytica, Laser World of Photonics and 
local information events. UULM will organise live demonstration sessions of the devices locally in the lab 
as “Industry Information Days” and also hands-on 1-2 day workshops at UULM for industry with theoretical 
sessions and hands -on practical sessions. The local demonstrations will be held in the local language to 
ensure the wide dissemination  of the PHOTONFOOD related results and offer a unique opportunity for 
networking with interested stakeholders. (8) Final event:  To engage with members of parliament and 
policy- and decision makers, WU will organise a workshop as the final event. The workshop will consist of 
presentations of the PHOTONFOOD key results, the policy brief and white paper will be presented and a 
panel discussion with invited experts from our stakeholder networks covering ethical, legal, social and 
economic considerations will be organised.  
PHOTONFOOD 
 
59 
 
Task 7.4 Future use and exploitation of the PHOTONFOOD platform and technologies (M1-M48) 
(lead partners: accelCH, HS, participants: all). The following measures will be taken for the future use and 
exploitation of the developed technology: (1) Business Model development: Potential business cases will 
be developed by the technology providers led by the Innovation Manager  that will facilitate the future 
upscaling and uptake of PHOTONFOOD. The business model(s) will take into account results fr om the 
demonstration and validation (WP6) and outcomes and recommendations from all research WPs (WP1-5). 
Supported by all WP leaders, they will identify adoption barriers for the involved stakeholders and develop 
strategies to overcome these barriers by d eveloping a PESTEL analysis to assess and monitor the macro -
environmental factors that may impact our project and the developed technologies. ( 2) Promotion of 
exploitation and future funding plans: Detailed report to include the consortium’s plan for 
commercialisation of the developed technology. Develop draft exploitation agreement to build on 
Consortium agreement. Actively seek licensees and future funding to ensure ease of commercialisation and 
funding during first year of exploitation. Subcontract servi ces of company to carry out future funding and 
investment searches. Begin process of establishing the product in product range, draw up distribution 
agreement and supply chain agreements with partners.  (3) Strategic grant planning:  To facilitate the 
further non-commercial use of results and outcomes through follow -up projects, accelCH will pre-select 
funding programmes relevant to partners and their project results by identifying suitable funding 
instruments. accelCH will present an extensive list of funding opportunities within the consortium which 
will discuss all options and select the most suitable instruments. Based on partner feedback, accelCH will 
create a short list of the most suitable EU and national funding schemes, including requirements, timings 
and recommendations, develop a proposal preparation schedule and help with the initial set up of possible 
follow-up projects. ( 4) Standardisation and guidelines:  The project results have the potential to be 
integrated into national food safety related guidelines. We will share our policy brief with decision and 
policy makers which will include recommendations for food safety guidelines. Our recommendations are 
not legally binding but could potentially influence regulations if our results are strong which could require 
countries to change their laws. (5) Roadmap for exploitation (RfE): the Exploitation Manager at HS will, 
together with the industry partners (especially NP)  and the Innovation Manager at NMBU,  develop a 
commercialisation strategy including an exploitation roadmap building upon the initial business models to 
examine the transferability of the PHOTONFOOD platform to the market based on outcomes from all 
research WPs. Sub-outcomes of the project such as individual technologi es developed will also be closely 
monitored and documented to ensure their individual exploitable use. Thus, the RfE will comprise a plan 
for the future commercial and non -commercial use of results at Consortium level, group, and individual 
partner level. The RfE will cover the exploitation, starting during the lifetime of the project (short-term) and 
mid and long-term plans <4 years, and <10 years after the project ends). 
 
Role of partners: accelCH will be leading this work package and in particular will b e responsible for the 
development of the Communication and Dissemination Plan (Task 7.1) , and for orchestrating all 
communication activities (Task 7.2). In addition, they will organise the Cluster Event in Task 7.3 and be in 
charge of all the documentation and reporting on WP7. NMBU will lead the partners in the dissemination 
of results to the target groups and will provide the Innovation Manager (Task 7.3). HS will lead the 
exploitation activities (Task 7.4), and in particular will be responsible for shapi ng the Roadmap for 
Exploitation. HS will furthermore pursue fabrication and commercialisation of the final HI -FI and MI-FI 
devices after the end of the project. NEBIH will be responsible for producing a white paper and policy 
briefs. NP and UULM will be in charge of the live demonstrations in Task 7.3. WU will organise the final 
event in Task 7.3. All partners will contribute to WP7 by disseminating and communicating about the project 
and results and by supporting the other partners in the WP7 activities. 
Deliverables: (1) D7.1 PHOTONFOOD website including audience specific areas, digital media and blog 
features and a secured area for central document storage ( accelCH, M2); (2) D7.2 Communication and 
Dissemination Plan (CDP) developed defining key strategies and implementation process required to 
implement all communication and dissemination activities (accelCH, M9); D7.3 Interim communication 
and dissemination activities report to provide an overview of the activities achieved to date and assess 
their impact by means of Key Performance Indicators. ( accelCH, M24); D7.4 Policy guidelines  for the 
integration of the PHOTONFOOD platform into the standard approach in food safety (NEBIH, M36); D7.5 
Live demonstrations  of the PHOTONFOOD solution  (NP, M42) ; D7.6 Roadmap for exploitation  
including strategies for the future commercial and non -commercial use of the outcomes and results ( HS, 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
60 
 
M48); D7.7 Final Scientific Symposium presenting the research results and the platform to scientists, food 
industry professionals and decision and policy makers (accelCH, M48) 
 
WP number 8 Start M1 – End M48 NMBU 
WP title Coordination and management 
Participant no. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name of 
participant 
NMBU 
UULM 
BOKU 
WU 
NEBIH 
NP 
ROMER 
IRIS 
acccelCH 
BIGH 
Seeberger 
BAMA 
HS 
Person-months 17 - 1 1 1 1 0.5 1 2 0.5 0.5 0.5 2 
Objective: Scientific, financial, administrative and ethical management of PHOTONFOOD with focus on 
the time and cost-efficient implementation of the work plan. The specific objectives are:  
• Provide the scientific and technical leadership, as well as the administrative and financial management, 
to ensure that PHOTONFOOD delivers qualitatively high results within the time schedule and budget of 
the project description.  
• Establish a single contact point with the EU and maintain continuously contact with EU representatives.  
• Perform a quality assessment of the progress, results and impacts of the project.  
• Deliver timely the progress reports and budget reports to the European commission.  
• Make sure that the Description of Action (DoA) and the consortium agreement are followed. 
• Establish a digital platform and intranet for the project to enable the exchange of data and information 
among the consortium partners.  
Task 8.1 Coordination (M1-M48) (lead partner: NMBU , participants: all). This task will perform  the 
overall coordination of the scientific and technological developments of all WPs in order to make sure that 
the developed components and scientific findings  are aligned . The Project Coordinator (NMBU) will 
establish a single contact point with the EU in order to communicate all results, scientific , financial, and 
related issues. A Project Manager (NMBU) and a Scientific Manager (Deputy Coordinator from NMBU) 
will assist the Coordinator (NMBU). The Executive Board (EB) and the General Assembly (GA) will meet 
biannually and annually, respectively, and arrange ad hoc meetings when required. The EB and the GA will 
monitor risks and project progress supported by the Coordinator and the Scientific manager. The coordinator 
will be supported by the project manager in all administrative issues and especially in reporting and finance. 
The milestones and the deliverables will be closely followed up by the scientific manager who will carefully 
review all progress plans. The Project Manager will be responsible for the on-time delivery of draft scientific 
and financial reports to the Project Coordinator. Gender equality will be monitored by the Coordinator and 
it will be made sure that the gender balance will be maintained throughout the whole project period.  
Task 8. 2 Financial management  (M1-M48) (lead partner: NMBU , participants: all) . The economy 
manager Christer Wulff-Olsen at NMBU will be responsible for the financial management of the project in 
close collaboration with the project manager. They will ensure the timely distribution of funds from the EC 
to the partners. During the kick -off meeting, the economy advisor will in troduce all partners in payment 
routines and aspects of financial reporting. All partners will obtain templates and instructions for financial 
reporting. The economy manager will be responsible to prepare all financial reports and deliver them timely 
to th e EC. All partners will be asked early to prepare their financial reports and each partner will be 
responsible to prepare the reports and deliver them to NMBU in time. The coordinator will monitor the 
financial management and inform the EU about all necessary financial transfers.   
Task 8.3 Decision making, conflict management  (M1-M48) (lead partner: NMBU ). Each WP is led by 
one of the partners (WP leader) with a deputy WP leader from a different partner. This will ensure  focus 
on the work that is agreed upon. The WP leaders take the routine decisions, communicate those with the  
Coordinator, monitor progress of output according to the work plan, and prepare all documents and  
documentations for their WP. The decision -making body will be the General A ssembly, with 1  
representative from each partner organization and chaired by the Coordinator (see details of composition in 
section 3.2), each partner has a vote and the ability to steer the project. Major strategic decisions will be 
made by the General Assembly, such as change of scope, IPR related decisions, conflicts, budget related 
decisions, etc. First line of day-to-day decision making will be up to the Executive board whose membership 
will comprise the Coordinator and the WP leaders. Matters of a str ategic nature are floated to the General 
Assembly and will aim to be accompanied by a recommendation from the Executive board. The Project 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
61 
 
Coordinator will handle any cases of fraud, unethical behaviour, and breach of procedures, however,  such 
incidences are expected to be highly unlikely. The Project Coordinator will distribute a list of decisions to 
be taken to all participants prior to each meeting. Partners may request in writing for additional topics to be 
discussed, and the updated agenda is distributed before the meeting. All meetings are documented, including 
the outcome of all decisions and distributed to all partners. 
Task 8.4 Organization of reporting to the EC (M1-M48) (lead partner: NMBU, participants: all).  
NMBU, the Project Coordinator, will present reporting procedures during the kick-off meeting. The Project 
Coordinator will provide templates for the formal reports and updates during the course of the project when 
necessary. The Project Coordinator will prepare a brief semi-annual report and distributes it to all 
participants. Formal project reports will be prepared by the Coordinator in keeping with the contractual 
reporting periods stipulated in the  Grant Agreement. The Coordinator will present this formal report, 
including finance, IPR, ethics, and gender issues to the EC on time (and during formal review meetings as 
proposed by the EC). The Coordinator will also prepare a brief non-confidential version of the formal report 
for public access on the website. 
Task 8. 5 Day-to-day management (Internet, helpdesk and back -office) (M1-M48) (lead partner: 
NMBU, participants: all).  A secure digital platform for networked information sharing will be established 
to minimize costs and environmental impact of travelling and to allow rapid access to collated data. The 
platform will have an option for open-source content management. The digital platform will be used for all 
internal communications. Access will be restricted to consortium members. Different access levels will be 
incorporated based on user roles. It will provide tools for knowledge management and the development of 
databases, to share preliminary res ults and internal documents amongst partners, to discuss and edit pre -
publication documents and deliverables. Each time new data is available, it will be made sure that the data 
is shared in the project database according standard formats which will be agreed on at the beginning of the 
project. This will ensure a steady exchange and sharing of all spectroscopic and metadata between all 
partners. This intranet will be maintained by NMBU. Shared documents, contact data, templates, agreements 
and links to official guidelines for reference and reports and conclusions of meetings will be stored on the 
password protected part of the website which will be maintained by NMBU. All periodic reports and collated 
reports will be stored in the project database.  
Task 8.6 Organization of consortium meetings (incl. telephone/video-conferences, web meetings) (M1-
M48) (lead partner: NMBU, participants: all).  A kick-off meeting for all project partners including the 
General Assembly  (and the Executive board  as part of the Committee), the Advisory Board and 
representatives from the EC will be organized by the Coordinator (NMBU. The back-office of NMBU will 
take care of all aspects of the consortium meetings, as presented in paragraph 3.2, such as agenda, 
invitations, preparation of materials (hand -outs, programmes, etc.), organisation of rooms and  equipment, 
catering and dissemination activities to the consortium in cooperation with the host of the meeting, i.e.  
typically the location of one of the WP leaders.  NMBU will also organize and host all consortium 
telephone/videoconferences (regular according to schedule, and on demand). In total 4 General Assembly 
meetings, 6 Executive board  meetings and several ad -hoc meetings, depending on the needs, will be 
organized. 2 plenary meetings will be organized in conjunction with an end user meeting in M35 and M45. 
The minutes of all meetings will be delivered in a timely manner by  the Project Coordinator . In case of 
unexpected events (e.g. COVID-19) the procedures indicated by the EC will be followed. 
Task 8.7 Maintenance of all legal agreements (M1-M48) (lead partner: NMBU, participants: all).  
All partners will sign a Consortium Agreement, with detailed matters on access to know -how, intellectual 
property ownership, and liability in line with the information contained in Section 2.2b as the starting point. 
During the kick-off meeting, all contractual requirements on the Grant Agreement will be reviewed with all 
the partners to ensure that all partners recap on their commitments. All partners must report issues relevant 
to the legal agreements to the Coordinator in a timely manner. The  Coordinator will decide on how to 
proceed with any deviation and will inform the Project Officer. 
Task 8.8 Risk Management (M1-M48) (lead partner: NMBU, participants: all). Alterations to the work 
plan will be identified early by following partners tightly in consortium meetings, regular technical meetings 
and periodic reports. A control procedure will be established by the c oordinator for handling identified 
alterations to the work plan.  All partners will be asked to continuously monitor risk factors and to report 
problems timely to the coordinator. Changes will be monitored in order to  respond to threats in a timely 
manner to ensure work packages continue smoothly. Areas of potential difficulties will be discussed with 
the respective partners and discussed in the consortium. The impact of problems will be  considered 
thoroughly in the co nsortium and contingency plans will be activated and mitigation measures will be 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
62 
 
discussed. It is important to make sure that mitigation measures are thoroughly discussed in the consortium 
and the impact of the respective mitigation measures are understood  for all affected partners and tasks. If 
necessary, resources will be reallocated, and objectives will be recovered and rescheduled. 
Task 8.9 Quality management (M1-M48) (lead partner: NMBU, participants: all). The project will develop 
a quality handbook for quality assurance and control that contains all data format definitions, methods, 
guidelines for communications, conflict management, innovation management and project reporting. The 
quality handbook will be continuously overseen and revised in meetings of the GA (discussed biannually).  
The external advisory board will give input to the quality handbook. 
Task 8. 10 Innovation management (M1-M48) (lead partner: NMBU; participants: all).  Freedom to 
operate: the IPR landscape will be mapped in the beginning of the project and continuously monitored 
throughout the project’s lifetime. This will ensure that relevant background IP is duly integrated into the 
consortium agreement and that the necessary licenses are negotiated by the project consortium.  IP strategy: 
the Innovation Manager will develop and negotiate a coherent IP strategy with all project partners, balancing 
the different interests of the participants (secrecy clauses, patenting, trademarking, licensing, publishing). 
The IP strategy will be closely aligned with the exploitation strategy and roadmap (see WP7), ensuring that 
the IP strategy can leverage the further commercialisation and business development activities planned after 
the end of the project’s lifetime and avoid undue conflicts between the consortium partners and with third 
parties. Ongoing IP management: the Innovation Manager will liaise continuously with the WP and Task 
Leaders to ensure that the IPR generated in the project is disclosed in a timely manner and protected in a 
way consistent with the IP strategy. Furthermore, the Innovation Manager will liaise continuously with the 
TTOs of the participating research organisations , and the legal  departments/representatives of the 
commercial actors in the project , to ensure that all necessary agreements are made in time and potential 
conflicts (between consortium partners or with third parties) are proactively resolved or avoided. 
Task 8.11 Data management plan (M1-M6) (lead partner: NMBU; participants: all). A data management 
plan (DMP) according to the Guidelines on Data Management in Horizon 2020 will be developed. The DMP 
will provide the procedures for efficient collection, safe storage, deep exploitation and evaluation  of the 
data. The DMP will ensure that research data will be easily discoverable, accessible, assessable and 
intelligible, usable beyond the original purpose for  which they were collected,  interoperable to specific 
quality standards, whenever relevant. The database will be used as  a first basis for exploitation of results 
and further exchange of knowledge and expertise. 
Role of partners: NMBU will be leading this work package and is responsible.   
Deliverables: D8.1 Next stage plans and internal progress reports (NMBU, M6); D8.2 Interim Status Report 
(NMBU, M12); D8.3 Communication framework between partners (NMBU, M24); D8.4 Biannual progress 
reports, mid-term reports and final report (NMBU, M48); D8.5 Organize initial, mid-term and final meetings 
(NMBU, M48); D8.6 Report on gender, societal and ethical issues of exploitation (NMBU , M24); D8.7 
Data management plan (NMBU, M6). 
 
Table 3.1c: List of Deliverables75   
NO Name WP Lead Type Diss. level Date 
D1.1 Report on stakeholder and user requirements 1 NMBU R CO M24 
D1.2 Overview on technical and user experiences 1 NEBIH R CO M40 
D1.3 Report on cost assessment 1 ROMER R CO M36 
D1.4 Report final user requirements, technology accept., market potential 1 NMBU R CO M48 
D 2.1 Deliverable report on sampling, extraction and selective purification 
approaches for one target contaminant (DON) 
2 WU R CO M24 
D 2.2 Deliverable report on the development of an interface between a 
fully integrated paper microfluidic device and optical components 
2 WU R CO 
 
M42 
D 2.3 Diversification of the paper-based microfluidics to at least a second 
target contaminant in a second commodity finalized. 
2 WU R CO M48 
D3.1 Advanced IC-LEDs for sensor integration (hardware) 3 NP DEM CO M18 
 
75Key: DL Dissemination Level; R Docum ent, Report; DEM Demonstrator, pilot, prototype, plan designs; DEC Websites, patents 
filing, press & media actions, videos, etc.; OTH: Software, technical diagram, etc.; PU Public, fully open; CO Confidential, restricted 
to consortium set out in Model Grant Agreement; CI = Classified information as referred to in Commission Decision 2001/844/EC. 
 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
63 
 
D3.2 Monolithic tuneable lasers for sensor integration (hardware, report) 3 NP DEM CO M26 
D4.1 Thin-film waveguide-based sensing interface for HI-FI analyser 4 UULM DEM CO M18 
D4.2 Performance test report for MI-FI analyzer 4 UULM DEM CO M30 
D4.3 Performance test report for HI-FI analyzer 4 UULM DEM CO M24 
D5.1 Pre-processing algorithms for HI-FI and MI-FI spectra 5 NMBU OTH CO M36 
D5.2 Classification and calibration models for MI-FI and HI-FI 
instruments ready for fungi and mycotoxins in all matrices 
5 NMBU OTH CO M36 
D5.3 Calibration and classification models validated 5 NMBU OTH CO M48 
D5.4 Digital Global Control System (GCS) Technical Manual 5 IRIS OTH CO M36 
D5.5 Digital Global Control System (GCS) User Manual 5 IRIS OTH CO M40 
D6.1 Report on preliminary comparability study 6 BOKU R CO M12 
D6.2 Report on completed validation studies 6 BOKU R CO M42 
D6.3 Report on completed demonstration exercises 6 NEBIH R CO M46 
D6.4 Evaluation of collected feedback data (report) 6 NEBIH R CO M48 
D6.5 Report on ring trial (interlaboratory comparison study) 6 BOKU R CO M42 
D7.1 PHOTONFOOD website 7 accelCH DEC PU M2 
D7.2 Communication and Dissemination Plan (CDP) 7 accelCH R CO M9 
D7.3 Interim communication and dissemination activities report 7 accelCH R CO M24 
D7.4 Policy guidelines 7 NEBIH R PU M36 
D7.5 Live demonstrations 7 NP DEM PU M42 
D7.6 Roadmap for exploitation 7 HS R CO M48 
D7.7 Final Scientific Symposium 7 accelCH OTH PU M48 
D8.1 Next stage plans and internal progress reports 8 NMBU R CO M6 
D8.2 Interim Status Report 8 NMBU R CO M12 
D8.3 Communication framework between partners 8 NMBU OTH PU M24 
D8.4 Six month progress reports, mid term reports and final report 8 NMBU R CO M48 
D8.5 Organize initial meetings, mid term meetings and final meetings 8 NMBU OTH CO M48 
D8.6 Report on gender, societal and ethical issues of exploitation 8 NMBU R CO M24 
D8.7 Data management plan 5 NMBU R CO M6