3.3 Consortium as a whole  
The PHOTONFOOD consortium has a wide geographical and cultural coverage across the Europe (Fig. 18). 
This naturally provides to the project an understanding on different business and healthcare practices, while 
enables to access several stakeholders and end-users providing wide feedback and promoting the project.  
The Norwegian University of Life Sciences (NMBU) is located close to Oslo and will contribute with top 
expertise in spectroscopy, data analysis and experience in food science , microbiology, user acceptance and 
innovation. NMBU will provide the scientific manager, coordinate the project, lead WP8 and provide project 
manager and coordinator . NMBU has recently started Norway’s first data science program and has t op 
expertise in data analysis related to spectroscopy. NMBU will lead the data analysis and software development 
in WP5. NMBU has further top expertise in innovation and provide the innovation manager for the project. 
The University of Ulm (UULM) located in the south of Germany, represented by the Institute of Analytical 
and Bio-analytical Chemistry is worldwide leading the development and application of innovative (micro- and 
nano-) analytical platforms providing advanced methods and technologies in sensing, diagnostics, and imaging 
of complex molecular processes relevant to environmental, industrial, and medical/biological applications. 
UULM will lead WP3 and be responsible for developing the prototypes of the HI-FI and HI-FI devices.  
The University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences , Vienna  (BOKU) located in Austria and 
represented by the Department of Agrobiotechnology (IFA-Tulln) is a leading institution in the area of agro -
biotechnology with a special emphasis on mycotoxin control a nd reduction since 1994. BOKU will lead WP 
6 on Demonstration and validation. BOKU will also summarize the feedback of WP1 on the usability of the 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
72 
 
 
Organisation Short 
Name NMBU 
 
Organisation Legal 
Name  
Norwegian University of Life 
Sciences 
Country NORWAY 
Website  https://www.nmbu.no/ 
Description of the legal entity 
The Norwegian University of Life Sciences (NMBU) in Ås is Norway’s largest life sciences university with 
5100 students; 1700 employees; 800 scientific staff; 580 PhD students; approx. 100 PhD degrees per year.  
• The Faculty of Science of Technology (REALTEK) at NMBU has key expertise in biophysics, 
spectroscopy and data analysis. REALTEK has invested heavily in being at the forefront in 
advanced multivariate data analysis and vibrational spectroscopic techniques (NIR, FTIR and 
Raman etc.). Today “Biospectroscopy and data modelling” (BioSpec) is identified to be one of the 
main research areas at REALTEK. The BioSpec group at is at the forefront of application of 
vibrational spectroscopy techniques in life sciences ab and data science for vibrational spectroscopy. 
The group consists in average of 20 PhDs, PostDoc s and Researcher. The academic staff of the 
group consist of Prof. Dr. Achim Kohler and Assoc. Prof. Dr. Volha Shapaval. The group has 
pioneered the development of algorithms for scatter correction and signal standardization in infrared 
spectroscopy. Over many years, the group has been developing so-called model-based pre-treatment 
approaches for spectral pre -treatment and data analysis methods for calibration and classification 
which are in use by a broad community in infrared spectroscopy in life sciences  and biomedical 
vibrational spectroscopy.  
• From the School of Economics and Business at NMBU, the Analytics, Innovation and Digital 
Business Transformation group will participate in the project. The group is led by Prof. Joachim 
Scholderer and consists of two professors, two associate professors, one postdoctoral fellow and 
four PhD students. The group cooperates closely with NMBU’s TTO and the various incubators 
and accelerators in NMBU’s innovation ecosystem. It will contribute with its expertise in the 
management of life science technology innovations, including IP strategy, market potential 
assessment, stakeholder and user acceptance along the value chain, forecasting, risk assessment and 
commercialization.  
Main role and task in the project 
The BioSpec group headed by Prof. Achim Kohler (M) will coordinate the project and lead the research 
related to the WP5. The BioSpec group will be strongly involved in spectroscopic measurements with 
benchmark and PHOTONFOOD devices in WP6. The group of Prof. Joachim Scholderer at the NMBU 
School of Economics and Business will be involved in the usability and technical -economic assessment 
activities (WP1), the demonstrations (WP6), the exploitation of the results (WP7) and the project 
management (WP8). Prof. Scholderer will be the Innovation Manager of the project.  
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities 
Prof. Dr. Achim Kohler (M) is Professor in Physics and an expert in spectroscopy and data science. Kohler 
leads the BioSpec group at NMBU -RealTek. He is an internationally recognized leader in data modelling 
for vibrational spectroscopy with 138 peer-reviewed papers, 10 book chapters, 3 patents in the field. His h-
index is 40. Kohler has been initiation, leading a nd been participating in a high number of national and 
international projects. He has been participating in 22 projects funded by the Norwegian Research Council 
and project leader for 11 of them. Kohler has been participating in 6 EU -funded projects and be en 
coordinating one of them. Kohler has been further participating in numerous Scandinavian projects. Kohler 
is the co-founder of three university spin-off companies. Further, Kohler has been participating in a course 
in Innovation management and Entrepren eurship at the Norwegian School of Management, Oslo and 
Stanford/Berkeley University, San Francisco.  
Prof. Joachim Scholderer (M) is Professor of Innovation Management at NMBU. Previously, he was 
Research Director at University of Zurich (2015 -2017), Prof essor of Quantitative Methods at Aarhus 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
73 
 
University (2000 -2015) and has had secondary affiliations at Agricultural University of Athens, ETH 
Zurich, University of Basel, University of Copenhagen and University of Tromsø. He has participated in 
altogether 17 EU projects (FP4-H2020) and numerous national ones in Denmark, Greece, Finland, Ireland, 
Germany, Hungary, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Tanzania, Uganda, Vietnam and the UK. 
Joachim is an expert in the management of life science technology in novations (incl. IP strategy, market 
potential assessment, stakeholder and user acceptance along the value chain, forecasting, risk assessment 
and commercialization), particularly in the food safety area (relevant previous EU projects include CADE-
GENTECH, ENTRANSFOOD, EUFRAM, EUROPREVALL, NOFORISK, NOVEL-Q, PROSAFEBEEF, 
Q-PORKCHAINS, SAFECONSUME, SEAFOODPLUS). His h-index is 42.  
Stine Brekke Vennemo (F) is a data engineer and working at the BioSpec group as data engineer and 
administrator. Stine Brekke Vennemo data science engineer will be responsible for the data management 
in the project and be responsible for the timely delivery of draft scientific and  financial reports to the 
Coordinator.  
Dr Volha Shapaval (F)  is an Associate Professor in bioprocess technology, has a multidisciplinary 
background in the field of microbiology, biotechnology and biospectroscopy. Shapaval was among of the 
first ones intro ducing high -throughput analysis of food spoilage fungi by FTIR spectroscopy and 
developing fully automated sample preparation system for spectroscopic analysis of fungi.  
Dr Boris Zimmermann (M) holds PhD degree in physical chemistry and has a strong background in 
analytical chemistry, organic chemistry and spectroscopy. 
Dr Valeria Tafintseva (F) holds PhD degree in applied mathematics and data analysis and has a strong 
background and experience in data analysis of spectroscopic and other multivariate data. She will be WP5 
leader and coordinate all activities related to data analysis in this WP. 
Maren Anna Brandsrud (F) is a young researcher who holds a Master of Physics. In her PhD she is 
working on modelling light scattering.  
Johanne Heitmann Solheim (F) holds a Master of Physics, and is a young researcher in the BioSpec 
group. Currently she is taking a PhD in modelling scattering and absorption in infrared spectroscopy. 
List of up to 5 relevant  publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements relevant to 
the call content 
1. Y. Xiong, V. Shapaval, A. Kohler, PJ. From. A Laboratory -Built Fully Automated Ultrasonication 
Robot for Filamentous Fungi Homogenization. 2019. SLAS Technology, 1 -13 
10.1177/2472630319861361 
2. Y. Xiong, V. Shapaval, A. Kohler, J. Li, PJ. From. A Fully Automated Robot for the Preparation of 
Fungal Samples for FTIR Spectroscopy Using Deep Learning. 2019. IEEE Access, 7(1):  132763-
132774. DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2941704 
3. J. Li, V. Shapaval, A. Kohler, R. Talintyre, J. Schmitt, R. Stone, A. J. Gallant, D. Zeze. A Modular 
Liquid Sample Handling Robot for High-Throughput Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy. 2015. 
In Book Advances in Reconfigurable Mechanics and Robotics II.