3.2 Management structure, milestones and procedures  
 
Project Management Organisation structure and decision-making procedures  
The coordination tasks defined in WP8 concern the overall coordination of the technological and scientific 
developments within the different WPs to ensure alignment of the developed products and scientific findings. 
The Coordinator, Prof. Dr. Achim Kohler (NMBU), will be responsible for the robust coordination of the 
PHOTONFOOD consortium and ensuring that the project is within scope, is delivered on time, within budget 
and to a high quality to ensure impact. Prof. Kohler is a well-renowned and well-respected academic from the 
MIR spectroscopy and data analysis field globally. Prof. Dr. Kohler has been involved in many international 
projects and has been successful co-founder of three spin-off companies of his university. He is an ideal figure 
to lead such a project and he also has the organisation and leadership skill-sets to effectively perform this role, 
which is demonstrated through his role as the Head of the Biospectroscopy and D ata Modelling group  at 
NMBU with a team of 20 researchers under his leadership. Prof. K ohler will also be responsible for 
communicating all results, scientific and financial, and related issues with the EU representative. 
The Coordinator will be assisted by a Project Manager and a Scientific Manager (Deputy Coordinator) 
from NMBU. The Project Manager will assist the Coordinator in administrative issues related to reporting and 
finance. The highly experienced Project Manager Stine Brekke Vennemo (NMBU) will be responsible for 
the timely delivery of draft scientific and financial reports to the Coordinator. Stine Brekke Vennemo has her 
background in data engineering and will further be responsible for the data management in the project.  She 
will also act as data protection officer and be responsible for managing all personal data according to GDPR 
described in section 5.1 (https://gdpr.eu/). The Scientific Manager Assoc. Prof. Volha Shapaval (NMBU) will 
monitor the progress of the milestones (see table 3.2a) and deliverables (see table 3.1c) and will (pre-)review 
all project reports. The Dissemination Manager Dr Johannes Ripperger (accelCH) will be responsible for 
leading the consortium in further planning and  implementation of the project communication and 
dissemination activities, and ensuring the project reaches out to different audiences in the most effective way. 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
64 
 
The Innovation Manager Prof. Dr Scholderer (NMBU) will be responsible for knowledge  management 
within the consortium. He will lead the consortium in protecting the project results where appropriate, and in 
maintaining confidentiality of the results until the IP is protected to safeguard the innovation impacts. Prof. 
Scholderer has vast  experience in relation to knowledge management in collaborative projects. He has 
experience of leading patent  applications, open access publications, etc. in past projects.  The Exploitation 
Manager Dr Julian Haas (HS) will lead the exploitation of the proj ect results. Dr. Haas has experience from 
other projects (e.g. H2020 MIRACLE , see Table 4 ) on how to identify stakeholder demands and market 
opportunities. 
Each WP is led by a WP leader who take routine decisions communicate those with the Coordinator, 
monitor progress of output and budget according to the work plan, and prepare all documents related to their 
WP. 
 
Table 3.2a: List of milestones  
Milestone  Milestone name Related 
WP 
Date Means of verification 
MS1.1 Component-level user requirements 
update presented to WP leaders 
All WPs M25 Feedback to the development WPs (WP2-5) about 
the updated requirements 
MS1.2 System-level user requirements 
update presented to WP leaders 
All WP M37 Report on system-level user requirements 
MS2.1  Portable Microfluidics Pre-
prototype 
WP2 M24 Evaluation of specifications and design   
MS2.2  Portable Microfluidics Prototype WP2 M36 Validation with MI-FI & HI-FI prototypes in lab 
validation 
MS3.1 IC-LEDs optical components WP3 M18 Evaluation of the spectral target coverage (1800-
1500 cm-1) 
MS3.2 Monolithic tuneable lasers  WP3 M28 Evaluation of the spectral target coverage (1800-
1500cm-1) 
MS 4.1 Five handheld MI-FI analyzer 
prototypes for demonstration 
WP4, 
WP3 
M30 Evaluation of MI-FI analyzer prototype design and 
performance on real samples 
MS 4.2 One portable HI-FI analyzer 
prototype for demonstration 
WP4, 
WP3 
M24 Evaluation of HI-FI analyzer prototype design and 
performance on real samples 
MS 5.1 Software Alpha release  WP5 M36 Pre-processing and calibration models validated in 
lab 
MS 5.2 Software Beta release  WP5 M48 Pre-processing and calibration models validated 
during demonstration 
MS 6.1 Portable HI-FI solution validated  WP6 M48 Performance validated in field and end users 
feedback implemented MS 6.2 Handheld MI-FI solution validated  WP6 M48 
 
Two project management bodies are envisaged  (see Fig. 17): The Executive Board (EB), which is an 
executive management body of the project, and the General Assembly (GA), which is the strategic steering 
and decision-making body. Day-to-day decision making will be the responsibility of the Executive board, 
chaired by th e Coordinator, whose membership will comprise the Coordinator (chair), Scientific Manager 
(Deputy Coordinator),  Project manager and WP leaders. The Executive board  will meet as frequently as 
required with a  minimum of every 6 months. In general, occasions will be sought to combine activities to 
minimise travel costs. The decision-making body on major strategic decisions will be the General Assembly, 
chaired by the Coordinator, whereby each partner organisation will appoint one representative . The GA will 
in addition include the  Coordinator (chair), the Scientific Manager, the Project Manager, the Exploitation 
Manager, the Innovation Manager, and the Dissemination Manager). Each partner is assigned one  vote to 
ensure a democratically run project (2/ 3 majority voting). Major strategic decisions will be made by the 
General Assembly, such as change of scope, IPR related decisions, conflicts, budget related decisions, etc. All 
matters of a strategic nature will be floated to the General Assembly and will aim to be accompanied by a  
recommendation from the Executive board. The GA suggests refocusing of research directions, proposes the 
publication plan and decides on conflicting issues such as prioritizing samples in case of a temporary 
breakdown or other c ontingency situation and subsequent mitigating actions (see table 3.2b). The General 
Assembly will meet once per year. 
In addition, a voluntary Advisory Board has been established that will provide guidance and advice to the 
consortium through its international experts in themes of high relevance for the project. To this end, the 
Advisory Board (AB) of  PHOTONFOOD involves two experts from the field of photonics (Prof. Gottfried 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
65 
 
Strasser from TU Vienna, Austria, expert in light sources  and Prof. Goran Mashanovich from University of 
Southampton, an expert in waveguides) . IBM as a global cloud platform and cognitive solutions company  
represented by Loek Vredenberg who will be part of Advisory Board to engage with their blockchain based 
Food Trust platform and supporting skills. IBM will contribute to developing an interface between the 
PHOTONFOOD software and the IBM Food Trust platform for integrating data and utilizing data for 
improving food safety and reducing waste along the food chain.  The Directorate General for Health and Food 
Safety/European commission in Brussels represented by Frans Verstraete will participate in the advisory board 
as a policy maker  organization. The Advisory  Board will provi de an important mechanism for providing 
guidance on the General Assembly. It is noteworthy that the Advisory Board is a voluntary body. The Advisory 
Board will sign a confidentiality agreement with the Coordinator in order to safeguard the confidential aspects 
of the project that they might be exposed to. The members of the Advisory Board will have no decision-making 
capacity in the project. The AB will meet three times with the GA. Two times by video meetings and two times 
in person. A budget for this is foreseen in the NMBU budget.  All advisory board members have expressed 
their willingness to join the Advisory Board (LOIs available, see Annex) should the PHOTONFOOD project 
be selected for funding. The advisory board members will provide additional ‘reality checks’ from the outset 
of the project. Since the consortium of PHOTONFOOD has a broad coverage of stakeholders that are strongly 
involved in the user acceptance and validation and demonstration activities, the advisory board was chosen to 
cover and policy maker members and scientific members to have further reality checks for the technological 
developments in the project. 
 
Meetings 
There will be 5 meeting 
points in the project during 
which one or several groups 
meet (Meetings are  
indicated in the GANTT 
Chart). The first of five 
Executive board  (EB) 
meetings will take place 
during the Kick-off meeting 
(M1) in Norway . NMBU 
will present the decision -
making and financial 
procedures and will put the 
corresponding 
documentation on the 
internal website. The other 
four EB meetings will take 
place in months M 12, M22, M30, M48. Comprehensive progress reports and pla ns for the next 4 -6 months 
will be presented by the WP leaders. These  meetings serve to solve practical and scientific issues of non -
strategic nature and to discuss immediate actions to be  taken case milestones or deliverables cannot be 
delivered on time.  
The four General Assembly (GA) meetings will take place during the kick-off meeting in M1 and in months 
M12, M30 and M48. At the GA meetings, major strategic decisions are made, the progress of the entire project 
is discussed in detail in cooperation with the Advisory Board (see below) and plans for the next period are 
reported. The General Assembly will verify that the project meets both deliverable and milestone targets. If  
there is a major decision point in a WP which could affect the scope of the work for example, the issue will be 
brought first to the Executive board and then to the General Assembly for decision making. The Project General 
Assembly will have an agenda which covers at least the following points: i) Update of progress against  
implementation plan; ii) Update on next stage of implementation; iii) Financial issues; iv) Contractual issues; 
v) Intellectual property issues; vi) Update on meetings stakeholders; vii) Gender  implementation plan; viii) 
Dissemination of project results . 
The Advisory Board (AB) meetings will take place in months M1, M22 and M48. In addition, annual 
videoconferences will be organised between the General Assembly and the Advisory Board.  Each meeting 
will be held at the location of one of the WP leaders. The host will provide meeting rooms, lunches and  one 
formal dinner for all attendants. The meeting in Month 12 will be held at UULM. The meetings at M30 and 
 
Figure 17: Management structure. 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
66 
 
M48 will be held in connection with end user meetings. Other meeting locations will be decided at  the kick-
off meeting. Videoconferencing will be used to address specific issues that might arise during the project or  
where specific decisions are required. WP leaders will also need to hold separate ad -hoc meetings of those 
partners involved in activities, and again these will be combined wherever possible with other meetings.  The 
Coordinator will chair each meeting and  will produce written minutes of each meeting, which shall be the 
formal record of all decisions taken. Minutes of each meeting will be distributed by e -mail to all project 
partners within a week. All Executive board Members and General Assembly members can suggest topics for 
the meeting  agenda. Additionally, it is expected that WP leaders could be invited to specific stakeholder 
association meetings to describe  specific commodity related aspects of the project. The Agenda will be a 
mixture of progress reports from WPs where there are non-confidential scientific and innovation achievements 
to report and items generated by the Project  General Assembly  that require end -user input.  Reporting 
Procedures: In addition to formal deliverables identified in table 3.1c, WP leaders will provide the Coordinator 
with bi-annual and annual internal progress reports as follows: (i) bi-annual reports summarising progress on 
milestones and deliverables, unexpected results , and future strategies , and (ii) annual report on progress, 
highlighting any planning issues and also providing a summary of financial resources for the WP. The internal 
reports will feed into the Contractual reports required by the Grant Agreement. 
In addition, all partners will contribute to the  formal project progress reports and will submit formal 
financial statements as appropriate in line with the requirements of the Grant Agreement. Communication 
amongst the consortium will be enabled through a secure section of the PHOTONFOOD website (by password 
access), which will also serve as a  structured repository for project documents and will be the main project 
platform for internal exchange of information.  
 
Appropriateness of the organisational structure and decision-making mechanisms 
This consortium includes European members that have a remit to address a pressing societal challenge in a 48-
month work plan through the delivery of a series of ambitious scientific and technological  advances and 
ensuring high impact. To this end, we are confid ent that a core project management unit made up of the  
Coordinator, Scientific Manager and Project Manager, each with key roles and responsibilities is a realistic 
and robust approach. This core unit and the supporting Executive board provide a sufficiently decentralised 
leadership to enable this ambitious project highly manageable. In the interest of a democratic and inclusive 
project for all  partners, the existence of a General Assembly that can focus o n the strategic direction of the 
project will ensure that all partners have a voice in how the project is run and all are afforded an opportunity 
to steer the project  ensuring it delivers impacts for all partners and for the wider stakeholder communities 
through external engagements and interaction with a highly relevant and influential Advisory Board. 
 
Innovation Management 
Since PHOTONFOOD intends to deliver innovations with a real impact on  food safety, it is crucial that the 
academic and industry partners in the consortium work in close collaboration with end-users and stakeholders. 
This has been taken carefully into account in the design of and the interaction between the project WPs. I n 
WP1 and WP6, end-users are directly involved as project partners, defining user requirements, participating 
in the demonstrations, and providing access to facilities and materials. Ultimate success, however, will require 
uptake by much larger parts of the food and agribusiness sector. Therefore, WP1 will engage also customers, 
users and stakeholders from outside the project already at an early stage. This will ensure that the project can 
respond rapidly to changes in customer needs, user requirements, market conditions, regulatory initiatives, and 
complementary or competing technological developments. The PHOTONFOOD prototypes will be ready in 
M24 and M36, respectively . The  validation, demonstration and systematic feedback-gathering activities 
involving customers, end-users and stakeholders will ensure a market-oriented and user -centric approach, 
substantially increasing the likelihood of commercial success of the developed solutions . Together, these 
mechanisms will establish an effective market feedback loop for our project.  
 
In order to ensure that the that the innovations and market opportunities are optimally managed, the project 
has created t wo special roles. The Innovation Manager (Prof. Scholderer, NMBU) will be responsible for 
knowledge management within the consortium  during the project’s lifetime. He will lead the consortium in  
protecting the project results where appropriate, maintaining confidentiality of the results until the IP is 
protected to safeguard the innovation impacts , and developing the IP strategy of the consortium . The 
Exploitation Manager (Dr Haas, HS)  will be responsible for the planning and initiation of the 
commercialisation and further business development activities after the end of the project’s lifetime . The 
Innovation Manager and the Exploitation Manager will work in tandem, ensuring (a) that the interests of the 
consortium members are properly balanced against the interests of the parties which will commercialise the 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
67 
 
technology, and (b) that the  IP strategy of the consortium provides support and leverage to  the further 
exploitation and business development plans. Both will be part of the Management Support Team, ensuring 
that innovation and exploitation are prioritised in all decisions made by the project.  
 
Risk management 
During the project, we will systematically analyse and manage risks that could jeopardise the implementation 
of the project, its scientific and technological outcomes, as well risks in relation to IPR, or the ability to deliver 
the projects innovation and long -term impact. The tasks and the organisational structure were analysed for 
their specific risks per WP. The severity of each risk was analysed and a plan for a solution was suggested. In 
case a r isk does happen, the partner will immediately inform the work package leader who will inform the 
Coordinator. The Coordinator will directly inform the EU representative. Solutions will be discussed between 
the coordinator, the WP leader and the partner and proposed to the EU representative and only be implemented 
after discussion with and written approval of the EU representative. Consequences for distribution of budget 
will be identified and agreed upon with EU representative before the implementation of the proposed solution. 
At proposal stage, a number of critical risks have been identified and discussed in table 3.2b below including 
details on risk mitigation action to be taken. 
 
Data management 
A data management plan will be developed in WP 8 according to the Guidelines on Data Management in 
Horizon 2020 (D8.7 M6). Although the DMP is not a fixed document and will evolve during t he lifespan of 
the project. It covers the following elements: 1) Data set reference and name, 2) Data set description, 3) 
Standards and metadata, 4) Data sharing, 5) Archiving and preservation (incl. storage and backup). Details on 
the agreed standards for  data collection, data exploitation (accessibility/shared), data preservation and 
dissemination of data results are provided in the Impact sections. 
Table 3.2b: Critical risks for implementation  
Description of risk (likelihood: 
Low/Medium/High) 
WP(s)  Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
Time 
Planned project activities cannot 
be realized in time as planned / M 
All Proper planning and tight regular follow up of the 
project work during the implementation phase. 
Several activities will start in parallel. 
Cost 
Project activities cannot be completed 
within the budget / L 
All Careful planning and up-date follow up of the budget 
during the project period. 
Management 
Key person(s) leave the partner 
organisations / M 
All Every key person has a competent named deputy in 
each WP. 
Management 
One of the partners leaves the 
consortium / L 
All Motivation of partners by allocating suitable roles for 
them in the consortium. Re-allocating the partner’s 
tasks to the other partners, or if not possible, recruiting 
a replacing partner according to the rule 
Management 
Partners are reluctant to IP sharing / L 
All Carefully prepared Consortium Agreement that sets 
the IP sharing principles. 
Implementation   
Technical 
User acceptance of the new photonic 
solution is low/L 
WP1- 
WP5 
User requirements and acceptance data from WP1 will 
be continuously feed to the WPs responsible for 
technology development to mitigate this risk 
Technical 
Investment cost and unit cost of 
laboratory tests will exceed the 
estimated threshold / L 
WP1- 
WP5 
Alternative technical scenarios have been identified 
during the project proposal development to mitigate 
this risk. The HI -FI and MI-FI solutions all bear 
marketing opportunities that could be exploited. 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
68 
 
Technical 
WP2: The desirable preconcentration 
clean-up effect is insufficient for the 
application/L 
 
 
WP2: The development of a fully 
integrated device could take long, which 
would result in delays in other WPs/L. 
WP2 
 
 
 
We have elaborated three strategies, based on existing 
research/concepts, for selective enrichment. In case of 
failure, there are back-up options readily available. 
The development of the different modules of the 
PHOTONFOOD solution is done in parallel. The 
modules will be combined in various stages of 
completion to ensure compatibility. Thus, if one 
modulus is delayed, the other WPs can still be 
achieved in time, whilst still assure that an integrated 
solution can be offered towards the end of the project. 
Technical 
Delays due to unscheduled down-times 
of equipment/L 
 
 
Light sources do not meet expected out-
put powers and wave-lengths/M 
WP3 Standardized preventive maintenance plans for all 
critical machines and tools to minimize and avoid 
unscheduled down-times. establishment of alternative 
processing routes where possible, e.g. on 2 nd tools 
 
1) Usage of established simulation tools to start with 
refined structures and early tests of gain structures by 
fast test processes e.g. via broadboard area lasers to 
enable quick feedback for improvement. 2) Careful 
time-planning to allow for 2-3 iterations minimum 
Technical 
Calibration models having not sufficient 
sensitivity/specificity/M.  
WP5 Mitigation measure: more measurements required  in 
WP6. 
Management 
Recurring COVID-19 outbreaks in 
European countries result in restrictions 
on travel and of events and project 
meetings / M 
WP7, 
WP8 
Should it be required, project meetings can be held via 
video conferencing. The live demonstrations (D7.5) 
could be postponed or turned into short videos 
published online. The Final Scientific Symposium 
(D7.7) would have to be turned into an online event. 
Technical 
Access to labs is restricted or limited as 
result of recurring COVID-19 outbreaks. 
/ M 
WP1-
WP6 
The possibility to carry out work in laboratories of 
another partner will be assessed. During periods of 
restricted access to labs, focus on theoretical work, 
documentation, reporting and communication tasks. If 
needed, seek solution with Project Officer, e.g. 
postponing tasks and extending the project.