2.1  Expected impacts  
The present market for fungal, mycotoxin, pesticides and antibiotics testing (kits/commercial lab services) 
already has a global value of € 1 billion (where Europe is the largest geographical segment with approximately 
40%). The ten globally leading providers include ROMER (partner in PHOTONFOOD), ALS, AsureQuality, 
Bureau Veritas, Eurofins, Intertek, Mérieux, Microbac, Neogen, Omic, SGS and Symbio. Although the market 
has been growing steadily at around 6.5% CAGR, there are significant barriers to further development:  
• Investment requirements on the customer side are still too high : according to market research 
conducted by the consortium members, customer willingness-to-pay for instrumentation (ELISA readers 
and related equipment) tops out at around €3000 per lab bench.  
• Per-sample costs must be brought down: according to market research conducted by the consortium 
members, customer willingness-to-pay for mycotoxin rapid tests (strip tests) tops out at €5-8.  
• Current staff skill requirements are unrealistic:  current analytical procedures require significant 
amounts of manual sample preparation and analysis by highly trained laboratory staff. The costs related to 
this are orders of magnitude higher than the costs related to instrumentation, reagents and test kits. 
• Hazardous waste needs to be minimised:  current analytical procedures are sample -destructive and 
generate significant amounts of hazardous waste that needs to be disposed of at high cost. 
This has unfortunate direct consequences: current analytical procedures are only affordable for food chain 
actors who operate at relatively high scale. Small and medium-sized operators—and this applies to primary 
producers, importers, food manufacturers, retailers and food authorities alike —are forced to test as rarely as 
possible and at relatively large batch sizes. Whenever a test yields a positive result, the amount of goods that 
needs to be destroyed leads to large losses , reducing the competitiveness of small and medium -sized 
operators. This, in turn, has large consequences on the societal level: the level of food quality and safety in the 
affected value chains is not as high as it could be. Growth and employment in the involved business sectors 
are kept below the levels they could reach. Sustainable development goals become more difficult to reach.  
The aim of PHOTONFOOD is to bring down the cost of  fungal, mycotoxin, pesticides and antibiotics 
testing on all levels of the food chain by developing, validating and demonstrating a compact, portable, broadly 
adaptable, multipurpose solution that is photonics-based and therefore non-destructive by nature. Our solution 
will be designed to deliver the following benefits: 
 Lower investments 
 Lower cost per sample 
 Rapid results 
 Higher throughput 
 No special education needed for staff 
 Training is simple 
 Can be installed in various industrial environments 
 Insignificant hazardous waste production 
The direct and indirect impacts of our solution, with respect to relevant EU policy objectives in the areas of 
food quality and safety, reduction of food waste, strengthening of small and medium -scale farming and local 
or novel ways of food production and processing, reinforcing value chains and increasing the competitiveness 
of the European photonics sector, and access to risk finance are detailed in Table 7. In addition, we detail the 
impacts with respect to the Photonics Strategic Roadmap and the UN Sustainable Development Goals. For 
each expected impact (EI), we specif y which strategic objectives (SO) the project has adopted in order to 
ensure that the impact will be delivered, and KPIs and target levels that will allow the verification of whether 
the impacts have been achieved in the medium term (within seven years from  project start) and long term 
(within 9 years from project start).  
Table 7. Expected impacts (EI) connected to the spe cific objectives (SOs) and key performance indicators 
(KPIs)  
Expected impacts related to the ICT-37-2020 call 
Cost-effective, flexible and easy-to-use photonic-based quality control analysis / SO1 – SO9    
PHOTONFOOD 
 
35 
 
The PHOTONFOOD solution will reduce the amount of costly, speciali zed, time-consuming laboratory 
work by providing a validated portable photonic solutions  that can be operated effortlessly on farms, in 
commodity distribution, food inspection and border control, food processing and manufacturing, and retail.  
KPI Decrease in analysis cost: at least 50% decrease in per-sample analysis cost within 7 years from project 
start (target level for prototype stage: < €3.00 per sample, target level after full scale-up: < €0.75 per sample 
for the MI-FI solution).   
KPI Reduced instrumentation cost: 50% decrease in instrumentation cost within 7 years from project start 
(target level after full scale-up: market price < €2,500 per MI-FI solution and €25,000 per HI-FI solution).   
KPI High user acceptance: The usability of the solution and its acceptance among users and stakeholders 
will be verified during the lifetime of the project. 90% of the users will be satisfied with the project results, 
and 85% will be willing to use it for quality control.   
Significant reduction of food waste in the farm-to-fork food production chain / SO1 – SO9    
The PHOTONFOOD solution will enable faster verification of suspected contamination cases at smaller 
batch sizes, increasing the ability to localise the contamination and thereby reducing the number and size of 
batches that have to be destroyed upon suspicion alone, reducing the amount of food waste in the relevant 
food value chains. 
 KPI Reduction of food waste:  20% decrease in food waste streams in relevant European value chains 
(cereals, nuts, dry fruits and aquaponics industry) within 9 years from project start.  
Strengthening small/medium-scale farming / SO1 – SO9    
Key parts of the modular solutions developed and validated by PHOTONFOOD will be fully usable without 
a need of further laboratory analysis, making it usable and affordable for small and medium-sized primary 
producers. This will enable small and medium -sized producers to increase the quality and safety of their 
products and thereby attain a better competitive position relative to large producers having sufficient 
resources already now to ensure the quality and safety of their production. 
KPI Increased quality of food:  Increased quality of farm -produced food by 50% within 10 years from 
project start.    
Strengthening local or novel ways of food production and processing / SO1 – SO9    
The PHOTONFOOD solution will be developed with aquaponics and vertical farming as specific production 
test cases and local farmer’s markets as a specific retail test case. This will ensure that the equipment is fully 
adapted to novel and local production systems, ensuring that they can achieve the same level of quality and 
safety as already established production systems. 
KPI Increased contaminants monitoring in novel production:  Penetration of 20% (turnover -based) of 
the EU aquaponics sector within 7 years from project start; Penetration of 40% (turnover-based) of the EU 
aquaponics sector within 9 years from project start.     
Expected Impacts related to the Photonic Strategic Roadmap72 
Reinforced value chains and deployment of photonics technologies by stronger cooperation of photonics 
stakeholders, clusters and end-users / SO1 – SO11    
The PHOTONFOOD consortium is a multi -actor initiative bringing together researchers (in  the fields of 
photonics, data science, fungal biology,  analytical chemistry and food safety) with commercial testing 
providers (such as ROMER), photonics SMEs (such as NP), end-users in primary food production (such as 
BIGH), processing and wholesale (such as BAMA and Seeberger) and food control (such as NEBIH). The 
project will serve as a model for future collaboration, laying the foundations for a strong photonics value 
chain and its future development.   
KPI Increase in photonics -based food analysis: Increase in the global market share of photonics -based 
mycotoxin testing to 20% within 7 years from project start. Increase in the global market share of photonics-
based mycotoxin testing to 40% within 10 years from project start. 
KPI Increase in photonics-related projects and developments: The number of collaborative development 
projects in the photonics value chain will substantially increase from the start and after the project. 
Increased competitiveness of the European photonics sector / SO1 – SO11 
The validated PHOTONFOOD solution will sharply increase the number of realistic use cases on all levels 
of the food chain and in related industries. At the same time, the tiered precision levels (high -, mid- and 
low-fidelity) will considerably reduce the c osts of photonics -based detection solutions. Together, these 
 
72 https://www.photonics21.org/ 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
36 
 
effects will substantially boost the competitiveness of European photonics sector vs. American and Asian 
competitors, and also vs. technological substitutes in the domain of traditional laboratory analytics.    
KPI Increase in global market share: Increase in the global market share of European-produced (or out-
licensed) photonics-based fungal/mycotoxin testing equipment to 10% within 7 years from project start. 
Increase in the global market share  of European -produced (or out -licensed) photonics -based 
fungal/mycotoxin testing equipment to 20% within 9 years from project start. 
KPI Increase in number of users:  The number of customers using photonics -based contamination 
detection solutions will incre ase in all relevant customer segments (primary producers, processor and 
wholesale, retail, food control authorities) 30% after 7 years from the project start. 
 Improved access to risk finance for the photonics sector in Europe / SO1 – SO11 
Increases in R &D and business development dynamics in the European photonics sector will make it an 
attractive opportunity for venture capital funds and private equity investors.   
KPI Increase in investments:  Increase by €25 mio in Series A investments in European companies 
developing photonics-based fungal/mycotoxin testing equipment within 7 years from project start. Increase 
by €75 mio in Series B investments in European companies developing photonics-based fungal/mycotoxin 
testing equipment within 9 years from project start 
Expected Impacts related to the Sustainable Developments Goals (SDGs)73 
  Increase in healthy non-contaminated food to decrease in mycotoxin -related health burden under 
"SDG3 Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages" / SO1 – SO9 
The deployment of the PHOTONFOOD technology in major European food chains will contribute to the 
general improvement of food quality and safety, reducing the health burden arising from mycotoxin 
contamination of cereals, nuts, dry fruits and aquaponics products. 
KPI Increase in food quality: 10%-point decrease in the positive sample rate in member state mycotoxin 
surveillance programmes within 9 years from project start. 
 Promote integration of innovative sensor solutions in food and farm industry under "SDG9 Build resilient 
infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation" / SO1 – SO11 
PHOTONFOOD will develop highly flexible innovative sensors for the analysis of microbiological and 
chemical contamination which can be easily deployed in the production facilities of farms, food 
processing and aquaponics facilities. 
KPI Increase in integration of photonics analysers in food safety control: 40% increase in the sales of 
photonics equipment for process control in the cereals, nuts, dry fruits and aquaponics value chains within 
9 years from project start.  
 Decrease of the food waste as an urgent action to combat climate change under "SDG13 Take urgent 
action to combat climate change and its impacts" (long-term EI) / SO1 – SO9 
The deployment of the PHOTONFOOD technology in major food value chains will allow the detection of 
microbial and chemical contamination at very early stages and enable early countermeasures, significantly 
reducing the amount of food spoilage. 
KPI Decrease in food waste: 20% decrease in relevant food waste streams (cereals, nuts, dry fruits and 
aquaponics industry) within 9 years from project start    
Other Expected impacts  
Increase food yield, quality and safety / SO1 – SO9 
PHOTONFOOD will develop a flexible photonic sensing solution field-tested in case studies allowing rapid 
detection of fungal and mycotoxin contamination on all levels of the food chain (production, processing, 
import, wholesale, retail, food control), increasing the quality and safety of the European food supply. 
KPI Increase in sustainability of food production: 10%-point decrease in the positive sample rate in 
member state mycotoxin surveillance programmes within 9 years from project start. 
Ensuring high food quality standards at lower resource usage and competitive costs / SO1 – SO9 
The deployment of the photonics-based technology developed in PHOTONFOOD will reduce the need for 
costly, specialized, time-consuming laboratory analytics. Furthermore, the modular concept of the platform 
ensures that the precision of contamination detection can easily be adapted to desired (and affordable) target 
levels.    
 
73 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
37 
 
KPI Decrease in analysis cost: at least 50% decrease in fungal/mycotoxin, pesticides and antibiotics per-
sample analysis cost within 7 years from project start (target level for prototype stage: < €3.00 per sample, 
target level after full scale-up: < €0.75 per sample for the MI-FI solution).   
KPI Increased availability of photonics analysers for food analysis: 50% decrease in instrumentation 
cost within 7 years from project start (target level after full scale-up: market price < €2,500 per lab bench 
for the MIFI solution). 
Societal impact on the increased quality and robustness of public food control services / SO1 – SO9 
PHOTONFOOD will develop technology which will allow public food safety and border control 
authorities to perform more tests faster but at the same overall cost as before. 
KPI Increase in the robustness of food safety monitoring:  50% increase in the number of 
fungal/mycotoxin samples analysed by European food safety authorities within 9 years from project start. 
Economic impact on the growth of photonic industry and photonics-related jobs / SO1 – SO11 
Broad deployment of the technology developed by PHOTONFOOD for food chains, and of further 
innovations based on the PHOTONFOOD approach but targeting other value ch ains, will significantly 
contribute to the growth of the European photonics industry in general. 
KPI Increased growth of innovative photonics industry: 30% increase in the (constant-price) sales of 
European photonics companies and 10% increase in the total number of photonics-related jobs in Europe 
within 9 years from project start.