2.2 Measures to maximise impact-Dissemination, exploitation & communication #@COM-DIS-VIS-CDV@#

First version of the ‘Plan for the dissemination and exploitation including communication activities’: Our planned measures to maximise the impact of our project are outlined in this initial ‘Plan for the dissemination and exploitation, including communication activities’ (PDEC). We count on the leadership of EPIC (European Photonics Industry Consortium) for driving forward the Communication, Dissemination & Stakeholder Engagement strategy (WP5), who will also support TEMATYS in the development of the Business Cases for the technological results (WP4), which will be underpinned by a strong Intellectual Property strategy (WP4) under the expert guidance of ICP who have secured over successful 1000 patents over the years.
Key Exploitable Results and value proposition design: PhotonX delivers 5 Key Exploitable Results (KERs), namely: KER1 Mid-IR ICL/QCL inline analyser; KER2 Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) device; KER3 InGaAs SPAD camera with on-chip processing; KER4 Chemical sensing arrays; KER5 PhotonX multimodal integration platform (hardware + data fusion + AI analytics). These KERs are supported by a series of Adoption Enablers: Validated demonstrators in industrial environments, that prove reliability, derisk adoption; Standardisation contributions to foster interoperability, facilitate market entry and build industry confidence in the PhotonX technologies; Business case, IPR and exploitation roadmap, to ensure partners have a route to market; Co-creation methodologies and upskilling, to support user acceptance and workforce readiness.
Together, these KERs and enablers are central to the PDEC. To maximise impact, the consortium will develop open-access training materials, contribute to relevant standards, and engage stakeholders through workshops, conferences, and targeted dissemination. This will be complemented by value proposition design, stakeholder-specific messages, demonstrations, exploitation strategies, business planning, and standardisation actions.
The consortium will systematically assess, document, and refine the KERs throughout the project, aligning them with the needs of target industries, SMEs, technology providers, end-users, and policymakers, and defining clear exploitation routes to maximise uptake and impact beyond the funding period.
COMMUNICATION PLAN & TOOLBOX: We have defined a strategic, holistic communication plan that will be tailored to project needs and updated as it progresses. It is underpinned by clear communication goals:
■ To engage and network with the photonics ecosystem in Europe, accelerating awareness, uptake, and standardisation of the PhotonX multimodal sensing solutions, strengthening the European supply chain and reinforcing open strategic autonomy in key enabling technologies, and fostering future collaboration with technology providers, research infrastructures, and industry clusters. EPIC (world leading photonics industry association, representing >800 companies) will ensure PhotonX is positioned & networked within the photonics ecosystem.
■ To inform key industrial end-user sectors about PhotonX and its benefits for industrial efficiency and sustainability- process industries (pharmaceuticals/bioprocessing, recycling, steelmakers, and other segments), as well as from the future wider application pool (food & agriculture, environmental monitoring, healthcare, critical infrastructure, among others) both directly and through their associations, clusters, and platforms (e.g., A.Spire, EFFRA, FoodDrinkEurope, Water Europe, among others). This engagement will be fostered through targeted workshops, sector-specific case studies and presence at relevant trade fairs, conferences, and stakeholder forums.
■ To outreach to standardisation organisations, contributing to the development of improved, science-based standards. UNE provides a credible pathway to connect with relevant standardisation bodies and ensure the PhotonX outputs are aligned with and feed into ongoing standardisation efforts.
■ To achieve high visibility and recognition within the scientific community, fostering credibility, attracting collaboration opportunities, and ensuring that the project’s findings contribute to advancing the state of the art in photonics, multimodal sensing, AI-driven data fusion, and their application to complex industrial and societal challenges. We will publish in peer-reviewed journals, present at leading conferences, and contribute to scientific dialogues on advanced photonics, multimodal sensing, hybrid AI for data fusion, and their deployment in sustainable, resilient, and human-centric industrial and societal applications.
■ To establish collaboration with existing (and upcoming) projects (e.g. RETINA, and new projects funded under this call topic) and develop synergies with other relevant European, national & regional initiatives, funding programmes and platforms, such as Digital Europe Programme (DEP).
■ To raise awareness among society at large of the critical role that advanced photonics, integrated with complementary sensing and AI play in enabling a greener, more competitive Europe. We will produce engaging video clips, booklets, infographics, and thought-leadership articles to present key messages in clear and accessible formats for diverse audiences.
We will design and build a Communication Toolbox to achieve our communication goals and objectives effectively:
■ Visual identity and brand: We have designed a logo during bid preparation; in the project implementation phase we will invest effort in building brand identity (brand book and brand values).
■ Project website.
■ Informative material: both printed and digital formats (banners, posters, flyers, Application Notes, etc.) & multimedia (introductory video presenting the innovative PhotonX concept, video clips, digital flyers) formats.
9 tradeshows/exhibitions (e.g., PIC International Conference, Laser World of Photonics (Munich), SPIE Photonics Europe, Hannover Messe, Vision Stuttgart, SENSOR+TEST (Nuremberg), ECOC–European Conference on Optical Communication, and Control, Automation & Vision Expo (Copenhagen), ACHEMA, CHPI Europe, etc.) face2face meetings, targeted mailings, and direct outreach to relevant stakeholders.
■ Commercial publications: ≥6 articles in online and offline trade magazines, blogs, and other professional outlets to reach industrial and technical audiences.
■ Public Relations strategy: Timely press releases aligned with key project milestones and outputs, distributed through appropriate press channels, including the European Commission News Section, as well as through industry platforms, networks, and associations (e.g. EPIC, Photonics21, SPIE, EFFRA, A.SPIRE, European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations (EFPIA), European Steel Association (EUROFER), and relevant Horizon Europe thematic clusters).
Dissemination of the Project Results: Aligned with our Open Science Strategy, we will proactively share all non-confidential project outcomes widely and promptly through various means, including scientific publications in photonic sensor advancements, multimodal integration, sensor fusion and machine learning approaches sensor data analysis, algorithm integration for enhanced processing capabilities and decision-making accuracy of photonic sensors, and their application in sustainable, resilient, and human-centric monitoring across diverse industrial and societal domains. Our Dissemination strategy will: ■ Identify results for effective transfer of knowledge to relevant stakeholders; ■ identify suitable dissemination channels; ■ Optimise research impact, extending the value of our findings beyond the target applications and use cases of this project (pharmaceutical bioprocessing, steelmaking, and plastics recycling) into additional domains such as healthcare, security, infrastructure, transportation safety, and other societal areas where multimodal sensing and AI-driven decision support can enable sustainable and resilient outcomes; and assess the outcomes of dissemination activities. Key dissemination tools include, among others:
■ Open Access Scientific publications  prepared by partners submitted in relevant journals, e.g. Sensors, Optics Express, Journal of Photonics for Energy, IEEE Sensors Journal, Applied Spectroscopy, Nature Communications, Advanced Optical Materials, and Measurement Science and Technology.
20 international conferences- oral/poster/paper contributions, e.g., SPIE Photonics Europe, Laser World of Photonics Congress (Munich), CLEO/Europe-EQEC, IEEE Sensors, ECOC (European Conference on Optical Communication), OSA Frontiers in Optics, Optica Imaging and Applied Optics Congress, EUROSENSORS, and SENSOR+TEST, among others.
■ Organisation of Annual workshops/symposia (x3) on themes related to Multimodal Sensing and Intelligent Monitoring for Sustainable Systems (some will be online & some will be held within existing conferences)
■ Sharing non-confidential results on online media and data platforms (e.g., Zenodo, ResearchGate, GitHub, project website) including research data, software, reports.
■ Organisation of ≥3 training and workshop sessions, aligned with the validation phase of the PhotonX demonstration prototypes, to train end-users and stakeholders on the operation, configuration, and interpretation of the multimodal sensing platform. These sessions will also be made accessible online, contributing to the development of relevant skills and competencies across target sectors. Where appropriate, the training will leverage resources and networks of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT), Photonics21, and other relevant European initiatives to support future exploitation and wider adoption of the technology.
■ Final dissemination conference in Brussels (~M34) organised by EPIC in collaboration with relevant European platforms and networks (e.g., Photonics21….), to showcase the PhotonX results within the photonics ecosystem, as well as to industry end-user representatives, policymakers, and wider stakeholders.
Exploitation strategy and business cases: The key goal of our exploitation strategy is to maximise the use of the PhotonX KERs for commercial, societal, scientific, standardisation and policy-relevant purposes. The envisaged exploitation actions are outlined below, and each partner’s specific exploitation intentions are linked to their positioning on the exploitation value chain: Technology SMEs (ALPES- KER1, NV-KER3, IRIS- KER2 + KER5, JLM-KER4) drive technology push, develop photonic and non-optical modules, secure IP, and prepare for industrialisation. Industry early adopters (CELSA, Van Werven, MyBiotech) provide market pull, co-create use case demonstrators, validate in operational environments and prepare for adoption. Research (USAAR, UNE): Advance fundamental R&D, perform lab-scale validation, and ensure technology transfer; Innovation actors (EPIC, TEMA, BRITEST, UNE, ICP etc.): Facilitate standardisation, ecosystem engagement, dissemination, and access to finance/investors, and assist in securing IP assets.
■ Commercial and Industrial adoption of the KERs supported by Business Cases: TEMA (with support from EPIC) will work with the technology partners in defining the post project scale-up and commercial exploitation pathways for the results, both from a standalone perspective (where relevant), and as an integrated offering with Business Cases designed around each of the validated use cases (in pharmaceutical bioprocessing, steelmaking, plastics recycling)  for developing sector-specific offerings, supported by:
A clear value proposition per domain, quantifying demonstrated benefits, and analysing user and customer needs, assessing cost-effectiveness, and defining the expected market position and competitive advantage
A roadmap of the technical scale-up plan, Time-To-Market, Go-to-Market (GTM) and commercialisation strategies (e.g. starting with niche, high-margin markets before scaling to broader applications). It will also include an assessment of regulatory & market barriers, and strategies for EU supply chain consolidation.
Protection of key innovations through IP filings and knowledge encapsulation (guided by ICP-discussed below)
Financing strategies for securing the follow-on funding and investments needed to reach higher TRLs and full-scale EU deployment.
Active engagement with EU initiatives (EPIC, DEP, Photonics21) to enhance visibility and partnerships.
A periodic PESTLE analysis (building from Table 13) will inform these activities by continuously updating our understanding of the external conditions (political, economic, social, technological, legal, and environmental) crucial for success. Industrial partners’ post-project commitments, including supply chain alignment, product robustness, activating strategic distribution channels, and ensuring user acceptance, will also be formalised. By project end, PhotonX will have delivered a validated, multimodal sensing platform, supported by a robust exploitation roadmap, ensuring that the innovations developed contribute to EU sovereignty, competitiveness, and sustainability goals.
■ Knowledge and skills development: Use of the project’s knowledge & expertise to train workers and professionals with the skills required to safely and effectively use the PhotonX innovations (led by expert partner BRITEST), supporting broader uptake and deployment across the wider EU process industries, and follow on applications (e.g. environmental monitoring, healthcare, agriculture).
■ Intellectual Property and patenting: We target the publication of ≥3-5 patents arising from the project, as further detailed under the Strategy for IP Management.
■ Scientific and academic exploitation: The project results will also feed into further research activities, including scale-up studies, development of new research lines, and academic use in PhD and post-doctoral research. We also anticipate further scientific publications, both during and after the project, contributing to the state of the art in the field of multimodal sensing, advanced photonics and AI-enhancements.
■ Contribution to standardisation: Under the leadership of UNE, PhotonX will contribute to pre-standardisation documents and technical reports that support innovative industrial and societal applications of multimodal sensing. The project will maintain regular contact with relevant standardisation committees (e.g., CEN-CENELEC, ISO/TC 172 Optics and Photonics, IEC/TC 76 Optical Radiation Safety and Laser Equipment, and others), ensuring that feedback from these stakeholders is incorporated and that PhotonX’s findings contribute to the development of new or updated standards, in alignment with the EU Knowledge Valorisation Principles fostering open science, intellectual property management, standardisation, and societal engagement.
ategy for IP Management: The PhotonX consortium has identified strategically important and commercially sensitive innovations stemming from the project work with strong licencing and commercialisation potential. As set out in Task 4.3 IP Protection and Patenting, our strategy for knowledge management and protection is to file, within the lifetime of the project, 3-5 new patents, alongside exploring other IPR tools such as trademarks, copyright and Trade Secrets, where appropriate.
To ensure Freedom to Operate (FTO) and protect project results, initial patentability studies using EPO and WIPO patent libraries have been conducted. These studies and in-depth patent landscaping will continue throughout PhotonX to ensure FTO for project outcomes considered for IP application and patenting. A Technology Watch activity performed under Task 4.3 will regularly inform the consortium on technology developments and advancements in the research community, highlighting emerging IP, relevant publications and articles. A complete IP strategy and associated IPR portfolio will be generated and maintained under Task 4.3, led by ICP using its proven IPR methodology (Fig. 9). As a strategic partner, ICP brings extensive expertise, having supported over 1,000 successfully granted/issued patents that underpin commercial solutions, products, assets and services, and has developed an inhouse IPR protection framework tailored to multi-party EC-funded R&I projects such as PhotonX. This framework, successfully applied in numerous IAs and RIAs since 2017, has achieved a high grant/issuance success rate across patents filed, advancing the competitiveness of many EU SMEs. Our efforts will focus on protecting commercially sensitive innovations, while also fostering open science where appropriate. The consortium recognises the importance of balancing IPR protection with openness, to allow other EU researchers to build on PhotonX outcomes. This commitment is reflected in our clustering and ecosystem engagement activities (Task 5.3), our adherence to open science practices (Subtask 6.3.2), including open access conferences and publishing, as well as adopting FAIR data principles (Task 6.3.1).
Knowledge Management: The management of knowledge and IPR in the PhotonX project will be governed by the  Consortium Agreement (CA), which will implement Grant Agreement regulations on IPR protection, among other aspects such as funds distribution, decision procedures, risk management, legal aspects regarding software, trademarks, and patents, and the rights of each partner in the exploitation of results. Signed by all partners before project start, the CA will specify the Background knowledge made available for project use, ownership of which will remain with the current owners, and will be made available to project members royalty-free where necessary for their project activities. No Background IPR from Third Parties is expected to be needed. Foreground knowledge is owned by the partner(s) generating it. Where multiple partners contribute, ownership will be shared pro rata based on effort. Foreground knowledge will also be made available royalty-free to other partners if necessary for their project activities. Where possible, both background and foreground knowledge will be made available to other project partners for (i) dissemination, research, demonstration, interoperability of software and academic purposes, respecting the IPR of the generating partner; and (ii) exploitation of dependent results under fair and reasonable conditions. Requests for such access will respect normal commercial/security/IPR considerations and will require the granting partner’s approval. #§COM-DIS-VIS-CDV§#