4. V. Shapaval, J. Schmitt, T. Møretrø, H -P. Suso, I. Skaar, A.W. Åsli, D. Lilehaug, and A. Kohler. 
Characterization of food spoilage fungi by FTIR. 2013. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 114 (3), 
788-796.  
5. Bassan P, Kohler A, Martens H, Lee J, Byrne H J,  Dumas P, Gazi E, Brown M, Clarke N,  Gardner 
P (2010) Resonant Mie Scattering (RMieS) Correction of Infrared Spectra from Highly Scattering 
Biological Samples, Analyst 135, 268–277. 
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
1. 2012-2014: Coordinator for the EU project ( FP7-SME-2012 ‘Research for the Benefit of SMEs’ ) 
entitled ‘Source tracking and monitoring of mould contamination in food production’ with acronym 
‘FUST’  in European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme managed by REA -Research Executive 
Agency (FP7-SME-2012-315271-FUST) Ranged as number 8 among approx. 150 funded projects. (EU 
funding:  1 130 050 Euros). 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
74 
 
2. 2019-2022: Coordinator for the NFR FriNaTek project entitled ‘DeepHyperSpec -Combining spectral 
and image information in the analysis of hyperspectral imaging data’ grant Nr. 289518 (Total grant: 
12.684 Mio NOK). 
3. 2016-2021: Coordinator for the ‘Multidisciplinary graduate and post -graduate education in big data 
analysis for life sciences’ funded by SIU, the Norwegian Center For International Cooperation In 
Education, Eurasia 2016 - Long-term grant Nr. 257622 (Total grant: 3 Mio NOK). 
4. 2018-2021: Partner in the EU Horizon 2020 project: ICT-30-2017: Photonics KET 2017: Mid-infrared 
arthroscopy innovative imaging system for real -time clinical in depth examination and diagnosis of 
degenerative joint diseases. (EU funding: total budget: 6133635 Euro, NMBU part: 538431 Euros) 
5. 2017-2022: Safer food through changed consumer behaviour: Effective tools and products, 
communication strategies, education and a food safety policy reducing health burden from foodborne 
illnesses (SafeConsume). Source: European Commission, Horizon 2020. EU funding: EUR 9,500,000). 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work 
The BioSpec group is a world leader in the data analysis of spectroscopic data, developing specific protocols 
for the processing, modelling and integration of data from spectroscopy, chemical analysis and genetic 
analysis for data in life and biomedical sciences. The group has during the last decade developed an excellent 
data science infrastructure with in-house GPU computing facilities. The BioSpec group is world leading in 
modelling of infrared spectroscopic data for calibration and classification problems. The BioSpec group at 
NMBU has developed a vibrational spectroscopic database (BIOSDATA SQL) which contains a large 
number of spectra of biological samples and chemicals and which is used for calibration and classification 
model establishment. The group has long-standing experience in using national computing infrastructures 
such as Notur (high performance computing in Norway) and Orion at NMBU. The group has a newly 
established facility at NMBU, comprising a high -throughput vibrational spectroscopic screening platform 
for macro-scale measurements (two FTIR and one FT-Raman system), and a vibrational microspectroscopy 
platform (FTIR microscope with a wide variety of objectives for transmission/reflection chemical imaging; 
Purchase of Raman microscope is i n process). The research groups involved in the project have a large 
spectrum of in-house developed modelling tools (in-house data science platform in Matlab and Python, data 
science platform Orange, numerical methods for electromagnetic field simulation such as integral methods 
and FDTD) and commercial software tools. TheBioSpec group has a well -established data management 
plan including a pipeline for storage and continuous documentation of experimental data, and a plan for 
archiving of data (see: https://www.nmbu.no/en/faculty/realtek/research/groups/biospectroscopy/data -
management). For archiving data we use the Norwegian Centre for Research Data (NSD).   
Organisation Short 
Name UULM 
 
Organisation Legal 
Name  University of Ulm 
Country GERMANY 
Website  https://www.uni-ulm.de  
Description of the legal entity 
UULM is among the leading ‘Golden Age Universities’ ranked #3 in Germany, and #18 in the 
world (Times Higher Education ranking) educating 10,000+ students in (i) Natural Sciences, (ii) 
Mathematics & Economics, (iii) Engineering, Computer Science and Psychology, and (iv) 
Medicine. The Institute of Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry (IABC; uni -ulm.de/iabc) at 
UULM is chaired by Prof. B. Mizaikoff and comprises 3 lead Professors next to 8 permanent 
technical and scientific staff members. Embedded in the faculty of natural sciences, IABC is 
internationally acknowledged for its cross -disciplinary research programs, which are focused on 
the development and application of innovative (micro - and nano-) analytical platforms providing 
advanced methods and technologies in sensing, diagnostics, and imaging of complex molecular 
processes relevant to environmental, industrial, and medical/biological application s. On average, 
20 Ph.D. students and 5 Postdoctoral Fellows are employed at IABC. IABC also operates the 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
75 
 
Elemental Analysis Center and the Focused Ion Beam Center UULM for micro-/nano-fabrication/-
characterization/-prototyping. 
Main role and task in the project 
Within PHOTONFOOD , UULM will be leading WP3, which is committed to developing, 
optimizing, calibrating, validating, and testing portable and hand -held mid-infrared laser- (HI-FI) 
and LED-coupled (MI-FI) sensing systems for analyzing fungal contaminations and mycotoxins in 
commodities. This will include close collaboration with all involved partners on tailoring the laser 
and LED technology, developing efficient thin-film waveguide transducers, and testing/validating 
of the established sensing systems in the field. Furthermore, UULM will be involved in activities 
related to data analysis in WP5, and in communication and dissemination activities in WP7. 
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities 
Prof. Boris Mizaikoff (M), Chaired Professor and Director of IABC since 2007. He received his 
Ph.D. in Analytical Chemistry in 1996, his Habilitation in 2000 – both at the Vienna University of 
Technology (Austria) - and has then been a faculty member at the Georgia Institute of Technology 
(Atlanta, USA) prior to joining UULM. He is author/co-author of 340+ peer-reviewed publications 
(h-index: 46) and 17 patents. Under his leadership, IABC has established an acknowledged track 
record of collaborations with small a nd large industrial partners including ExxonMobil, 
Agilent/Keysight, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Bruker Optics, Alpes Lasers, Sacher Laser, Nanoplus, 
OptoPrecision, etc. He has been elected Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement 
of Science (AAAS) for “building bridges with industry through academic research in sensors, and 
for facilitating technology transfer between academia and industry” in 2006. He is also Associate 
Editor of Analytical Chemistry (ACS), the highest ranked peer -reviewed journal in the analytical 
sciences. Julian Haas (M) is a research associate IABC, who has worked on integrated mid -
infrared photonics since his MA and PhD. He has been a leading researcher developing thin -film 
waveguide technologies combined with laser spectroscopic methods, and their implementation in 
practical applications including chemical contaminants in water, mycotoxin contaminants in 
commodities, and has lately focused on the in -vivo analysis of cartilage damage via arthroscopic 
mid-infrared probes. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements relevant to 
the call content 
1. R. Lu, G. Sheng, W. Li, H. Yu, Y. Raichlin, A. Katzir, B. Mizaikoff , IR-ATR Chemical 
Sensors Based on Ethylene/Propylene Copolymer Co ated Planar Silver Halide Waveguides 
for In-Situ and Simultaneous Detection of Multiple Organic Contaminants in Water , Ange. 
Chem. Int. Ed. 52, 2265-2268 (2013).                                                                                                                               
2. B. Mizaikoff, Waveguide-Enhanced Mid-Infrared Chem/Bio Sensors, Chem. Soc. Rev. 42, 8683-8699 
(2013). 
3. M. Sieger, F. Balluff, X. Wang, S.-S. Kim, L. Leidner, G. Gauglitz, B. Mizaikoff, On-Chip Integrated 
Mid-Infrared GaAs/AlGaAs Mach-Zehnder Interferometer, Anal. Chem. 85, 3050-3052 (2013). 
4. X. Wang, M. Karlsson, M. Sieger, L. Oesterlund, F. Nikolajeff, B. Mizaikoff, Diamonds 
are a Spectroscopist’s Best Friend: Thin -Film Diamond Mid -Infrared Waveguides for 
Advanced Chem/Bio Sensors, Anal. Chem. 86, 8136−8141 (2014). 
6. 5. J. Haas, R. Stach, M. Sieger, Z. Gashi, M. Godejohann, B. Mizaikoff, Sensing Chlorinated 
Hydrocarbons via Miniaturized GaAs/AlGaAs Thin-Film Waveguide Flow Cells Coupled to 
Quantum Cascade Lasers, Analyt. Methods 8, 6602-6606 (2016). 
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
1. 2019 (EU): VOGAS - Screening of Gastric Cancer via Breath Volatile Organic Compounds 
by Hybrid Sensing Approach; 
2. 2019 (EU): BREAK BIOFILMS - Breaking Bad Biofilms. Innovative Analysis and Design 
Rules for Next-Generation Antifouling Interfaces; 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
76 
 
3. 2018 (EU): BRICS - Broadly Tunable Interband Cascade Laser Source for Gas Analyzers; 
4. 2018 (EU): MIRACLE - Mid-infrared Arthroscopy Innovative Imaging System for Real-time 
Clinical in-depth Examination and Diagnosis of Degenerative Joint Diseases; 
5. 2018 (DFG): SFB CATA LIGHT - Light-driven Molecular Catalysts in Hierarchically 
Structured Materials; 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work 
IABC has developed a plethora of IR  spectroscopic sensing systems for 
environmental/clinical/medical monitoring, as well as for food contamination analysis with 
specific focus on fungal contaminations and mycotoxins. Next to broad -band FT -IR based 
technologies, IABC has pioneered miniaturized sensing systems combining interband cascade 
and quantum cascade lasers (ICLs, QCLs) with thin -film waveguides providing superior 
sensitivity in environmental monitoring, biomedical/clinical diagnostics, and food safety  
applications. The latter have been in part commercialized as a main result of a preceding EU -
project on IR-spectroscopic mycotoxin detection ( MYCOSPEC; EU project #314048) and will 
contribute to the adaptable sensing interface in PHOTONFOOD.  
Organisation Short 
Name WU 
 
Organisation Legal 
Name  Wageningen University 
Country NETHERLANDS 
Website  https://www.wur.nl/ 
Description of the legal entity 
Wageningen University (WU) provides world -class research to students from >100 different 
nationalities and has been awarded for the 15 th time in a row as the best university by Dutch 
students. WU is heavily involved in EU framework research programmes, as coordinator or as core 
participant. The laboratory of organic chemistry is specialized in surface bound chemical synthesis 
and the physical and chemical characterization of surfaces. The embedded special chair on 
analytical chemistry is focussed on advanced diagnostics, biosensors and ambient mass 
spectrometry. The analytical group is strongly linked to the applied research institute Wageningen 
Food Safety Research (part of another legal entity, Wageningen Research). Consequently, the 
academic analytical research at WU is eventually aiming for innovative on-site applications in food 
quality and safety testing. 
Main role and task in the project 
WU will be leader of the work package on paper microfluidics (WP2) and contribute to the 
modelling and software development activities in WP5 and the dissemination of the project (WP7). 
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities 
Michel Nielen (M)  is professor of analytical chemistry at WU. After a career at TNO and in 
chemical industry at AkzoNobel, he joined Wageningen University & Research in 2000 for a 
position at the RIKILT institute. Currently, he holds a part -time special chair on Analytical  
Chemistry at Wageningen University and is also part-time principal scientist at Wageningen Food 
Safety Research (WFSR). He is former president of the Dutch Society for Mass Spectrometry and 
former scientific director of TI-COAST, the Dutch public-private partnership on analytical science 
and technology. Nielen (co -)authored 200 peer -reviewed papers and book chapters (>8800 
citations, H -index 53) covering a wide range of analytical technologies, including mass 
spectrometry, chromatography, capillary electrophoresis and biosensors. 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
77 
 
Gert Salentijn (M)  is assistant professor at WU and the recent recipient of a highly prestigious 
personal grant from the national science foundation. He has obtained his PhD in analytical 
chemistry with honors from the University of Groningen. In 2019 he was a visiting scientist at the 
world’s leading MS group of Prof. Graham Cooks at Purdue in the USA. Salentijn is Work Package 
leader for detection technology in the Horizon 2020 ETN FoodSmartphone. He is co -founder of 
SG Papertroni cs, a spin -off company from the University of Groningen, developing platform 
technology for paper -based analyses, based on his patented technology for sample pre -
concentration on paper. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements relevant to 
the call content 
1. Ross GMS, Salentijn GIJ, Nielen MWF, Filippini D (2020) A 3D-micro-total analysis system 
for integrated multiplex immunosensor detection, Lab Chip, under review. 
2. Ross GMS, Salentijn GIJ, Nielen MWF ( 2019) A  Critical Comparison Between Flow -
through and Lateral Flow Immunoassay Formats for Visual and Smartphone-based Multiplex 
Allergen Detection, Biosensors, 9, 1-21. 
3. Santbergen MJC, van der Zande M, Bouwmeester H, Nielen MWF (2019) Online and in situ 
analysis of Organs-on-a-chip. Trends Anal. Chem., 115, 138-146. 
4. Ross GMS, Bremer MGEG, Nielen MWF (2018) Consumer-friendly food allergen detection: 
moving towards smartphone-based immunoassays. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 410, 5353–5371. 
5. Salentijn GIJ, Grajewski M, Verpoo rte E ( 2018) Reinventing (bio)chemical analysis with 
paper, Anal. Chem. 90, 13815–13825. 
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
1. 2017-2020 Nielen is coordinator of the EU H2020 Marie Curie Innovative Training Network 
on smartphone analyzers for on -site testing of food quality and safety, acronym 
FoodSmartphone (grant agreement 720325 – FoodSmartphone - H2020-MSCA-ITN, 2.8 M). 
Salentijn is Work Package leader for innovative detection mechanisms. 
2. 2018-2020 Nielen is co -applicant and core -partner of a regional EFRD -project on Citizen 
Science, aiming for the design, development and validation of portable analytical instruments 
and devices in food and health sciences.  
3. 2019-2023 Salentijn has received a prestigious personal grant from the Netherlands 
Organisation for Scientific Research, on the topic of Surface-Induced Adaptive Switching in 
Paper Microfluidics. 
Description of any signific ant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work 
Wageningen University has state -of-the-art analytical instruments, both within the laboratory of 
organic chemistry and on the Wageningen Campus. Moreover, full -time research technicians 
provide supports for undergrad and grad students in their research. The analytical segment of the 
lab of organic chemistry has expertise pertaining to relevant topics such as 3D -printing, paper 
microfluidics, on -site (bio)sensors, sample extraction and preparation, and a wide network of 
collaborators in these fields. 
Organisation Short 
Name BOKU 
 
Organisation Legal 
Name  
University of Natural 
Resources and Life Sciences, 
Vienna 
Country AUSTRIA 
Website  https://boku.ac.at/ 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
78 
 
Description of the legal entity 
The University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna (BOKU) (founded in 1872) has 
more than 2,800 staff and 11,300 students, with 10 doctoral programmes and was ranked as a Top 
25 GreenMetric World University for 7 years in a row. Its Department of Agrobiotechnology (IFA-
Tulln) with some 200 staff is a leading institution in the area of agro-biotechnology with a special 
emphasis on mycotoxin control and reduction since 1994. The Institute for Bioanalytics and Agro-
Metabolomics (iBAM; formerly Cente r for Analytical Chemistry) is well -known for the 
development of ground-breaking analytical methods for the determination of multiple mycotoxins 
and of novel LC-HR-MS-based metabolomics approaches. 
Main role and task in the project 
BOKU will coordinate W P6 on demonstration and validation of the photonics based detection 
systems. BOKU will also perform reference analysis of mycotoxins following a fully validated 
quantitative LC -MS/MS based multi -toxin approach.. Furthermore, BOKU will be involved in 
software development and models development activities in WP5. 
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities 
Prof. Rudolf Krska (M) , full Professor of (Bio -)Analytical Chemistry at BOKU, has an 
impressive track record in the research area of biotoxins in food and feed. Since 2015 he has been 
recognised as highly cited (top 1%) researcher for the fourth successive time in the Web of Science. 
Prof. Krska (male) is the most cited author in the area of mycotoxins (>350 SCI papers, h -index: 
62) of the last decade and has been coordinating several EU-funded projects incl. the current H2020 
project MyToolBox dealing with integrated strategies to reduce mycotoxins in the food chain. He 
is also the President of the International Society for Mycotoxicology. David Steiner  (M) is a 
research associate at the K1-competence center for Food and Feed Quality Safety and Innovation 
(FFoQSI) in Tulln, Aust ria. David Steiner was the leading researcher for mycotoxin method 
development and analysis following ISO 17025:2005 at the R&D department of the Austrian 
Competence Center for Food Safety (LVA GmbH). Furthermore, Steiner was responsible for the 
coordination of the accreditation processes of the IFA-Test Systems PT Scheme according to ISO 
17043:2010. Within his Doctoral thesis in Food Chemistry and Biotechnology he expanded his 
knowledge in analytical chemistry and generated major experience in development of LC-MS/MS 
based methods for multi-class contaminants in complex feed within the FFoQSI work-package on-
field/plant quality assurance. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements relevant to 
the call content 
1. Sulyok, M; Berthiller, F; Krska, R; Schuhmacher, R. Development and validation of a liquid 
chromatography/tandem mass spectrometric method for the determination of 39 mycotoxins 
in wheat and maize. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom. 2006; 20(18):2649-2659. 
2. R. Krska, M. de Nijs, O. McNerney, M. Pichler, J. Gilbert, S. Edwards, M. Suman, M, N. 
Magan, V. Rossi, HJ van der Fels -Klerx, F. Bagi, B. Poschmaier, M. Sulyok, F. Berthiller, 
H.P. van Egmond, Safe food and feed through an integrated toolbox for mycotoxin 
management: the MyToolBox approach. World Mycotoxin Journal, 2016, 9(4); 
doi.org/10.3920/WMJ2016.2136 
3. Sulyok, M.; Krska, R .; Schuhmacher , R. A liquid chromatography -tandem mass 
spectrometric multi -mycotoxin method for the quantification of 87 analytes and its 
application to semi-quantitative screening of moldy food samples. ANAL BIOANAL CHEM, 
389, 1505-1523; ISSN 1618-2642. 
4. Steiner, D; Krska, R; Malachova, A; Taschl, I; Sulyok, M. Evaluation of Matrix Effects and 
Extraction Efficiencies of LC-MS/MS Methods as the Essential Part for Proper Validation of 
Multiclass Contaminants in Complex Feed. J AGR FOOD CHEM. 2020; 68(12): 3868-3880 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
79 
 
5. Sulyok, M; Stadler, D; Steiner, D; Krska, R; Validation of an LC-MS/MS-based dilute-and- 
shoot approach for the quantification of >500 mycotoxin and other secondary metabolites in 
food crops: challenges and solutions, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 2020, 412, 
2607; doi: 10.1007/s00216-020-02489-9 
6.  
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
1. 2017-2021: Blue Area Leader for the project within a strategic participation (e.g. COMET) 
Feed and Food Quality Safety and Innovation (FFoQSI) funded by the Austrian Ministries 
BMVIT, BMWFW and the federal provinces of Niederösterreich, Upper Austria and Vienna. 
The programme COMET is administered by FFG. 
2. 2019-2020: Project leader for the project Mycotoxin degradation mechanisms in mealworms 
(Tenebrionidae) funded by the federal province of Niederösterreich and the European 
Regional Development Funds (ERDF). 
3. 2016-2020: Project leader for the project Safe Food and Feed through an Integrated Toolbox 
for Mycotoxin Management (MyToolbox)  funded by the Commission of the European 
Communities, Rue de la Loi, Brussels, European Union. 
4. 2016-2018: Project  leader for the project Multidisciplinary approach to strengthen 
cooperation and establish novel platform for comprehensive assessment of food and feed 
safety (MultiCoop) funded by the Commission of the European Communities, Rue de la Loi, 
Brussels, European Union. 
5. 2013-2016 Project leader for the project Novel infrared spectroscopic tools for mycotoxin 
determination in foodstuffs for increased food safety (MYCOSPEC) funded by the 
Commission of the European Communities, Rue de la Loi, Brussels, European Union. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work 
BOKU has already been involved in some 90 EC -funded projects within FP7 and H2020, co -
ordinating 19 projects. Currently, BOKU is hosting three ERC Grants and is partner in nine H2020 
projects. Prof. Krska coordinated 4 EU projects, and led WPs, e.g. the WP “Training activities” in 
the Horizon 2020 TWINNING project MultiCoop (GA no. 692195). BOKU was hosting the 
Special Research Programme of the Austrian Science Fund SFB -FUSARIUM, and had received 
some 10 Mio Euro of national funding. A major emphasis of the latter project was on metabolomics 
of Plant-Fusarium interactions. 
Currently the BOKU/IFA-Tulln is the coordinating institution of the H2020 -SFS-13-2015 project 
MyToolBox (Safe Food and Feed through an Integrated ToolBox for Mycotoxin Management)- 
coordinator Prof. Rudolf Krska. BOKU/IFA-Tulln is also beneficiary in the INTERFUTURE ITN 
(GA no. 722642) and CEREALPATHETN (GA no. 674964). BOKU/IFA -Tulln has also been 
receiving other major national funding for its research e.g. on  biomarkers and the development of 
multi-toxin methods as part of the activities of the Austrian Competence Center for Feed and Food 
(FFOQSI) which is co-owned by BOKU and funded by the COMET programme. 
Organisation Short 
Name NEBIH 
 
Organisation Legal 
Name  
National Food Chain Safety 
Office 
Country HUNGARY 
Website   
https://portal.nebih.gov.hu/ 
 
Description of the legal entity 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
80 
 
National Food Chain Safety Office ( NEBIH) is the integrated food chain safety authority of 
Hungary with control responsibilities covering the whole food chain from agriculture and food 
processing to retail and catering. NEBIH is the official Hungarian contact point to the European 
Food Safety Authority, the Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed and the International Food Safety 
Authorities Network. In addition to the traditional authority measures – risk assessment and risk 
management – risk communication has become a very important focus area during the last 10 years. 
To ensure food chain safety, NEBIH operates the national reference laboratory network. Besides 
food safety, food quality is also addressed in NEBIH’s activities. The KMÉ (“High-Quality Food”) 
trademark system has been established in 2019, aiming to distinguish high -quality food on the 
product market, based on laboratory experiments, label check, sensory analysis and consumer 
preference. 
Main role and task in the project 
NEBIH is a key contributor in PHOTONFOOD project as the leader of WP1. They will lead the 
assessment of photonic sensor solutions for monitoring food quality. As a food-safety authority 
NEBIH has direct contact with more than 3000 small and medium sized farms in Hungary, and 
will contribute to the validation and demonstration in WP6. In addition, NEBIH will be involved 
in model validation and demonstration activities in WP5. 
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities 
Gyula Kasza, PhD (M) – Leader of WP1 . Head of the Department of Risk Prevention and 
Education in NEBIH. Honorary professor of Szent István University, Faculty of Food Science and 
the University of Veterinary Medicine, Budapest. He gives lectures at Semmelweis University, 
Faculty of Health Sciences as well. He has an agricultural engineer and a law degree and a PhD in 
consumer research. He has experience in food related policy making and implementation of 
scientific findings into food control measures. His interests include food safety risk perception and 
risk communication. Author of more than 190 peer-reviewed publications.  
Attila Nagy, DVM (M) – Director of NEBIH’s Food Chain Safety Laboratory Directorate. He has 
a degree in veterinary medicine and law, and has a certificate as auditor of qua lity management 
system of food laboratories, based on EN ISO/IEC 17025:2001, internal auditor of EN ISO 
22000:2005 and modern methods of sensory analysis certification. He is responsible for the 
supervision of the national laboratory network, including Foo d Analytical, Food Microbiological, 
Food Toxicological, Radioanalytical and Feed Laboratories.  
Tekla Izsó (F) – Food safety referent at NEBIH. She has a master degree in Food Safety and Quality 
Engineering and currently is a PhD student in the Doctoral School of Food Sciences at Szent István 
University. She has experience in international projects (e.g. SafeConsume), risk assessment and 
risk communication. She has experience in qualitative and quantitative consumer research also. 
Author of several peer-reviewed publications.  
Eszter Csenki (F) – Food safety referent at NEBIH. She has a degree in Food Engineering (BSc) 
and is currently studying Food Safety and Quality Engineering (MSc). She has experience in 
implementation of H2020 and national level ESF projects and has expertise in risk assessment and 
stakeholder coordination.  She has been involved in several consumer awareness -raising 
communication campaigns in NEBIH, aiming to inform consumers about food-related risks.  
Dávid Szakos (M)  – Food safety referent at National Food Chain Safety Office. Dávid Szakos 
graduated as a c hemical engineer (MSc) at Budapest University of Technology and Economics. 
Currently, he is a PhD student at the University of Veterinary Medicine. His PhD deals with novel 
functional foods. He has got expertise in qualitative and quantitative consumer res earch and 
multivariate statistical analysis. He has participated in national and international research projects. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements relevant to 
the call content 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
81 
 
1. Kasza, G., Szabó-Bódi, B., Lakner, Z., & Izsó, T. (2019). Balancing the desire to decrease 
food waste with requirements of food safety. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 84, 74-
76. 
2. Vajda, Á., Kasza, G., & Mohácsi -Farkas, C. (2019). Estimation of the occurrence of 
foodborne salmonellosis in Hungary. Acta Alimentaria, 48(1), 96-104. 
3. Süth, M., Mikulka, P., Izsó, T., & Kasza, G. Y. (2018). Possibilities of targeting in food chain 
safety risk communication. Acta Alimentaria, 47(3), 307-314. 
4. Szabó-Bódi, B., Kasza, G., & Szakos, D. (2018). Assessment of household food waste in 
Hungary. British Food Journal. 
5. Szabó-Bódi, B., Kasza, G., & Szakos, D. (2018). Assessment of household food waste in 
Hungary. British Food Journal. 
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
1. SafeConsume (H2020 Grant agreement No. 727580, 2017-2022): Safer food through changed 
consumer behaviour: Effective tools and products, information strategies, education and a 
food safety policy reducing health burden from foodborne illnesses (http://safeconsume.eu/) 
– stakeholder coordination activity within SafeConsume project; 
2. LIFE-FOODWASTEPREV project ( LIFE15 GIE/HU/001048, 2016 -2020): Food waste 
prevention in the food chain to support the implementation of the 7th Environment Action 
Programme (http://maradeknelkul.hu/en/) – Good Practices Guides for catering, trade, food 
industry partners and community on food waste reduction; 
3. Reinforced Consumer Rights for Enhanced Food Safety and Quality (RCR -EFSQ) (811235 
- RCR-EFSQ – CONS-CPC-JA, 2018 -2021) ( https://portal.nebih.gov.hu/-/reinforced-
consumer-rights-for-enhanced-food-safety-and-quality) - investigation and laboratory 
analysis of dual quality; 
4. Nébih’s Szupermenta (Super Mint) project: a national, complex product testing program that 
includes laboratory experiments and sensory analysis as well; 
5. EU Menu Project ( EFSA-2010-00877, 2011 - ): EFSA Comprehensive European Food 
Consumption Database for Exposure Assessment; 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work 
Nébih has a dedicated directorate for food and feed laboratories, supervising 40 laboratories 
Nébih has a dedicated Food Toxicology National Reference Laboratory, which is responsible for 
the analysis of mycotoxins, drug residues, PAH compounds, metals, hormones, food contact 
materials, and dioxin from food and feed. Nébih operates two external university departments: 
Department of Food Chain Risk Manage ment with Faculty of Food Science, Szent István 
University and Department of Food Chain Safety with University of Veterinary Medicine, 
Budapest. Nébih operates a department for regular stakeholder forums.  
Organisation Short 
Name NANOPLUS 
 
Organisation Legal 
Name  
Nanosystems and 
Technologies GmbH 
Country GERMANY 
Website  https://nanoplus.com/ 
Description of the legal entity 
NP is an SME which was founded 1998 as spin off from Würzburg University. The company 
focuses on the development of customer specific optoelectronic devices for sensor applications. 
The company with currently 97 employees, has two clean room facilities with 250 m2 (Gerbrunn, 
Germany) and 650 m2 (Meiningen, Germany), respectively. A complete process line for 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
82 
 
semiconductor laser fabrication is available, comprising mask aligners for optical lithography as 
well as systems for electron beam lithography, different dry etch systems, sputter systems, 
evaporators, laser mount ing facilities, etc. Key products of NP are complex coupled distributed 
feedback (DFB) laser diodes. In these lasers complex coupling is obtained by combining a ridge 
waveguide with metal gratings on top of the waveguide layer on both sides of the laser ridge. DFB 
lasers realized by this technique in various material systems have a high single mode yield (>90%), 
high sidemode suppression ratio (>40dB) combined with low back reflection sensitivity and 
thresholds and efficiencies, which correspond to those of Fabry Perot lasers realized from the same 
layers.  
NP manufactures and sells DFB and Fabry-Perot laser diodes in the wavelength range from 0.7 up 
to 3.0 μm for sensing and spectroscopic applications. As base material for the lasers 
GaAlAs/InGaAs, InGaAsP, GaInAsN and GaInAsSb heterostructures are used. In addition, NP 
offers interband cascade laser (ICL) DFBs from 3 -6 μm and quantum cascade laser (QCL) DFBs 
at certain wavelengths between 5 and 14 μm for specific applications. Previous work within 
national and international cooperation have allowed NP to acquire significant experience in long 
wavelength device processing based on Quantum Cascade as well as Interband Cascade material. 
nanoplus has e.g. coordinated the European research projects SENSHY (www.se nshy.eu) for the 
development of GaSb based devices in the 3.0 – 3.6 μm wavelength range for which the company 
was awarded the Prism Award for Green Photonics and Sustainable Energy in 2012. 
Main role and task in the project 
NP main task is the developments of cascaded MIR light sources in WP3. Cost effective LEDs 
operating in the 5 -6.5 µm range are realized for the MI -FI device whereas high precision multi -
wavelength lasers will be developed for the HI-FI device. NP will also support the WP5 Prototype 
development. NP will in particular contribute to the PHOTONFOOD project by bringing in 
capabilities and related expertise in the field of ICL and QCL technology. NP is a leading supplier 
of semiconductor laser sources for gas sensing applications and has already been able to provide a 
variety of innovations (as discussed above) into this field. Having a high interest to maintain a 
strategic position with respect to emerging technology and related market opportunities concerning 
infrared emitters in biomedical field of food contamination, nanoplus is fully committed to the 
project and the related investigations for future device applications in biophotonics. 
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities 
Dr. Robert Weih  (Principal Investigator) (M) was born in Schwerin, Germany in 1985. He 
received his Diploma degree in nanotechnology engineering and PhD degree in Physics from the 
University of Würzburg in 2011 and 2018, respectively. His main research interests covered 
molecular beam epitaxy for mi d infrared emitting and detecting devices in the GaSb material 
system. In 2015, he joined the epitaxy division at nanoplus Nanosystems and Technologies GmbH. 
He is responsible for the epitaxy and chip dev 
elopment for innovative devices based on III-V semiconductors such as GaAs, InP and GaSb. Dr. 
Caroline Kistner (Co-Investigator) (F) was born in Würzburg, Germany in 1981. She graduated 
in Physics from the University of Konstanz, Germany in 2007. In 2011 she received her PhD degree 
for her thesis on the spectroscopy of electronically contacted micro-cavities from the University of 
Würzburg. Following her studies, C. Kistner joined the product development team of OSRAM 
Opto Semiconductors GmbH as Project Manager Engineering, where she led a variety of 
international product development projects concerning opto -electronical components. In 2016 C. 
Kistner joined the R&Ddivision of nanoplus as development engineer and is now heading the R&D 
department. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, serv ices, or other achievements relevant to 
the call content 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
83 
 
1. N. Schäfer; J. Scheuermann; R. Weih; J. Koeth; S. Höfling “High efficiency mid -infrared 
interband cascade LEDs grown on low absorbing substrates emitting >5  mW of output 
power”, Optical Engineering 58(11), 117106 (2009). 
2. M. v. Edlinger, J. Scheuermann, R. Weih, Ch. Zimmermann, L. Nähle, M. Fischer, J. Koeth,S. 
Höfling,and M. Kamp, "Monomode Interband Cascade Lasers at 5.2 μm for Nitric Oxide 
Sensing",Photonics Technology Letters, Volume 26 , Issue: 5 (2014); 
3. L. Naehle, C. Zimmermann, S. Belahsene, M. Fischer, G. Boissier, P. Grech, G. Narcy, S. 
Lundqvist, Y.Rouillard, J. Koeth, M. Kamp and L. Worschech , “Monolithic tunable GaSb -
based lasers at 3.3 μm“, Electronics Letters 47, 1092 (2011); 
4. J. Koeth, M. von Edlinger, J. Scheuermann, L. Nähle, L. Hildebrandt, M. Fischer, R. Weih, 
M. Kamp, Distributed feedback interband cascade lasers for applications in re search and 
industry“, Photonics West, 2015, February 7-12, 2015, San Francisco, USA. 
5. P. Fuchs, J. Friedl, S. Höfling, J. Koeth, A. Forchel, L. Worschech, and M. Kamp, “Single 
mode quantum cascade lasers with shallow -etched distributed Bragg reflector”, Opt ics 
Express, Vol. 20, Issue 4, pp. 3890-3897 (2012). 
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
1. SENSHY [FP7 EU]: develop high quality ICL material for device processing and since then 
commercially exploitation the project results (only commercial manufacturer worldwide to 
offer ICL based DFB lasers). 
2. MIRACLE [Horizon 2020] development and integration of multiple technologies in the first 
mid-infrared attenuated total reflection (MIR-ATR) instrument for arthroscopic use based on 
DFB-QCL light sources. 
3. MIRPHAB [Horizon 2020] European pilot line for single access point to all the Mid -IR 
technology and componen ts to build customized chemical sensors: nanoplus provides ICL 
technology. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work 
Nanosystems and Technologies GmbH, Germany is an ISO 9001:2015 and ISO 14001:2015 
certified supplier of semiconductor devices and one of the leading manufacturers of lasers for gas 
sensing applications. NANOPLUS is currently supplying mono mode DFB lasers in different types 
of packages at various wavelengths. Some typical DFB devices and their performance figures based 
on different material systems can be found at www.nanoplus.com. 
NP has significant experience with DFB lasers in the GaAs and InP, but also the GaSb material 
system and associated challenges like water -free chip processing. Based on this material system, 
NANOPLUS has e.g. supplied long -wavelength DFB lasers for the NAS A Mars Science 
Laboratory MSL mission (isotope ratio measurements on -board the Mars Rover Curiosity). The 
company holds the current long-wavelength record for mono mode type I GaSb-based laser diodes, 
as well as the current long-wavelength record for mono mode Interband Cascade Lasers. MIR laser 
sources based on DFB and multi-section BSG ICL devices with performance defining the current 
state-of-the-art have been demonstrated. Researchers from NP also made various important 
contributions in the field of Qua ntum Cascade Laser device development. NP will in particular 
contribute to the PHOTONFOOD project by bringing in capabilities and related expertise in the 
field of ICL and QCL technology. 
Organisation Short 
Name ROMER 
                         
Organisation Legal 
Name  Romer Labs 
Country AUSTRIA 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
84 
 
Website  https://www.romerlabs.com/ 
Description of the legal entity 
Romer Labs is an Austrian company (founded in Washington, USA in 1982) and a leading global 
supplier of diagnostic solutions for mycotoxins, food pathogens, food allergens, GMOs, veterinary 
drug residues and other food contaminants. The main objective of t he company is to provide 
scientifically sound, high quality products and services to make food safer. A broad range of 
innovative tests and services provide an important contribution to integrated food safety solutions 
also serving private and public laboratories. R&D facilities are operated in AT, UK, MY, and USA 
and the production plants are located in AT and USA. 
Main role and task in the project 
ROMER will contribute to the validation of the developed technology. As an analytical lab, Romer 
is in close contact with customers. Based on the end users requirements well known to Romer Labs, 
they will be able to provide valuable feedback on the strengths and weaknesses of the developed 
devices and suggest improvements. 
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities 
Dr. Kurt Brunner (M) is a Director Research and Development of the Romer labs. He led previously 
a research group for molecular diagnostics of food and feed at BOKU/IFA -Tulln, Austria.  Since 
20 years he is an active scientist in the field of food and feed safety. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements relevant to 
the call content 
1. Products: more than 50 different immunoassays for food and feed safety testing; 
2. Products: highly purified reference materials serving as analytical standards; 
3. Patents: 6 patent families protecting Romer’s core products; 
4. Kluger B, Bueschl C, Lemmens M, Berthiller F, Haeubl G, Jaunecker G, Adam G, Krska R, 
Schuhmacher R. (2013) Stable i sotopic labelling -assisted untargeted metabolic profiling 
reveals novel conjugates of the mycotoxin deoxynivalenol in wheat. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
405(15): 5031-5036. 
5. Ansari P, Haeubl G. (2016) Determination of cyclopiazonic acid in white mould cheese by 
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC -MS/MS) using a novel internal 
standard. Food Chem. 211:978-982. 
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
1. Safe Food II; development of novel methods for food allergen testing, funded by the Austrian 
Research Promotion Agency; 
2. FP7 project “MYCORED - Novel integrated strategies for worldwide mycotoxin reduction 
in the food and feed chains”; 
3. Austrian FFOQSI program; Integrated research from field to fork; 
4. K1 Center of the Austrian Research Promotion Agency; “Competence Center for 
Electrochemical Surface Technologies”; 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work 
As explained before, the farm is composed of three different production facilities and one 
processing facility. Each facility has specific technologies. In the greenhouses there are all the 
irrigation and heating systems with an automation system. In the f ish farm, there are different 
technologies installed to be able to grow fish in a recirculating system: mechanical filtration, 
biological filtration, water oxygenation, fish purging system, feeding system, automation and alarm 
system, etc. We have a complex heating system with a heating pump and gas boilers. 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
85 
 
Organisation Short 
Name IRIS 
 
Organisation Legal 
Name  IRIS Technology Solutions 
Country SPAIN 
Website  http://www.iristechnologygroup.com/ 
Description of the legal entity 
IRIS Technology Group (http://www.iristechnologygroup.com/) is an advanced engineering Group 
that was established in Barcelona in 2007. Since 2011, it also operates from Dublin (Ireland) 
whereas the Barcelona office is referred to as IRIS Technology Solutions S.L. It specializes in the 
manufacture and integration of Process Analytical Technology (PAT) -based real -time quality 
monitoring solutions for the process industries and IoT systems for smart manufacturing, 
predominantly targeted at the food, pharmaceu tical and chemical industries. In particular, our 
product line comprises proprietary state -of-the-art IR analyzers for at -line and in -line process 
monitoring.  
On the one hand, our solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics in the fields o f 
MEMs, Near Infrared Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral Imaging, and Raman. On the other hand, we 
leverage ICTs, whereby we apply Machine learning, Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining 
techniques for predictive and active control, as well as for decision support systems. In addition to 
photonics-based analyzers, we also work with IoT sensors for enabling equipment and machinery 
for smart manufacturing and transitioning industry to the Industry4.0 paradigm. Our solutions are 
cloud-based for mobility, remote monitoring and multi-site applications.   
Our Innovation Division which is governed by an Innovation Committee comprising Senior 
Management, and an Innovation Unit for managing and executing the company’s innovation 
roadmap, has 3 core strategic lines, for shaping the Factory of the Future: 
 
1. New optical photonics -based technologies and PAT systems for production process 
optimization 
2. ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms) 
3. Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorization 
In addition to running an internal R&D program, as well as carrying our various joint private 
projects with industry partners, our Innovation Division is highly experienced in working in 
collaborative R&D projects in H2020 (both as coordinators and partners), principally in the SPIRE, 
FoF, and BBI programs. The company was established in 2007 and currently employs 60+ staff 
with a turnover of € 5 M. It is equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet 
chemistry laboratory, optic s labs (2), and an electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 
9001:2008 certified and also is certified under UNE -EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems 
R&D&i. We are also certified by the local (Catalonian) government as a provider of technological 
R&D services (Tecnio Certification). IRIS is a member of the following sectorial networks: SPIRE, 
SPIE and SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial collectives such as Smart Space (association 
of companies and organizations that specialize in the ‘smartification’ of industry). 
Main role and task in the project 
IRIS has extensive expertise at this level, and in particular in the context of industry -driven FP7 
and H2020 projects, and private contacts with the industry. They will contribute in WP5, whereby, 
they will be responsible for the development of the Global System Control, software and data 
management platform. IRIS will also have minor contribution in WP4 and WP6 during prototype 
phase. 
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
86 
 
Dr. Ing. ELODIE BUGNICOURT  (F). Innovation Unit leader. Masters in Material Science & 
Engineering (2002), PhD in Polymers and Compos ite Materials (2005), both from National 
Institute of Applied Science (INSA), Lyon, France. Leader of the EcoMaterials business unit in 
IRIS from 2009 till 2014 and now Head of the innovation Unit. Since at IRIS, Elodie coordinated 
several European project s in the fields of bio -based packaging materials development, process 
monitoring and surface treatment. She has an extensive previous R&D experience in the in 
chemical industry especially related to reactive polymer formulations: i) Arkema (ex. Cray Valley, 
2002, Spain) in the field of polyester powder coating; Wacker Chemie (2002 -2005, Germany and 
France), Silicone division that funded her PhD thesis regarding the development of nanocomposites 
based on an epoxy matrix and silica; iii) Ashland (2006-2009, located sequentially in USA, Spain 
and France) in the Composite Polymers division, focussing on bio-sourced resins, flame retardant 
resins, SMC resins, PU and epoxy structural adhesives. With a strong interest on innovation and 
sustainability, so far, Elodie led and participated in many R&D projects aimed at developing new 
formulations, understanding mechanisms and structure -properties relationships, developing new 
analytical and modelling methods (for improved quality management); as well as collaborated with 
academic labs and other players in the supply and value chain. Finally, Elodie is author of several 
papers in peer -reviewed and technical journals and has presented her work in numerous 
international conferences.  
Dr. DAVID NETTLETON  (M), Data Mining An alyst.  He has obtained a PhD in Artificial 
Intelligence from the Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, M.Sc. In Computer 
Software and Systems Design from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K., and B.Sc. (Hons) 
Computer Science from the University of Wolverhampton, U.K. Has over 20 years’ experience of 
applying data mining algorithms (including neural networks, rule induction) and statistical 
techniques (including ANOVA, regression, principal components) in a diversity of data analys is 
and modeling projects, such as medical diagnosis/prognosis, fraud detection, customer loyalty and 
segmentation, online user web search behavior and data privacy. As well as commercial projects, 
he has conducted research and lectured at two universities. He has published a diversity of articles 
in specialized data analysis journals/congresses and three books. He has participated in several 
competitive multi -partner research projects and has a European patent application for a graph 
matching algorithm. 
MSc. ALEJANDRO ROSALES  (M) has a M. Sc. in Physics from the Universidad de La 
Habana (1986). His background comprises theoretical and technical skills in several scientific 
and technological areas: optics, lasers, high vacuum, colorimetry, UV -VIS-NIR-MIR 
spectroscopy, chemometrics and design of measurement instruments. He has extensive practical 
experience in programming, electronics and mechanical CAD design as well as R&D 
methodology and management. His career has included positions as researcher applicat ions 
engineer, design engineer, business developer and R&D manager. In 2000s, he worked in the 
FTIR spectroscopy field applied to quality control in the agrofood (wine) industry, whereby he 
developed two new measurement instruments for wine analysis. His career as industrial physicist 
has been focused in applying his wide expertise to provide solutions for industrial problems. 
Since 2011, he has been the Technical Manager in IRIS, leading a staff of 20 engineers and 
researchers involved in R&D projects aimed at developing novel high-end solutions for industry. 
Currently, he is the Science & Technology Manager IRIS.  
IVAN PAQUICO RODRIGUEZ (M) Telecommunications Degree in UPC (Barcelona) and a 
Joint Degree in Multimedia Development in LUAS (Finland). His fina l thesis, 'Augmented 
Reality Chess and Application to Detect Chess Moves', implemented by using Computer Vision, 
Augmented Reality and Artificial Intelligence techniques, has won several awards, such as the 
best final thesis of the UPC and the best final thesis of Spain (received from Vodafone Spain and 
Universia foundation). He is an official iOS and Android Developer since 2010, creating a social 
network for iPhone called: 'BeThere' developed by iOS SDK from Apple and used Couchbase 
technology for the database. He also has experience in different programming languages such as 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
87 
 
C, C++, Objective C or Java, 8 bits embedded and real time systems. He has expertise in 
multimedia methodologies ranging from Virtual Reality programming techniques to 3D/2D 
modelling software such as OpenGL, Quest3D, Autodesk Maya, Autodesk 3DS Max or Adobe 
Photoshop.   
TOMEU COLL  (M). Project and Innovation Manager. Degree in telecommunication 
engineering (UPC). Master’s degree in biomedical engineering (UB) and in project management 
(La Salle). 7 years experience in healthcare technology and biomedical engineering field, 
involved in different projects in collaboration with research centers, hospitals and technology 
companies. During this period he developed skills and deep knowledge to perform well in 
interdisciplinary environments involving engineering, medical field and life science . He has a 
solid academic background and proficiency to perform coordinate or interfacing functions that 
require a bridge between medical and engineering disciplines.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements  relevant to 
the call content 
1. EP18198458, 03/10/2018, Rosales Alejandro, Kehoe Timothy, Garrick Meabh. An integrated 
optical system for the examination of sample materials 
2. EP19382101,14/02/2019, Alejandro Rosales, Adrián Manotas, Joan Puig. Device for 
detecting foreign matter in an edible substance or in a container containing the edible 
substance and method employing the device. 
3. Rosales, O. Mc Nerney. Edited by Stefan Kräme r and Sebastian Engell. Wiley -Vch. Print 
ISBN: 978 -3-527-34074-3. Sensing Technology. Chapter 6. Resource Efficiency of 
Processing Plants. Monitoring and Improvement. 
4. A.A. Gowen, E. Gaston, J. Burger (2014). C.P. O´Donnell, C. Fagan, P.J.Cullen (Eds.), 
Process Analytical Technology for the Food Industry, 199-216, Springer, ISBN 978-1-4939-
0311-5. Hyperspectral imaging. 
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
1. Visum. SMEI-Phase 2, GA 731043. Cloud-enabled IR spectroscopy platform for the rapid 
integration and customization of affordable, real-time chemical monitoring solutions for food 
and pharmaceutical industries. 
2. Hypera. H2020- SMEInst, 2016-2017. Affordable hyperspectral Imaging System for on-line 
foreign body detection and chemical composition analysis. 
3. ProPAT. SPIRE, GA 637232. Robust and affordable process control technologies for 
improving standards and optimizing industrial operations. 
4. SPECTRAFISH. FP7, GA 605399. Hyperspectral imaging  technology for the quality 
inspection of fish products. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work 
Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, a FTIR-ATR 
(Interspectrum), 2 UV-VIS (PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), an Extended-SWIR (StellarNet) and 
a NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as well as a SWIR Hyperspectral imager (Specim -Xenics). 
The associated staff are properly trained and skilled in chemome trics modelling by using a 
commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non-commercial chemometric 
tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes). 
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up-to-date hardware 
and tools: signal generators, wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, 
development kits for programming microcontrollers, CNC -milling machines for electronic and 
mechanical prototyping, and CAD software [SolidWorks], among others.  
PHOTONFOOD 
 
88 
 
Our optical engineers work with ZEEMAX software for optimally designing of optical systems 
and to setup the designs by means of advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, 
windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and related “opticalware”). 
Food and wet chemistry lab equipped with a DSC, a Surface Energy analyzer, an HPLC, a Cobb 
tester, microbiological equipment, microscope and microtome for structural analysis, migration 
cells, colorimeter (for color and opacity measurement), Ford cup viscomet ers, water vapor 
permeation cells, turbidimeter, climatic chambers, manual and automatic coaters, electrospray, 
different drying technologies, plasma surface activation, etc. 
Organisation Short 
Name accelCH 
 
Organisation Legal 
Name  Accelopment 
Country SWITZERLAND 
Website  https://accelopment.com/ 
Description of the legal entity 
accelCH assists research institutions and companies in EU project management and the 
dissemination and exploitation of project results. The SME is specialised in European research, 
development and innovation support initiatives, such as Horizon 2020 and the SME -focused 
Eurostars programme. The core activities include professional project administration, consortium 
organisation and communication, the facilitation of dissemination of project results to external 
stakeholders, supporting the exploitation of project results and financial management and reporting. 
At present, accelCH is involved as a beneficiary, partner organisation or subcontractor in more than 
25 H2020 projects. accelCH is ISO 9001 certified ensuring a professional quality management and 
internationally accredited by IQnet. 
Main role and task in the project 
accelCH will be responsible for dissemination and exploitation and will lead WP7. 
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities 
Dr Johannes Ripperger (M) is a Research & Innovation Manager | > 10 years experience in the 
management of national and EU funded collaborative research and innovation projects | 
Technology Transfer Manager of the Swiss national technology platform energie-cluster.ch, 
responsible for innovation projects linking renewable energy enterprises with academia | 
Administrative Project Manager of CHEOPS (perovskite photovoltaics) SOSLeM (fuel cells) and 
also the FET Quantum Technology Flagship project macQsimal (metrology and sensing) | 
Dissemination Manager of other projects.  
Dr. Emily Rose Ciscato (F) is Project Manager in Communication at accelCH. She has experience 
in communication and research dissemination from her involvement in the ideation, organisation 
and management of working groups, dissemination activities, seminar series, workshops and 
conferences at ETH Zürich. She is involved in the communication and dissemination of various 
EU funded projects, including MOSAICS, CLASSY, EXIMIOUS and HEAT-INSYDE.  
Dr Jeanette Mueller (F) : founder and CEO of accelopment Schweiz AG. She is an Economic 
Geography graduate from the University of Bayreuth, Germany and the Université de Perpignan, 
France and received her Ph.D. on European funding programmes from the University of Wales 
Aberystwyth (UK). She has more than 20 years of ex perience in the acquisition and management 
of publicly funded projects (ICT, life sciences, social sciences and renewable energies) and is 
specialised in R&D and innovation projects and previously hold several executive positions in IT 
and other companies. Alongside that, she has been the founder of several enterprises and a board 
member of a commercial and non -profit organisation. She is the Administrative Project Manager 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
89 
 
and Dissemination (co-)leader of the EU Health projects EURO SHOCK and IMPROvED (both 
clinical studies). Additionally, she has been Work Package Dissemination Leader of Supporting 
LIFE (eHealth), EAGLE (ICT) and Robo-Mate (health support device) and Exploitation Manager 
of Robo-Mate.  
Julia Götz (F) : works in project communications at accelCH. Having previously worked as 
marketing project leader, she has experience in project management, marketing and design with a 
B.Sc. in International Management from the Zurich University of Applied Sciences. At accelCH, 
she has coordinated the dissemination work package for Mat4Rail, XoSoft, and PEARRL amongst 
others. She will be responsible for communication and dissemination activities of the EXIMIOUS 
project, a role she has previously held for the ClickGene, Robo-Mate and SOSLeM EU projects. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements relevant to 
the call content 
1. Ortiz, J., Rocon, E., Power, V., de Eyto, A., O’Sullivan, L., Müller, J., ... & Teeuw, W. B. 
(2017). XoSoft-A Vision for a Soft Modular Lower Limb Exoskeleton. In Wearable Robotics: 
Challenges and Trends (pp. 83-88). Springer International Publishing. 
2. Power, V., O'Sullivan, L., de Eyto, A., Schülein, S., Nikamp, C., Müller, J., ... & Ortiz, J. 
(2016, June). Exploring User Requirements for a Lower Body Soft Exoskeleton to Assist 
Mobility. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM International Conference on Pervasive 
Technologies Related to Assistive Environments (p.69). ACM. 
3. Neville, K., Doyle, C., Sugrue, A., & Müller, J. (2013). “Supporting cross border emergency 
management decision -making". Paper no. 1023 at the 21st European Conference on 
Information Systems. 
4. Kaar, M., & Müller, J. (2011). The Impact of Participation in Publicly Funded R&D Projects 
on Firm Competitiveness: Benefits and Barriers to the Use of National and EU Funding 
Programmes on the Example of Swiss SMEs in the Field of Renewable Energy . München: 
GRIN Verlag GmbH. 
5. Müller, J., & Spengler, C. (2008). Welcher Touchpoint zählt? In H. Ka ul & C. Steinmann 
(Eds.), Community-Marketing: Wie Unternehmen in sozialen Netzwerken Werte schaffen (pp. 
217-234). Stuttgart: Schäffer-Poeschel. 
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
1. XoSoft: Soft modular biomimetic exoskeleton to assist people with mobility impairments. 
GA No. 688175, H2020-ICT-2015, 2016-2019; 
2. MORE: Educating Europe`s Future Engineers in Nex t Generation Heavy Duty Mobile 
Machinery: Artificial Intelligence -driven Robotisation, Energy Efficiency and Process 
Optimisation. GA No. 858101, H2020-MSCA-ITN, 2020-2023. 
3. VANGUARD: New Generation  Cell Therapy: Bioartificial Pancreas to Cure Type 1 
Diabetes. GA no. 874700, H2020-SC1, 2020-2024; 
4. EXIMIOUS: Mapping Exposure -Induced Immune Effects: Connecting the Exposome and 
Immunome. GA no. 874707, H2020-SC1, 2020-2024; 
5. FRINGE: Fluorescence and reactive oxygen intermediates by neutron generated electronic 
excitation as a foundation for radically new cancer therapies. GA no. 828922, H2020 -
FETOPEN, 2019-2023. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work 
A secure and central online storage for project files will be provided by accelopment. This 
Document Management System will allow for notifications on changed files, version control and 
will be regularly backed up. All files are hosted within Europe. An ex tensive set of tools for 
administration, reporting, communication, dissemination and exploitation, e.g. tracking of 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
90 
 
deliverables, communication tools and templates, contact lists, etc. will be provided to all 
consortium members by accelCH. Communication tools for webinars, video conferences and phone 
conferences will be in place for the project start. 
Organisation Short 
Name BIGH 
 
Organisation Legal 
Name  
BIGH Anderlecht SPRL 
(BIGH = Building Integrated 
Greenhouses) 
Country BELGIUM 
Website  https://bigh.farm/ 
Description of the legal entity 
BIGH is a company that was founded in 2016 by Steven Beckers, a belgium  architect expert in 
circular economy who works on the topic of “sustainable cities”. The aim of it is to develop urban 
aquaponics farms in Europe. The first, and so far only farm, is “Ferme Abattoir”, located in the 
center of Brussels on the roof of the Foodmet, a local market hall, on the historical Abattoir site in 
the heart of Brussels canal priority development area.  It has been built in 2017 and productions 
started in 2018. This aquaponics farm, a combination of hydroponics and aquaculture, is the biggest 
urban farm located on a roof in Europe. The team consists of 7 employees plus a few interns and 
students who help us and in exchange of gaining experience in the aquaponics sector. The total 
area of the farm is around 4000 m2 with the following production facilities: 
- An outside garden of 2000 m2 
- A tomatoes greenhouse (770 m2) 
- An aromatic herb greenhouse (600m2) 
- A recirculating aquaculture system (RAS) of 500 m2 
The farm uses two closed -loop recirculating systems where fish and plants are linked by a 
biological filter. The filter with billions of microorganisms purifies the fish water, which in turn 
serves to feed the plants in the greenhouse and the outdoor garden. 
We have a capacity production of around 25 tons of Hybrid Stripped Bass in our piscicul ture, a 
popular fish similar to sea bass that can grow healthily in fresh water. We process our fish directly 
on the farm. In 2020 we are planning a few changes in the RAS system to improve the production. 
The goal of a RAS is to optimize the water using, by renewing only 10% of the water volume 
everyday instead of 100% in traditional aquaculture.  
Regarding the horticulture production, we produce 6 different types of aromatic herbs in pots, for 
a weekly production of 2700 pots. The production occurs during all the year and it has an organic 
certification. We also produce around 10 tons of tomatoes during 8 months along a year, and in 
2020 we will also try to grow eggplant and pepper. These hydroponics production are irrigated by 
fishwater and rainwater. All  the production facilities are heated by a heat pump, which uses the 
energy losses from the cold chambers of the building. 
All our products are sold, for half to direct customers (individuals, restaurant, caterers) and for the 
other half to supermarkets or  grocery stores, all in and around Brussels, offering customers the 
chance to know where their food comes from. 
Our goal is to grow healthy and sustainable products, and sell them in a local market to promote a 
circular economy. We also want to reach zero losses so we transform products that were not sold 
(for example damaged basil leaves transformed in pesto, damaged tomatoes that are dried), to show 
that everything can be used and consumed. 
Finally, we also organize different events, workshops and visits in the farm to share our experience 
in urban farming and more specifically in aquaponics. 
Main role and task in the project 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
91 
 
BIGH will contribute to testing, validation and demonstration for the detection of fungal 
contamination of herbs in WP6. 
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities 
Mrs Gwenn GUILLAUMIE (Principal Investigator)  (F) was born in Plouaret, France in 1992. 
She graduated in Environmental and Sustainable Development Economics from the Unive rsity of 
Paris-Saclay, France in 2016. She also has an engineering degree in agronomy and environmental 
sciences from the engineering school of AgroParisTech. She has been working for 2 years in 
Mozambique in the French Embassy as a Civil Society Cooperati on Officer until mid -2019. She 
entered the BIGH team in October 2019, as the French company Veolia became one of the investors 
of the company, to bring a technical assistance to optimize the functioning of the farm regarding 
different aspects (energy and w ater consumptions, production, sales, communication) but mostly 
focused so far on the aquaculture production. 
Mr Mathias DE VOS (Co-Investigator) (M) was born in Eupen, Belgium in 1991. He graduated 
in Bio-engineering from the University of UC Louvain in B elgium in 2014. He is currently the 
manager of BIGH since early 2018 but participated to the project since the beginning, helping with 
the design and construction of the farm. Previously to this experience he also worked for Urban 
farmers in Bern, Switzerland and at ECF Farmsystems in Berlin, Germany, which also developed 
aquaponics farms. He has therefore gained a wide experience on urban farming in general and more 
specifically on aquaponics farms, regarding all the aspects: development, management, sales , 
production, communication, quality management, but also the main issues we can face while 
managing an urban farm.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements relevant to 
the call content 
Not relevant 
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
Not relevant 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work 
As explained before, the farm is composed of three different production facilities and one 
processing facility. Each facility has specific technologies. In the greenhouses there are all the 
irrigation and heating systems with an automation system. In the f ish farm, there are different 
technologies installed to be able to grow fish in a recirculating system: mechanical filtration, 
biological filtration, water oxygenation, fish purging system, feeding system, automation and alarm 
system, etc. We have a complex heating system with a heating pump and gas boilers. 
Organisation Short 
Name Seeberger 
 
Organisation Legal 
Name  Seeberger GmbH 
Country Germany 
Website  https://www.seeberger.de/  
Description of the legal entity 
As a medium -sized family business that has been in existence since 1844, we know everything 
about tradition. Nevertheless, all our efforts are directed towards the future. As an aspiring 
company with growth in mind, we are always coming up with new ideas. We design our own 
products, open up new markets and guarantee maximum enjoyment and the very best quality. 
Thanks to decades of experience, we are at home in today’s markets around the world. Despite 
being open-minded and globally active, our top priority is still to ensure the future of our family 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
92 
 
business for our employees, customers and shareholders on the long -term. We have close ties to 
our location and bear responsibility via diverse commitments in the area. As one of the oldest coffee 
roasting companies in Germany, our range of products not only includes nuts and dried fruit but 
also coffee specialties. Whether its dried fruits and nuts for a quick snack, high-quality ingredients 
for cooking and baking or the finest coffee beans from the best altitude s of the world, Seeberger 
guarantees incomparable enjoyment on every occasion from the very best nature has to offer. 
Therefore, food/commodity quality and safety along the entire value chain is of prime importance 
to us.  
Seeberger GmbH is specialized on the production of nut (roasted and plain), dried fruits, soft fruits 
and cereals, regularly packed under protective atmosphere. Furthermore we have facilities for 
roasting coffee and peanuts, to caramelize nuts and seeds and to coat  different products with 
chocolate. In this regard organoleptic, wet -chemical, physical and chemical analyses are 
implemented in the company's own food chemistry laboratory for the quality control of raw and 
finished goods.  Decades of trading with nut ker nels, dried fruit and coffee. State -of-the-art 
packaging technology. Routine laboratory analysis of aflatoxins B1, B2, G1 and G2, and 
ochtratoxin A by imunoaffinity chromatography and HPLC with fluorescence detection. 
NO. OF EMPLOYEES: approx. 700 
NO. OF LOCATIONS: 1 (Ulm, Germany) 
MAIN FOCUS OF BUSINESS ACTIVITIES: Dried fruits, nuts, quality coffee 
Main role and task in the project 
Participation in the testing, validation and demonstration of PHOTONFOOD technology. 
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities 
Dipl.-Ing. (FH) Heidi Wöhrlin (F) was born in Singen a. Htw., Germany in 1968. She graduated 
in food technology from the University of Trier, Germany in 1991. She started her career in the 
chocolate industry followed by the pizza industry, where she was establishing and heading 
chemical, physical and microbiological laboratories, as well as implementing the associated 
analytical methods and the QA-System. She was then head-hunted to an animal feed manufacturer, 
first joining the R&D division where she was in charge of project management for extruder 
technology, and for developing snacks and treats for cats and dogs in the respective European 
Competence Center. In the following, she accepted an o ffer from the European Quality 
Management Division of Nestlé being responsible for DACH -region (i.e., Germany, Austria, 
Switzerland) to be in charge of implementing Nestlé Quality Systems for all branches of the region, 
and served as its European represent ative. During maternity leave, she worked as an author for a 
distance learning university (Fernuniversität) writing learning material for the Food Technology 
Department. Finally, 10 years ago she received the offer to work as Head of Quality Management 
and Quality Assurance at Seeberger GmbH. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements relevant to 
the call content 
- numerous packing systems (linear, duplex or triplex) with multipoint weighers under protective 
atmosphere 
- packing and pasteurization line for soft fruits 
- drum roaster for coffee beans 
- belt roaster for peanuts 
- equipment for the caramelizing of nuts 
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
None 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
93 
 
Food chemistry laboratory following QM -QA guidelines for routine analysis of e.g. mycotoxins, 
caffeine, sorbic acid, Sulphur dioxid and moisture.  Equipment includes predominantly HPLC (high 
performance liquid chromatography) systems with fluorescence dete ctors. The laboratory is 
specialized on the analysis of incoming goods and commodities. Although not accredited, the proof 
of suitability for the various analyses is regularly provided by participation in national and 
international proficiency tests. 
Organisation Short 
Name BAMA 
 
Organisation Legal 
Name  BAMA Gruppen AS 
Country Norway 
Website  https://bama.no/ 
Description of the legal entity 
  BAMA is the Norwegian market leader within fresh fruit and vegetables. The company is also 
gaining a steadily increasing market share within other fresh products, including flowers, drinks 
and sandwich products. While this presents opportunities, it also c onfers significant social 
responsibility in the markets where we operate. BAMA is one of Norway’s oldest privately-owned 
retail companies and has been in operation for 133 years. BAMA’s business strategy provides a 
basis for sustainable development of the company. Our vision is: Making Norway fresher and 
healthier. Our aim is to increase sales and stimulate greater interest in our products through 
inspiration and extra knowledge. BAMA shall be a growth driver in the Norwegian market, 
working in close collab oration with customers in all market segments. BAMA shall deliver 
products to its customers with an absolute focus on quality in all stages of the value chain and 
possess unique knowledge about suppliers and goods supply. Growth shall be based on sustainable 
choices along two dimensions: The first dimension is growth in the value chain through product 
development, research and innovation. The second involves an increased focus on a healthy diet 
and physical activity. Availability, taste, knowledge and inspiration are important for work to fulfil 
our societal remit in this area. BAMA shall be a driver of and model business for sustainable 
development with regard to the environment and social responsibility in the company’s product 
areas.  
 CORE VALUES  
Creating value for the entire value chain is the driving force behind all our activities,  
to which our employees proudly contribute each day while displaying:  
• Team spirit  
• Integrity  
• Consideration of others  
 NO. OF EMPLOYEES: approx. 2700   
NO. OF LOCATIONS: Norway, Netherlands, Poland, Sweden and Finland   
MAIN FOCUS OF BUSINESS ACTIVITIES: Fresh fruits, berries, vegetable, potatoes, dried nuts, 
juice and flowers.  
Main role and task in the project 
Participation in the testing, validation and demonstration of PHOTONFOODA technology. 
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities 
Harald Osa (M) is Research and Development manager, Department of Sustainability & 
Innovation. Mr. Osa is a renowned Norwegian chef that now focuses on research and innovation 
in fruits, berries and vegetables in BAMA.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements relevant to 
the call content 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
94 
 
None 
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
None 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work 
BAMA is active in many countries. In Norway, we have local divisions across the country, in 
addition to packaging plants and processing production. This provides us with proximity to 
Norwegian producers and customers. In Sweden, we carry out processing production and produce 
and sell meal solutions for the Swedish market. We also carry out processing production in Finland, 
while our Polish company delivers fruit and vegetables to Norway and the European market. Our 
Netherlands-based operations deliver berries, exotic produce and flowers to the European market, 
including Norway.  
Organisation Short 
Name HS 
 
Organisation Legal 
Name  
Hahn-Schickard-
Gesellschaft 
Country Germany  
Website  https://www.hahn-
schickard.de/ 
Description of the legal entity 
The Hahn-Schickard-Gesellschaft (HS) is a private, non-profit research organization that works in 
close partnership with the industry, providing innovative products and technologies. HS’s turnover 
in 2018 was €32m, with €10.2m from direct industry contracts. HS currently has >250 staff 
members and it is one of the leading institutes in Europe in the fields of microsystems engineering 
and microfluidics (https://www.hahn-schickard.de/en/). With its interdisciplinary staff, HS covers 
the whole range of lab -on-a-chip research and development, from computer -aided design (CAD) 
and simulation of f luid dynamics in microfluidics, fast prototyping and fluidic testing to the 
development and integration of biochemical assays and production scale -up. The three HS 
institutes are located in southern Germany (State of Baden-Württemberg) and are dedicated to: (i) 
manufacturing (Stuttgart), (ii) sensors and MEMS (Villingen -Schwenningen) and (iii) 
microanalysis systems (Freiburg and Ulm) with the most recently founded location in Ulm; the 
latter participates in this project.  
The HS location in Ulm has access t o the exquisitely equipped laboratories, and closely 
collaborates with Ulm University and the research group of B. Mizaikoff at the Institute of 
Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry (IABC). Thus, a strong collaboration and complementary 
interconnection of capabilities and expertise of both project partners is ensured. Strong connections 
to stakeholders from industry and research facilities, as well as insights into recent developments, 
technological advancements, and market demands render HS ideally suite d for exploitation 
management and dissemination within the project. 
Main role and task in the project 
HS will contribute to the dissemination, the exploitation and the innovation management of the 
project (WP7 and WP8). 
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities 
Dr. Julian Haas (julian.haas@hahn -schickard.de) is a group leader within the HS location in 
Ulm. He has obtained his PhD in chemistry with honors from Ulm University in 2020. In 2017, he 
was a visiting scientist in the Materials science group at Uppsala University in Sweden. During his 
PhD at Ulm University, he was involved in the development of infrared waveguide technology and 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
95 
 
infrared spectroscopy of complex biological tissues within the Horizon 2020 project MIRACLE. 
He further contributed to the projects MYCOSPEC (EU), IQST (BMBF) and TROPSENSE (EU). 
His research focuses on advancing infrared spectroscopy, attenuated total reflection spectroscopy, 
quantum cascade laser technology, thin -film waveguide technology, and on -chip integrated 
photonics. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements relevant to 
the call content 
Haas, J. & Mizaikoff, B. Advances in Mid-Infrared Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis. Annu. 
Rev. Anal. Chem. 9, 45–68 (2016). 
Haas, J., Wilk, A., Kokoric, V. & Mizaikoff, B. Next-Generation Mid-Infrared Chemical and 
Biological Sensors: Combining Quantum Cascade Lasers with Thin-Film and Hollow 
Waveguides. Spectrosc. Online 32, 22–30 (2017). 
Haas, J. et al. Polycrystalline Diamond Thin-Film Waveguides for Mid-Infrared Evanescent Field 
Sensors. ACS Omega 3, 6190–6198 (2018). 
Haas, J., Catalán, E. V., Piron, P., Karlsson, M. & Mizaikoff, B. Infrared spectroscopy based on 
broadly tunable quantum cascade lasers and polycrystalline diamond waveguides. Analyst 143, 
5112–5119 (2018). 
Haas, J.; Stach, R.; Kolm, C.; Krska, R.;Mizaikoff B. Gallium Arsenide Waveguides as a 
Platform for Direct Mid Infrared Vibrational Spectroscopy. Analytical and Bioanalytical 
Chemistry 2020, 412, 3447-3456. 
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
None 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work 
HS occupies approx. 160 sqm of highest quality office and laboratory space at the TFU 
Biotechnology Center in Ulm. Facilities include modelling work stations for optical design and 
system development, optoelectronic workbenches for photonic system prototyp ing, spectroscopic 
equipment, high-end 3D printing, and wet-chemistry laboratory facilities. 
 
 
4.2. Third parties involved in the project (including use of third party resources) 
 
NEBIH have subcontracting for 20  000 EUR. The subcontracting will be related to the 
activities in WP1 and the subcontractor will be selected according to the “best value for 
money” principle of the EU.  This will be done by collecting at least three independent offers 
  
 
Other PHOTONFOOD partners do not have any third party involved. 
 
Section 5: Ethics and Security 
 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
96
5.1 Ethics 
 
PHOTONFOOD project does not have any ethical issues as it was reported in the ethical issue table 
in the administrative proposal forms. The evaluation of the ethical issues was performed according 
to the guidance ‘How to complete your ethics self-assessment'. 
 
5.1.1 Protection and privacy of personal data 
The mechanisms to protect the personal data will be organized according to the GDPR 
(https://gdpr.eu/). The contact with project partners and external stakeholders, identified as data 
subjects will be performed as (written) informed consent.  The data controller will be Data Protection 
Officer (Dr. V. Tafintseva) from NMBU. 
 
Rights of the data subjects: 
- Right to be informed, link it to art.12 GDPR 
The data controller will take appropriate measures to provide any information and any communication 
relating to processing to the data subject in a concise, transparent, intelligible and easily accessible 
form, using clear and plain language. The information will be provided in writing, or by other means, 
including, where appropriate, by electronic means.   
            
- Right to access, link it to art. 15 GDPR  
The data controller will provide a copy of the personal data undergoing processing. For any further 
copies requested by the data subject, the controller may charge a reasonable fee based on 
administrative costs. Where the data subject makes the request by electronic means, and unless 
otherwise requested by the data subject, the information will be provided in a commonly used 
electronic form. 
 
- Right to rectification, link it to art.16 GDPR 
The data subject will have the right to obtain from the controller without undue delay the rectification 
of inaccurate personal data concerning him or her. Taking into account the purposes of the processing, 
the data subject will have the right to have incomplete personal data completed, including by means 
of providing a supplementary statement.  
 
- Right to be forgotten, link it to art.17 GDPR 
The data subject will have the right to obtain from the controller the erasure of personal data 
concerning him or her without undue delay and the controller shall have the obligation to erase 
personal data without undue delay where one of th e following grounds applies: (i) the personal data 
are no longer necessary in relation to the purposes for which they were collected or otherwise 
processed; (ii) the data subject withdraws consent on which the processing is based according to point 
(a) of Article 6(1) GDPR, or point (a) of Article 9(2) GDPR , and where there is no other legal ground 
for the processing; (iii) the data subject objects to the processing pursuant to Article 21(1) GDPR  and 
there are no overriding legitimate grounds for the proc essing, or the data subject objects to the 
processing pursuant to Article 21(2) GDPR; (iv) the personal data have been unlawfully processed; 
(v) the personal data have to be erased for compliance with a legal obligation in Union or Member 
State law to which the controller is subject; (vi) the personal data have been collected in relation to 
the offer of information society services referred to in Article 8(1) GDPR. 
 
 
- Right to restriction of processing (art. 18-2 GDPR) 
Where processing has been restricted under paragraph 1 art. 18 GDPR, such personal data will, with 
the exception of storage, only be processed with the data subject’s consent or for the establishment, 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
97 
 
exercise or defence of legal claims or for the protection of the rights of another natural or legal person 
or for reasons of important public interest of the Union or of a Member State. 
 
- Right to data portability, link it to art. 20 GDPR 
The data subject will have the right to receive the personal data concerning him or her, which he or 
she has provided to a controller, in a structured, commonly used and machine -readable format and 
have the right to transmit those data to another controller without hindrance from the controller to 
which the personal data have been provided. 
 
- Right to object, link it to art. 21 GDPR 
The data subject will have the right to object, on grounds relating to his or her particular situation, at 
any time to processing of personal data concerning him or her which is based on point (e) or (f) of 
Article 6( 1) GDPR, including profiling based on those provisions. The controller will no longer 
process the personal data unless the controller demonstrates compelling legitimate grounds for the 
processing which override the i nterests, rights and freedoms of the data subject or for the 
establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims. 
 
- Stakeholder engagement (art. 35-9 GDPR) 
Where a type of processing in particular using new technologies, and taking into account the nature, 
scope, context and purposes of the processing, is likely to result in a high risk to the rights and 
freedoms of natural persons, the controller will, prior to the processing, carry out an assessment of 
the impact of the envisaged processing operations on th e protection of personal data. The controller 
will seek the advice of the data protection officer, where designated, when carrying out a data 
protection impact assessment. 
 
- Right to a judicial remedy and the right to receive compensation (art. 79 GDPR) 
Without prejudice to any available administrative or non -judicial remedy, including the right to 
lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority pursuant to Article 77 GDPR, each data subject will 
have the right to an effective judicial remedy where he or she considers that his or her rights under 
this Regulation have been infringed as a result of the processing of his or her personal data in non -
compliance with this Regulation. 
Proceedings against a controller or a processor will be brought before the courts of the Member State 
where the controller or processor has an establishment. Alternatively, such proceedings may be 
brought before the courts of the Member State where the data subject has his or her habitual 
residence, unless the controller or processor is a public authority of a Member State acting in the 
exercise of its public powers. 
 
Detail data management approach in the project, including:  
 
- Record of processing activities (art. 13, 14 GDPR) 
Where personal data relating to a data subject are collected from the data subject, the controller will, 
at the time when personal data are obtained, provide the data subject with all of the following 
information. In addition, the controller will, at the time when personal data are obtained, provide the 
data subject  with the following further information necessary to ensure fair and transparent 
processing. Where personal data have not been obtained from the data subject, the controller shall 
provide the data subject with the requested information. 
 
- Data security technical and organizational measures (art. 29, 32-2 GDPR) 
The processor and any person acting under the authority of the controller or of the processor, who has 
access to personal data, shall not process those data except on instructions from the controller, unless 
required to do so by Union or Member State law. 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
98 
 
In assessing the appropriate level of security account will be taken in particular of the risks that are 
presented by processing, in particular from accidental or unlawful destruction, loss, alteration , 
unauthorised disclosure of, or access to personal data transmitted, stored or otherwise processed. 
 
- Personal data breach notification (art. 33 GDPR) 
In the case of a personal data breach, the controller will without undue delay and, where feasible, not 
later than 72 hours after having become aware of it, notify the personal data breach to the supervisory 
authority competent in accordance with Article 55 GDPR, unless the personal data breach is unlikely 
to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of natural persons. Where the notification to the 
supervisory authority is not made within 72 hours, it shall be accompanied by reasons for the delay. 
 
- Transfer of data.  
The data transfer between controller and data object will be performed on the request and according 
to the described above procedure.
5.2 Security 
 
Please indicate if your project will involve: 
• activities or results raising security issues: (YES/NO) 
• 'EU-classified information' as background or results: (YES/NO)