1.1 Objectives 
PHOTONFOOD’s aim is to provide a portable solution for flexible farm -to-fork sensing of microbial and 
chemical contamination in food products and along the food production chain. PHOTONFOOD will develop 
an integrated solution that combines innovations in mid-infrared (MIR) sensing with smart paper-based sample 
treatment, and advanced data analysis. This solution will be developed for the detection of microbial and  
chemical contamination, validated and demonstrated in real scenarios along the food value chain (Fig. 1). 
Novel light emitting diode (LED) light sources, as well as interband and quantum cascade lasers (ICL/QCL), 
will be combined with sophisticated waveguide technology to transform MIR sensing from existing lab 
solutions into a portable solution. The combination of MIR sensing with a paper microfluidic sample handling 
device is especially powerful, as it provides an easy and affordable means to measure purified extracts of 
contaminants. Purified extracts are necessary if one wants to achieve quantitative spectroscopic determination 
of levels of chemical and microbial contamination in food matrices at relevant detection limits. 
PHOTONFOOD will develop and demonstrate a photonic based monitoring solution for highly important 
contamination problems in the food production chain, namely (i) fungal and water mo uld (oomycetes) 
contamination and mycotoxins in wheat, nuts, dried fruits and aquaponic-based herbs, and (ii) pesticides 
and antibiotics in aquaponic-based herbs. Hence, the applicability of the developed portable devices will be 
demonstrated on-site at the end user level  (farms and retail) , including aquaponics as a novel type of food 
production system. We will demonstrate that the PHOTONFOOD solution is highly flexible and can be easily 
diversified: it can be used at the most critical control points in the production and distribution of these products, 
 
Figure 1: Overview of the PHOTONFOOD project . (a) The use of the MI -FI device for daily monitoring , and (b) the HI-FI 
device for reference analysis along the value chain. Compared to existing testing off-site, considerably more data will be collected. 
(c) The transfer of the data to platforms such as Food Trust™ and d ata integration will define a new paradigm fo r food safety 
control and reduction of food waste, and thereby represent a disruptive technology in agronomy and food industries.  (d) 
PHOTONFOOD devices will feature two different types of photonic technologies (IC-LED and ICL/QCL), and (e) a paper-based 
microfluidic sample handling unit, for detection of minute concentrations of contaminants. 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
4 
 
such as the entry point of the European Union for products produced outside the EU, at the farm level 
(traditional farming, novel forms of farming and on-farm vending), at the distributer level, and the level of the 
retailer.  
The solution is based on two innovative photonic devices, that are suitable for a wide range of application 
scenarios. Both photonic devices  will have integrated low-cost paper -based microfluidics  for sample 
collection, pretreatment, and analyte preconcentration, as well as an integrated data analysis platform (see 
Fig. 1). The first photonic device will be low-cost and handheld, delivering medium-fidelity data ( MI-FI 
device see Fig. 1)  by incorporation of innovative MIR light emitting diode (LED) light sources  based on 
interband cascade (IC) technology. The second photonic device will be medium-cost and portable, delivering 
high-fidelity data ( HI-FI device, see Fig. 1)  by incorporation of  interband and quantum cascade lasers 
(ICL/QCL). The HI-FI device will provide high-fidelity molecular signatures that can be used for reference 
measurements. The handheld MI-FI device is tailored for daily monitoring along the whole food chain and 
even retail, which is feasible due to  its low envisioned price. The HI-FI spectra will allow the quantification 
of contaminations at relevant detection limits  and will provide sufficient precision for accreditation of the 
method. Advanced data analysis will be used to calibrate the MI-FI and HI-FI spectral data. The obtained data 
will be further utilized by transferring it to and integrating it into platforms such as the block chain-based IBM 
Food Trust™ data platform for tracing food contamination and improving food quality. The availability of big 
data on food safety and the integration of the data into food block chain platforms will define a new paradigm 
for food safety control and waste reduction (see Fig. 1). 
The importance of detecting fungal and mycotoxin contamination.  Fungi are among the most resilient 
spoilage microorganisms and  can be missed  by the most advanced  control safety measures utilized in food 
industry1. Fungi are rapidly dispersed by water and air, can survive under extreme ly demanding conditions 
such as thermal, detergent - and preservatives -based processing regimes used in modern farm -to-fork 
production2. Approximately 25% of the global food  supply is wasted or lost because of postharvest fungal 
spoilage1. In a survey of food manufacturers in the United States and Europe, 94% of the surveyed producers 
reported fungal spoilage in the ﬁnished product as a frequent problem1. The majority of cases were related to 
nuts (70%), followed by fruits and vegetables (12%), herbs and spices (8%) and cereals (4%). The main food 
spoilage fungi secrete toxic secondary metabolites, so -called mycotoxins of which the immunosuppressive 
deoxynivalenol and the  carcinogenic aflatoxins are among the most prevalent 1. The European Commission 
pointed out that 5 –10% of global crop s produced are lost annually  due to mycotoxin contamination. 
Considering that the EU produces about 133 million tons of wheat annually, about €1.2-2.4 billion can be lost 
for wheat alone3. Mycotoxins are the most frequently notified food safety hazard in the EU 1. During the last 
five years, the number of mycotoxin notifications has been increasing at an average rate of 15% per year, thus 
highlighting the severity of the problem1. During this five-year period, the EU´s Rapid Alert System of Food 
and Feed (RASFF) reported more than 300 alerts relating to aflatoxin levels exceeding legal limits in peanuts 
imported into the EU3. Moreover, fungal and fungal-like oomycetes (water mould) contaminations constitute 
an increasingly urgent problem in aquaponics and vertical farming, a rapidly developing novel plant and 
vegetable production systems 4. Characteristic to aquaponic and hydroponic plant culture is the continuous 
presence of water in the production system , where the humid or aquatic environment suits most fungal and 
oomycetes plant pathogens4. Strikingly, our partner, the aquaponic company BIGH reported direct losses of 
aromatic herbs of around 5000 pots. BIGH estimates that it could increase the production by additional 20 000 
pots if they were not forced to reduce  their production density due to contamination by oomycetes (downy 
mildew). Currently, mycotoxins and fungal detection is addressed by laborious reference analytical methods, 
whereby for fungal detection methods based on culturing with subsequent genetic analysis are applied. 
Mycotoxins are usually detected vi a sophisticated lab -based LC -MS/MS-based multi -metabolite methods. 
Immunoassays (ELISA) are also applied for the rapid determination of a few regulated mycotoxins, especially 
in industrial settings. However, ELISA protocols still require several sample preparation steps, are not flexible, 
can hardly be used on -site, and are still prone to matrix effects due to cross reactivities of the employed 
antibodies. Among of the more rapid methods, lateral flow strips coul be  used even on sites but their price is 
ill far away from being optimal. The relevant limit of detection (LOD) for mycotoxins will vary depending on 
 
1 Cinar A, Onbaşı E: Mycotoxins: The Hidden Danger in Foods. In: Mycotoxins and Food Safety. IntechOpen; 2019. 
2 AW Gazai, F. Yildiz. Review of high pressure processing in foods. Cogent Food and Aquaculture. 2019, 5(1) 
3 Krska, R; et al. World mycotoxin J. 2016; 9(4): 487-495 
4 Stouvenakers G, et al. In: Aquaponics Food Production Systems. Springer; 2019: 353-378. 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
5 
 
the type of mycotoxin, for example the case of deoxynivalenol (DON) the LOD is around 1000 ppb. Therefore, 
prevention and control of the se toxic secondary metabolites remains difficult , and the agriculture and food 
industries continue to be vulnerable to problems of contamination. 
The importance of detecting pesticide residuals in cereals, vegetables and fruits.  Pesticides are used in 
agriculture to satisfy a continuously increasing consumer demand for agricultural products by minimizing the 
pre- and post -harvest losses. While agriculture productivity is increasing, pesticides represent hazards to 
consumers since  their residues accumulate in different fractions in agriculture products such as  cereals, 
vegetables and fruits. The persistence of pesticides has been reported for  wheat products, where milling 
distributes pesticide residues in different fractions in the bran, germ, and endosperm . In addition, pesticide 
residues could be detected in flower and in bread 5. In general, food processing allows decrease in pesticide 
levels. However, in some cases, residue levels  of pesticides  even increased in the final product due the 
processing of the raw materials 6. This can be related to water removal, for example in the production of dry 
fruits such as raisins, prunes and apricots 6. The control of pesticides residues in such novel productions as 
aquaponics has a particular importance, since pesticides and herbicides are toxic for fish7. 
Today, the detection of pesticides residues is time-consuming and performed by the traditional instrumental 
chemistry techniques , such as gas chromatography (GC) , liquid chromatography (LC) or capillary 
electrophoresis (CE), coupled to different detectors, especially to mass spectrometers (MS). While s everal 
biosensors were developed for the quick detection of pesticides, none of them have been accredited for the lab 
use and they are not broadly available on the market. The main reason for that is that relevant detection limit 
for pesticides is in 0.1 µkg/g which is not achievable by novel biosensors. 
The importance of detecting antibiotics in aquaponics. Aquaponics integrates recirculating aquaculture 
producing fish and hydroponics producing plants. In standard aquaculture, antibiotics are regularly used for 
fish production in order to eliminate the risk of fish disease. However, antibiotics are not allowed in aquaponics 
because they may impact plant growth , as well as  quality and the maintenance of nutrient solubilizing 
microorganisms. Therefore, the control of the presence of antibiotics in water circulating in aquaponics farms 
is of significant importance.  
Currently, detection of antibiotics residues is performed by the EU four -plate (EU4PT) in an ampoule or 
tube test or the Premi®Test (DSM) method which is based on microbiological assessment8. Both tests are time 
consuming. During the last decade, a series of high-throughput rapid methods for detecting antibiotics residues 
in food were developed , most of which are based on immunoassays, microbiological tests and biosensors . 
Despite their throughput, the detection limit is still above the requirements9.  
Up to date, only few photonic techniques have been adopted for the routine detection of contaminations 
such as fungi, mycotoxins, pesticides and antibiotics10,11,12, despite their potential for detecting microbial and 
chemical contaminants, their modularity, and their easy adaptability to a wide range of deployment scenarios. 
Among the optical/ spectroscopic methods, MIR spectroscopy has proven to be by far the most reliable 
analytical technique for probing molecular fingerprints of microbial and chemical contaminations via 
molecular spectral signatures13,14. The Norwegian University of Life Sciences (NMBU) has developed a fully 
automated laboratory system for spectroscopy-based analysis of fungi. The research is based on the R4SME 
FP7 project FUST, which was coordinated by the PI  (see Table 4) . Ulm University (UULM), BOKU and 
IRIS have developed a MIR sensing platform for lab-based analysis of mycotoxins in the MYCOSPEC FP7 
project coordinated by IRIS  (see Table 4 ). Both projects demonstrate d that laboratory -based MIR 
spectroscopy can be used for monitoring fungi and mycotoxins in different food processing e nvironments. 
However, portability and analysis of trace concentrations of contaminations in food matrixes remains a 
challenge to be solved. While few studies report the detection of food contaminants at low concentrations by 
indirect detection (detection of food matrix changes) , a reliable detection of contamination at low 
 
5 M.A. Randhawa, et al. In Wheat and Rice in Disease Prevention and Health, 2014, pp. 263-277. 
6 A. Özbey et al. GIDA/The Journal of Food, 2017, vol. 42(2), pp.204-209. 
7 P. Nicolopoulou-Stamati et al. Frontiers in public health, 2016, vol. 4 (148) 
8 M.G Pikkemaat et al. Food Additives and Contaminants, 2010, 28 (1), pp.26.  
9 C. Cháfer-Pericás, et al. TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry, 2010, Vol. 29(9), pp. 1038-1049. 
10 Goenka C et al. Lasers Surg Med. 2019. vol. 51(2), pp. 201‐207. 
11 Hyunjung Min, Byoung-Kwan Cho, J. of Biosystems Engineering, 2015; vol. 40(1), pp. 67-77. 
12 Xing F et al. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. 2019, vol. 59(1), pp. 173‐180. 
13 Janotta M, Karlowatz M, Vogt F, Mizaikoff B. J Analytica Chimica Acta 2003, vol. 496(1-2), pp. 339-348. 
14 Janotta M, Katzir A, Mizaikoff B. J Applied spectroscopy, 2003, vol. 57(7), pp. 823-828. 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
6 
 
concentrations (e.g. at ppm level) is theoretically not possible. Slightly varying food matrices introduce 
molecular signatures that completely obscure the levels of contaminations that need to be detected and that are 
at the parts per million level. Therefore, a pre-concentration of the contaminants is necessary in order to achieve 
the detection levels needed for most of the contaminants , and , eventually, to develop a portable photonic 
solution for detecting food contaminants on farms  and in food pro duction lines , wholesale , and retail.  
Wageningen University is currently developing user-friendly and inexpensive devices based on 3D printing 
and paper microfluidics in the EU ETN project FoodSmartphone (see Table 4). Such solutions can be further 
developed for pre-concentration of tiny amounts of contaminants in food matrices.  
PHOTONFOOD will build on the development of photonic components, modules and subsystems pioneered 
in FUST, MYCOSPEC and MIRACLE  (see Table 4 ), and user -friendly sample handling from 
FoodSmartphone. PHOTONFOOD will develop a flexible portable solution for the detection of microbial and 
chemical contamination. The solution will include high-fidelity (HI-FI) and mid-fidelity (MI-FI) MIR photonic 
devices, coupled to paper -based sample preparation module, and will be benchmarked against state-of-the-
art laboratory platforms. Advanced data analysis will be used for calibrating the spectral MI -FI and HI-FI 
data and for exploiting the obtained data for food safety and waste reduction. The developed PHOTONFOOD 
photonic solutions are broadly adaptable for usage along the entire food production value chain , from the 
farmer and distributer, to the importer, and up to the supermarket and consumer level.  
The research will be performed by a multidisciplinary team with globally acknowledged leading expertise in 
the field of IR spectroscopy, light source and waveguide development, paper-based on-site chemical analysis, 
food spoilage microbiology, and data science. The project will involve collaboration with leading mycotoxin 
analysis laboratories, an aquaponics farm, a distributor of dry foods , farms with on-site food processing and 
vending, and a producer of a digital platform for food safety.  
The PHOTONFOOD solution will be validated and demonstrated  in real settings for the detection of fungal 
and chemical contaminations by involving relevant major stakeholders in the food value chain, an international 
analytical laboratory specialized on mycotoxins and the Hungarian Food Safety Laboratory , and achieve a 
Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of 6. This will allow the developed photonic solution to have a short and 
direct way into the market after the project completion. The developed solution will in future allow t he 
detection of contamination points in the food value chain and reduce food producti on losses and food waste. 
The development of core photonics  and microfluidic technologies in the PHOTONFOOD project will in 
addition facilitate innovation in other application areas and – next to food safety - harness Europe at the 
forefront of photonics innovation and sensing/monitoring technology. 
 
Specific objectives and related key success criteria 
 
The main objective of the PHOTONFOOD project is to develop and demonstrate in real settings a flexible 
MIR photonic solution for the detection of microbial and chemical contaminations based on innovative 
photonic devices, paper-based sample handling and advanced data mining solutions. 
The transfer of the same core technology (i.e., MIR photonics) from the labor atory bench to a flexible 
portable solution enables broad usage on farms, in food processing, wholesale and retail  with the unique 
advantage of providing the same analytical signatures, at  two different levels of ‘fidelity’, (i) a HI-FI device 
that can be used for on -site reference analysis and (ii) a MI-FI device that can be used for contamination 
monitoring. This implies that several technical challenges involving efficient microfluidic sampling, 
extraction and preconcentration combined with  advanced MIR readout technologies, tailored light 
sources and waveguides, adaptable photonic devices, and data processing/mining tools for the detection 
of fungal/mycotoxin and chemical  contaminations must be overcome. The current technical challenges 
will be addressed as follows:  
 
Table 1: PHOTONFOOD specific technical challenges, specific objectives (SO) and key success criteria. 
 
Paper-based microfluidic preconcentration and separation 
Challenge: Due to the detection limits defined by the EU regulations, the PHOTONFOOD solutions would 
need to have a detection limit for microbial and chemical contaminants at EU regulation levels and it would 
be essential to obtain purified and enriched solutions of  contaminants for spectroscopic detection. 
PHOTONFOOD will deliver smart, cheap and user -friendly paper microfluidic devices to extract, 
separate and preconcentrate chemical and microbial contaminants  prior to spectroscopic analysis. 
This solution can be adapted to allow for trace analysis of any food contaminant. 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
7 
 
SO1: To develop paper microfluidic sampling, extraction and pretreatment for food contaminants from hard 
and soft commodities (WP2, WP6). 
Key success criteria: 
 Sampling strategies defined for hard and soft samples and delivered as a report (D2.1 M24). 
 Purification and enrichment device for one target mycotoxin (DON) in one commodity (wheat)  
demonstrated in real settings (D2.1 M24). 
 Diversification of approach to at least a second target contaminant in a second commodity demonstrated 
(D2.1 M48). 
3D printed interface for microfluidics and optical surfaces 
Challenge: In order to optimize the measured signal by the portable MIR sensing solution, the contact 
between the separated analytes and the MIR sampling surfaces and the detection area of the paper -based 
microfluids needs to be optimized. 3D-printed cartridges will be iteratively designed and produced to 
ensure alignment in the interface between the paper microfluidic strip and the optics for readout. The 
technology will be universally applicable for any chemical signal enhancement in optical measurements in 
medical and life sciences. 
SO2: To develop a functionalized cartridge for the paper microfluidic devices that allows robust and user-
friendly interfacing with spectroscopic detection (WP1, WP2).  
Key success criteria: 
 Report on strategy for coupling optical components, and the paper microfluidic interface (D2.1 M24). 
 Fully integrated device for analysis of one target mycotoxin (DON) in one commodity (wheat) available 
(D2.2 M48). 
 Diversification of approach to at least a second target contaminant in a second commodity  finalized 
(D2.3 M48).. 
HI-FI ICL/QCL light source for 1500-1800 cm-1 range spectral range 
Challenge: In order to develop a high-fidelity (HI-FI) portable MIR spectroscopic device providing the 
level of sensitivity and selectivity needed for the detection of relevant fungal and mycotoxin contamination 
at defined detection limits in food/commodity matrices, the brightest possible MIR light sources are required 
covering a broad spectral window. PHOTONFOOD will develop monolithic interband/quantum cascade 
laser ( ICL/QCL) technologies with the required coverage of  a broad wavelength window. A 
monolithic QCL or ICL is one of the major photonics innovations of PHOTONFOOD and will be useful 
for a plethora of applications within the field of photonics. 
SO3: To develop tunable ICL/QCL MIR lasers for measurements with high precision and sensitivity (WP3). 
Key success criteria: 
 Broadly tunable lasers based on Vernier effect demonstrated for the 1500-1800 cm-1 wavelength range 
(D3.2 M26). 
 Tunable ICLs/QCLs available and validated in operation within the HI-FI device (D4.3 M24). 
MI-FI IC-LED light sources for 1500-1800 cm-1 range spectral region 
Challenge: For low-cost handheld mid-fidelity (MI-FI) analyzers, a low-cost powerful light source in the 
MIR needs to be developed. PHOTONFOOD will develop MIR light emitting diodes (MIR-LEDs) with 
significantly lower production cost with lesser spectral brightness and a broader emission linewidth as trade-
off. The availabili ty of MIR  IC-LED technology across the MIR spectral window would provide a 
breakthrough alternative to single mode laser technology facilitating low-cost hand-held analyzer platforms 
with numerous applications across a wide range of monitoring scenarios.  
SO4: To develop IC-LED light sources for low-cost contamination detection (WP3). 
Key success criteria: 
 IC-LEDs (Interband cascade light emitting diodes)  for integration into MI-FI device available (D3.1 
M18). 
 IC-LEDs available and validated in operation within MI-FI devices (D4.2 M30).  
HI-FI MIR portable photonic device in the 1500-1800 cm-1 range 
Challenge: For the on -site detection and reference analysis of the level of microbiological and chemical 
contaminants in food commodities, portable label -free MIR photonics read -out devices are needed .  
PHOTONFOOD will develop a high-end portable ICL/QCL laser-based device (HI-FI) based on thin-
film nanocrystalline diamond waveguides to provide MIR molecular signatures of commodity matrix 
changes and contaminants with maximum spectral resolution, sensitivity and precision at a reference level. 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
8 
 
In addition to the food sector, the portable devices will be applicable for a broad range of applications, such 
as wastewater or liquid fertilizer analysis.  
SO5: To prototype a HI-FI MIR photonic sensing device and integrate ICL/QCL light sources (WP3).  
Key success criteria: 
 Thin-film GaAs waveguide- based photonic sensing platform demonstrated (D4.1 M18). 
 Robust sensing interface using on -chip nanocrystalline diamond thin -film waveguide technology 
established (D4.1 M18). 
 One portable HI-FI ICL/QCL analyzer platform (1500-1800 cm-1) validated, tested and demonstrated  
(D4.3 M24). 
MI-FI MIR handheld photonic device for the 1500-1800 cm-1 range 
Challenge: For daily monitoring of contamination a low-cost handheld device is needed. PHOTONFOOD 
will develop a low-cost monolithic dispersive MIR device (MI-FI) using MIR IC-LEDs obtaining rapid 
medium-resolution MIR molecular signature s with satisfactory precision and sensitivity . The handheld 
device will be applicable to a wide range of applications outside the food sector , such as monitoring of 
wastewater, process fluids, as well as surface and ground water. 
SO6: To prototype MI-FI MIR photonic sensing devices and integrate MIR IC-LED light sources (WP1, 
WP4, WP6). 
Key success criteria: 
 MIR IC-LEDs (1500-1800 cm-1 range) tested for MIR sensing applications (D4.3 M30). 
 Hand-held MIR IC-LED (1500-1800 cm-1 range) monolithic grating spectrometer prototype assembled 
and lab tested (D4.3 M30). 
 Five MI -FI MIR  IC-LED (1500 -1800 cm -1) hand -held photonic sensing devices validated and 
demonstrated (D4.3 M30). 
Advanced data analysis platform 
Challenge: The use of a narrow spectral window (1500-1800 cm-1 range) provides a substantial challenge 
for the data processing . Further, the prediction of multiple contaminants obtained from multiple 
commodities requires stable calibration procedures . PHOTONFOOD will innovatively resolve this by 
developing specific pre-processing tools and establishing robust calibration models for MI-FI and HI-
FI data covering a narrow but very discriminative spectral range. The developed approaches will serve 
as a platform for future photonic sensor applications based on IC-LEDs and ICL/QCL data.  
SO7: To use advanced data analysis to calibrate MI -FI and HI-FI solution for detection of microbial and 
chemical contaminants in food (WP5, WP6). 
Key success criteria: 
 Pre-processing approaches for spectroscopy data of MIR  IC-LED and ICL/QCL light sources  
established (D5.1 M36). 
 Machine-learning based calibration and classification tools established (D5.2 M36). 
 Calibration and classification tools validated and demonstrated (D5.2 M36). 
PHOTONFOOD software application for data analysis for mobile and laptop 
Challenge: The toolbox of data processing algorithms needs to be accessible through a PC and a mobile 
application. The data analysis models will be established in a cloud service and provided as application 
for a laptop and a mobile pho ne for the MI -FI and HI -FI instrumentation. This will allow the 
demonstration of the broad applicability of the solution at the end of the project  and enable fast 
commercialization of the solution after the project period. During the project period, PHOTONFOOD will 
develop a strategy for data integration into the IBM’s Food Trust™ block chain. This will in future allow 
rapid mitigation of contamination events and is expected to reduce associated food waste considerably. 
SO8: To provide user-friendly interface, intuitive decision support tools and data integration strategy (WP1,  
WP5). 
Key success criteria: 
 Collection of user requirements summarized in a report (D1.1 M24). 
 Architecture design validation fulfilled (D5.4 M36). 
 Software platform demonstration and end-user acceptance (D5.5 M40). 
Validation and demonstration 
SO9: To validate and demonstrate the PHOTONFOOD solutions in real settings (WP1, WP6). 
Key success criteria: 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
9 
 
 PHOTONFOOD solutions demonstrated for fungal contamination and mycotoxins in wheat, nuts, dry 
fruits and aquaponic-based herbs (D1.2 M40, D6.3 M46, D6.4 M46). 
 The applicability of the PHOTONFOOD solution to pesticides and antibiotics in aquaponic-based herbs 
demonstrated (D1.2 M40, D6.3 M46, D6.4 M46). 
Dissemination of the PHOTONFOOD solution to stakeholders 
SO10: To assess marketability for the PHOTONFOOD solution. (WP1, WP7) 
Key success criteria: 
 Cost assessment in line with target levels (D1.3 M36). 
 Positive initial feedback from end-user groups obtained (D1.4 M48). 
 Positive attitude among key stakeholder groups assessed in stakeholder survey (D1.4 M48). 
 TRL 6 reached. The device is accepted by end-users and key corporate decision-makers in immediately 
relevant market segments (D1.4 M48). 
Exploitation of the application of the developed components in other sectors 
SO11: To strengthen Europe’s leadership in photonics (WP1). 
Key success criteria: 
 Positive assessment of the applicability of the technology to other value chains beyond those in which 
the device is being validated (D1.4 M48). 
 Positive attitude among key stakeholder groups assessed in stakeholder survey (D1.1 M24).