1.2 Relation to the work programme  
 
The project addresses topic ICT-37-2020 Advancing photonics technologies and application driven photonics 
components and the innovation ecosystem : Sub-topic Flexible Farm -to-Fork Sensing. Table 2 outlines how 
PHOTONFOOD fits to the specific topic challenge and scope, and to other relevant parts of the “Towards 
2020: Photonics Driving Economic Growth in Europe – Multiannual Strategic Roadmap 2014-2020”. 
 
Table 2: Contribution of PHOTONFOOD to the ICT-37-2020 call and the Photonic Strategy Roadmap 
 
Challenge I as defined in ICT-37-2020 call 
"To develop and apply core photonics technology for the next generation of devices (including components, 
modules and sub-systems) in order to drive innovation in key application areas , which are significant for 
current or future markets and where photonics can bring a key competitive advantage." 
PHOTONFOOD contribution 
PHOTONFOOD will design, develop and validate next-generation MIR photonic sensing devices, based on 
innovative MIR light emitting diode ( IC-LED) light sources and ICL/QCL lasers combined with novel 
waveguides, for the detection of microbial and chemical contamination in food and commodities along the 
food value chain. 
Challenge II as defined in ICT-37-2020 call 
"Innovative photonic sensing solutions can contribute to reducing food production losses and food wastes, 
estimated in Europe at about 300 kg per capita, and to increasing food safety for the end consumer along 
the food production chain from farm to fork." 
PHOTONFOOD contribution 
PHOTONFOOD will provide more and better data on contamination along the food production chain, since 
on-site monitoring data from the MI-FI device and reference data from the HI-FI device will be connected 
to existing data platforms such as the Food Trust™. The use of the PHOTONFOOD data about microbial 
and chemical contamination will in future allow detect ing the weak points of the food chain . Thus, it will 
make a considerable contribution to the reduction of food wastes, where the reduction of wastes in cereals 
production and import of nuts and dry fruits will be ab out 40% and 60% in aquaponic herbs production of 
the existing losses associated with the fungal and mycotoxin contaminations. 
Scope I as defined in ICT-37-2020 call 
"Development of an innovative smart photonic sensor solution, utilizing an appropriate bandwidth between 
the ultraviolet (UV) and the far -infrared spectral range for monitoring food quality with respect to 
microbiological and chemical contamination along the farm-to-fork food production chain." 
PHOTONFOOD contribution 
PHOTONFOOD will provide the first low -cost hand-held MIR sensing solution (MI -FI) and a high -end 
portable MIR device (HI-FI) enabling flexible microbial and chemical analysis of food products on farms, 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
10 
 
in food processing, wholesale and retail. The MIR region was chosen as the appropriate band widths since 
it has proven to be the most discriminative region for determination of chemical and microbial contaminants. 
The photonics sensing solution will contain an innovative smart paper -based microfluidic sampling pre-
concentration allowing the detection of tiny amounts of contaminants.  
Scope II as defined in ICT-37-2020 call 
"The targeted solution should combine photonic sensing technology with advanced data analysis techniques 
and be portable, easy -to-use, flexible, and broadly adaptable for usage on farms, in food processing, 
wholesale and retail." 
PHOTONFOOD contribution 
PHOTONFOOD will innovatively combine the developed photonic sensing devices with advanced data 
analysis approaches for mining specific fungal and mycotoxin contaminants in the pre -concentrated and 
analyte-separated samples. PHOTONFOOD will develop robust calibration modelling strategies for the data 
obtained by the proposed photonic solutions using the most advanced pre-processing, machine learning and 
deep learning tools. The calibration models for the cases demonstrated in PHOTONFOOD will serve as a 
template for further developments bey ond the project period as they will set standards in the data pre -
processing and methodology to detect and utilize specific molecular signatures. The models will be 
established in a cloud service and provided as application for a laptop (HI -FI device), and as a mobile app 
(MI-FI device). PHOTONFOOD will further develop a strategy for data integration into existing platforms 
such as the Food Trust™ Block Chain. The developed technology will be validated and demonstrated for 
the usage on farms, food processing, wholesale and retail through involvement of the relevant partners.  
Scope III as defined in ICT-37-2020 call 
"Actions should focus on the following areas: (1) food production by small/medium-sized farms; (2) novel 
types of food production, such as aquaponics; (3) on -site food processing and vending (e.g. on farms or 
local food markets)."  
PHOTONFOOD contribution 
PHOTONFOOD focuses on (1) sma ll/medium-sized cereal farms through NEBIH, nuts and dried fruit 
production farms through the distributor Seeberger; (2) novel type aquaponic and on -site food producer 
BIGH. PHOTONFOOD will perform extensive demonstration of HI -FI and MI-FI devices by Seeberger, 
end-user ROMER, food -safety authority N EBIH and aquaponics  company BIGH. As a food safety 
authority, N EBIH has direct contact with more than 3000 small and medium sized farms in Hungary, 
therefore the photonic solution can be tested under various field conditions. 
Strategic Objective as defined in Photonic Strategic Roadmap 
"The European photonics industry must now continue working with the European Commission and national 
policy makers to coordinate a joint approach to innovation, and to pool investments for enabling the rapid 
development of new products and minimising times to market.  This to market approach needs to include 
the entire value chain, from advanced research through to technology take -up, pilot lines, and 
manufacturing platforms." 
PHOTONFOOD contribution 
The PHOTONFOOD consortium represents the entire “photonics value chain”, from advanced research 
partners (UULM, BOKU, WU, NMBU) to component manufacturers (NP), systems engineering and 
manufacturing companies (HS, IRIS), laboratory analytics service providers (ROMER) , end-users among 
food businesses (BAMA, BIGH, Seeberger), food control authorities (NEBIH), and provider of large-scale 
integrated traceability solutions (IBM in advisory role). Customer and stakeholder involvement, prototype 
development, pilot production, on -site validation, end -user testing, market scanning and further business 
development can be seamlessly coordinated in the consortium, ensuring minimal time-to-market and rapid 
scale-up.