2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
 
Measures to maximise impact will be delivered via WP7 Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation, led 
by accelCH and closely supported by NEBIH, NP and ROMER. Support and feedback on the planned 
measures and their long-term impact for commercial and non-commercial exploitation, will be received from 
a dedicated Innovation Manager. The primary goal of our multi-disciplinary and cross-sectorial consortium in 
WP7 is to disseminate the research results generated in the scientific work packa ges (WP1-WP6), to raise 
awareness and provide information on our novel photon -based technology, through communication and 
outreach activities, and to pave the way for exploitation of the PHOTONFOOD innovations and IP for medium 
and long-term non-commercial and commercial purposes such as detection and analysis of (micro)biological 
and chemical contamination along the food production chain from ‘farm to fork’. An overview of our 
dissemination, exploitation, and communication activities is detailed in the fol lowing sections (see 2.2.1 and 
2.2.2).  
 
2.2.1 Dissemination and exploitation of results                                                                                           
To maximise impact, we have defined a project specific dissemination, exploit ation and communication 
strategy that builds on the following three main points. 
  
(1) Stakeholder involvement and 
target-group orientation:  To 
ensure that the interests and 
requirements of external audiences 
are fully taken into consideration 
during the delivery of the 
PHOTONFOOD project. Along the 
whole food value chain ’from farm 
to fork’, we will actively involve 
representatives of our key  target 
audiences (farmers a nd novel food 
producers, food processors, food 
retailers and whole sellers, 
analytical labs, EU entry points, 
technology providers, photonic companies), from the beginning of the project to ensure technology acceptance 
(WP1), validation in a realistic setting (WP6) and outreach (WP7). The proposed target -group orientation 
allows us to define and implement measures that are geared to the specific needs of the different audiences 
(Fig. 12). Additionally, PHOTONFOOD will be in close contact with relevant food safety authorities and will 
work towards strengthening the community, uniting many important players in food supply chain. The project 
 
Figure 12: PHOTONFOOD’s key stakeholder groups 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
38 
 
will aim to collect feedback from interested and influential stakeholders, as well as related  projects, and 
disseminate its results and achievements to them, in order to maximise impact.  
 
(2) Cross-channel and multi -media approach:  To guarantee the widest possible outreach, we will use 
different channels to inform about the PHOTONFOOD project and  to disseminate research results and 
innovation and technology developments. These range from direct or face -to-face contact with scientists at 
conferences and webinars and industrial workshops organized in WP1 to indirect information distributed to all 
stakeholders. Additionally, we will take advantage of print media, digital tools and platforms for our 
dissemination, training, and communication activities. Some of our digital outreach highlights include video 
clips, open webinars, education and marketing videos.  
 
(3) Open access and open data policy: To enable the future uptake of PHOTONFOOD’s research results and 
to facilitate future sustainability of the materials and technologies, we are fully committed to open access 
publishing, following the Guidelines on Open Access to Scientific Publications and Research Data in Horizon 
2020 that are in line with current trends in IP management and publication strategies (see section 2.2.1.3). This 
will be achieved by (i) applying existing standards for the development and results publication, (ii) involving 
stakeholders as of the beginning of the action and 3) publishing project results in peer-reviewed journals while 
ensuring open access.  
 
Plan for dissemination and exploitation of results  
The WP7 leader accelCH will coordinate and monitor the related tasks and closely cooperate with all project 
partners and external collaborators involved. They will be responsible for monitoring and coordination of the 
implementation of the defined outreach strategy, through the dissemination activities, exploitation plans, and 
communication actions at the consortium level with all work package leaders offering support related to 
dissemination, communication and exploita tion of the project and its outcomes.  To implement the 
Dissemination and Exploitation strategies, we will set up two separate plans for the dissemination and 
exploitation of the project's results:  
 
Table 8: PHOTONFOOD plans to implement the communication, dissemination, and exploitation strategy  
Communication and Dissemination Plan (CDP)   Roadmap for Exploitation (RfE)  
Content: The CDP will include a refined strategy, planned 
activities as outlined in WP7, and described in more detail 
below, their expected impacts. The CDP will further 
include a detailed stakeholder analysis and a definition of 
the most relevant tools and channels to address the 
individual PHOTONFOOD target audiences.  
Objectives: The CDP will define the strategy and 
implementation of all PHOTONFOOD dissemination and 
communication activities and be continually assessed and 
updated, to achieve the widest possible outreach to our 
defined target groups.  
Lead: Guided by accelCH with many years of experience 
as Dissemination and Exploitation Manager in many EU 
funded projects, all partners will contribute necessary 
information and input to the CDP.  
Content: Comprising a plan for the future 
commercial and non-commercial use of results at 
Consortium level, group, and individual partner 
level. The RfE will cover the exploitation, 
starting during the lifetime of the project (short-
term) and mid and longer-term plans <4 years, 
and <10 years after the project ends).  
Objectives: The RfE will build upon the initial 
technology and economic evaluations and 
requirements from WP1, as well as outcomes 
from WP6, to clearly define and develop 
possible business and operational models for the 
project results.  
Lead: The RfE development will be led by HS.  
Deliverable D7.2, M9, Task 7.1  Deliverable D7.6, M48, Task 7.4  
 
Assessment of outreach measures. To assess both the implementation and impact of the defined activities, 
we will include evaluation of our individual outreach activities, based on the guidelines and structure set out 
in the European Commission’s Toolkit for the evaluation of the communic ation activities for small scale 
evaluations74 This will include defining the scope, objectives, and metrics for each outreach activity defined 
in the CDP, as well as quarterly monitoring and updates of the activities to see if interventions are required 
(D7.3 Interim communication and d issemination activities report, M24). This allows for assessment of the 
individual activities and timely adaption, where relevant, to maximise outreach.  
 
Dissemination Measures. Publicly disclosing PHOTONFOOD results and outcomes to targeted stakeholders, 
sharing our knowledge to facilitate discussions on food safety and monitoring of relevant contaminants, novel 
 
74 European Commission, July 2015. Toolkit for the evaluation of the communication activities, Brussels: 6. 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
39 
 
detection technologies and food safety digitalisation, circulating scientific  validation results to the scientific 
community, and informing policymakers on PHOTONFOOD are the main aims of our dissemination plan. In 
order to achieve this, we have planned a broad range of cross-channel and multi-media dissemination activities, 
as shown in table 9.  
 
Table 9: PHOTONFOOD dissemination activities  
Activity and Description  Target group | 
Lead  
Impact | KPIs 
Conference presentations, peer reviewed publications  
Comply with Guidelines on Open Access to Scientific Publications and 
Research Data in H2020. Results to be published in peer -reviewed 
journals, e.g. Jounal of Biophotonics, Applied Spectroscopy, Food 
Control, Food Additives and Contaminants, Analyst, Analy tical 
Chemistry, NewFood. Demonstrations and dedicated sessions on the 
relevant conferences  
Presenting results at established international photonics conferences such 
as SciX, SPEC, Food Safety, PITTCON, SPIE Photonics West, SPIE 
Photonics Europe, ANALYTI CA, PITTCON; food science and 
technology conferences - Hungalimentaria 2021 (Budapest), Conference 
on Food Science and Technology 2020 (Budapest, Szent István 
University), Food, (RAFA Prague) Feed (World Nutrition Forum); 
analytical conferences , such as the World Mycotoxin Forum, 
EuroAnalysis2021 (www.euroanalysis2021.nl). 
Scientific 
community | 
NMBU  
Wide 
dissemination of 
PHOTONFOOD 
results, peer 
scrutiny and 
validation of 
results |10 
publications, 20 
conference 
presentations 
Project cluster event  – A project cluster and networking event held 
together with similar projects  of the ICT -37-2020 call after the first 
project year to present initial results from the project to coordinate 
research developments and facilitate the efficient use of standard 
approaches to technology development and food safety. 
Scientific 
community, 
researchers and 
EU projects | 
accelCH 
Exchange of 
knowledge with 
other relevant 
national and EU 
projects and 
research groups  
Training activity - Partners will organise trainings and training materials 
derived from results and outcom es from PHOTONFOOD to students 
through existing training events and programs. These will include the 
following: 
NEBIH takes part in university education with two external departments 
jointly operated with University of Veterinary Medicine, Budapest and 
Szent István University, Faculty of Food Science. This will include in 
Bachelor/Master courses, Lab settings for students/researchers, online 
webinars for food industry. 
NP will provide training in high -tech photonics within summer course 
"Bachelor of Nanotechnology" from the University of Würzburg. NP also 
will present on summer schools for students e.g. the iNOW (International 
Nano-Optoelectronics Workshop) summer; Winter School Mautendorf 
"New developments in solid state physics". 
WU as a co -organizer of the world’s leading symposium series Recent 
Advances in Food Analysis (RAFA) will organize European Workshop 
on Portable Food Analysis and Citizen Science in the scientific program 
on RAFA2021 and RAFA2023. Moreover, WU will have a se parate 
section for live demos in the RAFA Smart Lab demo sessions at 
RAFA2021/2023 (see www.rafa2021.eu and to get an idea about how it 
will look like, check out www.rafa2019.eu). 
BOKU have two courses to which it would be added a PHOTONFOOD 
workshop and/or lecture, i.e. “Biohazards in Food” within our Master 
Programme “Safety in the Food Chain” and to 2 weeks training course 
“Mycotoxin Summer Academy”.   
Students, 
researchers | 
NEBIH 
Knowledge 
distribution to the 
next generation of 
food safety 
experts | each 
listed partner 
organised min 1 
training event. 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
40 
 
Policy brief - Deliver concise policy briefs to support national and 
international standard setting and policy processes  
Policy briefs will be made available via the project website, partner and 
relevant authority platforms and presented at policy related events and 
standards working groups.  
Regulators & 
policy makers, 
relevant 
authorities | 
NEBIH  
Possible influence 
and contributions 
to standards and 
policy | guidelines 
distributed/ 
downloaded 80 
times 
White paper - Develop a White Paper on ‘photonics -based novel 
technologies for food safety applications’’ in the final year. 
Provide recommendations to be considered for future guidelines and 
international regulations  
Policymakers will be invited to comment on the draft paper, which will 
be discussed before a final decision is made and presented during the EU 
Parliament workshop  
Regulators & 
policy makers, 
relevant 
authorities | 
NEBIH  
Inform food 
safety 
professionals 
about new 
applications and 
guidelines; brief 
policy makers; 
contribute to 
standards 
PHOTONFOOD live demonstrators - The PHOTONFOOD 
demonstrators and technologies developed in WP6 will be presented 
across Europe in form of live demos at different tradeshows and local 
events. NP will be demonstrating PHOTONFOOD technology on trade  
shows for  lasers or demonstrators at Photonics West - San Francisco, 
Analytica- Munic, Laser World of Photonics - Munich, Sensors - 
Nuernberg, Pittcon, New Orleans, Mirsens workshop 
http://mirsensconference.org/. UULM will organise live 
demonstration sessions of the devices locally in the lab as “Industry 
Information Days” and also hands-on 1-2 day workshops at UULM 
for industry with theoretical sessions and hands -on practical 
sessions. 
Food industry 
and technology 
providers | NP  
Disseminate 
results, raise 
interest and 
understanding of 
our approach, 
build contacts for 
future uptake of 
results  3 
demonstrator 
sessions 
Final project event - Present final project results from PHOTONFOOD 
in the final 6 months of the project at a workshop in Brussels for 
stakeholders from DG-Reseach, DG-Sante, DG-Agri and that event will 
be open for members of parliament and key stakeholder group 
representatives from the food value chain. The wor kshop will consist of 
presentations of the key outcomes from the project, introduction to our 
policy recommendations and whitepaper as well as a round table session 
with key experts. 
Policy and 
decision 
makers, EU 
parliament 
members and 
stakeholders 
from the food 
value chain | 
WU 
Knowledge 
transfer, uptake of 
results and 
networking | 80 
participants at 
event 
  
Publications and Open Access Policy. In line with the Horizon 2020 rules and current trends in IP 
management and publication strategies, the PHOTONF OOD consortium is committed to open access 
publishing, following the Guidelines on Open Access to Scientific Publications and Research Data in Horizon 
2020. This means all beneficiaries agree with the principle that an article is immediately provided in open 
access mode by the scientific publisher. As the associated costs are usually shifted away from readers, and 
instead to the university or research institute to which the researcher is affiliated, such costs have been 
accounted for by our research partner institutions. Budget has been allocated accordingly for open access fees 
(see section 3.4). In accordance with the rules of the Grant Agreement, partners are required to give prior notice 
of any planned publication.  
 
 Open Data Policy. Our PHOTONFOOD consortium has agreed on a joint Open Data Policy. This implies 
that we will develop a Data Management Plan (DMP, D8.7, M6). The DMP will determine and explain 
what data, generated by our research, will be made available for open access, based on the Guidelines on 
Data Management in Horizon 2020 , and define the rules for future use of the data. A non -exhaustive 
preliminary overview of the types of data we expect to generate and collect during the project has been 
documented in Table 10. The Data Manager will be responsible for the design and implementation of a 
solid plan for the collection, storage, evaluation and exploitation of the data that will be produced during 
and after PHOTONFOOD. Openness, accessibility to beneficiaries and reusability of the produced data 
will also be ensured by the data management plan. The data management plan includes all the necessary 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
41 
 
steps for efficient collection, safe storage, deep exploitation and evaluation of the data. These steps involve 
the Data Repository for sharing data and the Design and Implementation of a process, which will integrate 
data coming from different sources (Data Mapping) and securely store them. The Data Manager will also 
take action for metadata handling and sensitive data handling. Furthermore, data produced throughout 
PHOTONFOOD will be shared among open European Research Databases. The project will comply with 
the newly imposed rules concerning  data quality, sharing and security (also GDPR  principles will be 
applied). The cloud-based database will be used as  a first basis for exploitation of results and further 
exchange of knowledge and expertise.  A data management plan will be produced by Month 6 and updated 
at the project midterm and end. We will ensure that:  
 Research data will be easily discoverable, accessible, assessable and intelligible, usable beyond the original 
purpose for which they were collected, interoperable to specific quality standards, whenever relevant.  
 All data generated in the course of this Research and Innovation Action, will be assessed for quality and 
quantity.  
 All data will be evaluated  regarding new IP that can either be protect published or used by the project 
partners, as described in the IP management section above.  
 The Pilot on Open Research Data of Horizon 2020, which aims at improving and maximising access to 
and re-using of research data generated by PHOTONFOOD, is followed.  
 
The PHOTONFOOD coordinator as WP8 lead will manage all data related activities and issues to ensure that 
the defined data management processes, as defined in Section 3.2, are followed by all partners.  
    
Table 10: PHOTONFOOD preliminary types of data and their use  
WP  Type of Data  Methodology   
WP1  User requirements and experience data. Interviews and questionnaires will be anonimised, 
processed and published in scientific report. 
WP2   Scientific research and development data.  Paper microfluidics, 3D printing, surface chemistry. 
WP3  
Tuning Characteristics of the laser; Optical 
properties of the LEDs; Light-Current-Voltage 
Characteristics.  
 FTIR measurements, Standard electro-optical 
characterization (photodiodes, current and- voltage 
sources-/meters) followed by a dedicated algorithm 
for data analysis in case of the tunable lasers. 
WP4  
 Pre-treatment models, calibration data. Large 
amounts of HI-FI and MI-FI data collected 
during the project. Data on food safety and 
food waste production.  
 Multivariate model development. Big data analysis. 
WP5   MI-FI and HI-FI test data.  MI-FI and HI-FI device test during development of 
the devices. 
WP6  
LC-MS/MS data for reference analyses of 
mycotoxins in peanuts and wheat. MI-FI and 
HI-FI data. 
 Liquid Chromatography – Tandem Mass 
Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) for reference analysis.  
 
IPR management. The management of intellectual property rights (IPR) will be pursued vigorously over each 
step of the knowledge acquisition process with exploitation being agreed internally between the respective 
PHOTONFOOD partners in accordance with the management procedures as described in Section 3.2. We have 
agreed on the following organisation of related tasks:   
 The Coordinator will monitor all developments in order to ensure that such activities are compliant with 
the rules of the Consortium Agreement.  
 All partner will disclose all foreground IP generated in the project to the Management Board.  
 The Innovation Manager ( Prof. Joachim Scholderer , NMBU) will monitor the IP landscape  and FTO 
issues, liaise with the partner TTOs and legal representatives, develop a coherent IP strategy for the project, 
and assess the right forms of protection for the foreground IP generated in the project.  
 The Exploitation Manager (Dr. Julian Haas , HS) will closely collaborate with the Innovation Manager , 
ensure that the IP strategy supports the further commercialisation of the results.  
 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
42 
 
In order to fully exploit the project results and to pave the way for future commercialisation, we have already 
agreed on the following principles that will govern the IP terms in this project, and form the basis of the IP 
terms in the Consortium Agreement:   
 Access rights: In order to ensure access rights to and use of existing knowledge the consortium members 
will differentiate between Background and Foreground Knowledge:  
 Background: The Beneficiaries will bring background knowledge into the project (e.g. the techn ologies 
to be used). The availability of background will be declared, and a list of available background knowledge 
will be maintained in the Consortium Agreement. Each Beneficiary will grant the other partner(s) free 
access to this knowledge for the purposes of this project and for the duration of that project.  
 Foreground: Existing technologies will be further developed and new knowledge and products will be 
created during the PHOTONFOOD project. Each new result will be notified to the Management Board for 
dissemination and exploitation.  
 Solely generated IP: Will be solely owned by the generating party, with an option to the other project 
partners of a non -exclusive license to foreground IP for commercialisation based on fair and reasonable 
conditions. Jointly generated IP:  All intellectual property generated jointly during the course of the 
Project (“Joint Foreground IP”) will be jointly owned by the generating parties and will be managed in 
accordance with the terms of a Joint Ownership and Management Agr eement (JOMA). The terms and 
conditions will be fair and reasonable and follow the commercialisation strategy below.  
 
Expected exploitable results and exploitation strategy . Although there are no existing patents or patent 
applications to limit the objectives or exploitation activities planned for the results of this project at present, 
the consortium will follow this closely through the project period.   
The commercial actor s in the consortium  will work closely with the Innovation Manager and the 
Exploitation Manager to manage IP in a way that contributes to the short-term and long-term objectives of the 
project, and at the same time balances the different interest within the  consortium with regard to 
commercialisation. One important aspect of this is freedom to operate: the IPR landscape will be mapped in 
the beginning of  the project and continuously monitored throughout the project ’s lifetime. This will ensure 
that relevant background IP is duly integrated into the consortium agreement  and that the necessary licenses 
are negotiated by the project consortium.  A second important aspec t is coherent IP strategy: it will commit 
the consortium partners to an agreed IP strategy that balances the interests of all participants (secrecy clauses, 
patenting, trademarking, licensing, publishing), can leverage the further commercialisation and business 
development activities planned after the end of the project’s lifetime, and avoid undue conflicts between the 
consortium partners and with third parties. 
Detailed report to include the consortium’s plan for commercialisation of the developed technology. 
Develop draft exploitation agreement to build on Consortium agreement. Actively seek licensees and future 
funding to ensure ease of commercialisation and funding during first year of exploitation. Subcontract services 
of company to carry out future funding and investment searches. Begin process of establishing the product in 
product range, draw up distribution agreement and supply chain agreements with partners.  
Commercial viability of the PHOTONFOOD technologies and innovations will be ensured by an evaluation 
of costs and benefits planned in all technical WPs. The following paragraphs provide a qualitative overview 
of the commercial interests of each PHOTONFOOD partners:  
 
NP: NP is the world leader for single mode light sourc es for tunable diode laser spectroscopy (TDLAS). All 
research activities of NP follow the strategy to maintain this position and to open up new markets such as in 
the food industry and the medical sector. Traditionally, the TDLAS market is mainly focusing on industrial 
process control and safety applications in the oil and gas industry. In recent years, NP have observed a strong 
market demand for both, highly specialized widely tunable single mode laser sources for high-end sensors as 
well as a strong customer interest in low and medium cost high power MIR light sources for consumer or semi-
professional applications. Both topics are addressed by NP within the research undertaken within the 
PHOTONFOOD Project. The tunable cascaded laser shall address the high-end market whereas the MIR IC-
LED will serve the semiprofessional market. If the sales number grow well, the MIR IC-LED device is also 
expected to be cost competitive for the consumer market.  
IRIS: In PHOTONFOOD, IRIS will provide a supercomputing cloud -enabled platform to allow the 
digitalisation from the MI -FI and HI -FI analysers and to commercialize it through a Software -as-a-Service 
(SaaS) business model. This has the advantage of offering affor dable, high performance computing to end -
users for high processing power and speeds in novel sensing technologies. During the development of the 
project, IRIS will structure the value proposition of the developed software. In addition, IRIS will draw up the 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
43 
 
product datasheets that will outline the key information, and will also create software brochures outlining 
applications, highlighting the benefits, etc. The services that support the software will also be clearly defined 
(maintenance service, customizat ion services, upgrades to the software and models), consultancy based on 
system use and data understanding. The software interface will also be a further vehicle to build the 
PHOTONFOOD brand identity: this aspect will be developed in collaboration with th e other industrial 
partners.  
IBM: In PHOTONFOOD IBM will provide an advisory help to develop a strategy for implementing the MI-
FI monitoring data and HI-FI reference analysis data into the Food Trust™ block chain for big data analysis 
to improve food safety and reduce waste in the whole food production chain.  
ROMER:  ROMER is in close contact with its customers and is thus very familiar with their needs. Based on 
this expertise, ROMER will evaluate the HI-FI device using real world samples (in cooperation with BOKU) 
and the reference data available for these samples. Based on the end users requirements well known to 
ROMER, they will be able to provide valuable feedback on the strengths and weaknesses of the developed 
device and suggest improvements. 
Seeberger:  The PHOTONFOOD technology is expected to save waste and is economically of high interest 
for Seeberger. The technology which can be used for monitoring on farms is expected to reveal contamination 
at the origin. This would allow to avoid that contaminated raw goods would not even be sent and not mixed 
with non-contaminated batches. If contaminated raw goods are sent to the distributer, the entire final batch of 
around 20 tons is contaminated and must be blocked, destroyed or returned.  
     Hahn-Schickard (HS):  In parallel to NP, which is taking care of the commercialization of the light sources, 
Hahn-Schickard will manage the commercialization of the final HI -FI and MI-FI products at the end of the 
project. Market demands will be evaluated critically and potential stakeholder demands will be collected in 
order to adapt potential products after the project to that need and with the highest value and user-friendliness 
for final customers. 
accelCH:  accelCH does not plan to directly commercialise the results of the project. They rather anticipate to 
increase their visibility by participating in excellent projects like PHOTONFOOD 
BIGH: For the aquaponics farm BIGH, the PHOTONFOOD technologies will allow to imp rove their 
production of aromatic herbs both in terms of quantity and quality. Indeed, fungi  causing Downy mildew in 
herbs and tomatoes  is one of the main contaminants  for their production.  Having an early detection of this 
fungi could be used for taking appropriate early actions and preventive measures. 
BAMA: BAMA is the Norwegian market leader within fresh fruit and vegetables.  Mycotoxins pose a huge 
risk for BAMA. Having a monitoring and analysis tool for mycotoxin at hand would enable them to improve 
food safety and to proof that their products are safe. 
Several results are expected to be exploitable for non -commercial purposes. The PHOTONFOOD partners 
have identified a number of ways in which they wish to use their research results:  
 Subsequent projects - By using the results in further research activities, such as (i) mycotoxin monitoring, 
recommended for industrial partners; (ii) on -site quick testing by authority personnel; (iii) research 
activities, such as Horizon Europe and national funded research and development programs aiming for on-
site testing of food quality and safety parameters; (iv)  in Horizon Europe- and national funded research 
and development programs aiming for citizen science; 
 Positioning - As a recognized expert center for official c ontrols via on -site testing: National Reference 
Laboratory (NRL) and European Reference Laboratory (EURL) for on -site testing of food quality and 
safety parameters. 
 Publishing data – academic publishing in peer-reviewed and popular science journals, 
 Networking – BIGH will participate in networking with the food science hub; NP will participate with 
presentations on summer schools for students e.g. the iNOW (international nano-optoelectronic workshop) 
summer; Winter School Mautendorf "New developments in sol id state physics"; WU will perform 
proactively sharing the PHOTONFOOD developments and outcomes through the official EU network of 
national and European Reference Laboratories (note that Wageningen Research is the designated EURL 
for mycotoxins, plant toxi ns and veterinary drug residues). BOKU will link PHOTONFOOD to the 
networks of the Austrian Society of Analytical Chemistry and of the International Society of Mycoxicolgy 
and Global Food Security networks at Queen´s U Belfast.  
 
Exploitation measures. To facilitate the future commercial and non -commercial uptake of results based on 
our strategy above we have defined the following activities to exploit results during and after the project ends: 
 
Table 11: PHOTONFOOD exploitation measures 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
44 
 
Activity description  Target group | 
Lead  
Impact | KPIs 
Business Model– To facilitate the future upscaling and uptake of the 
PHOTONFOOD platform and solutions, potential business cases 
will be developed. This will include a stakeholder mapping as well 
as an extensive SWOT and PESTEL analysis of our new 
technologies to ensure its sustainability in the long term. 
Industry, 
technology 
providers | HS 
 
Uptake of project 
results after the 
project end | business 
models developed 
and implemented 
Strategic grant planning - To support the project and all partners 
in the use of their results and outcomes in further research, accelCH 
will conduct a strategic grant plan to identify future funding 
opportunities for the PHOTONFOOD platform and the individual 
technologies developed. Early identification of potential funding 
opportunities will support the preparation of grant applications to 
exploit project results. 
Researchers, 
project partners | 
accelCH 
Exploitation of 
outcomes through 
follow-up projects | 
one planning session 
with all partners  to 
identify future 
funding 
opportunities 
Standardisation and guidelines : The project results have the 
potential to be integrated into national food safety related guidelines 
such as Good Hygiene Practices based on the Regulation (EC) No 
852/2004 and national level food codices, such as the Codex 
Alimentarius Austriacus and th e Codex Alimentarius Hungaricus . 
We will share our policy brief with decision and policy makers 
which will include recommendations for food safety guidelines. Our 
recommendations are not legally binding , but could potentially 
influence regulations if our r esults are strong which could require 
countries to change their laws. 
Policy-decision 
makers | NEBIH 
 
Use and 
contributions to 
standards and 
guidelines | uptake of 
results  
 
Policy change - The project partners are committed to exploiting 
their results to have a direct influence on current guidelines on food 
safety. Using dissemination materials created during the project we 
use our established contacts with policy makers to change policies. 
Policy-decision 
makers | NEBIH 
 
Stakeholders briefed 
on our approach to 
contribute to change 
| contacts with 50 
policy makers 
Roadmap for exploitation (RfE):  Develop a path -to-market 
strategy including an exploitation roadmap building upon the initial 
business models (see table 7) 
Industry, 
technology 
providers, 
researchers, HS 
Uptake of projec t 
results after the 
project end | RfE 
developed (D7.6, 
M48) 
 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
45 
 
Business case.  The Innovation Manager  of the project has developed an initial business case  in close 
collaboration with the other PHOTONFOOD partners. The business model canvas is shown in Figure 13.  
 
Roadmap and outlook. To achieve the expected impact of PHOTONFOOD results beyond the end of the 
project, we have designed a preliminary roadmap for exploitation showing the timeline and the main measures 
needed to facilitate the up-take of commercial and non-commercial exploitation of results. The initial roadmap 
for exploitation (RfE) has been visualised in Figure 14 and covers PHOTONFOOD exploitation measures 
during the lifetime of the project (short-term) and mid- and long-term plans (<4 years and <10 years after the 
project ends).  
The initial RfE  will be used as a basis for the achievement and wide uptake of PHOTONFOOD project 
results and outcomes and further developed during the project based on the research results from WP1 -WP6 
and the business plans. The results will be recorded in the deliverable Roadmap for Exploitation (D7.6, M48) 
and used by all partners to facilitate the implementation of exploitation measures beyond the duration of the 
project. This will include: (a) a detailed report of the consortium’s plan for commercialisation of the developed 
technology, (b) a draft exploitation agreement to be annexed to the consortium agreement, (c) active seeking 
of licensees, (d) active seeking of future funding to leverage commercialisation and funding during first year 
of exploitation, 
(e) initiating 
the process of 
establishing 
the 
product/service 
range, and (f) 
initiation of up 
distribution 
agreement and 
supply chain agreements with partners.  
 
2.2.2 Communication activities  
The PHOTONFOOD communication activities target a broader audience than dissemination measures (as 
described in Section 2.2.1.1) . They are aimed on the one hand to support and complement our defined 
dissemination measures, and on the other hand offer materials that can be further spread by our partners’ 
network. Communication activities aim at: Raising awareness of the project to farmers/producers, processors, 
logistics, retailers and technology developers along the food value chain, as well as the general public on the 
 
Figure 13: PHOTONFOOD business canvas  
 
Figure 14: PHOTONFOOD roadmap for exploitation  
 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
46 
 
importance of early contamination detection in food and the potential of the PHOTONFOOD solution. In order 
to achieve these aims we have planned the communication measures presented in Table 12.  
Table 12: PHOTONFOOD communication activities  
Activity Description  Target group 
| Lead  
Impact | KPIs 
Project website - Set up and maintain the project website, which will 
notably function as the main source of information and resources related 
to the project, partners, latest developments, publications and public 
deliverables for all stakeholders. Information relevant to t he project will 
be updated regularly including short blog texts on the project’s progress 
as well as events our partners are contributing to.  Links to social media 
to for sharing relevant information through partner’s existing and well -
established networks  on Twitter, Facebook and YouTube such as 
BOKU’s twitter which received over 100.000 views this year.  
All Target 
groups | 
accelCH 
Updating of 
stakeholders on 
development and 
results, and 
raising general 
awareness | 
Average 500 
users per month 
Communication materials - Logo, design guidelines and templates 
created to support the visual identity of the project.  Print and online 
materials created and available to all project partners to be distributed 
online, via social media, at conferences/exhibitions such as:  
 Case studies to show the food along the value chain and our solution 
 Poster and roll-ups for events and tradeshows 
 Technology factsheets on the innovative developments 
 Factsheet and/or brochures providing basic project information 
All Target 
groups, but 
with custom-
made 
materials | 
accelCH 
Spreading 
general 
knowledge on 
the project | 200 
downloads or 
print outs 
distributed 
 
Local science events - Our academic partners organise local science 
events to inform the general public on science related topics and increase 
the interest of students to a career in science.  
Participate at local events to facilitate two-way engagement with society 
and increase interest in the project in students and the general public.  
General 
public, 
students, 
media | 
UULM  
Increase interest 
in science and 
the project | 
participation at 4 
events 
Audio/visual material - Interactive digital audio/visual material will be 
created including videos presenting the project activities including 
interviews with key partners and infographics to visualise complex 
information in a simple way to the food industry the general public. The 
digital media will be shared via the project website, social media channels 
and existing partner networks. Videos and infographics will be 
distributed via the project website, partners’ social media channels  
General public 
and media, 
Food industry 
| accelCH 
Inform dedicated 
target groups 
about the 
PHOTONFOOD 
approach | 600 
views online 
Press releases and articles - As interest in food waste and food safety is 
increasing, communications with mass media will prove central to reach 
out to a large audience. In case of breakthrough findings, we will issue 
press releases to popular media in collaboration with the media relation 
units of the partner institutions, will then coordinate all requests for press 
conferences, interviews, press, news and TV coverage 
General 
public, media | 
WU 
Awareness 
raising and 
informing of key 
project results | 
4-7 press 
releases planned 
 
Communication requirements. This project is funded by one of the calls under the Photonics Public Private 
Partnership (PPP). All communication activities related to the project will acknowledge the context of the 
Photonics PPP, for example by stating that the project is an initiative of the Photonics Public Private 
Partnership. 
Specifically, for workshops, press releases, presentations etc., the EU emblem and Photonics21 logo will 
be displayed prominently together with the text “Photonics Public Private Partnership”. The link 
www.photonics21.org will also be included. When communicating on Twitter or other social media about 
project activities, #Photonics will be included together with @Photonics21 and @PhotonicsEU. 
The consortium will issue a professional press release at project launch, additional professional press 
releases whenever the project has reached a significant milestone or exceptional scientific, economic or societal 
impact is expected, and a final professional press release at project end. 
A professional communication kit about the project (as a minimum a n arrative text, photographs, slides 
possibly complemented by a video and any other suitable communication material, accompanied with 
copyright licences for the European Commission and for Photonics21) will be prepared and delivered at the 
end of project mon th 3 at the latest. The communication kit will target audiences beyond the project’s own 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
47 
 
community, including the broader public and potential end-users, and focus on expected outcomes and related 
socio-economic benefits for the EU. The professional commun ication kit will be updated at mid-term and at 
project end to reflect project progress achieved. 
The communication activities will involve public relations experts to ensure the pertinence of messages to 
target audiences and high outreach at both national and EU level through the use of the relevant national and 
EU-wide media channels (e.g. newspapers and broadcast). 
Project communications such as project press releases, workshops announcements, websites, brochures will 
respect the principle of fair visibility for all partners. If the logo of any individual beneficiary is included, then 
the logos of all beneficiaries will be included.  
 
3. Implementation