1.3 Concept and methodology 
1.3.1. PHOTONFOOD concept  
 
A large number of studies have demonstrated that MIR spectroscopy in combination with advanced data 
analysis has the capability to identify and detect a broad range of microorganisms and chemical 
contaminants in a lab setting15,16. Since its invention, the interest from industries in this technique has grown 
considerably. The technology can be used for identification of contaminants at the genus, species level and in 
 
15 Shapaval. V., et al. Applied Microbiology, 2013, 114, 788-796, doi:10.1111/jam.12092. 
16 Lecellier. A., et al. Int J of Microbiology, 2014, 3;168-169:32-41.doi: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.10.011. 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
11 
 
most cases even down to strain level. For bacteria and, recently for fungi, it has been shown that identification 
is possible with an accuracy above 90% on species level. For moulds, MIR spectroscopy outcompetes any 
existing technology in accuracy and the broad range of fungi that can be addressed16,17. However, state-of-the-
art applications are performed in environments and under conditions that are not relevant for on-site use along 
the farm-to-fork food production chain16,17. State-for-the-art sample preparation protocols for detecting and 
identifying microbial contamination by MIR analysis are based on culturing and sub-culturing whereas spectra 
are obtained in pure culture 16,17. 
The detection of mycotoxins by MIR spectroscopy has been demonstrated by the consortium in the 
spectral range of 1500–1800 cm -1 in extracts from grains  (see Fig. 2) . However, the challenge is the 
exceedingly low limits of detection that are required from a legislation point of view. In addition, the potential 
presence of multiple mycotoxins and contaminants makes the situation even more difficult . The low 
concentrations of mycotoxin and other contaminants such as antibiotics and pesticides make the direct 
detection and separation of signals in food matrices impossible. To date, this challenge can only be met by 
using sophisticated analytical techniques in especially equipped laboratory (e.g., LC-MS/MS) or via antibody-
based immunoassays (e.g. ELISA).  
 
The PHOTONFOOD concept is to perform preconcentration of samples using paper -based microfluidics 
strategies and to combine the cheap and environmentally friendly paper-based microfluidics with label-free 
MIR photonic read-out devices (see Fig. 3).  
 
While paper microfluidic tests for numerous applications in point -of-care-testing, and environmental 
research have been demonstrated with detection limits in the mid ppb range1718 , few of these offer an integrated 
solution that also addresses sampling and sample pretreatment. Therefore, the integration of preconcentration 
 
17 Hariharan et al., Opt. Mater. (Amst), 2019, vol. 94, pp. 305–310. 
18 M. Medina-Sánchez, M. Cadevall, J. Ros, and A. Merkoçi, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2015, vol. 407(28), pp. 8445–8449. 
 
Figure 2 : State of the art examples of IR detection of fungal and mycotoxin contaminations . (a) FTIR -ATR spectrum of 
mycotoxin deoxynivalenol on a paper-based sampling strip. (b) QCL IR spectra of 24 maize extracts with different deoxynivalenol 
contamination levels (Reprinted from Sieger et al. J Scientific reports 2017, 7:44028). (c) FTIR spectra of chitin and fungal biomass 
with the characteristic spectral biomarkers for detection of fungal contaminants. (d) Emission spectrum of an IC -LED designed for 
the 2500 wavenumber (the strong absorption features around 2300 cm-1 are caused by CO2 present in the measurement path). 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
12 
 
would lead to improved detection limits. The WU team has demonstrated such paper microfluidic sample 
preparation, including paper -based two -phase countercurrent extraction 19, and combining paper and 3D -
printed microfluidics for controlled preconcentration20. Very recently, WU has developed a miniaturized total-
analysis system for the detection of allergens in food products, integrating 3D -printed components with a 
lateral flow immunoassay, and smartphone readout. This system has been successfully used by an  untrained 
user (15 years old) to differentiate between a cookie containing hazelnut allergen and one without 21 . 
PHOTONFOOD will built on this experience and develop paper -based microfluidics that can be used by an 
untrained user such as a consumer and will be tested by end-users as outlined in the stakeholder involvement 
section on page 29.  
In preparation of this proposal, partners UULM, WU and BOKU demonstrated the feasibility of the 
fundamental concept of combining paper-based sampling strategies with label-free MIR read-out technologies. 
They have recorded the MIR signature of the exemplary mycotoxin deoxynivalenol (DON) sampled via a 
paper sampling strip from solution, and then directly detected it via conventional MIR-ATR spectroscopy (Fig. 
2a). The experiment shows that high -quality spectra can in principle be obtained from paper -based 
microfluidics pressed on an ATR surface. PHOTONFOOD will build on this technology and develop 3D 
printed interface for microfluidics and the optical surfaces of the MI-FI and HI-FI devices.  
Furthermore, the c onsortium members UULM, BOKU  and IRIS have shown that mycotoxins can be 
detected through molecular signature changes in the spectral region from 1500–1800 cm-1  22  (Fig. 2b). NMBU 
has shown that filamentous fungi have strong and characteristic molecular signatures in the MIR spectral 
region23  (Fig. 2c). Acetylglucosamine is a subunit of chitin that is present in the cell wall of all fungi and that 
gives rise to strong signals in the amide I and amide II region of the MIR (1500–1700cm-1) (Fig. 2c). Antibiotics 
and pesticides show discriminative molecular  signatures in this spectral range as wel 24 . T herefore, 
PHOTONFOOD will develop tailor -made light sources for this spectral range . Partner NP has already 
developed breakthrough IC-LED technology with devices emitting in the 2500-3333 cm- 1 spectral range with 
several mW of output power at room temperature  (Fig. 2d). Adapting the PHOTONFOOD solution to new 
contaminants that require other spectral ranges in the MIR will be easily possible in the complete 3333-1000 
cm-1 range. This will be possible due to the ability to specifically engineer the band structure of ICL and QCL 
 
19 G. IJ. Salentijn, M. Grajewski, and E. Verpoorte, Lab Chip, 2017, vol. 17(20), pp. 3401–3404. 
20 G. IJ. Salentijn and M. H. Hoekstra, “Sensor Cartridge for chemical assays of a liquid sample containing analyte molecules - Patent 
No. WO2018226097,” 2017 
21 Ross GMS, Filippini D, Nielen MWF, Salentijn GIJ (2020), Lab Chip, 2020, under review 
22 Sieger M, et al. J Scientific reports 2017, 7, 44028. 
23 S. Dzurendova, et al., PlosOne, 2020, accepted.  
24 Undabeytia T, Morillo E, Maqueda C. J Agric Food Chem. 2002, vol. 50(7), pp. 1918‐1921. 
 
Figure 3: The overall concept of PHOTONFOOD.  

PHOTONFOOD 
 
13 
 
gain material as well as to modify the design parameters of the devices developed within PHOTONFOOD in 
order to cover additional wavelengths. ICLs and IC -LEDs can be operat ed in continuous-wave mode up to 
room temperature in this wavelength range with low power consumption, rendering them very cost effective. 
For QCLs however, power consumption is significantly higher, yet, pulsed operation at room temperature 
yields significantly higher power output compared to ICL based devices. The research on the photonic devices 
is based on results obtained in previous FP7 and Horizon 2020 projects such as SensHy, MIRPHAB and 
MIRACLE (see Table 4) as well as national projects that laid the basis for long wavelength ICL and high 
performance QCL devices25,26. PHOTONFOOD will be using this knowledge as a basis for the dedicated gain 
material and the chip development for IC -LEDs and widely tunable lasers in the 1500 -1800 cm -1 spectral 
region. The photonic devices developed will have TLR of 6 at the end of the project. 
Portable solutions that can be used for monitoring and reference analysis along the food chain that allow 
the detection of microbial and chemical contaminations (e.g., mycotoxins, antibiotics) do not exist and are 
highly desirable22,27,28,29 . Therefore, the PHOTONFOOD solution will include a low-cost mid-fidelity (MI-FI) 
device for monitoring and a high-fidelity (HI-FI) device for reference analysis, with a mobile application for 
easy, on-site operations The MI-FI data will be of sufficient quality to decide if contamination is present or 
not, while the HI-FI device will deliver high-quality spectra, providing the ground for the later a ccreditation 
of the device for a larger range of contamination problems. These devices will supersede and advance the 
developed TRL6 -level technology established at UULM and partners for the analysis of mycotoxin 
contaminations in the laboratory22,28 (see Table 4). 
To identify if contamination is present or not and to estimate the level of contamination, powerful machine 
learning, deep learning and other advanced date mining techniques will be used and wrapped into applications 
for use on mobile phones and portable computers. At the end of the project period the PHOTONFOOD solution 
will have been demonstrated and validated for selected contaminants and food commodities. Initially, the focus 
will be on some of the most important microbial and chemical contaminants in food, i.e. fungi, mycotoxins, 
antibiotics and pesticides. Furthermore, we will demonstrate that the PHOTONFOOD solution can be easily 
and broadly adapted to any food contaminant.  
The combination of this broad range of ground -breaking technologies requires highly interdisciplinary 
competence in such fields as MIR spectroscopy, light source and waveguide development, paper-based on-site 
chemical analysis, food spoilage microbiology, and data science.   
The PHOTONFOOD project consists of three essential phases and stakeholders will be involved during all 
three: (i) The first phase is the technology development phase during which the photonic sensor solution will 
be developed. (ii) During the second phase the solution will be  demonstrated in lab settings.  (iii) The third 
phase includes the demonstration and validation of the platform in real settings at critical control points along 
the food production chain. During the first phase, a technology acceptance and technical-economic evaluation 
(WP1) will go along with the development of photonic components and data analysis algorithms (WP3-5) and 
paper-based microfluidics for rapid and reproducible sampling from hard and soft food produc ts and sample 
pretreatment (WP2). In the second phase, the pre-validation of samples obtained from critical control points 
along the food chain (raw materials, water from the processing environment (aquaponics), final food products) 
will be done in laboratory settings. In the third and final phase of the project, the complete solution will be 
validated in real settings by relevant stakeholders along the food supply value chain. For the validation , one 
HI-FI and five MI-FI instruments will be produced. The demonstration and validation will be accompanied by 
evaluation of technology acceptance and technical-economical evaluation in real settings: on farms (wheat and 
walnut farms), in food processing  facilities (dried fruit producers, peanut processing), wholesale and retail 
(grain, nuts and dried fruits), and novel food production (aquaponics), as well as food laboratories (authority 
and private laboratory units). The interaction with users along the complete food supply chain will be crucial 
for addressing user requirements. 
 
1.3.2 PHOTONFOOD main results and technology readiness levels 
 
 
25 N. Schäfer; J. Scheuermann; R. Weih; J. Koeth; S. Höfling, Optical Engineering, 2019, vol. 58(11), pp. 117106. 
26 L. Naehle, et al. “Monolithic tunable GaSb-based lasers at 3.3 μm“, Electronics Letters, 2011, vol. 47, pp.1092. 
27 K. Roodenko et al. in Proc. SPIE 11233,  Optical Fibers and Sensors for Medical Diagnostics and Treatment Applications XX, 
112330C (9 March 2020). 
28 T. Öner, P. Thiam, G. Kos, R. Krska, F. Schwenker, B. Mizaikoff, World Mycotoxin J., vol. 12(2), pp. 113 – 122. 
29 McMullin, D., Mizaikoff, B. & Krska, R. Anal Bioanal Chem, 2015, vol. 407, pp. 653-660. 
PHOTONFOOD 
 
14 
 
PHOTONFOOD will provide innovative photonic IC-LED and ICL/QCL light sources and waveguides for 
the MIR to overcome drawbacks of existing photonics technology with respect to price, precision and power 
and will adapt the solution to specific requirements for on-site measurements in the whole food chain. These 
advances will provide a portable solution that can be used for photonics monitoring and reference analysis in 
the whole food chain . The photonics solution will contain a unique sample preconcentration that allows the 
photonics detection of contaminations at the lowest level s. The photonics solution will be combined with a 
software application that enables the use on-site (mobile and computer application). The prototyping planned 
in the project and the demonstration of the solution will pave the way to a commercialization after the project 
period. Table 3 summarizes the technology levels for the different components developed in the project, while 
Fig. 4 explains the TRL for the complete solution. 
 
Table 3: The individual components of PHOTONFOOD and their TRLs at the project start and after project 
completion 
1. Paper-based microfluidics - preconcentration and separation 
TRL 3-4: The proof-of-concept, which is the MIR detection of mycotoxins from a paper strip has been 
established for this proposal. Proof-of-concept has already been published for functionalities that will be 
employed in this project, such as paper-based liquid-liquid extraction, as well as modified-paper-based 
selective enrichment and immunocapture. These approaches will be further developed and tailored 
towards the mycotoxin applications in PHOTONFOOD. 
TRL 5-6: By the end of the project, the most appropriate concept for sample pre-treatment will have been 
selected, validated and demonstrated in a real scenario. Sampling and pre-treatment will be combined into 
 
Figure 4:  TRLs description for the PHOTONFOOD solution prior, at the start, during, and after the project completion. 
 

PHOTONFOOD 
 
15 
 
easy-to-operate cartridges, which will be made available for testing. Demonstrations of the developed 
technology will be performed for the selected food safety cases. 
2. 3D-printed interface for microfluidics and optical surfaces 
TRL 4-5: A 3D-printed micro total analysis system has been developed in the WU labs, which allows for 
facile extraction and sample pretreatment of allergens from a solid food matrix, followed by a lateral flow 
immunoassay. This immunoassay has been validated as a screening assay, and the total system was 
successfully used by an untrained individual.  
TRL 5-6: By the end of the project, novel strategies will have been developed and validated/demonstrated 
in real-life scenarios for the hard and soft food products relevant to PHOTONFOODS. Sampling and pre-
treatment will be combined into easy-to-operate cartridges, which will be made available for testing. Also, 
facile interfacing with MIR readout will have been achieved at this point. 
3. HI-FI ICL/QCL light source for 1500-1800 cm-1 range spectral range  
TRL 4: The technology has already been investigated for the 5000 cm-1 wavelength range based on diode 
lasers and is currently under evaluation for the sensing of blood alcohol levels within the Driver Alcohol 
Detection System for Safety (DADSS) program by the Automotive Coalition for Traffic Safety (ACTS). 
The patent for the underlying technology is pending. NP has the exclusive right of the use of the 
technologies for any application beyond alcohol sensing in cars. 
TRL 6: The tunable laser technology will be developed further to extend it to the MIR wavelength range 
in the 1500-1800 cm-1 spectral region. Depending on the performance requirements in terms of tunability 
and output power either QCL or ICL gain material will be used for the realization of tailor-made lasers for 
mycotoxin detection within the PHOTONFOOD project. The proposed novel ICL/QCL based light source 
will provide essential advantages with respect to ruggedness, compactness, speed and costs compared to 
tunable external cavity systems currently available on the market.