4. Ethics self-assessment ....................................................................................................................................... 32  
  
1. Excellence  
Project overview  
The Solanaceae family is one of the largest plant families in the world being present on all continents except 
Antarctica, and its economic importance lies in many different fields such as food, medicines, cosmetics, etc. The 
most economically important genus of the family is Solanum, which includes the potato 
(Solanum tuberosum) and the tomato (Solanum lycopersicum). Potato and tomato crops 
are integral sources of carbohydrates, vitamins, and minerals essential for a balanced and 
healthy diet, making them staples in human consumption for centuries and being cultivated 
globally. Indeed, within the EU, these two crops stand out as the most significant among 
fresh vegetables, underscoring their importance in both regional and global agriculture. In 
2022, the harvested area of potatoes across the EU was 1.4 M Ha, of which 47.5 MT of 
crops were produced. Germany (22.5%, 10.7 MT), France (17.0%), the Netherlands 
(14.6%) and Poland (12.7%) together accounted for around two thirds of the EU’s potato 
harvest.1  In Latin America (LATAM), cultivated potatoes are widely distributed in the 
 
1 Key figures on the European Food Chain (2023). Eurostat. Available here.  
Figure 1. 
 1 
  
 Symptoms on  
potato tubers affected by  
Cs and on tomato by Rs. 
  
 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 3 of 33  
Andean region with over 4,500 varieties and more than 100 wild species. 2 Regarding tomato, the total production 
in 2022 was 15.4 MT of harvested production, with Italy (39.8%) and Spain (23.7%) at the top of EU, followed by 
Portugal (9.1%). Both crops are vulnerable to several pest diseases, a threat that is greater than ever because of the 
considerable increase in the volumes, commod ity types and origins of trade in plant material from third countries, 
the  
introduction of new crops, and the impact of climate change, which is affecting the boundaries of pests and their 
vectors. Based on range of annual production, output values and estimated percentage of damage, annual losses 
caused by pests range from 2.4-3.1 B€ for potatoes and 1.5-2.3 B€ for tomatoes, corresponding to 20-25% of total 
production damage.3 Among the quarantine and priority pests that threaten crops and that have caused severe losses 
in recent years, the bacteria Clavibacter sepedonicus (Cs ) (ring rot in potato)  and the bacteria Ralstonia 
solanacearum (Rs)  (Smith, phylotype II) [RALSS] (bacterial wilt in potato/tomato) are considered the most 
economically and environmentally relevant diseases and constitute a menace for seed production in particular (Fig 
1).4 Both bacteria are included in the Part B Annex of the Regulation 2019/2072  and are classified as EPPO A2 
quarantine pests.5,6 Furthermore, Cs/Rs are regulated by their respective EU policy establishing measures for  
  
eradicating and preventing their spread in EU.7,8,9,10 In this context, and in line with the regulation Associated with document 
Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/20252016/2031 on  
protective measures against pests of plants , effective front -line detection methods and innovative monitoring 
technologies suitable for surveillance and prevention are critical for recognizing infected crops and finding incursions 
of quarantine plant pathogens or pests in an early stage.11 In addition, fossil-base disease management practices  are 
still applied to prevent new outbreaks and further spread of currently infected areas. More sustainable practices, 
aiming for the development of rapid response pest eradication capabilities, that are non -dependant on fossil-based 
pesticides (in line with the EU Green Deal target of 50% pesticides reduction ) are necessary to safeguard 
ecosystems and biodiversity while improving food safety.   
  
Figure 1.2. POMATO overview of the multi-actor approach towards the IPM strategy to tackle Clavibacter sepedonicus 
(Cs) and Ralstonia solanacearum (Rs) outbreaks.  
In view of the current scenario, POMATO's primary goal is to safeguard the health of potato and tomato crops, as 
well as the quality of the final product, by effectively combating outbreaks of Cs and Rs. This mission is anchored in 
 
2 Rondon, S.I.(2022). In: Alyokhin, A. et al.Insect Pests & Potato 317-330.  
3 Damage is estimated by manufacturer of plant protection products.   
4 Nouioui I, et. al. (2018). Front. Microbiol. 9:2007. Available here.  
5 Regulation (EU) 2019/2072 protective measures against pests of plants. Available here.   
6 PM1/002(32) EPPO A1 & A2 Lists of pests recommended for regulation as quarantine pests (2023). Available here.  

 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 4 of 33  
four key pillars, guiding the project’s strategic initiatives and activities (Fig 1.2): 1) to isolate and identify Cs/Rs 
and to characterise at molecular level the resistance genes of potato/tomato , 2) to provide effective early 
detection and surveillance strategies  (Artificial Intelligence (AI) predictive models,  Multiparametric Disease 
Detection (MDD) sensing device, mathematical modelling tools, polymeric sensors, AI -driven Cloud data 
management platform and adquisition of infected field with drones), 3) to develop natural and bio-control solutions 
applied to seed, plant and soil (plant -derived organic substances, biocontrol coatings, plant growth -promoting 
microorganisms (PGPMs) and chemoperception disruptors), 4) to evaluate and validate the performance of all the 
above mentioned strategies at TRL5 in four case studies (CS#1 -#4) at field trials and to prepare the POMATO’s 
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) Plan with the aim to reduce the incidence of the pests by 40 -60%. 
POMATO is the first of this class of project that brings together a multi-actor approach to prevent and eradicate 
the spread of quarantine pests known to occur in the EU. POMATO is a 48-month project that will involve strategic 
actors of the potato/tomato value chain. The actors include academic research organizations ( 4 universities (UBU, 
USFQ, WUR, CBGP) and 5 RTOs (IHAR, AGRO, IDER, FUND, JSI) with high expertise on molecular biology 
of plant’s resistance characterization of Cs/Rs, on data analysis, modelling, AI -based models, polymeric sensors 
development and crop protection by natural bio-control solutions and 2 agrochemical companies (CHEM, FERT) 
to scale-up and validate the solutions. Moreover, POMATO will involve farmers (as field validators) through its 3 
agriculture EU associations (EUPAT, PIN, F4S), 1 SME (IRIS) to develop the multiparametric disease detection  
  
7 Regulation (EU) 2022/1194 on Clavibacter sepedonicus (Spieckermann & Kotthoff 1914) Nouioui et al. 2018. Available here.  
8Regulation (EU) 2022/1193 on Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith 1896) Yabuuchi et al. 1996 emend. Safni et al. 2014. Available here.  
9Cs present in: Belarus, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, European 
part of Russia, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine.  
10Rs present in: Georgia, Moldova, Russia, Serbia and Ukraine.  
11 Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 on protective measures against pests of plants. Available here.  
device, and 1 SME responsible for dissemination, communication and exploitation (INO) Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025of the project’s results.  
Finally, POMATO’s international partners from Colombia (AGRO) and Ecuador (USFQ), currently heavily affected 
by Cs/Rs, will ensure the exchange of good practices while at the same time providing access to a wide germplasm 
collection of potato/tomato and to infected fields to evaluate the developed strategies.  
1.1. Objectives and ambition  
 
1.1.1.  Objectives  
POMATO strategies are aligned with the topic “HORIZON -CL6-2024-FARM2FORK-02-04 two stages: Tackling 
outbreaks of plant pests”. The project proposes 5 objectives (O) with their respective 5 outcomes (OC), articulated 
under 21 results (R).  
O1. To develop molecular approaches for Cs/Rs disease Resistance Genes (RGs) identification in potato 
and tomato varieties. Linked to WP 2  
R1  Tool (I -matrix) and procedure for specific isolation of bacterial cells directly from contaminated 
environmental samples to reach at least 80% effectiveness.  
R2  
At least 100 isolated bacteria from potato/tomato infected areas and germplasm culture collections from 
LATAM and Poland, 12 completely sequenced bacterial genomes, and at least 12 transcriptomic analyses 
will be performed to understand the genetic diversity and virulence signatures of field samples of Cs/Rs.  
R3  
Identification, compilation, and mapping of all annotated potato and tomato resistance (R genes), 
susceptibility (S genes) and plant metabolic pathways and regulatory networks that interact with these 
R and S genes.  
R4  
Identification of potential resistance genes/regions (RGs) against Cs/Rs through whole -genome 
transcriptome and genome-wide association studies (GWAS) analysis of incompatible interactions between 
Cs/Rs and potato/tomato using extensive germplasm working collections from Europe and LATAM: 200 
potato and 200 tomato samples.  
R5  
Isolating and characterizing 10 different non-suppressive consortia that are involved in or are allowing 
the establishment and spread of pathogen infection. These consortia will allow the identification of the 
interactions between at least 6 genetic, environmental and soil factors (temperature, humidity, soil, pH, 
texture, organic matter content).  

 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 5 of 33  
R6  
Implement FAIR by design pipelines to prepare data and metadata for interoperability , ensuring 
alignment with open -science principles and readiness for subsequent data analysis models and machine 
learning.  
OC1  
The identification of RGs and the development of new molecular tools will enable breeding programs to 
produce Cs/Rs-resistant potato and tomato varieties. This will reduce disease incidence, enhance crop 
resilience, and decrease pesticide use.  
O1’s pertinence to topic: one or more plant pests: Union quarantine plant pests present in the EU or priority pests 
in the EU. Effective implementation of the principles of IPM. Innovative biological and other non-chemical control 
and resistance breeding. Drivers of plant pest introduction, spread and establishment and its interaction with host 
plants and antagonists.  
O2. To develop tools for the early detection and surveillance of Cs/Rs in potato and tomato. Linked to  
WP 3  
R7  
Metagenomically Assembled Genomes (MAGs) will be used to build Genome Scale Metabolic models 
(GEMs), understand the plant’s immune response against Cs/Rs and identify key metabolites generated in 
the early stages of the infection ( at least 10 metabolites ) that will be detected some of them using 
polymeric sensors allowing the early detection of both pests.  
R8  
Machine learning and deep learning approaches will be combined with mechanistic modelling to identify 
dysregulated pathways related to disease progression, their regulators and molecular signatures. The 
pangenome of the characterized pathogens and at least 10% of the most relevant genetic signatures 
identified will be subjected to extensive comparative genomic analysis.  
R9  
Acquisition and analysis of >1000 high-resolution multispectral images from drones and satellites to 
detect, differentiate, and quantify the severity of Cs/Rs infections in tomato and potato crops, integrating 
this data with AI-based predictive models for early detection and targeted interventions.  
R10  Analysis of >1,000 images with AI based models, to establish a relationship between plant phenotype and 
severity of the bacterial infection to reach at least 80% of weighted accuracy.  
R11  
An advanced AI-driven cloud platform  that integrates diverse data sources and employs machine 
learning algorithms, interfaced through a digital application, to deliver tailored insights based on specific 
environmental conditions and crop health metrics, thereby enhancing disease prediction for potato and 
tomato crops.    
OC2  
The development of advanced tools for early detection and surveillance of Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025Cs/Rs will enable rapid 
identification of infections in potato and tomato crops. AI-driven models, along with sensor-based detection 
and image analysis, will significantly enhance disease prediction accuracy.  
O2’s pertinence to topic:  Influence of climate change, ecosystem degradation, and globalisation.  Efficient 
surveillance methods and strategies for early-detection.  
O3. Natural and bio-control solutions against Cs/Rs applied on potato and tomato seeds, plants and soil 
beneficial for both conventional and organic farming. Linked to WP 4  
Plant-derived organic substances, biocontrol coatings and chemoperception disruptive products to  
R12  
decrease at least 40% the incidence of Cs/Rs with respect to untreated plants.  
Development of sustainable practices using the treatment with PGPMs obtained from the healthy plants to R13  
decrease at least 60% the incidence of Cs/Rs with respect to untreated plants.  
The adoption of sustainable solutions to improve seed, plant and soil health and pest control for the reduction  
OC3  
of chemical pesticide and fungicide use in potato/tomato crops.  
O3’s pertinence topic: target to reduce by 50% the overall use and risk of chemical pesticides and reduce the use by 
50% of the more hazardous pesticides. Develop efficient (bio)control of the pest(s).  
O4. To validate the Integrated Pest Management (IPM) strategies at TRL 5 in 4 Case Studies (CS#) in 
greenhouses and real infected field in LATAM and EU. Linked to WP 5  
R14  
4 Case Studies (CS#)  to validate POMATO’s IPM strategies at both greenhouse and infected fields in 
LATAM and Europe: 3 related to Rs in potato/tomato (CS#1 CS#2 and CS#3) and 1 to Cs in potato (CS#4) 
at several locations in Colombia, Ecuador, Portugal and Poland.   

 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 6 of 33  
R15  The MDD sensing device  (90% of reliability) and portable polymeric sensors (>90% accuracy) will be 
validated in field trials in the CS# for in-situ diagnostic detection of Cs/Rs in potato/tomato crops.  
R16  
Plant-derived organic substances, biocontrol coatings, PGPMs and chemoperception disruptive 
products will be formulated at pre -industrial level (TRL5) and validated in field trials in the CS# as 
biocontrol strategies for Cs/Rs in potato/tomato fields.  
R17  The generation of recommendations to optimize processes and products using  the Safe and Sustainable by 
Design (SSbD) Framework.  
OC4  
The field trials will lead to the deployment of reliable diagnostic tools and effective biocontrol solutions for 
Cs/Rs in potato/tomato plants (at TRL5) and validate the effectiveness of the IPM strategies to control 
outbreaks of these pests with potential to be replicable in other Solanaceae crops.  
O4’s pertinence to topic: tools and technologies of economically and environmentally sound solutions, taking into 
account the use of non-chemical or biological control methods; analyse the ecological impact of plant pest(s) spread 
and establishment; International cooperation with countries affected by the same pest(s).  
O5. To disseminate, communicate and exploit the main achievements of POMATO project. Linked to WP  
5 and WP 6 (detailed KPIs in Section 2.2)  
R18  
Creation of POMATO’s multi -actor participatory platform (MAPP) and activities to share knowledge, 
expertise, and background across the interdisciplinary consortium and the target actors. To generate at least 
25 “practice abstracts”  to contribute to European CAP Network repository and insights for farmers and 
potato/tomato traders; at least 10 peer reviewed publications, 10 publications in specialised agriculture media 
outlets.  
R19  
Project dissemination results will be shared through relevant channels  to support the impact and 
exploitation outcomes including websites, social media, training materials, project related videos, social 
events (including both physical and online), etc.  
R20  
4 engagement activities  in Europe and 2 in LATAM to increase the project’s visibility across the target 
groups, especially focused on farmers (see section 2.1). 4 Thematic POMATO’s Open Days addressing the 
4 different pillars.  
R21  
POMATO IPM Plan (translated into at least 3 languages ) among relevant stakeholders, including those 
related in the policy and decision-making cycle. EU recommendations will be sent to the EC, the European 
Parliament, the Committee of the Regions, the Commission Expert Group on Plant Health Legislation (2 
policy briefs, 1 position paper, at least 2 policy roundtables and briefings).  
OC5  Providing the foundations and drivers for future development and implementation of IPM strategies by 
farmers and other key players in the event that these potato/tomato pests outbreak in EU.  
O5’s pertinence to topic: social and economic implications for farmers, foresters and other economic operators 
affected by the outbreaks of the plant pest(s); implement the multi-actor approach; cooperation with other proposals.  
1.1.2.  Ambition and progress beyond the state of the art (BsoA) Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 
08/04/2025 
POMATO project aims to provide a powerful European initiative for a sustainable IPM strategy to control and treat 
the presence of Cs/Rs in potato and tomato crops. Beyond the state of art, several innovative strategies will be 
implemented within the project which are articulated in 5 ambitions:  
Ambition #1: Isolation, genomic and transcriptomic characterization of Cs/Rs and molecular characterization 
of potato/tomato RGs (WP 2, T2.1-2.2, 2.4):  SoA: Cs/Rs pests possess distinct characteristics that complicate both  
their diagnosis and management of their spread. These pathogens may exist in potato plants and tubers as a latent 
infection, which may be caused by low concentration of bacteria, different virulence of strains, and/or different 
tolerance of potato varieties to the presence of pathogens. On the other hand, their symptomatic form is often confused 
with the symptoms of wilting and other potato diseases. In tomato, Rs typically gains access to host root systems 
through natural wounds and then bacteria move to the vascular system, where they multiply in the xylem. As tomato 
and potato affected by bacterial wilt (Rs) present latent infections, and the contaminants present in the tested samples 
(extracts from plant tissue, soil and water) make diagnostics difficult and false, disease control continues to be a 

 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 7 of 33  
challenge BSoA: IHAR, based on previous patent to identify Cs,7  will develop an effective protocol based on 
isolation matrix (I-matrix) for the specific isolation of Rs cells from plant tissues and tubers, soil and water with 
the simultaneous possibility of concentrating the tested cells, maintaining their viability and eliminating burdensome 
contaminants. This will allow to enhance field monitoring by improving detection of Rs in latent and/or symptomatic 
infected environmental samples.   
POMATO will also conduct genomic and gene expression analyses of Cs/Rs to understand the process of bacterial 
pathogenesis and virulence during vascular colonization and plant immunity, and to gain new insights into the genetic 
diversity of bacteria populations. This will allow the early detection of genes and effectors involved in pathogenicity 
and strengthen biosecurity measures and field monitoring of Cs/Rs in latent infection and/or symptomatic plants. The 
risk of Cs/Rs intrusions and putative dissemination of pathogens represents a challenge for Europe and optimized and 
validated methodologies for the detection of Cs/Rs are required. Commercial kits are available for the detection of 
Cs/Rs (Agdia®); however, these diagnostic kits present some relevant constraints, validations are limited to few 
reference isolates and kits are expensive, showcasing the need for the development of new approaches for Cs/Rs 
diagnosis. The phenotypic and genotypic characterization of Cs/Rs will contribute to the advance of SoA by providing 
new insights into the genetic diversity of pathogen populations which is still highly unexplored in both LATAM and 
Europe. Additionally, much remains to be learned about the genes invo lved in the pathogenicity and virulence of 
Cs/Rs during vascular colonization. Identification of such genes could improve understanding of how pathogens 
cause disease.  
POMATO will complete a broad screening for the identification of new sources of potato and tomato RGs  to 
Cs/Rs including wild and native varieties from European and LATAM germplasm collections. A prerequisite for 
finding new sources of disease resistance is the characterization of genes involved in plant resistance. Sources of 
resistance to bacterial wilt originat ing from tomato wild relatives, S. pimpinellifolium , S. pennellii and S. 
lycopersicum var. cerasiforme have been already reported. 8 Published results suggested the presence of polygenic 
and strain-specific resistance in tomato wild relatives.9 Considering the centre of origin of potato/tomato, the Andean 
region in LATAM provides a high diversity of wild potato/tomato germplasm and a potential source of variability 
and genetic resistance against plant pathogens, such as Cs/Rs. Part of the diversity of potato/tomato genetic resources 
(> 3.000 accessions) is maintained in different potato/tomato Germplasm Banks (PGB and TGB) in LATAM and 
Poland, which has mostly not yet been characterized for their resistance/susceptibility to Cs/Rs. This TGB is 
constituted by an important number of tomato wild relative accessions, such as, Solanum peruvianum , S. 
lycopersicum var ceraciforme, S. arcanum  S. pimpinellifolium , S. pennellii  and S. hirsutum, among others. A 
screening for resistan t plants to Cs/Rs including wild potato/tomato accessions will advance the SoA through the 
identification of new sources of resistance that could be used as resistant parentals in breeding programs. Additionally, 
deciphering the molecular mechanisms of potato/tomato wild genotypes during interaction with effector genes from 
the pathogens will contribute to the understanding of the processes underlying plant immune responses.  
Ambition #2: Factors affecting the establishment and spread of Cs/Rs (WP 2 T2.3, 2.4 & WP 3 T3.1):  SoA: 
Climate, soil, and agronomic management practices play a crucial role in the susceptibility of potato/tomato to 
Cs/Rs. 10  For instance, temperature and humidity levels can impact pathogen growth and spread, while soil 
characteristics such as pH, texture, and organic matter content can affect the plant’s ability to uptake nutrients and 
resist infection.11  Agronomic management practices, such as the use of irrigation systems, fertilizers, and pesticides,  
  
 
7 Patent PL 427988. Link.  
8 Barchenger, Derek W., et al. (2022) Scientific Reports 12.1, 8374.  
9 Shin, Il Sheob, et al. (2020) Euphytica 216, 1-20.  
10 Singh, D., et al. (2014). Arch. Phytopathol. Plant Prot, 47(13), 1574-1583.  
11 Jiang, G., et.al (2021). Soil Ecol. Lett. V ol 3, 356-366.  
 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 8 of 33  
can also influence disease incidence and severity. For instance, improper use of pesticides can lead to the development 
of pesticide -resistant variants of Cs/Rs. BSoA: Understanding the influence of climate, soil, and agronomic 
management practices on Cs/Rs susceptibility is critical to developing effective disease management strategies. In 
POMATO, activities will be carried out to map and determine the impact of environmental factors such as soil type 
and climate on the predisposition of potato/tomato fields to bacterial wilt disease, as a base study to avoid and control 
the spread of Cs/Rs. This activity will provide for the first time a map of factors affecting the susceptibility of 
potato/tomato to Cs/Rs such as precipitation, temperature, soil characteristics, and farming conditions and how these 
factors can influence the disease dynamics.  Furthermore, POMATO will identify the keystone microbial species 
and molecular features from both plants and plant -associated bacterial microbiome that prevent the pr ogression of 
Cs/Rs strains. To do so, two modelling strategies will be deployed: i) MAGs and their GEMs will be obtained from 
publicly available data. If not available, automated tools for GEM reconstruction will be used, and ii) Uni- and 
multivariate statistical modelling in combination with predictive modelling using machine and deep learning (like 
Random forest and Neural networks), network inference and analysis, and reverse engineering approaches will be 
used to integrate and analyse data and metadata.  Mechanistic models will be simulated using SoA approaches that 
consider spatio - temporal dynamics that will be expanded to include host pathogen.  Statistical approaches and 
machine learning methods12 will be expanded to identify the genetic makeup of the observed virulence. Identification 
and characterization of the key microbes in the complex network of plant pathogen interactions will enable 
development of artificial microbial communities with plant protective effects. Based on the results obtained from the 
modelling approach, the rhizosphere microbial sub-communities will be constructed using an innovative microfluidic 
approach. This construction will serve as the foundation for determining and comparing interactome signatures with 
the modelling data under exposure of plants together with their rhizosphere microbiome to Cs/Rs.  
Ambition #3: Early detection digital tools (WP 3 T3.1 -3.2, T3.4-3.5): SoA: Current AI-based decision support 
systems (DSS) utilize advanced machine learning models such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and 
Transfer Learning to identify plant diseases from images, particularly focusing on plant leaves. 13,14,15 These models 
have been developed beyond traditional machine learning models like Random Forest and Naïve Bayes. However, 
their application is limited to leaf diagnostics and is heavily reliant on public datasets like PlantVillage, which have 
limitations such as regional specificity, imbalanced class distributions, and a focus on common diseases. This results 
in high false detection rates in different environmental conditions and challenges in early disease detection and 
surveillance due to a lack of temporal analysis and detailed disease progression insights.21,16 BSoA: POMATO aims 
to transcend current limitations by extending AI applications to include various plant parts for a more holistic disease 
detection approach. This involves utilizing advanced imaging and deep learning techniques, such as new computer 
vision architectures and Visual Language Models (VLMs), to correlate molecular patterns with visual symptoms. 
Key innovations include assessing disease severity and progression over time, integrating environmental and climatic 
data for dynamic disease management, and enhan cing model transparency and trustworthiness through explainable 
AI (XAI) techniques. These advancements are designed to improve early detection, provide comprehensive risk 
management, and adapt to changing environmental conditions, thereby significantly ad vancing the current state of 
plant disease diagnostics and management. Genomic databases will be inspected using bioprospecting approaches to 
identify genomic markers of microbial actors involved in each situation.  
Furthermore, POMATO will develop mechanistic models for severity and progression assessment by analysing 
changes of microbial community composition over time. To that purpose, MAGs and their constructed GEMs will 
facilitate the elucidation of the metabolic interactions that drives ecological relationships. In this way, dynamic 
models of the micr obial community are meant to provide insights into how pathogenic bacteria evolve and spread 
within a crop microbiome, facilitating the identification of strategic interventions at critical stages of disease 
development. In addition, POMATO will go beyond traditional detection methods 17  to develop advanced and 
automated contactless, non-destructive detection methods tailored for in -field (portable or handheld) and on -drone 
applications, enabling real-time and accurate disease information for potato/tomato farmers through a MDD sensing 
device. The integration of multivariate spectroscopic analysers, imaging technology and univariate sensors into a 
single, innovative sensing device will significantly enhance the accuracy of detecting and identifying plant pests and 
diseases, empowering early detection during latent infection periods. Additionally, the device will have a userfriendly 
 
12 Poncheewin et al (2022) Scientific Reports 12, no. 1 (June 27, 2022): 10857.  
13 Latif, G., et al. (2022) Plants. 11 (17), p. 2230.  
14 Arafath, M. et al (2023) Advances in Science and Technology, 124, 236-245.  
15 N. N. Moon, et al (2021) International Conference on Smart Generation Computing, Communication and Networking pp. 1-8 
21 Rashid, J., et al (2021) Electronics, 10 (17) p. 2064.  
16 Jafar, A., et al (2024) Frontiers in Plant Science, 15, p. 1356260.  
17 Zhou, C. et al (2023). Appl. Spectrosc. 77(5), 491-499.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 9 of 33  
interface for easy operation. Finally, POMATO will develop an AI powered Cloud data management  
platform, interfaced by both web and mobile applications. The cloud platform will integrate data collected from  
  
polymeric sensors, multispectral images at high spatial resolutions (5 -20 cm) from both healthy and infected potato 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
and tomato crops, the MDD sensing device and other relevant information sources. In addition, it will also integrate the 
AI models developed within the project framework to run based on the available data for disease prediction.  
Ambition #4: Monitoring strategy based on polymeric sensors to detect plant metabolites (WP 3 T3.3): SoA: 
Smart polymers react sharply and present a selective intelligent response to physical and chemical stimuli (chemical 
species, biomolecules, pH) and so, the interest in such materials has recently increased exponentially, finding 
applications in environmental, biomedical and food safety sectors, among others 18. Particularly, polymeric sensors 
exhibit physical measurable responses like a change in colour or fluorescence visible to the naked eye, enabling any 
inexperienced user to employ them for qualitative and quantitative analysis. BSoA: POMATO will design innovative 
solutions for the rapid, simple, inexpensive, and on-site detection and quantification of key metabolites, generated by 
potato/tomato plants in the early stages of infection, through tailor -made sensory polymers that will allow the 
identification and alert of the presence of both Cs/Rs by non-specialized personnel in an early stage.  
Ambition #5: Natural and bio-control solutions (WP 4 T4.1 – T4.5):   
Biocontrol coating solutions: SoA: The decrease in the number of authorized synthetic plant protection products 
coupled with societal demands for a more oriented organic farming involves searching for bio -based solutions to 
protect crops19. In the case of Cs/Rs, nowadays there are not commercial sustainable chemical-free solutions to control 
these pathogen diseases in field crops. Biocontrol agents as antagonist bacteria and specific enzymes are recognised 
as effective treatments against diverse phytopathogens d ue to their capacity to metabolise biocide compounds. 
However, the effectiveness of biocontrol agents depends on application strategies, formulation method, and types of 
strains used. Because of the genetic diversity of pathogens, no unique biocontrol agen t has been universally 
effective20. Moreover, the field application effectiveness of biocontrol agents is reduced by environmental factors. 
Therefore, the use of coating formulations and encapsulation techniques plays a vital role in prolonging the viability 
and enhancing their survival ag ainst adverse environmental conditions 21. BSoA: POMATO will study the mode of 
the combinations action of microbial strains which some of them will be isolated from the rhizosphere of diseased 
plants and/or enzymes with antagonistic antibacterial effect and their improved plant application feasibility by using 
coating formulation including encapsulation techniques to provide significant biocide effectiveness against Cs/Rs.  
Plant-derived organic substances: SoA: Detection of hazardous chemical pesticide residues in foods and increased 
consumer awareness on food safety has resulted to ban of certain pesticides in agricultural production and natural 
plant protection products are gaining popularity as an environment ally friendly tool for the crop protection 22. Plant 
pathogens virulence can be suppressed by the application of plant -derived organic substances, such as extracts and 
essential oils and their active principles which have been studied for their antimicrobic and antioxidant properties 23. 
However, several bioactive molecules are highly volatile, chemically unstable and susceptible to the adverse external 
environment limiting their direct utilization. 24  BSoA: In POMATO, the identification of the most effective 
plantderived organic substances against Cs/Rs will be carried out. Moreover, promising delivery strategies for 
application and release of the bioactive substances in potato and tomato crops will be evaluate and developed.  
Plant growth-promoting microorganisms (PGPM): SoA: PGPM have proved to be a green strategy to manage 
plant disease through production of inhibitory chemicals, inducing immune system, niche exclusion, deprivation of 
key chemical elements, increasing stress response of plants as well as production of VOC t hat can completely 
diminish expression of virulence factors of pathogens.31 Although not limited to, the most frequently isolated PGPM 
representatives are various strains from Bacillus and Pseudomonas genera that are showing the inhibitory effects on 
Cs/Rs.32 However, the microbial networks involving multiple microbes competitively exclude the pathogen, such as  
 
18 García, J. M. et al. (2022) “Smart Polymers: Principles and Applications”, Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter.  
19 Kumar, J. et al. (2021). Plants, 10(6), 1185.  
20 Mishra, P . et al.(2016). Microorganisms for Sustainability, 11. 259-285.  
21 Riseh, R.S. et al. (2023). Carbohydrate polymers, 15, 120384.  
22 Souto, A.L. et al. (2021). Molecules, 26(17), 4835.   
23 Arshad, Z. et al. (2014). Int. J. Chem. Biol. Sci., 6, 11-17.  
24 Wang, W. et al. (2026). Trends Food Sci. Technol., 56, 21-38. 31 
El-Saadony, M.T. et al. (2022). Front. Plant Sci, 13, p.923880 32 
Gautam, S., et al. (2019). Microb. Pathog, 130, pp.196-203.  

 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 10 of 33  
Rs, through the nutritional interdependence 25. Microbial community showing low nestedness, high connectance and 
niche overlap with the pathogen are more resilient to the pathogen invasion, constrained growth of the pathogen, 
resulting in reduced disease occurrence 26 . However, the random use of combination of PGPM can result in 
antagonistic effects and can exclude the PGP action of PGPM strains when used separately.27 Efficient PGPM activity 
depends on factors like PGPM combination, preparation method, and the delivery system. Recent reports suggest that 
adding charcoal as a carrier matrix can enhance PGP and pathogen suppression. 28 BSoA: POMATO will develop 
microfluidic/encapsulation platform that will enable to i) isolate individuals and micro-community of compatible  
  
PGPMs, ii) screen their growth-promoting activities on a large scale including several 1000 combinations of PGPMs 
and iii) evaluate and determine their synergistic effects through cell-to-cell interaction assays. On 10 most promising 
isolated combinations of PGPMs, POMATO will determine mechanisms of action against Rs and Cs using OMIC 
techniques. POMATO will develop electrostatic based carrier system that will have stimulatory effects of PGPMs 
on PGP activity and having inhibitory effect against Cs/Rs when applied on plants.  
Chemoperception disruptive products: SoA: Phytopathogenic bacteria actively move to their host via chemotaxis 
and enter the plant through natural openings. The secretion of natural attractants, such as amino acids and organic 
acids by the host, triggers the chemoperception systems that enable th e control of motility and plant 
colonization 29 ,30 ,31 ,32 . Considering this, a disrupting chemoperception strategy based on the use of saturating 
concentrations of natural attractants can impair the bacterial chemoreceptor functions and avoid the infection of the 
plant by the pathogen.37 However, information regarding the chemoperception systems of phytopathogenic bacteria 
Cs/Rs is scarce, and the role of the signals perceived in bacterial virulence is not yet defined. BSoA: POMATO will 
describe and identify the role of chemoperception in the infection process of Cs/Rs, and it will develop natural 
products solutions to block the infections. The list of the EC of active substances to fight bacterial diseases only 
include 6 approved substances.33 The knowledge of the mechanisms used by bacteria to enter the plant tissue and the 
possibility to interfere it by plant -based compounds open the development of alternative sustainable tools as an 
efficient alternative to fight these diseases.  
1.1.3.  Positioning and Technological Readiness Level (TRL)  
The activities developed in POMATO will start at TRL 2/3. The project will promote the opportunity to evaluate the 
synergies of the technological solutions within the IPM strategy both for organic and conventional tomato and potato 
fields at TRL 5 as the following table shows:  
Table 1.1. TRL positioning of POMATO innovations (Start- End)  
Innovation  TRL  Justify current and final TRL  
I-matrix for bacteria 
isolation  2→5  
Contaminants in environmental samples and the lack of effective methods for their removal 
falsify or prevent correct diagnosis of Rs. The development of an I -matrix for the specific 
isolation of bacteria and its verification on environmental samples will improve and make the 
diagnostics in these samples more efficient and effective.  
Gene Expression of 
and genome data from 
Cs/Rs  
 2→4  
Transcriptional profiles in Cs/Rs are characterized in planta using susceptible cultivars and in 
rich medium. Specific transcriptomic Cs/ Rs when interacting with wild varieties (more 
resistant to disease and environmental stresses) will be studied. Whole -genome sequence for 
Cs/Rs representative isolates.  
Genetic Resistance 
of potato/tomato  2→4  
Genetic resistance to Cs/Rs is mainly polygenic and strain specific. To identify new sources 
of resistance to Cs/Rs, an interesting approach is to look for resistance genes in tomato wild 
relatives. GWAS combined with transcriptomic analysis will contribute to the identification 
of new RGs in potato/tomato wild varieties.  
AI predictive 
algorithms and 
mathematical models  
2→5  
AI tool advances disease detection with climatological features, evolving from conceptual 
models to predictive algorithms. It forecasts disease spread in potato/tomato crops, marking 
a shift from basic research to refined technology tested in controlled en vironments.  
 
25 Yu, X., et al. (2022). Biol. Control, 170, p.104937.  
26 Wei, Z., et al. (2015). Nature communications, 6(1), p.8413.  
27 Kang, Y ., et al. (2014). Microbiology, 83, pp.666-673.  
28 Ahmad, C.A. et al. (2024). Front. Microbiol, 15, p.1360703.  
29 Río- Alvarez, I. et al (2015). Molecular Plant Pathology 16:685-698  
30 Santamaría-Hernando, S. et al (2022). Molecular Plant Pathology 23:1433-1445  
31 Cerna-V argas JP et al. (2019). mBio. 10(5):e01868-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01868-19   
32 Gálvez-Roldán, C et al. (2023). Phytopathology 113, 390–399  
33 EU Pesticides database, Active substances, safeners and symergists. Link  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 11 of 33  
MDD sensing 
device  2→5  
Initially, the concept of integrating multivariate spectroscopic analyzers, imaging technology, 
and univariate sensors will be formulated and investigated. The development will progress 
through experimental proof of concept, creating a first laboratory -scale prototype. Further 
advancement will involve developing a functional prototype and validating it in a controlled 
laboratory environment. At a final stage, the components will be integrated, and the device 
will be validated in test fields or greenhouses, ensuring accurate disease detection and 
userfriendly operation.  
  
AI powered Cloud 
data management for 
disease prediction  
2→5  
The AI powered Cloud data management for disease prediction will be first conceptualized 
undergoing initial development and testing through 50 users in the crop fields for the final 
deployment.  
Smart carriers for 
PGPMs delivery  3→5  
Smart carrier approaches to enhance the delivery and effectiveness of PGPMs acting against 
pathogens by use of combination of materials that stimulate and on demand release nutrients 
and stabile soil colonisation through radial encapsulated community expan sion.  
Polymeric sensors  2→5  
The currently existing strategy for the design and development of polymeric sensors will be 
adapted for the detection of the previously identified key metabolites produced by the plants 
in the early stages of infection, alerting of the presence of Cs/Rs.  
  
 Plant-derived 
organic substances 
and coatings  3→5  
Biocontrol agents and non-pesticide chemicals Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 
08/04/2025have been developed as part of integrated  
management of crops diseases. Improved coating formulations based on microorganisms and 
enzymes and encapsulated plant-derived substances will be tested against Cs/Rs.  
Chemoperception 
disruption products  3→5  
From the proof of concept to the development of disease interfering strategies based on the 
application, in relevant environments, of natural products to inhibit pathogen 
chemoperception, thereby preventing their entry into crop plants.  
  
1.2. Methodology  
 
1.2.1.  Concept and overall methodology in POMATO  
POMATO is a 48-month RIA action project based on the following activities against the presence of Cs/Rs pest threats 
in potato and tomato plants (Fig. 1.3).  
Thereby, POMATO proposes a work methodology based on 6 work packages (WPs) to be executed in 48 months, 
where all the molecular studies, early detection and surveillance solutions, as well as the natural and bio -control 
solutions will be tested in real scenarios in order  to validate the Integrated Pest Management strategies to protect 
potato and tomato against both bacteria. To addressed this, POMATO’s methodology is structured in four pillars 
(Pillar #1 – Pillar #4)  
The overall methodology of POMATO is illustrated in the following figure:  

 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 12 of 33  
   
Figure 1.3 POMATO Overall Methodology  
Pillar #1: Isolation of bacteria and molecular characterization studies. Linked to WP 2/O1 (R1-R6)  
I-matrix for bacteria isolation: The aim of the planned research is to obtain innovative tools for the isolation of Rs 
bacteria that will allow for the concentration and specific isolation of living cells of Rs while removing contaminants 
from the tested environmental samples (plant extracts, soil, water). The methodology of the research will be staged: 
first, the biological material will be selected (3 strains of Rs, 12 varieties of potatoes and tomatoes) and optimal 
conditions for the isolation of bacterial cells will be developed thro ugh the selection of appropriate microbiological 
media, buffers and Rs isolation time. Based on the selected bacterial strains, appropriate receptor molecules will be 
designed to enable a specific reaction with Rs bacterial cells. By choosing suitable materials and shapes, matrix bases 
with a surface that allow covalent attachment of receptor particles will be created. From the best template bases and 
the most effective receptor particles will be combined to produce various I-matrix prototypes for Rs cell isolation. In 
the last stage of laboratory tests, the effectiveness and durability of the developed I -matrix will be assessed in the 
presence of standard strains of Rs bacteria and tested samples (extracts from tubers and plants, soil and water) 
obtained under environmental conditions. The results obtained will allow the development of a protocol using Imatrix 
to effectively isolate Rs cells directly from contaminated environmental samples (the reason of excluding Cs is 
explained in the footnote34, and due to previous patent by IHAR12).  
Potato and tomato for resistance against Cs/Rs: One of the most significant challenges to address in molecular 
breeding for bacteria-plant interactions is the strain specificity of the majority of identified Quantitative Trait Locus 
(QTLs). At least 100 bacterial isolates will be obtained from potato/t omato genotypes collected from 40 field 
 
34 due to the risk of violating the patent claims of an earlier patent, the development of I -Cs-Matrix on similar principles is too risky for POMATO. Trying to 
circumvent this reservation by finding an alternative solution consisting in replacing the source of receptor molecules from mammals to birds may not be possible 
due to the constantly increasing requirements and changing regulations of ethical committees for animal experiments.  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 13 of 33  
locations in LATAM, 40 Polish infected potato samples, and 20 (10 Cs and 10 Rs) from microbial culture 
collections. First, Cs/Rs characterization at phenotypic and genotypic levels will be performed. Then, transcriptome 
analysis and GWAS studies will be combined for identification and validation of marker genes and RGs in the 
potato/tomato-Rs pathosystem and the potato-Cs pathosystem. For this, marker-trait associations (MTAs) previously 
reported for Cs/Rs resistance will be in potato/tomato wild relatives,  additionally SNP (Single Nucleotide 
Polymorphisms) array-based genotyping will be performed to find new QTLs. Finally, a workflow for transcriptome 
analysis and annotation will be generated for plant wild varieties -bacterial interaction to identify candid ate genes 
related to resistance responses against Cs/Rs. Genomes from newly isolated bacterial will be annotated using 
pipelines designed to maximize data interoperability 35 and to ensure that newly generated datasets can be queried 
together with the machine -actionable semantic database of >100.000 consistently de novo annotated microbial 
genomes available at WUR. Features related with gene structure and function, transmembra ne domains and protein 
localization, presence of biosynthetic gene clusters, protein domains and genome properties will be annotated to 
enable comparative genomic analysis. 36 Classification approaches (Random Forest and support vector machines), 
followed by feature importance analyses will be followed to identify genetic features associated to pathogenic 
microbial lifestyle.37  
The stimulatory  interaction between the plant microbiome and pathogenic Cs/Rs will be studied using 
microfluidic and microdroplet -based methods. The rhizosphere microbiome will be extracted at various disease 
stages, with either natural aggregates preserved, or artificial aggregates constructed through microaggregation using 
polyelectrolytes. Stained aggregates will have electrostatically topically attached cells of pathogenic strains and be 
further entrapped in microdroplets using T -type microfluidic chips , allowing the formation of 10 4 
microbiomepathogen combinations. Pathogen growth will be monitored via fluorescence and analyzed using flow 
cytometry and microscopy. Microbiomes influencing pathogen growth will be metagenomically characterized with 
the SqueezeMeta platform, including ge nome assembly and annotation. Positive microaggregates will be further 
analyzed by forming 3D structures to test cell distances and microenvironmental conditions using confocal 
microscopy and microelectrodes. Environmental factors like pH, Fe availability, and plant exudates will be assessed, 
with transcriptomic studies identifying interspecies responses under stimulatory conditions. These studies will be 
complemented with insights into the molecular mechanism associated to in fection signatures and the underlying 
molecular networks that may contribute to plant resistance and the development of predictive models of disease 
progression that include environmental factors and genetic determinants.  
Pillar #2: Early detection and surveillance tools. Linked to WP 3/O2 (R7-R11)  
POMATO will identify the keystone microbial species and molecular features from both plants and bacteria that 
prevent the progression of Cs/Rs strains. To do so, two complementary modelling strategies will be approached : i) 
Dynamic microbial community metabolic modelling tools (including MAGs and GEMs) to study the microbial 
co-occurrence networks of healthy and infected soils and plants Network analysis tools will be applied to explore the 
associations among genes or microbial species, and to provide insights into the functional potential and interactions 
within microbial communities. On the other hand, constraint -based stoichiometric models and the Flux balance 
analysis (FBA)approach38 for mathematical microbial community modelling will facilitate the identification of their 
ecological interactions. FBA is the best approximation to infer growth rate and production/consumption of 
metabolites based on metabolic capabilities of the stoichi ometric network and the assumption of the steady state. 39 
Additionally, in dynamic FBA,40 the snapshot the steady-state assumption provided in FBA approach can be replaced  
  
 
35 Koehorst, et al. Bioinformatics 34, no. 8 (April 15, 2018): 1401–3.  
36 van, Dam Scientific Data 6, no. 1 (November 4, 2019): 1–9.  
37 Molder, et al. Et BMC Genomics 22, no. 1 (November 23, 2021): 848.  
38 Heirendt et al., Nat. Protoc. 14 (2019): 639–702.  
39 Orth et al., Nat Biotechnol 2010 Mar;28(3):245-8  
40 Mahadevan, R. et al. Biophys J, 83:1331-1340 (2003)  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 14 of 33  
by discretizing time in intervals and assuming quasi -steady-state conditions. Thus, it is possible to update at each 
time step the metabolite levels based on how much has been consumed or secreted. The ability to predict individual 
growth rate, metabolite consumption preferences and by -products production, makes dynamic FBA suitable to 
parametrize the metabolic interactions that drives the dynamical evolution of the individual abundances and the 
community evolution. 41 ii) Statistical and Mathematical Modelling  Data from various measurements and from 
metabolic modelling will be integrated to extract underlying common and distinctive processes. This will be achieved 
using specialized methods for analysing complex multi -set data (e.g., GSVD, DISCO -SCA and MOFA). To 
complement the statistical approach, construction of (multilayer) networks will provide the relationships between 
molecular features, phenotypic and disease data. Network inference approaches will be used to handle various data 
types, including Mixed Gaussian  Graphical Models (GMM), probabilistic GMM and Random Forest, which will 
enable the construction of conditional independence/dependence graphs. This will allow pinpointing and mapping 
key molecular features from both plant and bacteria to identify and defi ne infection signatures and the underlying 
molecular networks that may contribute to resistance or be targets for treatment.  
Following this, POMATO will address the early detection by applying 5 cutting-edge tools (Fig1.4):  
i) Acquisition of high-resolution 
multispectral images using remote sensing 
technologies (drone and satellites). These images 
will be analysed using a range of vegetation 
indices, including the Normalized V egetation Index 
(NDVI), Chlorophyll Index (CI), Leaf Area Index 
(LAI), Greeness Index, Modified Chlorophyll 
Absorption in Reflection Index  (MCARI), 
 Transformed  Chlorophyll Absorption  in 
 Reflection  Index  (TCARI), Triangular 
Vegetation Index (TVI), and Simple Pigmentation 
Index (SIPI). By leveraging ma chine learning 
algorithms, the data will be processed to detect, 
differentiate, and quantify the severity of disease 
symptoms, offering early identification and 
forecast of potential outbreaks. Satellite imagery 
from sources like Landsat 8 and Sentinel -2, 
equipped  with  visible,  near-infrared 
 (NIR), shortwave infrared (SWIR), and thermal 
bands, will complement drone data to provide a multi-scale view of field conditions. The remote sensing techniques 
employed will detect plant stress through reduced absorption of visible wavelengths, particularly in the red and blue 
spectrum, and decreased reflectance in NIR bands. Data collected from both infected and healthy potato/tomato fields 
in Portugal and Poland will be analysed to classify contamination levels an d infer ecosystem health and drivers of 
contamination. This comprehensive dataset will also provide a training suite for AI models focused on identifying 
contamination levels and allocating functional measurements of crop diseases across broad geographic areas.  
ii) AI-based predictive models : POMATO will implement AI -based predictive models using a structured 
methodology: data acquisition, image and climate data processing, image segmentation, model training, integration 
of advanced technologies, and iterative testing. The process begins with the collection of comprehensive plant disease 
data, including high -resolution images and molecular data. FUND will collaborate with consortium partners to 
optimize image parameters (resolution, brightness, format, colour spaces l ike HSV , HIS, RGB) and source open 
weather data from NASA and ECSA databases. Data processing involves standardization, quality control, 
regularization, colour space adjustment, distortion removal, and application of filters (e.g., Laplacian) and 
transformations (e.g., Fourier Transform). This ensures data consistency for robust model training. AI model 
architecture will be designed considering factors like time window size for meteorological data and image resolution. 
The models will incorporate appropriate neural network blocks for the task. Training will utilize open -source tools 
like Weights & Biases for tracking and Bayesian hyperparameter optimization. The dataset will be strategically split 
for training, internal evaluation, and testing to assess real-world performance. Model performance will be evaluated 
using metrics such as Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC), Kappa Coefficient, and false positive/negative rates. 
To ensure interpretability and trustworthiness, AI predictions will be compared with  human expert annotations. 
 
41 Gomez et al., BMC Bioinformatics 15 (2014): 409.  
Figure 1.4. Cutting 
 - 
edge digital technologies applied in  
POMATO 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 15 of 33  
Finally, the models will undergo validation in real-world scenarios with unseen data, serving as the final optimization 
phase. This approach aligns with HORIZON-CL6-2023-GOVERNANCE-01-16 projects on digital technologies for  
  
plant health early detection. Collaboration on data sharing and model validation with project funded under that call 
is already envisaged and will enhance the robustness and applicability of the developed models.  
iii) Polymeric sensors: The development of sensory polymers will be linked to the insights gained through 
MAGsbased metabolic studies. POMATO will firstly identify key metabolites in the Cs/Rs pathogenesis process 
and will study their effects on plant -microbe and microbe -microbe interactions with chemometrics and 
cheminformatics together with spatial structuring and selection strategies (consortia isolation, formulation 
preparation and efficiency testing) of metabolites. Secondly, specific target metabolites ass ociated to Cs/Rs in the 
initial stages of infection of potato and tomato plants will be selected for sensor design. POMATO will develop 
polymeric sensors based on hydrophilic film materials capable of detecting the presence of such key metabolites 
associated to Cs/Rs by triggering a visual alert (a change in colour or fluorescence) upon contact with these target 
species. To do so, specific receptor molecules will be designed for the selected metabolites and will be co -
polymerized to prepare the sensory film s. These materials can be used by individuals without specialized training, 
and even a simple photograph taken with a mobile phone can be used for quantification at ppm or ppb levels of the 
selected Cs/Rs-associated metabolites, providing a timely alert to proactively combat infections in potato/tomato 
plants.  
iv) Multiparametric Disease Detection (MDD) sensing device: An innovative multiparametric device able to 
accurately detect and identify plant pests and diseases in potato and tomato crops using a combination of advanced 
sensing technologies and machine learning will be developed. The optimal combination of these technologies will 
be engineered and integrated into the compact device to allow the monitoring of temperature and soil moisture, plant 
disease identification, changes in plant temperature during latent infection periods, and visible symptoms, wounds, 
and other signs of plant diseases. The collected data from the different sensors will not only be shown in a userfriendly 
interface from the device to allow users to operate the device and obtain easy -to-understand information easily, but 
also to an AI powered Cloud platform.   
v) AI powered Cloud data management for disease prediction will be a sophisticated multilayer digital tool 
designed to revolutionize disease detection in agriculture. This Cloud platform, with an Application Programming 
Interface for data connectivity through a user -friendly web or mobile ap plication, will serve as a comprehensive 
storage and data processing unit for data obtained through cutting -edge AI algorithms, polymeric sensors, and 
Portable Disease Detection Multiparametric Devices, among other relevant information sources. The data collected 
will be seamlessly processed within the platform, utilizing advanced analytics to generate precise and timely 
responses regarding the detection of agricultural threats.   
Pillar #3: Natural and bio-control solutions. Linked to WP 4/O3 (R12-R13)  
Plant-derived organic substances and bio-control coating: FUND will formulate biocontrol coating solutions with 
antimicrobial activity based on the action of biological catalysts (enzymes) and microorganisms (bacterial 
antagonists) as an alternative solution to the use of chemical pesticides for the protection of potato and tomato crops 
against Cs/Rs diseases. Despite the well demonstrated effectiveness of biocidal agents against a wide range of 
bacteria, only a limited number of these products are currently available on the market.42 Therefore, further research 
efforts are needed to strengthen the feasibility and advancement of promising biocontrol solutions. In POMATO, 
the activity of animal derived enzyme systems, such as lysozyme and lactoperoxidase, will be studied optimising 
most effective substrate ratios in in vitro assays to have high antimicrobial metabolite production. For antagonistic 
bacteria, a screening will be carried out to identify the best effective microbiological strain candidates. On the one 
hand, microbial strains from public collection will be studied , evaluating their antimicrobial effects against Cs/Rs. 
On the other hand, in collaboration w ith CBGP, a pool of microbe candidates will be isolated from the rhizosphere 
of plants infected by Cs/Rs. The identification of selected strains will be performed through Mass Spectrometry and 
Amplicon Metagenomic Sequencing analyses. Once the microbial candidates are selected as biocidal agents, the 
fermentation process will be evaluated and optimised studying the effect of different parameters (temperature ranges, 
agitation, pH, aeration, and different inoculum ratios) to have higher yield of biocidal met abolite production. This 
biosynthesis from both the biological catalyst and the microorganism will be assessed to evaluate the ability to 
produce molecules that induce systemic resistance to Cs/Rs. The concentration of antimicrobial compounds and the 
production of lytic enzymes will be determined by chromatographic and enzymatic approaches; the microbiological 
 
42 Lahlali, R. et al. (2022). Microorganisms 10(3), 596.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 16 of 33  
evaluation will be carried out to assess the antagonistic effects on Cs/Rs in agar plates. In parallel, solutions based 
on plant-derived organic substances will be developed and tested to control the incidence of Cs/Rs in potato and 
tomato crops. The use of natural compounds such as plant extracts and substances and their active principles 
(alkaloids, phenols, monoterpenes and sesquiterpenes, isoprenoids) is a very promising approach, given their various 
antimicrobial and antioxidant properties. 43. In POMATO, screening in vitro assays of active compounds derived 
from plant extracts (e.g. garlic, onion, neem, etc.), essential oils (e.g. thyme, clove, cinnamon, lemongrass, etc.) and 
natural resins such as propolis will be carried out to identify and test the most effective biocidal agents against Cs/Rs. 
Delivery system strategies based on micro- and nanoencapsulation techniques will be implemented to ensure the  
  
feasibility of applying both plant -derived organic substances and biocontrol agents to potato and tomato crops. 
Monitoring of the biocidal activity of the developed solutions will be evaluated in tomato and potato seeds and plants 
inoculated with Cs/Rs in growth chambers. For biocontrol coating solution developments, several improved coating 
formulations based on effective microbiological strain combinations (mainly Streptomyces, Pseudomonas and 
Bacillus spp.) will be tested against pathogen candidates on seed and plant crops. Similar experimental trials will be 
also carried out testing the antimicrobial effectiveness of animal derived enzyme systems activity as lysozyme and 
lactoperoxidase.   
PGPM to inhibit Cs/Rs: JSI will develop a novel approach to screen and select consortia of microorganisms based 
on the random combination of cells and their electrostatic aggregation. Microbial cells extracted from the 
rhizosphere, without prior cultivation, will undergo modifi cation through viable staining and coating with 
polyelectrolytes to alter their surface charge. When oppositely charged cells are mixed, including those of pathogenic 
strains, aggregates of various sizes are formed. These aggregates will be encapsulated in  a polymeric matrix using 
microfluidic T/Y junctions for droplet generation and encapsulation, or microencapsulation through perlation. JSI 
will monitor the efficiency of PGPM, determine PGP traits, and assess inhibition of Cs/Rs using approaches based 
on the spectrometry and flow cytometry. Within the POMATO project, JSI will develop various matrices for 
encapsulation of aggregated strains to test the activity of excreted substances, competition for nutrients and 
microelements, and evaluate effects on micr oenvironmental niche formation and ecological nesting, among other 
factors. The most effective consortia against Cs/Rs, identified from among thousands of combinations, will undergo 
characterization using omics tools based on the shotgun sequencing data. For the most effective consortia, we will 
determine the microspatial distribution of involved microbes using confocal m icroscopy, which will guide the 
strategies for encapsulation and rhizosphere inoculation. The efficiency of root attachment, colonisation and biofilm 
formation will be monitored using molecular tools and microscopy studies.  
Disruption of bacterial chemoperception of Cs/Rs: Based on available public genome databases and new genomic 
data generated in WP2, computational analyses of Cs/Rs chemoperception genes will be conducted. The classification 
of chemoreceptors (the proteins responsible for initiating the chemosensory signaling cascade) and their ligand 
binding domains (LBDs) will be performed using a de novo methodology developed by CBGP.44 A manually curated 
dataset of 960 representative species of plant-associated bacteria (including 119 phytopathogens) will be employed 
to classify the chemoreceptor LBDs based on their degree of plant specificity. This will enable the research to focus 
on candidate chemoreceptors that are potentially more relevant for pathogen -plant interaction as targets for the 
disruption strategy. Functional analysis of chemosensing proteins in the selected Cs/Rs strains will be performed by 
constructing mutant strains in the selected chemoreceptors. To identify potential ligands for these chemoreceptors, a 
high-throughput capillary -based chemotaxis assay will be used to detect bacterial chemotactic responses to a  
BIOLOG™ compound collections. Chemicals that elicit a differential response between wild-type and mutant strains 
will be considered putative ligands of the disrupted chemoreceptors. This will allow to determine the chemotactic 
profile of the selected chemoreceptors. To implement a successful chemosensing disrupti on strategy is crucial to 
establish whether the attractant compound(s) bind directly to the chemoreceptor LBD, and to determine their binding 
affinity constants. The selected chemoreceptor LBDs will be cloned, expressed, and purified for biochemical 
characterization. To determine if there is a direct binding, the following approaches will be followed: i) 
Fluorescencebased Thermal Shift assays (FTS); ii) Positive FTS results will be corroborated through Isothermal 
Titration Calorimetry (ITC). To establish the role of each of the chemoreceptors in the plant infection, the 
pathogenicity of chemoreceptor mutants will be analysed in tomato and potato plants. For that, plants will be 
inoculated with bacterial suspensions of the wild-type or mutant strains, and symptoms will be evaluated. Bacterial 
populations will be analysed during the time -course of infection to have an estimation of the relevance of the 
functions of these chemoreceptors in the pathogenicity. To assess the effectiveness of plant or natural produc ts that 
 
43 Simonetti, G. et al. (2019). Plant Biosyst. Inter . J. 154, 100–106.  
44 Sanchis-López C., et al. (2021). Systems 6:e00951-21.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 17 of 33  
bind to chemoreceptors in interfering with virulence, the ligands of the most relevant chemoreceptors will be tested 
as disruptive agents. Infection assays will be conducted with varying saturating concentrations of the compounds to 
evaluate the extent of interference with disease development.  
The solutions developed in the Pillar #3 will be up scaled and manufactured by the companies CHEM and FERT to 
be used in the validation case studies in the next Pillar #4.  
Pillar #4: Integrated Pest Management strategies validated in Case Studies. Linked to WP5/O4 (R14-R17)  
In situ pilot validations are planned in 5 case studies (TRL 5), ensuring that the different pest management strategies 
developed in Pillars #2 and #3 are thoroughly tested in real -world scenarios. The validation studies will be 
strategically planned based  on the best solutions identified in WP3 and 4. The CS will focus on both bacterial 
pathogens (Cs/Rs) and crops (tomato and potato) across LATAM and Europe as depicted in Fig. 1.3. Validation 
studies for Rs will be conducted in 3 CS distributed across Ecuador, Colombia and Portugal. This distribution 
leverages our experimental fields that have the necessary permits to work with these quarantine bacteria in potato 
CS#1 (AGRO, USFQ), and tomato crops CS#2 (AGRO), CS#3 (F4S). Validations for Cs, due to stringent  
  
regulations, can only be conducted in Europe CS#4 (IHAR). Specifically, these studies will be limited to Poland, 
where the partner in charge, IHAR, has secured the necessary permits to work with this bacterium in potato crops. 
The polymeric sensors and the MDD sensing device developed in WP3, and the solutions identified and scaled up in 
T4.5 will be implemented according to the tasks described in WP5. The implementation process will take place in 
the predetermined study locations. These locations have been strategically chosen to maximize the effectiveness of 
our solutions and ensure compliance with regulatory standards applied by the corresponding local/regional/national 
authority. The polymeric sensors, the MDD sensing device and the two best scaled solutions will be deployed at the 
onset of the trials considering the growing season in each country, with subsequent evaluations conducted after 3 
months and again after 1 year to assess the long -term impact and efficacy of the solutions. During the validation 
trials, all necessary permits from relevant agencies will be secured to ensure compliance with local and international 
regulations. Additionally, throughout the project, efforts will be made to identify potentially contaminated fields, 
which will aid in the identification and management of infected sites, thereby contributing to the broader goal of 
disease prevention and control.   
CS#1 (AGRO, USFQ) will be conducted in Colombia and Ecuador, focusing on potato crops. Our collaboration 
with AGRO and USFQ provides access to experimental fields where Rs can be studied under real conditions. CS#2 
(AGRO) will also take place in Colombia and will focus on tomato crops. AGRO’s extensive field networks will 
allow for a thorough examination of Rs under real conditions.  
CS#3 (F4S) will take place in Portugal, where F4S has secured fields for tomato cultivation, permitting the study of 
Rs under controlled conditions.  
CS#4 (IHAR) will be carried out in an experimental field located in one of IHAR's divisions at Bydgoszcz, Poland. 
IHAR’s qualified staff will lead this study focused on potato plants, taking advantage of the permissions obtained 
from the State Plant Health and Seed In spection Service (SPHSIS) to conduct field tests involving quarantine Cs 
bacteria.  
A safety and sustainability assessment of POMATO’s solutions will be carried out since their development phase. 
The SSbD Framework will be applied, and the safety will be assessed to comply with the EU regulatory framework 
2019/1009 and 528/2012 providing useful recommendations to optimize the processes and final products, making 
them safer and more sustainable. POMATO will envisage the involvement of the Joint Research Centre (JRC) to 
develop reference documents in support of a harmonised IPM in the EU legislative acts and policy recommendations. 
Besides, JRC will be tasked to support UBU on the social life cycle assessment (s -LCA) evaluating the real and 
potential social and socio-economic impacts of POMATO implementation strategies within potato/tomato identified 
target groups (Table 2.1).  
1.2.2.  Compliance with the “Do not Significant Harm” principle  
All the research activities of POMATO will comply with DNSH principle under the Recovery and Resilience Facility 
Regulation in different ways: i) no activity is harming the climate change mitigation as the developed plant health 
products are fossil -free; ii) no activity is harming the circular economy concept. All the contrary, the project will 
apply circularity principles in the plant health protection products leading to higher resource efficiency, to zero-waste 
practices, and to sustainable and iii) no a ctivity is harming biodiversity and ecosystems as the project enhances 
potato/tomato genetic varieties.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 18 of 33  
Link to other R&I activities   
POMATO project will capitalize the results of previous and ongoing research and innovation activities, mainly at 
EU level in H2020 and HEU projects related to crop protection and control where the project’s partners have 
participated. Table 1.2 describes projects relevant for POMATO and identifies the connection and valorisation:  
Table 1.2. Previous and ongoing initiatives related to POMATO.  
Project, partners involved and description  Outcome and valorisation in POMATO  
PATAFEST HEU 2023-2027 (FUND, IRIS, EUPAT, CHEM):  
IPM strategies to treat and control the presence of Candidatus 
Liberibacter solanacearum pest in potato plant and address the 
incidence of soil -borne pathogens during potato postharvest 
storage.  
Biocontrol and digital technologies already 
developed for potato tubers will be adapted for its 
application on controlling Cs/Rs presence on potato 
and tomato plants.  
Smart polymers as advanced materials, their design and synthesis 
for agri-food and environmental sustainability applications. AEI 
2024-2027 (national project) (UBU)  
Insights from this project will feed to POMATO 
strategy to detect metabolites of Cs/Rs during early 
stages of infection.  
TRIBIOME HEU 2023 -2026 ( UBU): Advanced tools for 
integration and synergistic interconnection of microbiomes in 
resilient food systems to reduce the damage to ecosystems and 
natural biodiversity.  
The interconnection strategies will be explored for 
controlling Cs/Rs, enhancing microbiome resilience 
in POMATO crops.  
ADAPT H2020 2020 -2024 ( EUPAT): Identify new breeding 
targets and match potato varieties to specific challenging 
environmental growth conditions of the future.  
The breeding strategies will be aligned with the 
identification of RGs for Cs/Rs to create robust 
varieties for POMATO.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 19 of 33  
BIOSYSMO HEU 2022 -2026 ( UBU, IDEN, JSI): Novel 
approaches for the isolation of whole natural bacterial consortia; 
computationally assisted framework for designing and 
optimizing synergistic biosystems mixing bacteria, fungi and 
plants.  
The isolation techniques will support Associated with 
document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025POMATO's  
aim to characterize the plant microbiome and 
identify beneficial interactions against Cs/Rs.  
SECRETed HEU 2021-2025 (IDEN): Chemoinformatics, GEM 
models and other computational tools to unravel the mechanisms 
for the biosynthesis biosurfactants and siderophores.  
The tools will help decipher the chemoperception 
disruption mechanisms to control the spread of 
Cs/Rs.  
CHEMOADAPT 2022-2025 (CBGP) Bacterial chemosensing 
in the adaptation to plant environment and its function in 
pathogenesis  
The insights on the relevance of chemoperception 
obtained through the analysis in model 
bacteria/plant interactions using tomato and potato 
plants as hosts will support their application in the 
Cs/Rs interaction with plants in POMATO.  
AUSCAR  CaribV et 2022-2023 (AGRO): Surveillance systems 
in the Caribbean territories: molecular detection and risk 
modelling.  
Methods and models from AUSCAR will be 
adapted for developing resilient monitoring 
systems for early detection of Cs/Rs outbreaks in 
POMATO.  
An Integrative Approach to Enhance Disease Resistance Against 
Fusarium Wilt (Foc TR4) in Banana – Phase II, IAEA 2023-2028 
(AGRO)  
The approach for discovering beneficial microbes 
will be adapted for enhancing potato and tomato 
resistance Cs/Rs.  
Plant Microbiome ( USFQ): In this project, microorganisms 
related to potatoes and their diseases, such as Pectobacterium and  
Rizotonia, are being studied.  
Data from this project will be leveraged to better 
understand microbial interactions affecting Cs/Rs 
infections in potato and tomato plants.  
PHOTONFOOD H2020 2021-2024 (IRIS): Development of the 
global system control, software and data management and 
processing platform.  
The photonic-based monitoring technology will be 
explored for real-time detection of Cs/Rs in potato 
and tomato plants.  
LILAS4SOILS HEU 2024 -2029 ( F4S): Transformation of the 
European agricultural sector towards a healthy soil & 
zeroemission system. Creation of Living Labs in the 
Mediterranean Region with focus on improving soil health and 
carbon farming.  
Insights from the project will support the acquisition 
of images in POMATO crops.  
UNLOCK (WUR): Large scale open infrastructure for 
microbial research focussed on the study of microbial 
communities and their interactions with their host funded by 
the Dutch Science Fundation (NWO).  
Tools, methods and algorithms to support the 
analysis of the data generated in POMATO.  
1.2.3.  Digital technologies and Artificial Intelligence applied in Plant Disease Early Detection  
As a cross-cutting element, POMATO will leverage advanced digital technologies and artificial intelligence (AI) to 
enhance the detection and management of Cs and Rs. The AI-based predictive models will be developed with a focus 
on technical robustness, ensuring accuracy and reproducibility in various environmental contexts. This will be 
achieved through a systematic methodology encompassing data acquisition, preproce ssing, and model training, 
employing techniques such as Bayesian hyperparameter optimization  to fine-tune the models. The performance of 
these AI models will be rigorously evaluated using reliable metrics like the Matthews Correlation Coefficient, 
ensuring their ability to handle and inform users about potential inaccuracies and errors, proportio nate to the risk 
posed by these pests. Moreover, to ensure social robustness, the AI models will be developed with a deep 
understanding of the agricultural context in which they operate, thereby ensuring their reliability and intended 
functionality. The AI -powered Cloud data management platform will serve as a sophisticated tool for disease 
prediction, integrating data from polymeric sensors and multiparametric devices to generate precise and timely 
responses. While providing a detailed explanation of the AI's decision-making processes is complex and beyond the 
immediate scope, the project will focus on fostering trust and trustworthiness among stakeholders. This will be done 
by considering objective trustworthiness characteristics and maintaining both "abso lute" and "relative" 
trustworthiness values to reflect the system's reliability over time, thereby supporting human trust decisions.  
1.2.4.  Gender dimension  
Although not specifically required by the topic 2024 -F2F-02-04, POMATO has a strong multi -actor participatory 
approach and involvement of citizens, thus it will commit to address the diverse roles, needs, and opportunities, of 

 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 20 of 33  
citizens regardless their gender and sex. Special attention will be taken to the existing gap between men (68.4%) and 
women (31.6%) farm managers to foster the engagement of women farmers in the MAPP creation.  
1.2.5.  Open Science practices  
By being compliant with the European Open Science Policy (EOSP) , the POMATO consortium adheres to 
achieving responsible research practices to achieve high quality and trustworthy results. The strategy to disseminate 
or protect the results of POMATO is described in Section 2.2. Data associated with results which have potential for 
commercial or industrial value will not be made accessible for verification and re -use, in general, due to IPR 
measures. The consortium underlines the importance of OA to scientific publications and research data, which will 
be managed by INO as lead partner for CDE activities and UBU as task lead Data management, who will ensure 
adherence to EU guidelines about OA scientific publications and research data under Horizon Europe. Furthermore, 
openness of the data and the results will be addressed throughout the project: i) all scientific publications will be 
made freely accessible as early as possible through OA repositories on the EU innovative OA publishing services 
such as Open Rese arch Europe53, and shared in OpenAire- and Google-compliant repositories, like Zenodo and 
European Open Science Cloud (EOSC) , ii) the Communication and Dissemination Activities (WP6) have been 
designed in a OA manner (see section 2.2) aimed at encouraging early sharing of outputs in an open, transparent, and 
re-usable manner, to a wide audience incl. sector specific target stakehold ers and citizens, thereby contributing to 
increasing the quality of research results, and maximizing the impact for society.  
1.2.6.  Research data management  
The data management process will prioritize how data and results are “Managed,” “Protected,” “Shared,” and 
“Exploited,” using tools, methods, and open repositories to streamline sharing. Research Data Management (RDM) 
will ensure the data is handled respon sibly, adhering to FAIR principles (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, 
Reusable). Data will be stored in repositories like Zenodo and Figshare for long-term accessibility, with compliance 
to Article 17 of the Model Grant Agreement and the IPR policies in the Consortium Agreement. A Data Management 
Plan (DMP) will be created early in the project (M6) and continuously updated, addressing data security, GDPR, 
IPRs, and exploitation. The project will generate various data types, including observational, simul ation, reference, 
and experimental, stored in file formats or database connections. UBU will be responsible for curating and preserving 
all project data, with a dedicated budget for data management and quality assurance. WP2 will implement 
FAIRcompliant pipelines to ensure the data remains machine -actionable and compatible with AI/ML analysis in 
WP3, enhancing data accessibility and reuse.  
2. Impact  
2.1. Project’s pathway towards impact   
 
This section covers POMATO’s pathways towards the Expected Outcomes (EOs)  defined in the topic at 
mediumterm (from project’s end to 4 years later)  and these two Expected Impacts (EI)  of the Destination ‘Fair, 
healthy and environment -friendly food systems from primary production to consumption’ of the Cluster 6 Work 
Programme:  EI 1: sustainable, productive, climate -neutral and resilient farming systems […], while minimising 
pressure on ecosystems, restoring and enhancing biodiversity, […] generating fair economic returns for farmers. EI 
3: sustainable, healthy and inclusive food systems delivering co-benefits for climate mitigation and adaptation, […], 
sustainable healthy nutrition, safe food consumption, food poverty reduction, the inclusion of marginalised people, 
the empowerment of comm unities, and flourishing businesses. These pathways are defined by clear, measurable, 
quantified, and assessable impact indicators  that fall  under 3 impact categories : scientific, economic & 
technological and societal impact. The results of the project will be used or further up-taken by direct target groups 
(TG, Table 2.1). POMATO will generate credible and sustainable will generate credible and sustainable impact 
pathways in line with the Key Strategic Orientation 1 ‘Green Transition’ of the recently published HEU Strategic 
Plan for 2025-2027.  
Table 2.1. POMATO’s Target Groups (TG)   
TG1. Conventional and organic potato and tomato growers  – farmers, land managers, landowners , national 
and regional potato and tomato growers’ cooperatives (e.g. Agrico, HZPC, IPM Potato Group, TomatoLand 
Cooperative, Anecoop, Consorzio Casalasco del Pomodoro), EU agricultural associations representing the interest 
of stakeholders in the EU ( e.g. COP A-COGECA, Europatat, APRODEV ), agricultural holdings, agricultural 
advisors, extension services  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 21 of 33  
TG2. Retailers, Wholesalers, and Distributors – supermarkets, grocery stores, wholesalers, and distribution 
companies involved in the buying, storing, and selling of potatoes and tomatoes to end users (e.g. Carrefour, Tesco, 
Lidl, METRO Cash & Carry, Eroski)  
TG3. Input related industry: seed producers (e.g. EUROSEEDS); bio-based plant health services, manufacturers 
of bio-based plant protection products (EBIC, IBMA )   
TG4. Research and academic institutions - Institutions involved in research related to plant health and pest 
control, RTOs focused on applied research and technological development, International research partners 
involved in potato/tomato pest research   
  
53 https://open-research-europe.ec.europa.eu/   
TG5. Technology and innovation sector – AI and data analytics companies developing predictive models and 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
data analysis tools; Sensor technology companies developing polymeric sensors and other detection technologies; 
Mobile app developers creating detection and monitoring apps.  
TG6. Policy makers and regulatory bodies  – EU regulatory bodies involved in creating and enforcing 
agricultural policies and regulations ( e.g. DG SANTE, DG AGRI, EFSA, EPPO, EU Plant Health Standing 
Committee); National plant health agencies responsible for plant health regulation at the national level (e.g. BMEL 
– Germany, MIP AAF – Italy, LNV – Netherlands); International regulatory bodies overseeing international 
standards and regulations for plant health ( e.g. F AO, WTO- SPS Committee, IPPC, OECD – Agriculture and 
Fisheries).  
TG7. Environmental and conservation organisations – NGOs and advocacy groups focused on environmental 
protection and sustainable agriculture (e.g. IUCN, TNC); EU, national and international biodiversity and ecosystem 
service organizations dedicated to preserving biodiversity and ecosystem services (e.g. EEA, EEB, UNEP , BUND 
– Germany).  
TG8. End consumers – Consumers of potatoes and tomatoes who benefit from healthy and sustainably grown 
crops; Consumer advocacy groups representing consumer interests in food quality and safety ( e.g. BEUC, 
Consumers International (Europe), EPHA, ICRT).  
TG9 Media and general public– Agricultural media (publications, websites, and other media outlets) focused on 
agriculture and farming; General media: newspapers, television, radio, and online platforms that can help raise 
public awareness and disseminate information about the project; Science and technology media that focus on 
scientific advancements and technological innovations.  
  
SCIENTIFIC IMPACT   
Increase the information of the molecular and biological characterization of potato/tomato RGs and the 
quarantine and priority pests Cs/Rs. Corresponding to project´s objective O1  
Impact Indicator: Acquisition of data related to potato/tomato RGs and isolation of bacteria from infected areas. 
Target groups: TG1, TG2, TG3, TG4, TG6.   
Scale and Significance: Currently in EU, there are no effective biological or chemical control methods for the 
disease caused by Cs/Rs, and resistance to the disease in potato stocks has not been found. Control relies upon 
keeping the pathogens out and on strict “decontamination” procedures as for example incineration of infected 
material, machinery, planted material being destroyed and prohibitions to plant the crops until fields are found free 
of the pathogens.7,8 In the USA, yield losses in individual cr ops due to diseased plants and tuber due to Cs have 
been as high as 50%.  On the other hand, most commercial tomato plants are susceptible to Rs and the few resistant 
varieties that exist make very small tomatoes. 54 POMATO proposes a method for studying potato RGs against 
Cs/Rs, and for tomato against Rs based on the respective genetic resources. This will ensure a long-term sustainable 
and successful strategy for managing increasing Cs/Rs disease and cultivating more resistant potatoes and 
tomatoes. POMATO will thus offer a strategy in line with the EU Biodiversity Strategy 2030's primary action to 
enhance genetic variety on agricultural land, which would benefit EU health and economy. To achieve this impact, 
the project proposes the following pathways:  
Project Contribution to 
EO 1: responses to new 
and/or emerging plant pests  
Means of Verification  

 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 22 of 33  
Short term: Collection of 
all the available genetic 
Cs/Rs, and identification 
and characterisation of 
potato/tomato RGs against 
diseases caused by these 
bacteria. Medium term : 
Mapping of potato/tomato 
RGs against quarantine 
pests Cs/Rs in EU.  
Linked to results R1-R6 of the project:  
• 100 isolated bacteria from infected areas with 80% effectiveness  
• Molecular monitor control: 12 metagenomic analysis performed in 100 isolated 
bacteria.  
• 200 potato samples (50 native and 20 wild varieties from Europe; 130 native and 
landrace varieties from LA TAM) analysed for their tolerance level.  
• 200 tomato samples (50 native, 130 wild and 20 improved varieties from LATAM) 
analysed for their tolerance level.  
• Establishment and spread of pathogen: 10 non-supressive consortia identification 
and ~ 6 genetic, environmental and soil factors.   
  
Project Contribution to EI 3: delivering co-benefits for climate mitigation 
and adaptation  Means of Verification  
Long term: Prevent similar losses in potato/tomato production in the EU to 
those seen in other countries where these pests already exist.9,10 Similar  
At least 5% (of the above 200 
samples of potato/tomato resistance  
  
54  Planas-Marquès et al. (2020). J.  Exp Bot 71, 6, 2157-2171  
 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 23 of 33  
molecular characterisation strategies could be replicated to other type of 
crops (pepper, eggplant, etc.).  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 
08/04/2025varieties for targeted diseases 
and pests will reach the market.  
  
ECONOMIC/TECHNOLOGICAL IMPACT   
Long-term sustainable pest diseases integrated management, including prevention, early detection 
surveillance and natural control strategies. Corresponding to project´s objectives O2-O4. Impact Indicator:  
Catalogue of innovative solutions to respond to quarantine potato/tomato pests. Target groups: TG1, TG3, TG5, 
TG8, TG9.  
Scale and Significance: POMATO is structured around the EU's agricultural research and innovation strategy, 
notably the set of initiatives aimed at "Priority 2: healthier plants".55 As the EU strives to reduce the use of chemical 
pesticides,56 natural biocontrol products are being more widely used in agricultural practices (e.g., biopesticides 
CAGR 20% vs synthetic pesticides CAGR 4.7% for the period 2018-2023).57 POMATO will develop sustainable 
and systemic IPM strategies to address the prevention, monitoring, control, and management of Cs/Rs, as an 
alternative to the use of pesticides or other strict methods, in combination with other innovative agronomic and 
digital solutions. In this regard, the project is fully in accordance with the actions of the “Agriculture and the Green 
Deal”, as it promotes the adoption of a long-term IPM by farmers to achieve a healthy and sustainable food system 
for people and the Earth.58 To achieve this impact, the project proposed the following pathway:  
Project Contribution to  
EO 2: to prevent, monitor and 
(bio)control plant pests  
Means of Verification  
Short term : Integrate 
sustainable innovative 
solutions and validate them 
as an IPM strategy at TRL 5 
in 4 different geographical 
areas (Poland, Spain, 
Ecuador and Colombia) 
based on their respective 
climate conditions and 
globalisation factors.  
Medium term : laying the 
foundations for future 
development (TRL 5→7/8) 
of novel plant diseases 
strategies (e.g., natural 
products stimulating the 
expression of RGs).  
Linked to results R7-R18 of the project  
• MAGs and GEMs towards plant’s immune response against Cs/Rs and identify ~10 
metabolites at early stages of infection.   
• At least 10% of the most relevant genetic signatures of the pathogens are identified 
related to disease progression.  
• >1,000 high-resolution multispectral images from healthy and infected crops.  
• >1,000 analysed infected plant images with AI -based models (80% weighted 
accuracy).  
• 10 active suppressive metabolites detected by polymeric sensor.  
• Decrease of 40% the incidence of Cs/Rs applying plant-derived organic substances, 
biocontrol coatings and chemoperception, and 60% when applying PGPM.  
• Early detection of diseases by the MDD detection device (90% reliability) and by 
polymeric sensors (95% accuracy).  
• Validation of POMATO’s IPM strategies in 4 CS at 2 LATAM and 2 EU countries 
in greenhouses and real infected field trials, including a complete study of the 
safety hazard assessment and safe by design study and environmental and 
economic analysis.  
  
Project Contribution to EI 1: resilient farming systems, 
minimising pressure on ecosystems, restoring and  
enhancing biodiversity, fair economic returns for farmers.  
Means of Verification  
Long term : Exploitation and dissemination of a rigorous, 
sustainable, and economic IPM to control Cs/Rs for potato, 
tomato and other crops of the Solanaceae family. The project 
envisaged the collaboration with the JRC to develop 
reference reports in support of a harmonised IPM in the EU 
legislative acts and standards.59  
The dissemination of EU guidelines and/or action 
plans rooted in POMATO's IPM strategy for 
preventing potato and tomato diseases stands to 
significantly benefit crop farms across the EU, 
which constitute 58.2% of all farms.1  
  
SOCIETAL IMPACT   

 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 24 of 33  
Creation of an interactive innovation model to help the implementation of potato and tomato’s IPM plans 
across different professional backgrounds at local, regional, national and international scale (‘Multi-Actor  
Approach’). Corresponding to project´s objective O5. Impact Indicator: Practice abstracts of EIP-AGRI. Target 
groups: All TGs  
  
55  A strategic approach to EU agricultural research & innovation (2016). Final Paper. Available 
here. 56  Directive 2009/128/EC. Sustainable use of pesticides. Available here. 57  Frost & Sullivan 
(2019). Global Crop Protection Market, Forecast to 2023. 58 
 Integrated Pest Management in the EU Green Deal. Available here.  
59 JRC: Reference & Measurements. Available here.  
Scale and Significance: The EIP-AGRI policy goal of “speeding up” innovation will be met from the start of the 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
project and in the long run thanks to the active participation of farmers and agri -food businesses through the key 
associations. The multi-actor participatory platform will include the scientific & technical community, companies 
(SMEs, large industries, ag ricultural/potato associations, and cooperatives), and citizens/consumers across the 
potato/tomato value chain to share knowledge and cooperate one with each other to maximize our results and 
outcomes. This platform will be critical for enhancing rural com munity engagement at all scales (local, national, 
and international) and for disseminating the project's proposed IPM strategies. POMATO's impact will be 
amplified by close engagement with current EIP Operational Groups (OPs) and sister projects. To achieve this 
impact, the project proposed the following pathway:  
Project Contribution to EO3: Support to 
relevant EU and Associated Countries’  plant  
health policies  
Means of Verification  
Short term : Share knowledge, experience, 
and background due to the complementary 
disciplines of the multiple actors. Medium 
term: acceptance and adoption of the 
POMATO solutions by farmers and other 
actors of the potato value chain production.  
Linked to results R19-R22 of the project:  
Multi-actor participatory platform (4 years + 5 additional years 
after projects end). 25 “practice abstracts” for EU CAP Network; 
4 one -on-one workshops with policymakers; participation in 
government consultations, and 4 Thematic “Open Days”; 1 Policy 
Recommendation Report (M40) presented to the EC in a clustering 
event;1 POMATO IPM Plan (translated in at least 3 languages)  
  
Project Contribution to EI 1: resilient farming systems, 
minimising pressure on ecosystems, restoring and  
enhancing biodiversity, fair economic returns for farmers.  
Means of Verification  
Long term: Implementation of potato/tomato IPM across 
all the actors and main EU producers will ensure economic 
sustainability of EU potato/tomato production, increase 
farm competitiveness and improve key actor’s position in 
the value chain.  
Farmers, potato/tomato producers and traders will be 
aware of the potential threats, and they are also well 
informed and trained in the strategies to carry in case 
of potential impact in their lands and production.   
2.1.1 POMATO’s Contribution to other EC priorities   
POMATO is built up with a strong commitment towards the key policies objectives of the new Common 
Agricultural Policy (CAP), Farm-to-Fork strategy and SDG (2, 8, 13, 15, 17) for the period 2023-2027, briefly: 
1) “Fostering knowledge & Innovations” → involving farmers to our research activities and outcomes; 2) “Halting 
& reversing biodiversity loss” → preserving more resistance potato/tomato varieties, 3) “Efficient natural resource 
management” → developing a sustainable, effective and long -term management strategies to tackle outbreaks of 
pests; 4) “Contributing to climate change mitigation”  → boosting sustainable and bio-based circular solutions for 
plant health and reduce the use of pesticides; 5) “Increasing competitiveness” → involving all relevant actors in the 
potato/tomato value chain. The project also will support the Plant Health Law 2016/2031  and all the associated 
implementing acts related to pests, commodities and plant health requirements11.   
2.1.2  Requirements and potential barriers  
The technological barriers facing POMATO lie in the potential for low demand of various natural and bio -control 
solutions among end-users in the potato/tomato industry, as well as within the bio-based agrochemical industry. This 
challenge has the potential to hinder the further development of the solution as it progresses to higher TRLs. On the 

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 25 of 33  
citizen side, a lack of engagement and adoption of IPM plan could undermine the application of POMATO's 
outcomes. Potential economic externalities such as the fluctuation in demand and prices of crops may also impact 
the economic viability for farmers to adopt new pest management practices. To address these challenges, POMATO's 
strategy is two-fold: First, project partners will collaborate with other funded EU projects, initiatives, and OPs of the 
EIP-AGRI to establish dedicated stakeholder forums. These fo rums will aim to mitigate potential barriers by 
showcasing the benefits of the developed strategies to a wide audience. Second, POMATO will provide 
welldocumented results, dissemination materials, and engagement activities to all stakeholders. This comprehensive 
approach will provide a solid foundation to garner support for our results. Regulatory standards play a pivotal role 
in the POMATO project. All our endeavours will meticulously adhere to the standards set forth by the EPPO, 
particularly those pertaining to pests, such as PM1/002(32) EPPO A2 Lists of pests recommended for regulation as 
quarantine pests (2023),6 and the diagnostic standards PM 7/59 2 for Cs and PM 7/21 (3) for Rs species complex.45 
This commitment ensures alignment with established norms and prevents potential conflicts with existing standards. 
POMATO will prioritize compliance with the EU’s regulatory framework, which significantly influences the 
production and commercialization of pest management solutions. Key components of this framework include the 
Plant Health Law 2016/2031,11 essential for implementing IPM strategies to safeguard plant crops both during and  
  
beyond the project's duration, and the Regulation 2019/2072 5 on protective measures against plant pests, alongside 
specific regulations targeting the eradication of Cs/Rs,7,8 which will be closely observed to ensure comprehensive 
adherence to regulatory requirements.  
2.2. Measures to maximise the impact  
 
POMATO’s Dissemination, Exploitation and Communication Plan (DEC) is crafted to spotlight the innovative 
features of the project, encompassing different tools and technologies, along with meticulously developed Integrated 
Pest Management system, to prevent, monitor and (bio)control plant pests.  
2.2.1.  Dissemination strategy  
The POMATO Dissemination Strategy will provide a blueprint to guide partners in sharing knowledge and results 
with target groups for adoption and reuse. Using the AIDA communication model, dissemination activities will 
follow a multi -actor, multi-step approach to en sure POMATO results are effectively communicated. The table 
outlines tailored Dissemination Objectives, actions, channels, and KPIs for each target group (TG).  
Table 2.2 Dissemination Objectives (DO) with corresponding actions/channels, KPIs and TGs  
DO-1. Increase Awareness and Knowledge Sharing Among Growers: Raise awareness and share knowledge 
about innovative pest management strategies and tools developed by the POMATO project   
Activity/channel: Engagement with growers in LA TAM (2, one in Colombia and other one in Ecuador) and in 
Europe (4, Poland, Spain, Portugal and Brussels); Open days related to each pillar of POMATO IPM strategies 
in collaboration with agricultural advisors and extension services (4), IPM Guidelines for farmers (2 translated in 
at least 3 languages); Practice Abstracts ( 25), Explanatory videos showcasing best practices and POMATO 
technologies (≥3); POMATO Multi-Actor Participatory Platform for information sharing.  Target groups: TG1  
DO-2. Foster Collaboration and Knowledge Exchange: Facilitate collaboration and knowledge exchange 
between research and academic institutions involved in plant health and pest management   
Activity/channel: Present research findings and innovations at scientific conferences & symposia ( ≥20 
proceedings/posters) and webinars/online workshops ( ≥15), Publish articles in peer -reviewed journals ( ≥10). 
Establish a network of researchers and institutions for ongoing collaboration and information sharing (including 
sister EU projects) (≥10 members outside of consortium). Target groups: TG 4,5,7  
DO-3. Promote the adoption of sustainable pest management: Promote the adoption of sustainable pest 
management practices among retailers, wholesalers, and distributors to ensure the supply chain supports and 
enhances the quality and safety of potatoes and tomatoes, ultimately benefiting end consumers  
Activity/channel: Informational brochures ( 2), video ( 1) and joint workshops/seminars ( 4) to discuss best 
practices and share success stories; Partner with retailers and wholesalers for pilot programs to test and validate 
POMATO’s innovations in real-world supply chains (≥4 representatives engaged). Target groups: TG 2  
 
45 EPPO standards for C. sepedonicus here. R. solanacearum here.  
 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 26 of 33  
DO-4. Engage Policy Makers and Regulatory Bodies: Support the implementation of effective plant health 
policies and regulations based on POMATO's findings  
Activity/channel: Policy briefs (2 – translated in at least 3 languages), Position paper (1 – translated in 3 at least 
languages) to highlighting key findings and recommendations; Policy roundtables and briefings with relevant EU 
and national regulatory bodies ( ≥2 events); Participation of POMATO members in consultations and advisory 
panels to influence policy development (≥3 events). Target groups: TG6&7  
DO-5. Promote POMATO Innovation to Industry: Promote the adoption of natural and bio-control solutions 
and integrated pest management (IPM) strategies within the agricultural industry, including seed producers and 
manufacturers of plant protection products  
Activity/channel: Collaborate with industry partners to scale up and validate bio -control solutions and IPM 
strategies ( ≥5 industry representatives engaged in POMATO multi-actor activities); training sessions and 
workshops for industry stakeholders on implementing POMATO solutions (≥6). Case studies and success stories 
demonstrating the economic and environmental benefits of the proposed POMATO strategies (≥10 publications 
in specialised agriculture media outlets; over 30 related blogs on the POMATO Participatory Platform). Target 
groups: TG3  
DO-6. Raise Public Awareness and Consumer Engagement: Raise public awareness and engage consumers 
about the importance of sustainable pest management practices and the benefits of POMATO's innovations for 
food safety and quality  
Activity/channel: Educational content, including infographics ( ≥2 translated in 3 languages), videos ( 3), 
Collaborate with at least 6 consumer advocacy groups to amplify the message and reach a broader audience.  
Target groups: TG 8 & 9  
2.2.2.  Exploitation strategy  
POMATO will put in place an Exploitation Plan, which will include:  i) assessment and categorisation of the key 
exploitable results (KERs) ii) assessment of exploitation strategies for POMATO results (scientific & educational, 
societal, policy and potential commercial) and roadmap for their implementation; iii) the joint and individual  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 27 of 33  
exploitation plans; iv) assessment on how different multi -actor governance models have been implemented in the 
project pilots, and how these models could be utilised for the promotion of POMATO’s KERs. Preliminary 
provisional list of KERs and end users are:  
Table 2.3. Identification of KERs, Background Knowledge, Future Exploitation Intentions and Target Stakeholders  
KERs, Background Knowledge, Future Exploitation Intentions and Target Stakeholders  
KER1: AI Predictive Models for disease detection, spread & risk (Background: FUND, other partners involved in 
development: WUR, IDEN, AGRO. Exploitation intentions: (non)commercial (year of commercialisation: 1-2 years 
after project ends). Target stakeholders: TG1  
KER2: Multiparametric Disease Detection sensing device (Background: IRIS). Exploitation intentions:  
commercial (year of commercialisation: within 3 years after project ends). Target stakeholders: TG1  
KER3: Mathematical modelling tools ( Background: IDEN). Exploitation intentions: commercial. Target 
stakeholders: TG5  
KER4: Polymeric sensors (Background: UBU). Exploitation intentions: commercial. Target stakeholders: TG1  
KER5: AI-driven Cloud data management platform (Background: IRIS). Exploitation intentions: commercial  
(year of commercialisation: within 1 years after project ends). Target stakeholders: TG1  
KER6: Natural and bio-control solutions, Exploitation intentions: commercial, Targeted stakeholders: TG1  
KER6.1 Plant-derived organic substances (Background: FUND)  
 KER6.2 Biocontrol coatings (Background: FUND)  
 KER6.3 Plant growth-promoting microorganisms (PGPMs) (Background: JSI)  
 KER6.4 Chemoperception disruptors. (Background: CBGP),   
KER7: Omics marker of infection (WUR), Exploitation intentions: commercial (year of commercialisation: within 
1 years after project ends), Targeted stakeholders: TG1  
KER8: POMATO’s Integrated Pest Management (IPM) plan, guidelines and policy recommendations 
(Background: joint). Exploitation intentions: non-commercial. Target stakeholders: TG1, TG3, TG4, TG6, TG7.  
KER9: POMATO Multi-Actor Participatory Platform (INO). Exploitation intentions: non-commercial. Target 
stakeholders: TG1-9  
2.2.2.1. Main POMATO’S Exploitation Routes  
Scientific exploitation – Academia will use POMATO results to establish new R&I projects building upon the 
project achievements. The scientists and developers releasing new or updated models under opensource modality 
will leverage open -source communities, widening their visibility. The POMATO results will potentially lead to 
spinoff research both by project partners and by other stakeholders due to the multiplier effect of the pilot and 
networking activities. POMATO will further high-profile research beyond the project through: (a) training a new 
generation of researchers in AI predictive and mathematical modelling, polymeric sensors, bio-control solutions and 
integrated pest management (UBU, FUND, USFQ, CBGP); (b) publishing its innovative pest management methods 
and scientific results in high-impact journals and conferences; (c) exploring opportunities for using POMATO results 
for educational purposes (e.g. launching new academic programs); (d) liaison with entities including FAO, WTOSPS 
Committee, IPPC, OECD-Agriculture and Fisheries, and its Flagships and Initiatives (T6.3).  
Policy related exploitation – POMATO results will be developed to create long lasting impacts on the farm to fork 
strategy and transition to fair, healthy and environmentally-friendly food systems as well as to support EU Regulation 
on protective measures against pests of plants. Thus, with the active participation of EUROPA TAT, UBU, PIN and 
JRS, POMATO will invest significant efforts to influence the targeted policy processes on multiple levels by 
supporting regional, national or international (e.g. DG SANTE, DG AGRI, FAO, IPPC) reports, policy instruments 
such as decrees and norms, and policy implementations in programs and projects. To orchestrate the partners’ efforts, 
the POMATO activities related to policy and scientific outreach (T5.5) will be planned and executed to bring 
together and highlight the knowledge created in the WPs. Different forms of outputs of POMATO project results 
(DO’s 2 & 4) are envisioned to lead to policy influence and impact, such as: high -quality scientific writing; 
highquality s cientific presentation (oral/keynote at international scientific and policy conferences, workshops or 
events); training on project outputs (workshops, hands -on sessions, but also videos and other digital artefacts 
available in the POMATO Participatory Platform); publicly disseminated recommendations, guidelines and best 
practices; written statements on the (potential) policy relevance of project results (policy briefs).   
Societal exploitation - Community outreach and educational programs will be developed to raise awareness and 
engage the public in pest management practices. As such, POMATO outputs will include tools, solutions and 
methods that allow a wide range of stakeholders to actively engage in supporting implementation Farm to Fork 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 28 of 33  
strategy in general and identifying and managing Cs/Rs pests in particular. Combined with outreach campaigns that 
highlight the importance of sustainable pest management for food security and environmental health, collaboration 
with agricultural services to implement best practices and enhance community resili ence against pest outbreaks. 
Commercial exploitation  - KERs perceived as having potential for commercial exploitation at this stage are 
Multiparametric Disease Detection sensing (KER2), Polymeric Senso rs (KER4) and four Natural and bio -control 
solutions (KER6). The partners owning IPR over these solutions will consider investment in their post -project 
development to reach full market readiness level at TRL 8-9 or expand to other markets. This commercial initiative 
is envisioned to be examined on an individual basis in cases where IPR belongs to only one partners or bilaterally 
during cases of joint results during the project course (clarified in the Consortium Agreement). In the latter case 
partners will consider creating a pool of resources (e.g., monetary, personnel) to cover the activities needed for market 
penetration, if clear market opportunity and demand are identified during the project lifetime. This will permit sharing 
risks and costs related to exploitation of results and concentrate efforts on reaching target markets. Detailed market 
conditions for the commercial exploitation will be identified during the project development phase in D6.4 (M48).  
2.2.3.  Communication Strategy  
POMATO’s communication strategy will effectively employ content marketing, social media, and events to reach 
out to society and show the impact and benefits of the project. Additionally, the POMATO Multi-Actor Participatory 
Platform, in the scope of the website, will be a collaborative space, enabling stakeholders to share best practices, 
access, and exchange resources.   
Branding & Visual Identity  TGs: 1-9      M1 to M48  
Establish a uniform POMATO brand and tone across all media channels, respecting gender dimension.  
Target Values: Printable brand book 1; 1 Promo set – available as a e -material (Roll-up, Poster, Stickers, Bags, 
Notebooks, Folders, Pens, etc.); 1 fact sheet per each pilot site; 3 Brochures on solutions, sustainability 
commitments, technology benefits. No. of hard copy promo material distributed ≥ 1000  
Website & Participatory Platform   TGs: 1-9  M01 to M48  
Website (including POMATO Multi-Actor Participatory Platform) allowing easy retrieval of main action data 
while acting as the core source of information about the POMATO objectives & activities. The first version of the 
website will be online by M01, while the Participatory Platform by M18.   
Target Values: Unique visitors from M12: >2.000; Unique visitors from M36: >10.000.  
Social media  TGs: 1-9  M01 to M48  
Online presence in social media channels (LinkedIn, X, YouTube) by spreading tailored content to interact with 
different target groups.   
Target Values: Size of online community (by M36): >1.000; No. of impressions (monthly average): >500; No. of 
all project related videos on Youtube ≥ 20   
Online publishing  TGs: 7, 8, 9  M1 to M48  
Leveraging online press release publishing platforms (e.g. Eurekalert, AlphaGalileo), magazines that publishes 
popular-audience articles by academics (e.g. Agrinnovation magazine, The Conversation), as well as CORDIS 
Research EU Magazine will enable to rea ch out to a broader audience. Partners will disclose non -confidential 
information of the project in their language to local media. Pilot partners will lead the stakeholder’s engagement 
in their countries.  
Target Values: Press releases ( ≥4 translated in 3 languages), Media engagements at pilot sites (at least 3 media 
coverage per pilot site); Blog articles (≥40) for dissemination through various media channels.  
Multimedia  TGs: 7, 8, 9  M6 to M48  
Producing clear presentation of project scope, results and funding. A set of interviews from project experts and 
other partners, utilising plenary meetings & events.  
Target Values: Short videos ≥4; Number of interviews produced ≥10; Number of views >2.000  
Public event management & community relations  TGs: 7, 8, 9  M6 to M48  
Opening pathways for communication with broader audience through project events and providing the information 
about POMATO innovation and solutions.  
Target Values: (Online) events for broader audience (including events at demo site and events co-organised with 
local actors): >10; Visitors per event: >50; Co-organisation of clustering events (≥3), Project final conference 1  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 29 of 33  
POMATO will regularly assess the effectiveness of communications and adapt the strategies by referencing 
established benchmarks and KPIs, through Google Analytics and social media dashboards.   
Dissemination and communication activities after the end of the project : Post -project dissemination and 
communication efforts will focus on maintaining the website and POMATO Multi-Actor Participatory Platform for 
four years, archiving newsletters, and periodically updating social media to inform stakeholders, such as farmers and 
policymakers, about ongoing activities. Partner contact information will remain accessible for con tinued 
collaboration and support. We will share practice abstracts, policy recommendations, and audio-visual content on our 
platform and others, like the Horizon Results Platform, adhering to Open Science practices. Open -source tools and 
datasets will be available in an open -access repository, with defined usage terms, while collaboration with relevant 
initiatives will enhance outreach and ensure the sustained impact of the project's contributions.  
2.2.4.  Feedback to policy measures  
Key policies and legislative relevant to the POMATO project include the Farm to Fork Strategy, the Regulation on 
Protective Measures Against Pests of Plants (Regulation (EU) 2016/2031), EU Plant Health Legislation, and the 
Council Directive 2000/29/EC on protective measures against the introduction and spr ead of harmful organisms 
within the Community. Throughout the project and within the framework of T5.5 IPM Guidelines for farmers and 
Policy Recommendations, POMATO will focus on understanding these regula tory landscapes and identifying 
challenges related to plant pest management. This will be accomplished through a phased approach: Phase 1 (M0112) 
will involve mapping out regulatory requirements and safety protocols for combating plant pests, including 
compliance with existing EU regulations and directives. Phase 2  (M12-36) will leverage insights from project 
activities to draft and refine EU policy recommendations, ensuring alignment with the Farm to Fork Strategy and 
other relevant legislative frameworks.  Phase 3  (M36-48) will involve organizing stakeholder roundtables and 
workshops to validate and enhance these recommendations. Our partners, affiliated with various policy and industry 
bodies, will actively participate in policy networks and working groups, such as the Standing Committee on Plants, 
Animals, Food, and Feed, industry meeting of Potato Value Chain, EAPR's (European Association for Potato 
Research) Triennial Conference, the EUCAP Network, etc., to ensure that POMATO results inform and shape future 
policy measures effectively. Through these efforts, POMATO aims to provide robust, evidence -based 
recommendations that support the EU's goal of sustainable plant health management.  
2.2.5.  Intellectual Property (IPR) management  
POMATO will manage all IP rights under T6.5 Exploitation and IPR Management, distinguishing between two key 
types of knowledge: i) Background knowledge, where consortium members will grant access to each other's 
background knowledge based on agreements made prior to signing the Grant Agreement (GA), and ii) Foreground 
knowledge, referring to new knowledge developed during the project, which will be protected, owned, and funded 
by the partner(s) responsible for its creation. IP-related risks, challenges, and opportunities will be addressed in the 
Consortium Agreement (CA), following EU recommendations on IP and knowledge transfer. POMATO will comply 
with Horizon Europe's open access mandate, publishing on Open Research Europe and making materials available 
on its website and OpenAIRE. To exploit project results, access rights will be agreed upon before signing the GA 
and granted either under fair and reasonable conditions or royalty-free. Confidential information will not be shared 
with third parties without explicit  authorization. Ownership of foreground IP will belong to the generating partner, 
with joint ownership rules established in the CA. In the event of IP -related conflicts, partners will resolve issues 
following the CA guidelines with the support of the Coord inator's IP Lawyer. To foster innovation, the consortium 
has already outlined potential KERs and partner-specific IP, forming the basis for discussions during T6.5. INO will 
also conduct three IP Rights Workshops for consortium partners during the project's lifespan. 
 
 
  
  
2.3. Impact summary  
 
Specific Needs  Expected Results (at the end of the project)  D & E & C measures  Target Groups  
The growing threat of 
Clavibacter sepedonicus  (Cs) 
and Ralstonia solanacearum  
(Rs) outbreaks, classified as 
EPPO A1 quarantine pests and 
subjected to EU regulations 
aimed at eradicating and 
preventing their spread  
(Regulation 2019/2072), which 
severely affect potato and 
tomato crops , demands urgent 
action. Current fossil -based 
disease management practices 
are unsustainable, and the 
spread of these quarantine 
pests, exacerbated by climate 
change, poses a significant risk 
to EU agriculture. There is a need 
for rapid-response, and 
cuttingedge digital 
technologies for pest early 
detection, surveillance, control, 
and eradication.  
POMATO develops a I-matrix tool for the specific isolation of 
Rs from environmental samples, with at least 80% effectiveness 
and it fully identifies at molecular level the of resistance genes 
(RGs) from over 200 potato and tomato varieties (both wild and 
cultivated) from EU and LATAM’s germplasm culture 
collections. It sequences at least 12 pathogen genomes and 12 
transcriptomic analyses to understand pathogen diversity and 
virulence, while identifying at least 6 genetic, environmental 
and soil factor that determine pathogen’s spread  and 
establishment (R1-R6). POMATOs delivers metagenomic and 
AI-driven detection tools  for early diagnosis and disease 
surveillance, including polymeric sensors  that detect key 
infection metabolites with 90% reliability , and AI models  
trained on 1000+ images for 80% accurate disease prediction 
(R7-R11). POMATO’s natural and bio-control solutions reduces 
the pathogen’s incidence by 40 -60%, including plant-derived 
substances, chemoperception disruptive products and PGPMs 
(R12-R13). Finally, POMATO’s main goal is to validate the 
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) Plan in 4 case studies (EU and 
LATAM) at TRL 5 to control the outbreaks of these bacteria (R14-
R17), providing the foundations and drivers for future 
implementation of the IPMs by farmers and other target groups 
through a dedicated multi-actor participatory platform and the  
Dissemination & Exploitation 
Measures: - >10 peer -reviewed 
publications and >10 KER (Key 
Exploitable Results). - Organization 
of >4 thematic Open Days and 3 
workshops with field trials across 
Europe and LATAM. - Creation of 3 
videos, 2 infographics, and >15 
newsletters, targeting farmers, 
researchers, and policymakers.   
Communication Measures : - A 
multi-actor participatory platform 
(MAPP) for knowledge sharing, 
cocreation, and networking with at 
least 25 practice abstracts 
contributed to the European CAP 
Network. - Policy briefs and 
position papers shared with EU 
regulatory bodies. - Engagement 
with >800 stakeholders including 
farmers, industry, and academia  
TG1-TG9: 1) Potato/tomato 
farmers and growers (organic and 
conventional), cooperatives, and 
agricultural advisors across the EU 
and LATAM. 2) Retailers and 
distributors (e.g., Carrefour, Lidl) 
responsible for delivering 
sustainable produce. 3) Seed 
producers and bio -based plant 
health service providers. 4) 
Research and technology 
organizations (RTOs), universities, 
and AI/sensor tech companies. 5) 
Policymakers, regulatory bodies 
(e.g., DG AGRI, EPPO), and 
national plant health agencies. 6) 
NGOs and advocacy groups focused 
on biodiversity and sustainable 
agriculture. 7) End consumers of 
potatoes/tomatoes, particularly 
those interested in sustainably 
grown produce  
C&D&E measures ( R18-R21 )  
OUTCOMES  IMPACTS OF POMATO  
 
 
OC1: New resistance genes identified for Cs and Rs, improving the genetic defence 
of potato and tomato crops. OC2: Advanced AI -driven early detection and 
monitoring technologies, including polymeric sensors and disease prediction 
models with 90%+ accuracy.  OC3: Natural and bio -control solutions for Cs/Rs 
reduction validated in real -field conditions, reducing pest incidence by 40 -60%. 
OC4: Validated IPM strategies in real case studies ready for replication in other 
Solanaceae crops, ensuring long-term pest control. OC5: Engagement and adoption 
of POMATO tools across 4 case studies (LATAM and EU), fostering knowledge 
exchange and sustainable farming practices  
Scientific Impact : Establishment of molecular and biological data on potato/tomato 
resistance genes and quarantine pests, leading to improved disease management practices and 
enhanced biodiversity. Economic Impact: Adoption of long -term IPM strategies, reducing 
reliance on chemical pesticides and improving farmers' economic returns. Technological 
Impact: Development of innovative AI and sensor technologies for early detection and 
biocontrol of pests. Societal Impact: Increased awareness and knowledge sharin g among 
farmers and other stakeholders, leading to more resilient farming systems, reduced 
environmental pressure, and better food safety for consumers  
#§IMP-ACT-IA§#  
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 25 of 33  
  
 
 
3. Quality and efficiency of the implementation  
 

 
 
engagement and exploitation activities will secure the maximum impact of the project (WP6). The technical WPs will be supported by WP 1 of project’s management.  
  
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 26 of 33  
 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
Table 3.1h: Purchase costs items (travel and subsistence, equipment, and other goods, works and 
services) Travel and subsistence: T&S; Equipment: E; Other goods, works and services: OGWS  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   

 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 35 of 33  
 
 
 
   
   Page 27 of 33
3.2  Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole  
 
POMATO consortia is formed by 16 partners from 8 European Countries and 2 Latin American (AGRO and 
USFQ). These partners bring the knowledge and experience for the implementation of POMATO bringing together 
a multidisciplinary with strong competences in the field of plant pest management. In addition, the presence of the 
EEAB will provide independent opinions on the research outputs and propose new actions to improve the quality 
and applicability of project results.  
research institutes in Poland with the multi -disciplinary area of crop improvement, biotechnology, 
germplasm conservation and enhancement. It was founded in 1951 for research in breeding and seed 
production of major field crops. It currently employs over 300 people (including 1/3 of scientists) and  
consists of 17 R&D locations, including 6 research centers, 6 experimental stations and 5 plant breeding companies 
located in different parts of Poland. The group of phytopathology involved in POMATO has extensive, specialized 
research and scientific experience in the field of diagnostics, materials engineering, nano - and biotechnology 
regarding potato pathogens, including the quarantine ones.  
Added value to POMATO: IHAR has quarantine plant pathogens resources as well Potato Gene Bank a source of 
collection of EU varieties and wild species of potato. Its laboratories allow for the performance of diagnostics needed 
to prepare for research and identify the pathogens tested under WP2 and WP5. In addition, the team has the 
appropriate conditions to develop a I-matrix, a tool for the isolation of Rs bacteria from environmental samples (WP2, 
ST 2.1.1). IHAR has the appropriate facilities (equipment and phytotron chambers) to perform tests within WP2 and 
a quarantine experimental field of 400 m2 allowing for the performance of validation tests with Cs on potatoes in 
WP5. Role: Provide Cs strains and potato varieties for GR studies, developing I-matrix for bacteria isolation (WP2) 
and validation for Cs in potato fields in WP5 (CS#4 Leader).  
AGRO (Colombia): AGROSA VIA, the Colombian Agricultural Research Corporation, 
founded in 1993, focuses on agricultural research, environmental sustainability, and food 
security. With 23 locations, including 13 research centers, AGROSA VIA operates across Colombia’s five natural 
regions. It employs over 380 researchers and 360 support staff, publishing over 600 research papers annually.   
Added value to POMATO:  Dr. Mauricio Soto-Suárez’s laboratory specializes in plant pathology, studying pathogen 
and host interactions to develop sustainable disease management strategies. The team, experts in various fields, has 
published over 85 scientific articles in the las t decade. Role: AGRO’s role includes genomic and transcriptomic 
characterization of potato and tomato resistance ( WP2 Leader). Their advanced facilities feature high -throughput 
sequencing, gene expression analysis, and controlled growth chambers. The Tibaitatá Research Center has a 
quarantine greenhouse and laboratory for biosafe experiments and field trials with local farmers (CS#2 Leader, 
WP5)  
USFQ (Ecuador): USFQ, a leading research university in Quito operates 3 research 
stations in the Amazon rainforest, Galapagos Islands, and Andean region. For 15 years, 
their lab has focused on pathogen identification, plant responses to stress, and plant- 
microbe interactions, working with crops like potato, tomato, banana, broccoli, and maize. The team includes a 
fulltime professor, a junior researcher, a lab technician, two PhD students, three master's students, and five undergrad 
students. USFQ have publ ished 38 scientific papers with a total of 5445 citations, showcasing the impact of our 
research.  
Experts in Cs/Rs and Resistance Genes  
 IHAR (Poland):  IHAR (Plant Breeding and Acclimatization Institute)61 is one of the largest agricultural  

 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 36 of 33  
  
61 Link to IHAR Institute.  
Added value to POMATO: collection of native and commercial potato varieties, essential for studying genetic 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
resistance to various stresses. USFQ facilities include greenhouses and fields for pathogenicity assays, a molecular 
lab for pathogen identification, and a microbiology lab for pathogen multiplication and morphological descriptions.  
Role: Provide potato varieties for GR studies (WP2). CS#1 Leader in connection with local potato farmers (WP5). 
 CBGP (Spain): The “Phytopathogenic Bacteria”46 group from CBGP, a center of excellence Severo Ochoa, belongs 
to Polytechnical University of Madrid and it is a leading research group in plant pathology and biotechnology, with 
a focus on understanding and combating bacterial diseases in  
plants. The group has a long and contrasted experience in molecular biology and phyto-bacteriology techniques and 
works with different models of phytopathogenic bacteria that affect tomato and potato crops. The group has a highly 
qualified and multidisciplinary team of researchers and technicians and has published several relevant papers in the 
last 10 years.  
  real-time process monitoring and Digital Analytical Platforms. It excels in Photonics and AI, offering 
solutions in NIR technology, Raman spectroscopy, hyperspectral technology, and machine vision,  
crucial for Industry 4.0 innovation.   
Added value to POMATO : IRIS has developed SWIR, hyperspectral imaging, and Raman devices, alongside 
predictive software (Scadalytics), applicable in sectors such as food, pharmaceuticals, chemicals, plastics, and wood 
industries. Their solutions enhance industry intelligence, sustainability, efficiency, process improvement, quality, and 
resource efficiency while reducing waste and preventing off -spec products. Role: WP 3 Leader, Developer of the 
cutting-edge Portable Disease Detection Multiparametric Device  
 IDEN (Spain):  IDENER Research and Development is a RTO composed of a team of  
engineers, scientists and software developers exploring the potential of AI for solving  
challenging science and engineering problems. To do so, IDEN is using an extended interpretation of AI which fuses 
machine learning, systems modelling, advanced control and mathematical optimization.  
 
46 Link to the “Phytopathogenic Bacteria” group  
Added value to POMATO:  All the tasks carried out by CBGP will be carried out in their own facilities, with the 
specific requirements for the research objectives. CBGP has P1 and P2 facilities for GMOs and a P3 laboratory for 
quarantine pathogens. The research group is authorized to use all the CBGP facilities. The research team involved in 
POMATO is made up of highly qualified members in the field of Agrobiotechnology with high experience in the 
approaches to be developed in POMATO: Prof. Emilia López Sola nilla, Prof. José Juan Rodríguez Herva, Prof. 
Gema López Torrejón, Prof. Saray Santamaría Hernando. Role: Natural products to disrupt bacterial 
chemoperception (T4.4 Leader).  
Experts in Computational analysis, IA predictive models, and digital tools  
 IRIS (Spain):  IRIS Technology Solutions, S.L. is an advanced engineering company specializing in  

 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 37 of 33  
Added value to POMATO:  Along many different European initiatives, IDEN has developed a strong background 
in the development and application of computational tools to biotechnology processes, including machine learning, 
process modelling and assessment and optimization tools. Role: Big-data analysis; ML techniques; GEM models for 
studying microbial interactions in WP 2 and 3.  
WUR (Netherlands): The Laboratory of Systems and Synthetic Biology (SSB) 47 at WUR is a 
leading group in developing and applying computational and experimental methods to study  
microbes and their interactions with the environment and hosts. The group has expertise in metabolic modelling, omics 
data analysis and integration, synthetic biology, data mining, and FAIR data management.   
Added value to POMATO: The group brings to the POMATO project the ability to analyse AI predictions with 
knowledge-based approaches and to associate biomolecular data with disease symptoms. The group consists of 31 
members, including four senior researchers who are directly involved in the project: Prof. Dr. María Suarez Diez, Dr. 
Edoardo Saccenti, Dr. Jasper Koehorst, and Dr. Cristina Furlan.  
Role: Computational analysis methods of biological data; AI predictive models of disease progression and 
interpretation (participation in T2.4 and WP 3)  
FUND (Spain): FUND is an RTO with expertise in Agrifood and Digital Transformation.  
FUND will participate with a team of three researchers with experience in edible coatings,  
natural and biocontrol solutions, and AI models for image analysis and disease prediction. FUND will coordinate 
WP4 on natural and bio -control coating solutions and contribute to WP3 on AI -based early detection and risk 
assessment. FUND has participated in 13 EU projects and published several scientific articles and patents.  
Added value to POMATO:  FUND coordinates the project PATAFEST related to IPM strategies to control the pest 
in the potato plant caused by bacteria zebra chip (ZC) and other threats during the postharvest activities. The 
researchers working in Patafest will be directly involved in the project: Dr. Christian Ghidelli, Dr. Belinda Pérez 
Bibbins and Álvaro Huertas. Role: AI for image analysis, AI models for pest spread in tomato and potato (T3.X) and 
plant-derived organic substances and bio-control coating (WP 4 Leader)  
  
UBU (Spain): The University of Burgos features a versatile research team composed of the Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
Polymers Group and the ICCRAM -EST Research Group. This team is skilled in developing 
innovative strategies for early plant pest detection using polymeric sensory materials and applying  
the SSbD framework for safety assessments of biocontrol solutions.   
Added value to POMATO:  The Polymers Group specializes in detecting molecules using polymeric sensors, 
focusing on designing, developing, and characterizing novel sensory materials for environmental applications. Their 
expertise includes creating smart materials that detect targ et molecules with visible changes, such as color or 
fluorescence, and developing accessible detection methods using a colorimetric display and smartphone app. 
ICCRAM complements these capabilities with its focus on Environmental Biot echnology, Sustainability, and 
Toxicology. Role: UBU, with extensive experience coordinating EU projects, will serve as the coordinator of 
POMATO, having led 41 projects and participated in 99 across various EU programs Having participated in 35 EU 
projects, The Polymers Group is leader of WP 5, coordinating all the activities performed in each CSs and is also 
leading the development of the polymeric sensors (T3.3). ICCRAM excels in toxicity assessments and sustainability 
evaluations. Their work includes li fe cycle assessments and applying the SSbD framework for material safety and 
sustainability (T5.4)  
Experts in the formulations and manufacturing of natural and bio-control solutions for plant pests  
JSI (Slovenia): Institute Jožef Stefan is the largest public institute in Slovenia performing research 
in biology, chemistry and physics and is composed of several departments. The  
Department of Environmental Sciences is one of the largest departments hosting predominantly  
chemists and molecular biologists and is the department where the Laboratory for Colloid Biology is located and 
where studies of microbial communities in different environments are carried out. The research group is also dealing 
with ecological and physiol ogical aspects of prokaryotic microorganisms in relation to other prokaryotes or 
organisms like plants.   
Added value to POMATO : The group for colloid biology specializes in understanding the ecological roles and 
functioning of bacterial communities. In the project the team will be characterizing the microbiome that show 
protective properties against potato and tomato pathogens. A dditionally, the team specialized in obtaining the 
established functionally interconnected bacterial consortia from environmental samples, which can be applied in 
different ways to the seeds, rhizosphere or the soil to enhance plant pr otection. Role: Characterization of natural 
 
47 Link to the The Laboratory of Systems and Synthetic Biology (SSB)  
 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 38 of 33  
plant-related microbiota, preparation of formulations of bacterial consortia with plant protective characteristics. 
Development of artificial consortia to be scaled up and applied in plant expermients in laboratory and field stage.  
CHEM (Italy): CHEMIA is an Italian company that specializes in fine chemicals and agro -chemistry products. It 
has a history of innovation and environmental awareness, with 11 patents on biopesticides and other formulations. 
Chemia has a farm, an R&D laboratory, and a control quality laboratory, where it can produce, develop, and test its 
products. Chemia owns all its infrastructures and does not need external  
access for the project activities.  
Added value to POMATO: Formulation of the solutions and capacity to scale-up the products for the greenhouses 
and field validations following highest standard of quality, safety and respect for the environment. 
Role: Scale-up process at pre-industrial scale (TRL 5) (Participation in WP4 & 5).  
FERT (Serbia): FERTICO, an expert in industrial development of crop fertilizers, will be responsible for 
manufacturing solutions developed at the pre-industrial (pilot plant) scale. Their areas of expertise are microbiology, 
phytopathology, plant protection and chemistry.  
 for diverse European value chains, such as agriculture and food production, Earth observation, and 
water management.   
Added value to POMATO:  Vladimir Mrkajic, with over 10 years of experience in implementing EU projects, will 
occupy the role of POMATO Dissemination & Exploitation Manager. Maja Sremacki (PhD), with over 5 years of 
experience in communicating scientific research, will occupy the role of POMATO Communication Manager. Role: 
INO will lead WP6 and optimize dissemination activities to ensure the sustainability of project results, as well as 
deliver a wide array of communication activities across different target groups using appropriate channels. INO will 
also lead the project exploitation, managing IPR, and ultimately supporting the increased uptake of project results.  
  
PIN (Poland): The Polish Seed Trade Association (PIN) represents 83 affiliates, covering 80% of Associated with document 
Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
Poland's seed market. Its Potato Section controls over 90% of the country's potato seed market and focuses 
on breeding, seed production, and phytosanitary safety, particularly combating Clavibacter.  
PIN has led efforts to eradicate Clavibacter in Poland, collaborating with national authorities, European  
organizations, and the potato sector.  
Added value to POMATO : Extensive network and influence within the Polish potato seed industry and policy 
makers. Role: PIN will facilitate effective communication and collaboration among stakeholders in the potato value 
chain. Its strong ties with national authorities, local organizations, and European bodies will help promote project 
outcomes, ensuring that key players ar e engaged and that the project's innovations reach the necessary audiences 
(WP6).  
EUPAT (Belgium): Europatat is the European Association of Potato Traders (including breeders, 
distributors, storers, packers, importers and exporters) delivering seed potatoes to farmers, as well as raw material to 
the food industry, packed potatoes to the retailers and food service sector. In total EUPAT has 69 members from over 
 
48 Link to the certified products of FERTICO  
Added value to POMATO:  Four registered microbiological products for seed treatment available on the market: 
SPEED for SEED GRAIN, CORN, SOYA, and SUNFLOWER. 48 Role: Formulation of the solutions developed by 
JSI and capacity to scale-up the products (TRL5) for the greenhouses and field validations following highest standard 
of quality, safety and respect for the environment. (Participation in WP4 & 5).  
Multi-actor engagement, including direct contact with farmers and policy makers  
 INO (Serbia):  INO is a consultancy specialized in impact maximization and business services  

 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 39 of 33  
20 countries. It represents more than 80% of the European potato production and works with 
different sectors of the potato value chain, EU institutions and research centres.  
focuses on sustainable food production and consumption. Their mission is to achieve carbon neutrality 
and reduce environmental impact through innovative agricultural technologies, education,  
and partnerships. F4S specializes in Circular Economy, Sustainable Agriculture, Territory, Functional Nutrition, and 
Entrepreneurship & Innovation, supported by a team of 30 R&D experts.  
Added value to POMATO : F4S offers specialized training, workshops, and webinars on sustainable agriculture. 
They have organized 50+ webinars and co-hosted the Soil-Microbiology Mini-conference, engaging stakeholders in 
discussions on soil health and biocontrol. Role: In POMATO, F4S will be involved in knowledge transfer and 
multiactor activities ( WP6), and in remote sensing image collection of healthy/infected tomato/potato fields in 
Portugal and Poland (WP3). F4S will be in close contact with Direção-Geral de Alimentação e Veterinária (DGA V), 
the Portuguese authority responsible for plant protection, plant health policies, phytosanitary measures, as well as the 
agriculture notices service of the Portuguese Ministry of Agriculture. CS#3 Leader (WP5).  
  
4. Ethics self-assessment  
Ethical dimension of the objectives, methodology and likely impact  
HUMAN CELLS/TISSUES:  
The SSbD strategy within POMATO includes the application and validation of cutting-edge in vitro assays involving 
human cell lines for testing the potential hazards and toxicity of the solutions proposed in WP4. The human cell lines 
used within these assays are widely used within the field of toxicology assessment. These tests are relevant to evaluate 
potential hazards and risks of the developed solution early in the development phase in order to guide the design 
towards safer alternatives. All the cell are commercially available.  
ANIMALS:  
Animal experiments performed in POMATO will ONLY involve aquatic toxicity test Acute Toxicity to Fish (OECD 
203) to determine the LC50 for fish and the Honey Bee Toxicity Test (OECD 213) to determine contact and oral 
toxicity to honey bees. Thus not subjec ted to request of authorization. However, POMATOS’s partners engage in 
minimizing as much as possible the number of animals used in this project.  
PERSONAL DATA:  
POMATO will involve human participants through the conduct of interviews, surveys, workshop and other relevant 
events along the project duration, especially in the activities planned in T6.2 and T6.4 where the multi-actor approach 
activities will be carried out.  
In more details human participant will be participating in:  
1) engagement of the farmers and wider society (including youth and general publics) through workshops and four 
“POMATO Pilot Open Days” in order to raise awareness about environmental and economic problems related to pest 
outbreaks and inform them about P OMA TO solutions and cutting-edge technologies to address these challenge; 2) 
consultations and one-on-one meetings with key industry and policy stakeholders at relevant events;  
3) Identified stakeholders will be contact to assess their real-life needs, problems, and opportunities to engage in the 
co-creation process of POMATO’s solution development and evaluation, as well as knowledge sharing throughout 
the project's lifespan.  
NON-EU COUNTRIES: Colombia (AGRO) and Ecuador (USFQ).  
Added value to POMATO: Recent Eurostat production figures, incorporating the EU 27, UK, Norway, and 
Switzerland, show that the 19 national members of EUPAT account for over 80% of Europe's total potato output, 
highlighting the extensive reach the project has to key players in th e potato sector. Role: facilitate the collection of 
data and information towards all the members, influence policy decision -makers about the project’s outcomes and 
promote networking and communication activities (T5.5 and WP6).  
 F4S (Portugal):  Associação para a Inovação no Alimento Sustentável (Food4Sustainability, F4S)  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 40 of 33  
AGROSA VIA’s role includes genomic and transcriptomic characterization of potato and tomato resistance (WP2 
Leader). Their advanced facilities feature high -throughput sequencing, gene expression analysis, and controlled 
growth chambers. The Tibaitatá Research Centre has a quarantine greenhouse and laboratory for biosafe experiments 
and field trials with local farmers. AGROSA VIA is leading the case study CS#2 in WP5.  
USFQ’s will provide the collection of native and commercial potato varieties, essential for studying genetic resistance 
to various stresses. USFQ facilities include greenhouses and fields for pathogenicity assays, a molecular lab for 
pathogen identification, and a microbiology lab for pathogen multiplication and morphological descriptions. USFG 
is involved in potato varieties for GR studies (WP2) and is the leader of the case study CS#1 Leader in connection 
with local potato farmers (WP5).  
Both partners are included in the POMATO strategically as they are currently the same outbreaks that POMA TO is 
dealing with (Clavibacter sepedonicus (Cs) and Ralstonia solanacearum (Rs). Both partners will ensure the exchange 
of good practices while at the same time providing access to a wide germplasm collection of potato/tomato to carry 
out the tasks in WP 2 and to infected fields to evaluate the developed strategies of POMA TO in two case studies 
(WP5).  
Regarding the importing material from EU countries to this LATAM countries: AGROSA VIA is in charge of the 
characterization at phenotypic and genotypic level of both bacteria (WP2). For this purpose, AGROSA VIA will use 
isolated strains from potato/tomato infected and germplasm collections from the partner IHAR (Poland). Potato and 
tomato samples obtained from the European (IHAR, Poland) culture collections will be used to study their resistance 
genes (WP2). In order to ensure that there will be no problems w ith shipping from Poland to Ecuador, IHAR has 
already been in contact with the Office of Phytosanitary Supervision and International cooperation of our 
Phytosanitary Inspection to follow the rules applied to this kind of samples.  
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE:  
POMATO will include AI-based models in the development of the early detection tools. AI-based predictive models 
will be developed with a focus on technical and social robustness, ensuring accuracy and reproducibility in various 
environments. This will invo lve systematic data acquisition, preprocessing, and model training, using Bayesian 
hyperparameter optimization. Model performance will be rigorously evaluated with metrics like the Matthews 
Correlation Coefficient to handle potential inaccuracies. The mode ls Will be tailored to agricultural contexts, 
ensuring reliability. An AI-powered Cloud platform will integrate sensor data for disease prediction. Trustworthiness  
will be fostered by maintaining both absolute and relative trust values, supporting informed human trust decisions. 
Compliance with ethical principles and legislations  
Processing of personal data: according to article 89.1 of the General Regulation on Data Protection, “the processing 
for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or statistical purposes, shall be 
subject to appropriate safeguards, in accordance with this Regulation, for the rights and freedoms of the data subject”. 
POMATO will put in place a centralized system, in which only the lead partner (UBU) will have the competencies 
to authorize access and, by extension, withdraw access to any sort of personal data concerning the project. With this, 
POMATO wishes to successfully ensure that the rights of the participants in the project will be safeguarded. For the 
informed consent, POMA TO will provide each participant with a consent form that will always have to be signed 
before participation in the project. Since one of the fundamental principles of the GDPR (article 5) is transparency, 
it is on best interest of POMATO to provide as much information as possible and to make  the information as 
transparent as possible. The consent form includes the following subjects, according to the EU Guidelines on consent 
under Regulation 2016/679: i) The controller’s identity; ii) The purpose of each of the processing operations for 
which consent is sought; iii) What (type of) data will be collected and used; iv) The existence of the right to withdraw 
consent; v) Information about the use of the data for automated decision-making in accordance with Article 22 (2)(c) 
where relevant; vi) On the possible risks of data transfers due to the absence of an adequacy decision and of 
appropriate safeguards as described in Article 46.  
Ethics Summary Report  
Human participants will be involved in research and communication activities such as surveys, workshops, and 
consultations. Data processing including transfer between EU and non -EU countries will take place. Standard 
toxicity tests will make use of commercially available human cell lines and fish and honeybees. Export of bacterial 
pathogens for potatoes and tomatoes is planned and infected experimental sites will be exploited in the project. 
Finally, the proposal included the development of AI tools for early detection and prediction.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025 
101181658 POMA TO – Part B    Page 41 of 33  
Due to the diversity and the number of ethics issues raised by the planned activities and the large number of partners 
involved, it is recommended to appoint an ethics mentor to advise the project participants on the ethics issues and to 
keep a report on the activities on file to be made available promptly upon request.  
The Consortium declares that compliance with the ethical principles and the applicable EU, international, and 
national laws for the ethics issues identified in the Ethics Summary Report and any additional ethics issues that may 
emerge in the course of the grant, will be ensured.  
The Consortium confirms that for any applicable ethics issue, the guidance provided in the European Commission 
Ethics Self-Assessment Guidelines will be rigorously followed.  
 
 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)2863795 - 08/04/2025HE 
MGA — Multi & Mono: v1.2 
ANNEX 2