3.3 Consortium as a whole ................. 68
3.4 Resources to be committed ......... 69 
 
 
Acronyms Table  
BIF: barrier improvement factor 
CAGR: Compound annual growth rate  
CE: circular economy 
DMP: detailed management plan 
DSS: decision support system 
eBeam: electron beam 
(e-)LCA: (environmental) LCA 
EVOH: Ethylene vinyl alcohol 
EoL: End of Life  
ESG: External stakeholders group 
FA: Fatty acid 
FCM: food contact material 
GDPR: General Data Protection Regulation 
GHG: greenhouse gases 
IP(R): Intellectual Property (Rights) 
KPI: key performance indicator 
LCC: life cycle cost assessment 
MAP: modified atmosphere packaging 
mcl: middle chain length 
MS: milestones 
OTR: oxygen transmission rate 
PA: polyamide 
PE: Polyethylene 
PEDR: Plan for exploitation and dissemination 
of the results 
PET: polyethylene terephthalate 
PLA: polylactic acid 
PHA: polyhydroxy alkanoate 
PVD: physical vapour deposition 
r: prefix for recycled 
RTO: Research & Technology Organisation 
SbD: safe by design 
s-LCA: social LCA 
SME: Small & Medium-sized Enterprises 
SRPCs or MRPCs : self- or microfibrilar 
reinforced polymer composites 
SRM: secondary raw material  
SSH: Socio-economic science & humanities 
WVTR: water vapour transmission rate
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 2 of 70 
 
 
1. Excellence
1.1 Objectives  
While Europe depends heavily on fossil-derived plastics and consumes in the range of 50 Million tonnes per year, 
only 32% of the resulting waste is currently recycled1 (with a negligible part going to organic recycling) and a larger 
share is incinerated or landfilled. This contributes to the depletion of our limited resources and is hard to accept in 
view of EU’s resource efficiency objectives. Besides, according to the Ellen MacArthur Foundation2, as much as 32% 
of the plastic packaging end s up leaking in the environment,  outside of controlled end of life (EoL) management 
systems leading to dramatic long-term pollution. Given that  packaging consumes more than 40% of all plastic 
produced each year, improving its circularity from origin to subsequent life cycles is more than urgent. Furthermore, 
despite their growing market (CAGR 20%3), bioplastics still have a very limited share amo ng plastics (approximately 
1-2%). They can, however, provide advantages in terms of switching to renewable feedstocks an d EoL modularity. 
Nevertheless, while some drop -in solutions exist, there are still unmet demands for which speciality bio -based 
materials need to be developed. Furthermore, the biodegradability of available biodegradable biopolymers is not 
possible in every environment and their recycling is also insufficiently established. 
 
Building upon a number of past projects and in synergies with ongoing projects such as Refucoat, Decoat, Terminus, 
ECOat, BIOnTop, etc. (Table 1.3), we will enhance bio-based packaging in terms of properties that currently limit the 
application of bioplastics as well as in terms of EoL. Our upcycling strategies to boost packaging performance in the 
first and subsequent life cycles of the materials comprise: 
1. Application of previously dev eloped biobased coatings  and adhesives  that will be tailored and used in new 
materials combinations that are easy to sort and recycle: 
• Removable optionally meta llised oxygen barrier protein coatings  and hydrophobic fatty acid grafting 
technologies that decrease biopolymer gas permeability to permit packing sensitive food products which, in 
spite of being applied in multilayer films, do not jeopardize their posterior recyclability or biodegradability.  
• Removable primers/adhesives for multilayer films involving adhesive lamination as well as for allowing the 
separation of labels from the packaging. 
• PHA coatings providing barrier to water vapour, liquid food/ beverages a nd grease, especially for paper/ 
cardboard/ pulp-based beverage packaging.  
2. Application of eBeam radiation that has shown, at lab scale, the ability to increase the barrier and mechanical 
properties of biopolymers and increase the compatibility of polymer blends. Despite the fact that this technique 
shows good industrial potential as an emerging decontamination step in packaging lines, it has not been applied 
in the intended scope at a 
higher TRL.  
3. To compensate second ary 
raw materials (SRM) 
downgrading during material 
reprocessing, we will deliver 
recycled bioplastics with 
improved properties th rough 
self-reinforcement. While this 
can also be applied on virgin 
materials, it is especially 
innovative for reprocessing 
bicomponent packaging (e.g. 
coextruded films) without 
needing to separate the 
layers.  
4. Furthermore, more 
conventional additiv ation 
such as chain extenders as 
well as compatibilizers (in the 
case of blends ) will be 
pursued.  
 
 
1 Plastics – the Facts 2019 An analysis of European plastics production, demand and waste data 
2 THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY RETHINKING THE FUTURE OF PLASTICS, Ellen MacArthur foundation, 2016 
3 Source partner EUBP (European Bioplastics association) 
 
Figure 1.1 Life cycle of PRESERVE upcycled innovative materials (minor unavoidable waste due to 
non-mature collection system or littering not represented) 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 3 of 70 
In terms of exploiting biotechnological advances to support more positive EoL, the use of enzymes will be explored 
in 3 complementary approaches: 
1. Embedding enzymes in the bioplastics (enzymation) based on technologies patented by Carbios. This will allow 
PLA to be enhanced to biodegrade even at greater thickness or in milder conditions than standard PLA thanks to 
the previously discussed strategies.  
2. Enzymatic controlled recycling will be applied to polyesters, such as PLA, and coated/ multilayer PLA materials in 
order to obtain oligomers and preserve the majority of covalent bonds present along the macromolecular chains 
to retain the energy spent to create them. The oligomers will be exploited as additives and building blocks to 
synthesize new polymers with chemical structure specifically designed for upcycled secondary applications in 
coating and adhesive fields. 
3. Adhesive or coating removal using enzymatic detergents during cleaning of EoL packaging for delamination. This 
will be an optional process before reprocessing and upcycling of mono and multilayer bioplastic food and drink 
packaging or before repulping of the fibre-based packaging.  
The food and drink packaging sector is the main target of PRESERVE  primary materials. But in keeping with current 
legislations, to create a market for our SRMs and although their applicability for food packaging will be checked with 
migration tests , these  recovered polymers will be initially mainly target non-food-contact applications such as 
packaging for personal care products  as well as  reusable textiles and composites  secondary packaging , equally 
relevant to transport food and drinks, as upcycling demonstrators4.  
The versatile compatibility of our solutions with different existing and enhanced EoL options is key to adjust ing to 
the wide range of packed products and formats (e.g. in case of significant product leftover) as well as  to the highly 
variable waste management infrastruc tures across Europe to eventually lead to s ignificantly reduc ing landfill, 
incineration and pollution. The impact of enzymation as well as functional finishing treatments on the prevention of 
microplastics release in the  environment due to unfortunate inci dences littering will also be assessed. For the 
different stakeholders to define the best upcycling approach based on a case-by-case multiparametric optimisation, 
a decision support system (DSS) will be designed. 
 
We combine pre-existing advances with breakthrough circular approaches and address the challenges towards their 
market uptake. We will therefore demonstrate that our solutions match the requirements for the most widely used 
packaging materials and formats from large converters such as SUDPACK, GPI and SIBO and end users like MDLZ, 
BDF, DANONE (and CocaCola5 among others) who have been pioneers in the market introduction of bio-packaging. 
We have selected bioplastics that are readily integrated in existing packaging production lines (“drop in” and/o r 
compatible with standard processes)  and thanks to an ambitious exploitation roadmap, we expect the PRESERVE 
innovations to show the potential to substitute more than 60% of all food and drinks packaging by 2030 (details in 
Table 1.4). The added value of the secondary applications thanks to the upcycled bioplastics performance will greatly 
incentivate the adoption of such new solutions. This will also be supported by outreach activities towards the related 
stakeholders and policy makers as well as social and consumers perception studies and awareness raising campaigns. 
A new value chain from biopolymer suppliers, packaging converters, end users, waste management companies, and 
technological support will be created. Recommendations for new incentives and standards tailored to bioplastics will 
be defined to support the commercial roll out of our solutions.  
 
Our PRESERVE circular renewably sourced packaging solutions and derived upcycled applications will optimally 
preserve the actual food and drinks, our finite material and energy resources and the environment. We will 
demonstrate this by life cycle and safety assessments, by upcycling strategies including self-reinforcement, eBeam-
assisted material enhancement, removab le coatings as well as  by developing novel EoL scenario s for enhanced 
reprocessing, enzymatic recycling or enzyme-stimulated biodegradation. 
To achieve our goals, a 48-month work plan will meet the following specific objectives. Each objective is linked to a 
WP in our workplan as has associated metrics and key performance indicators (KPIs)  that will be encapsulated in 
milestones (MS) for facilitating project implementation.  
Objective 1: To specify the materials &processes to upcycle by tailored PRESERVE approaches (WP1) 
After an updated state of the art, patent and market review, the 
detailed requirements for each upcycling route followed in 
PRESERVE will be outlined.  
KPI: By M4 (MS1), specifications defined for at 
least 10 industrial applications and val ue 
chains 
Objective 2: To upscale the production and application of PHA coatings (WP2) 
The fermentation process from rice waste to middle chain length 
(mcl) PHA will be upscaled, as well as the formulation of derived 
coatings based on biobased solvents and solvent-free approaches 
KPI: By M12 (MS2), at least 10kg of PHA will 
be available and by M15 (MS3), 100m of PHA-
coated films will be ready for further 
 
4 Although our different materials recycling route could lead to upcycling, we only refer to upcycling when secondary use is defined and bound to a greater materials value / kg 
5 Due to repriorization needs in the Covid19 situation, CocaCola decided not to take part in stage 2 proposal as core partner and act as a stakeholder member instead.  
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 4 of 70 
and their application on bio-based plastics and paper substrates. conversion. By M24 ( MS10), at least 25 Kg of 
different PHA coating s will be ready for 
conversion into final packaging. 
Objective 3: To use protein coatings and adhesives in new multilayer structures with delamination potential (WP2) 
Based on the defined specifications (WP1), the suitable multilayer 
structures will be eco-designed and produced with removable 
adhesives and barrier coatings. Metallisation and Fatty acid (FA) 
grafting will be used where needed to tune the water vapour 
barrier. 
KPI: By M18 (MS6), at least 100m of laminates 
with bio-based content >85% and barrier 
properties similar to fossil benchmark will be 
available. By M24 ( MS11), 25 Kg of protein 
coatings and adhesives will be ready for 
conversion into final packaging. 
Objective 4: To demonstrate the use of enzymes for enhancing end of life of bioplastics (WP 3, 4) 
Enzymes will be selected: (i) to be encapsulated and compounded 
with plastics the biodegradation of which will be tested; (ii) to be 
used for delamination/ layer separation and (iii) to recover 
polyesters oligomers by hydrolysing the selected bioplastics (PLA 
and derived materials) which will be reused to obtain new 
copolymers with enhanced properties for use as adhesives for 
packaging and coatings for textiles. 
KPIs: By M15 (MS4), 10kg of enzymated PLA 
will be ava ilable for further upcycling and 
testing biodegradability in soil / microplastics 
release and by M3 6 (MS12), the enzyme -
enabled recycling processes will be in place at 
pilot scale. 
Objective 5: To set up tailored eBeam process for upgrading bioplastics properties (WP3, 4) 
The best compromise of eBeam process conditions (power, time, 
etc.) will be tested to partly crosslink the bioplastics and increase 
their properties while still allowing their reprocessing or enzymatic 
recycling.  
KPI: By M15 (MS5), eBeam-treated primary or 
secondary bioplastics with barrier and 
mechanical properties similar to fossil or virgin 
alternatives will be available. 
Objective 6: To upcycle bioplastics functional performance & processability via self-reinforcement (WP3,4) 
Different bioplastics combinations will be tested in the generation 
of micro-fibrils reinforced structures before applying a similar 
approach to reprocess bilayer films. The use of eBeam to improve 
their compatibility will be tested. Resulting self-reinforced polymer 
composites (similar nature for fibrils and matrix) or microfibrilar 
reinforced ones (dissimilar materials), SRPC and MRPC respectively, 
will be tested in terms of melt strength and processability by e.g. 
injection moulding, textile filaments and film extrusion. 
KPI: By M18 (MS7), the greater performance 
of SRPC/MRPC (mechanical load, longer 
lasting applications and high demanding 
processes such as drawing) will be proven. By 
M24 ( MS8), 50 Kg of compounds for food 
packaging and by M42 (MS15), 50 Kg of  
compounds from SRM will be provi ded to 
WP5. 
Objective 7: To appropriately combine the previously developed upcycling approach to obtain final prototype 
packaging, textiles and composites from primary and secondary raw materials (WP5) 
The materials’ processing, coating and conversion into final 
packaging and recycling will be upscaled and characterised. The 
reprocessed materials will also be tested in the production of 
textiles and composites with <15% of added virgin materials. 
KPI: By M36 (MS13), at least 5 demonstrators 
of upcycled bio-packaging will be available for 
further validation with food and recycling into 
cosmetic packaging, textiles and composites  
Objective 8: To validate obtained prototypes for food and drink packaging and assess potential for other 
applications (WP5) 
Shelf life of ca. 3 food products and ca. 3 drinks will be assessed in 
comparison with benchmark packaging. Food contact safety will be 
assessed. The recycled packaging will be tested for personal care 
products. The composite and textiles will be characterised among 
others in terms of microplastic release to define applications with 
the ability to absorb greater margin for recycled materials.  
KPI: By M48 (MS16), the ability to replace at 
least 60% of fossil plastic packaging materials 
will be shown including compliance with 
existing regulations and accessible added 
value secondary applications will be 
highlighted. 
Objective 9: To assess the sustainability of the PRESERVE solutions, demonstrate the ability to sort the different 
upcycled bioplastics and provide a DSS for material and EoL selection as well as value chain optimisation (WP4, 6) 
e-LCA, LCC and s-LCA will be performed on the obtained materials 
to provide recommendations to eco-design the final products the 
sustainability of which will also be assessed. The appropriate 
photonic techniques will be combined and calibrated to detect the 
materials developed. A DSS will be developed to support decisions 
at the packaging designers, recyclers and end users’ levels. 
KPIs: By M24 (MS9), the sorting ability 
towards the suitable EoL treatment will be 
proven. By M40 (MS14), a DSS will be available 
to test in WP5 and the reduced environmental 
impact and viability of final PRESERVE 
solutions will be shown by M48 (MS17).  
Objective 10: To maximize the dissemination and impacts of PRESERVE results via post project exploitation (WP7) 
As will be summarised in our final PEDR, we will establish a positive 
framework to stimulate the uptake of the PRESERVE innovation. 
Consumer perception and acceptance will be studied. Business 
models will be designed and the new value chains studied. A 
professional communication campaign to outreach, engage with 
and mobilise our key stakeholders will be designed and executed. 
Significant efforts will be dedicated to encourage policy makers to 
support beneficial legislative frameworks for PRESERVE solutions. 
Knowledge transfer and training activities will be organised. 
KPIs: By M48 (MS18), our 2030 roadmap will 
be in place for the post-project transition to 
the market, as well as the plan to successfully 
integrate PRESERVE in future waste 
management practices and circular value 
chains. Patent applications will be filed. All 
relevant stakeholders will be liaised with, and 
policy/ regulatory recommendations 
disclosed. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 5 of 70
1.2 Relation to the work programme  
Table 1.1 highlights how the proposal relates to the challenges and scope addressed by the topic CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Upcycling Bio Plastics of food and drinks packaging, as part of the work programme leadership in enabling & industrial 
technologies, Nanotechnologies, advanced Materials, Biotechnology, advanced manufacturing & Processing. 
Table 1.1: How PRESERVE relates to the scope and specific challenges of the CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 topic 
Scope/challenges How PRESERVE addresses them 
[…] economic and 
environmental benefits of a 
more 'circular' approach.  
 
[…] substitution of 
consumer products derived 
from fossil fuels […]. Most 
plastic (>98%) is produced 
from non-renewable 
sources. […] 20% of oil 
consumption.  
 
Some plastics are bio-
based; however not all are 
recyclable, reusable or 
biodegradable […] 
 
As mentioned, the recycling rates are insufficient in EU and needs to increase in line w ith 
the European Green Deal and other policies discussed in section 2.1. As illustrated in the 
New plastics economy2, there are huge opportunities to shift from the current linear use of 
plastics, whereby in the best case, monomaterials are recycled with d owngrading, to a 
circular use to capture both CO2 (comparison of virgin vs. recycled plastics, as well as bio vs. 
fossil ones in section 2.1) and the economic value employed to produce them. This is even 
more true for complex materials that are currently not recycled. In such context, PRESERVE 
has the ambition to substitute conventional fossil plastics by bio -based ones (or even 
recycled bio-based ones where applicable) in consumer products such as packaging, textiles 
and composites (target share for the substitution discussed in table 1.4). Our goal is that in 
their primary life, our food packaging materials have more than 85% bio-based content. 
PRESERVE focuses on the main fractions of rigid and flexible packaging which are currently 
not yet recycled satisfactorily (e.g. excluding monomaterial bottles). In these applications, 
the reliance upon non-renewable resources is aggravated by the very short use and single 
lifecycle failing to retain the economic value of the resources employed. Using a toolbox of 
complementary approaches and selecting the most adequate material and EoL in a number 
of cases, as supported by LCA, LCC , S-LCA and a DSS, we will be able to demonstrate the 
benefit of our circular approach  benchmarked to current materials. Our target is that the 
content of virgin materials should be lower than 15% in our upcycled SRM demonstrators. 
These applications, including personal care packaging and durable reusable “packaging 
materials” used to transport different goods, have significant market volumes and value to 
pull the market for the recycling of our biobased packaging that will be allowed by different 
approaches as discussed below (and table in task 5.1 for EoL depending on the structure). 
The majority of plastic 
cannot be recycled and 
contains toxic additives.  
 
There are legal limitations for the use of recycled polymers in food contact, therefore food 
and drink packaging will be mainly based on primary bioplastics. All in all, our safe by design 
(SdD) packaging will consider food contact legis lation from the project outset.  PRESERVE 
will select only safe natural additives (details in section 2.1) and biopolymers. The safety of 
the food contact applications of the final materials  will be assessed in order to verify their 
compliance with the Euro pean legal framework applicable to food contact mater ials and, 
particularly, the Framework Regulation (EC) No. 1935/2004 on materials and articles 
intended to come into contact with food. The necessary tests to demonstrate the suitability 
of the material f or food contact will be performed according to EC No.  10/2011 verifying 
PRESERVE suitability for the given applications and the absence of microplastic release. To 
verify the materials’ safety, in vitro assays to determine adverse effects at molecular, 
organelle and cellular level will be conducted, covering  either acute and chronic adverse 
response effects on human health such as inflammation, cytotoxicity, and genotoxicity.  
To develop upcycling 
technologies of plastics for 
food and drinks packaging 
transforming them into new 
materials or products of 
better quality or 
environmental value, 
ensuring that micro-plastics 
are avoided. To allow the 
sustainable recycling or 
biological degradation in 
accordance with existing 
and novel technologies, 
standards and certification 
schemes. To expand the 
potential of current 
technologies & materials 
for manufacturing, design 
of recyclable/ bio-
degradable bioplastics 
We focus on approaches to improve the properties of virgin and recovered bioplastics for 
various applications. In that scope, we will demonstrate our upcycled materials in the eco-
design of recyclable multilayer laminates in turn converted into pouches  as well as trays, 
wraps/ flow pack as cups, bricks and bottles  overall serving the needs of both drinks and 
solid food. Others of our upcycled materials will be suitable for injection moulding as will 
be demonstrated for packaging personal care products in case of using SRM. 
PRESERVE multifunctional upcycling involves improving:  
• Barrier properties to gases/ liquids/ grease, new functionalities (e.g. antimicrobial and 
optional easy emptying to reduce waste) 
• Mechanical and processability behaviour 
• EoL versatility and upcycled secondary applications : i)  Material reprocessing with 
improved approaches for separation or preventing need for it, ii) Support of enhanced 
biological approach (see below) 
Moreover, following SEALIVE and NANOUPTAKE procedures developed at ITENE, novel 
methodologies to reduce the release of microplastics based on the application of functional 
finishing treatments capable of protecting materials during the processability will also be 
studied for textile packaging applications. 
Exploit known or develop 
new biotechnologies, based 
on enzymes or enzyme 
combinations & 
microorganisms, for 
improved plastics recycling 
Tailored enzymes will be developed and applied for each of the following key EoL scenarios: 
• Recyclability even for multi -materials via enzymatic removal of “tie” layers or alike  
(barrier coating, adhesive or primer based on adhesives) 
• Enzymatic recycling of polyesters 
• For biodegradation as EoL, we aim for making PLA home compostable at high thickness 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 6 of 70 
or biodegradation (as opposed to industrially compostable with limited thickness currently).  
Develop novel standards 
and certification schemes 
applicable to packaging 
materials made from 
recyclable and 
biodegradable bio-plastics; 
As further discussed in section 2.2 and the aim of task 7.2, w e will identify areas in which 
PRESERVE can contribute to the improvement and development of standards, certifications 
and labelling schemes,  such as in terms of determination of recycled content, home 
composting, etc., and engage in an in -depth exchange with the relevant standardisation 
bodies (many of them with partners participation).  
SSH & gender aspects to 
improve consumer attitude 
for purchasing/ recycling 
food & drink packaging; 
SHH and gender aspects will be considered among others in consumer perception studies 
(task 7.1), the outcome of which will inform the communication and dissemination context 
to ensure our message is appropriate to reach both genders. More details in section 2.1.  
Take a systemic approach 
and involve cooperation 
among actors in the supply 
chain, from producer to 
final consumer, and from 
research to policy makers. 
The whole circular bio -based value chain  is covered by the PRESERVE partners and its 
External Stakeholders Group (ESG). It is optimally designed to allow knowledge transfer and 
support upscaling of the results obtained by the RTDs with a view to seamless post-project 
replication. In terms of systematic approaches involving all stakeholder cooperation, 
diverse tools will be used like above-discussed standardization, incentive scheme and DSS. 
Perform an analysis of the 
SoA to avoid duplications & 
overlaps with past or 
ongoing research, including 
BBI & CE projects  
As PRESERVE builds on a number of past and on-going projects (table 1.3)- many in funded 
in BBI and CE calls-, and based on the reviewed state of the art presented in section 1.4, the 
consortium is well informed of the relevant scientific state of the art . The consortium 
intelligence on industrial take up and market acceptance of sustainable packaging is 
guaranteed thanks to the participation in our consortium of companies pioneering in bio-
packaging and in plastics circularity, e.g. by participation in Ellen Mac Arthur foundation’s 
New Plastic Economy initiative. 
Clustering activities to 
capitalise on synergies with 
relevant projects selected 
under this topic and topic 
CE NMBP 26-2018 is 
encouraged. 
See details in section 2.1 and task 7.6 in terms of the overall clustering activities. In 
particular, when dealing with NMBP 26 -2018, we are building on 3 funded projects with 
partners participation (Table 1.3). We particularly generate synergies with Decoat (via IRIS 
& CTB & IVV) and Terminus (via UNIBO & OWS) in the use of triggers of different types to 
remove coatings/ primers/adhesives and allow the recycling of core substrates materials.  
In addition, in line with  Repair3D (via CTB & ITENE), common additivation strategies  for 
upcyling EoL packaging streams could be followed. 
Include a business case and 
exploitation strategy 
The project will include the business cases that are highlighted in Table 1.4 as well as an in-
depth exploitation strategy from a value chain perspective. KNEIA will support this work. 
Start TRL 3, achieve TRL 6 PRESERVE aims to upscale several techniques with TRL3-4 towards TRL6, see Table 1.2 
EC contribution of € 6-8M We request close to 8M€, with a high value-high impact work plan, which is also enabled 
by the synergies with on-going and past projects.
1.3 Concept and methodology 
a) Overall concept  
The main focus of the propo sal is to substitute fossil fuels 
derived plastics used in food and drink packaging by bio-based 
ones thanks to the improvement of their properties  using the 
complementary approaches illustrated in Figure 1.1. The novel 
recycling and upcycling processes will preserve our resources by 
maintaining their values over several cycles and reducing 
environmental direct and indirect release of plastics and 
microplastics. Resulting  technically and economic ally feasible 
eco-designed bio -based packaging, composite and textile 
solutions from primary and secondary renewable raw materials 
will respond to current market needs. 
In PRESERVE, our trans-disciplinary team (Figure 1.2) combines 
all the relevant skills and organisations ne eded to address the 
full extent of t he challenge of developing and validating 
innovative sustainable bio-based packaging and EoL valorisation 
solutions (different scientific and technical disciplines, 
engineering, SSH, etc.). The participation of a number of leading 
industry players is testimony to the soundness of the concept 
for generating broad impact and will maximise the consortium’s ability to transfer the results of the project to enable 
post project further demonstration/ qualification into broadly available market ready solutions. PRESERVE will enable 
knowhow transfer through its value chain of actors: from technology institutes & academia ( 7 RTOs: FRAUNHOFER 
IVV, UNIBO, AIMPLAS, ASU, CTB, NTT, ITENE ) to industry participants (10 SMEs including a pan-EU industry 
association and 9 Large enterprises leaders in their field):  polymers and bio-based raw materials to be used in the 
new packaging solutions harnessing the potential of biotechnology  (BIOPOL, EUBP, CARB, BOSTIK/ARKEMA as its 
Figure 1.2 PRESERVE Circular Value Chain (featuring business 
partners only- RTOs & support service providers not included) 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 7 of 70 
third party), plastic/packaging converters (PLANET, SUDPACK, GPI, SIBO), end users packers  (DANONE, MDLZ, BDF 
among others in our ESG ), up-recyclers, providers of  technological solutions, H&S and environment assessment 
(ROMEI, PLATO, IRIS, DENIMX, OWS) and innovation/dissemination specialists (KNEIA, CHX ). To complement our 
consortium, further stakeholders will be involved in an ESG for complementary technical, policy and business-related 
insights, especially outreaching other sectors using packaging as well as other potential adopters of upcycled SRMs 
and even retailers (which are relevant actors for stimulating market pull).  
Positioning of the project 
In terms of TRL, the main activities performed in PRESERVE span from technology screening and validation in the lab 
(TRL4) to demonstration in operational environment (TRL6) but, in that case, within different materials combinations. 
The technologies involved in the project will benefit from industrial support,  will be developed building on prior 
research and IP from involved partners as discussed in Table 1.3. As such, it is deemed realistic that the main project 
results, i.e. all packaging demonstrators, will reach TRL6 by the end of the project allowing meeting our ambitious 
goals. Table 1.2 summarises the TRL advances that will be achieved for each key component of the project. 
Table 1.2: Summary of the TRL advancements that will be brought about as a result of the PRESERVE project 
PRESERVE upcycling TRL 
advancement 
Comment on current status and improvements 
Protein barrier coatings 
and adhesives 
4->6 Whey protein coatings per se were already applied at TRL7 but only in preliminary trials at TRL4 in 
combination with nanoscale FA, PVD and eBeam modification s. Protein adhesives we re shown in 
lab scale (bench coating) for paper/PE laminates (TRL4). In both case s, tests in pilot coating and 
lamination lines will reach TRL6. 
PHA coatings 4-5->6 The fermentation process established at lab scale in Refucoat will be upscaled to pilot scale reactors 
and the application process will be performed in wet coating pilot lines at TRL6. Alternative plastisol 
technology established for different applications by CTB at TRL5 will also be tested. 
eBeam treatment of 
biopolymers 
3->6 Ability to increase biopolymers barrier and mechanical properties only demonstrated in few lab 
scale studies at TRL3  at ASU . No comprehensive data available including effects on barrier and 
mechanical properties and recyclability. Tests in pilot plants will allow reaching TRL6 at NTT. 
Reinforcement of bi-
component 
biopolymers 
3->6 First demonstrator developed showed the potential of self - and microfibrillar reinforcement. The 
knowledge needs to be transferred to bi-component biopolymer structures. Test will span from lab 
to pilot scale demonstration. 
Delamination for 
recycling 
4-5->6 for 
adhesives and 
coatings resp.  
ROMEI is establishing the TRL5+ process for protein coating delamination in BIOnTop . The 
collaboration with PLA TO will allow designing prototype equipment fo r adhesive removal and 
separation of recovered layers at TRL6. 
Enzymation  6 for PLA 
(different 
formulation) 
CARB has pre-commercial enzymated PLA masterbatches validated for home composting which will 
be extended to soil biodegradable applications and further combined with SRM following upcycling 
strategies. 
Enzymatic recycling 3/4->5 Based on prior research at TRL3/4, UNIBO will develop a protocol of the enzymatic degradation of 
polyesters, like PLA, and derived prototypes. AIMPLAS will upscale the enzy matic degradation and 
the products (oligomers and/or monomers), after recovery/purification, will be used for the 
synthesis of new copolymer s with specific properties for applications in the adhesive and textile 
fields at TRL5. 
Use of biopolymers 
SRM for packaging, 
textiles and composites 
4->6 for PLA, 
bioPE, bioPET,  
3->5 for PHA 
Reuse of recycled polymers for packaging, textiles and composites has been applied at TRL6 but in 
combination with biopolymers, trials will start at TRL4. The project aims at TRL 6 demonstration in 
pilot lines by using innovative steps to be able to recycle biopolymers efficiently. 
National or international research and innovation activities linked to the project 
PRESERVE will build on prior state -of-the-art as well as IP belongin g to several project partners. A selection of the 
most relevant projects that the PRESERVE partners are/have participated in are listed in Table 1.3  highlighting the 
derived expertise, results and processes that will feed into PRESERVE. They will also be liaised upon in  clustering 
activities described in section 2.1.  
Table 1.3: National or international research and innovation activities linked to the project  
topic Project (Funding programme, reference), Title Partners  Opportunity for carryover to Preserve 
Biobased coatings and adhesives 
REFUCOAT Full recyclable food package with enhanced 
gas barrier properties and new functionalities by the use 
of high-performance coatings (BBI 745791) 
AIMPLAS, 
BIOPOL, IRIS 
Initial tests of PHAs coating for printing technologies 
application onto PET polymeric material 
 
WHEYLAYER Barrier biopolymers for sustainable 
packaging, Whey protein -coated plastic films to replace 
expensive polymers & increase recyclability (FP7  315743 
& FP7 218340) 
IRIS, IVV, PLANET 
(via UNIPI) 
Developed whey protein -based oxygen barrier coatings 
for plastic films  
ECOAT ECO sustainable multifunctional biobased 
COATings with enhanced performance and end of life 
options (BBI 837863) 
IVV, IRIS, PLANET Development of non -aqueous protein adhesives for 
plastic films 
ProCell Consumer /Manufacturing Driven Bio -based 
Packaging Solutions from Agri -Food Waste Streams ( EIT 
Food 20137) 
IVV Vegetable protein coatings for improved oxygen barrier of 
cellulose-based food packaging films 
BioActiveMaterials Development of recyclable bio -based 
materials with antimicrobial and antioxidant 
functionalities to improve food shelf life (CORNET222 EN) 
IVV Protein-based coatings as mineral oil barrier in paper -
plastic laminates 
Micellar Adhesive  Barrier adhesive based on vegetal IVV Plant protein-based adhesive (lupine) for lamination 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 8 of 70 
 
b) Methodology 
Our approach and methodology involve 2 
main components: 
1. Laboratory and pilot scale development, 
upscaling & validation of the new materials 
and processes : Figure 1 .3 summarises  the 
methodology for the technical activities in 
the project.  End users and packaging 
producers define the specific technical needs 
to guarantee industrial acceptance of the 
developed solutions. Technological providers 
screen the right formulations/ combinations 
for pre -selecting the most adequate 
materials, while enhancing EoL options. This 
involves support from assessment and 
modelling (DSS) for deciding the right  
upscaling and upcycling paths up to industrial 
validation. We will also verify compliance with KPIs set in the proposal and further defined at the project outset and 
track the actual TRL of each technical component. In terms of upcycling methodology, we rely on the experience of 
DENIMX which, since 2011, has designed a number of high value-added (r)biopolymers/ r-fibres composites tailored 
to different end user requirements able to cope with the intrinsic variability of such recovered fractions. 
 
2. Innovation management: This work will accompany and cross-cut the research and innovation activities with the 
aim of preparing for post -project industrial uptake and for building the foundation s for market penetration of the 
project outcomes. These activities consist of: 
• analysis of the market, regulatory, social & safety aspects  that could impact the future acceptance and 
commercialisation of the proposed solutions leading to guidelines and rec ommendations for further upscaling 
and standardization. 
• dissemination & training of the project results following open data management methodology, including a series 
of activities to exchange knowledge between the relevant actors to validate their interes t in the results of the 
project and with standardisation bodies who will be a perfect window to echo the relevance of our new solutions.  
micellar protein for food packaging applications (BMBF 
031B0072B) 
Delamination, complex recycling 
 
BIOnTop Novel packaging films and texti les with tailored 
end of life and performance based on bio -based 
copolymers and coatings (BBI 837761) 
ASU, IRIS, 
AIMPLAS, CTB, 
PLANET, SILON,  
Protein and FA coatings, demonstration of the ability to 
delaminate multilayer biopackaging for recycling at TRL5 
 
MULTICYCLE Advanced & sustainable recycling processes 
& value chains for plastic -based multi -materials (SPIRE 
820695) 
CTB, IRIS, IVV, 
AIMPLAS, SILON 
Use of packaging SRM in textile, optical sorting, etc. 
Dissemination strategy articulated around a Circ ular 
Plastic Helix. 
Decoat Recycling of coated and painted textile and plastic 
materials (NMBP 814505) 
CTB, IRIS, IVV, 
AIMPLAS 
Strategies for triggering coating and interlayer debonding 
for allowing recycling coated materials 
Plast-i-Com Efficient reus e of contaminated polymers/ 
polymer blends through compatibilization and 
stabilization (IWT 13510) 
CTB Recycling of polymer blend, use of compatibilisation 
TERMINUS In-built triggered enzymes to recycle multi -
layers: an innovation for uses in plastic-packaging (H2020 
814400) 
UNIBO, OWS Enzymatic degradation strategies to degrade biopolymers 
and recover/purify products 
SRPCs or 
MRPCs: BIO4SELF Bio-based self -functionalised self -reinforced 
composite materials based on high performance 
nanofibrillar PLA fibres (H2020-NMBP 685614)  
CTB, NTT Development of PLA based self -reinforced composites 
with high mechanical properties which used as basis for 
PRESERVE textiles. 
FIBRILTEX, Blends4Innovation , Microfibrillar reinforced 
textiles and derived composites (CORNET) 
CTB Development of microfibrils in textiles applications 
 
Ebe
am E-SLEEVE Direct filament wound rotor carbon resin 
sleeves by bulk curing / layer-by-layer ebeam 
polymerisation (FP7- 323475) 
NTT EBeam ability to increase biopolymers barrier, mechanical 
and antimicrobial properties 
Clustering, Policy 
OPEN-BIO Opening bio -based markets via standards, 
labelling and procurement (FP7-KBBE-613677)  
OWS Pre-standardisation work on biodegradation in marine 
conditions, soil and organic recycling (industrial and home 
composting, anaerobic digestion). 
SEALIVE: Strategies of circular Economy and Advanced 
bio-based solutions to keep our Lands and seas alive from 
plastics contamination (H2020-BG, 862910) 
ITENE, OWS, NTT Bioplastics formulations with advanced propert ies, 
microplastics reduction finish. Pre-normative studies and 
standardisation related with marine biodegradation, 
home composting, anaerobic digestion. 
FlexFunction2Sustain: Open Innovation Ecosystem for 
Sustainable Nano-functionalized Flexible Plastic and Paper 
Surfaces and Membranes, (NMBP, 862156) 
IVV Upgraded pilot lines for atmospheric and vacuum 
coatings, design for circularity concepts for paper and 
plastic based flexible products 
 
Figure 1.3: Methodology for PRESERVE technical activities 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 9 of 70 
• exploitation and business planning to plan the investments needed for full scale production and implementation 
of PRESERVE solutions to carry them over the notorious ‘valley of death’ towards commercial adoption. 
Sex & gender analysis in the project’s content: See gender SHH requirements of the topics in sections 1.2 and 2.1.
1.4 Ambition 
PRESERVE has the ambition to develop upcycled bio-based packaging materials with tailored end-of-life that will lead 
to significant knowledge advancements vs. the state-of-the-art (SoA) as follows: 
Protein barrier coatings and adhesives 
Protein coatings serve several functions. They can be applied to improve barrier properties of packaging materials or 
they can be used as an adhesive to allow lamination of two dissimilar materials6. Whey protein coatings (Wheylayer®) 
applied as wet coating on plastic films according to a patented process (see table 1.5) have been demonstrated to 
improve the gas barrier properties of different plastics with OTRs close to EVOH7, without affecting biodegradability 
in case of being applied on compostable films8. Converting 40% of the ca. 50% of 50 million tons of whey discarded 
annually in Europe could cover the global need in EVOH for food packaging  and is therefore considered a reliable 
and non-food competing source (compatible with feeding livestock with other whey fractions). Whey proteins can 
also be used as environmentally safe adhesive in paper glues and as wood adhesive9. The two main processes, which 
allow the application of a protein layer are wet coating and extrusion. The decision to apply the one or the other 
technique depends on the target structure and the coating formula itself. For instance, studies already demonstrated 
the applicability of aqueous lupine protein  formulations10 as adhesive for laminates. However, due to its aqueous 
character that hinders the drying efficiency, it is still limited to combinations with at least one porous substrate such 
as paper 11. Alternatively, fully biodegradable c asein based thermoplastic materials 12 can be used as a hot melt 
adhesive. In general, protein-based coatings can be physically, chemically and/or biochemically-modified to further 
enhance their barrier or adhesive function13. Additional grafting with fatty acids is expected to provide significantly 
improved barrier properties towards water vapour14 and easy emptying due to increased surface hydrophobicity  
behaviour as being tested in BIOnTop. In addition, whey protein-based coatings on metallized plastic films showed 
very high oxygen barrier properties (barrier improvement factor BIF of > 30 in combination with inorganic layers15). 
However, the direct metallization of protein-based coatings that would simplify t he delamination of the metallized 
layer at EoL led to brittle fracture in preliminary trials.  
Beyond the SoA, PRESERVE will combine removable protein adhesive and barrier coatings in novel packaging 
structures to reach barrier properties  similar to that of the fossil -based packaging materials. All processes will be 
optimized and upscaled. Novel biobased adhesives from BOSTIK and protein based hot melt adhesives will enable 
their application in polymeric laminates, by liquid dry-lamination and co-extrusion lamination processes, respectively. 
Protein layers will be fine-tuned with non-volatile plasticizers to allow the metallized layer removal at EoL. Therefore, 
none of the developed structures wi ll compromise materials recyclability and biodegradability (depending on 
selected substrates). Moreover, oligomers obtained by enzymatic degradation of PLA will be opportunely modified 
to be upcycled for their use in adhesive formulations as plasticizers or as hot-melt adhesives designed with a possible 
debonding mechanism triggerable at the end of their life. 
PHA coatings 
Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are thermoplastic biopolyester produced by microorganisms with high 
biodegradability including marine environments 16 but also thermosensitivity and instability limiting its use as films, 
coating, fibres etc. The RefuCoat project developed coating for printing technologies application onto PET polymeric 
material but also high potential for paper coating . Long chains PHAs are generally water insoluble and resistant to 
hydrolytic degradation due to their high hydrophobicity 17. They show good solubility in common printing solvents 
like ethyl acetate (which can be bio -based) and possess excellent film -forming properties and serve as a barrier 
against oxygen with a water vapor permeability of 25 -30 g/m2/day, 25μm thickness & 25ºC 18. They have  good UV 
resistance, but poor resistance to acids and bases. Rice flour (a low-cost by-product) has been used as a substrate 
for PHA production. Ne vertheless, the process has not been developed at a sufficient scale for producing larger 
 
6Coltelli et al. (2016). SoA in development &properties of protein-based films and coatings and their applicability to cellulose based products: an extensive review. Coatings 6, 1 
7 E. Bugnicourt et al. (2013). Processing and validation of whey-protein-coated films and laminates at semi-industrial scale. Adv Mater Sci Eng, 2013 
8 Cinelli (2014) Whey protein layer applied on biodegradable packaging film to improve barrier properties while maintaining biodegradability. Polym Degrad Stab 108:151-157 
9 Guo, M.; Wang, G. (2016) Whey protein polymerisation and its applications in environmentally safe adhesives. Int. J. Dairy Technol. 
10 Eibl et al. (2018). Adhesive based on micellar lupin protein isolate exhibiting oxygen barrier properties. J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 46383. DOI: 10.1002/app.46383  
11 Ecoat, H2020 BBI, GA 837863, ECO sustainable multifunctional biobased COATings with enhanced performance and end of life options (2019-2022). 
12 Domaske, A (2014). Method for producing a milk protein based plastic material. Patent US 2015/0013569 A1 
13 Zink et al. (2016) Physical, Chemical and Biochemical Modifications of Protein-Based Films and Coatings: An Extensive Review. Int. J. Mol. Sci., 17, 1376  
14 Péroval et al. (2003). Modified Arabinoxylan-Based Films. Part B. Grafting of Omega-3 Fatty Acids by Oxygen Plasma and Electron Beam Irradiation. J. Agric. Food Chem. 
15 Schmid, M. Formulation and properties of the whey protein coating material. in Wheylayer - Demonstration Session. 2014. Ljubljana. 
16 Bugnicourt et al. PHA: Review of synthesis, characteristics, processing and potential applications in packaging, eXPRESS Polymer Letters Vol.8, No.11 (2014) 791–808 
17 Petersen et al. Potential of biobased materials for food packaging. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 1999, 10, 52–68 
18 Vibhore Kumar Rastogi et al, Bio-Based Coatings for Paper Applications, Coatings 2015, 5, 887-930 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 10 of 70 
quantities of mcl-PHA (middle chain length e.g. C8-10) yet. Furthermore, CTB has filed a patent on inks specifically 
developed for PLA and PHA in March 2020 (table 1. 5) making use of mixtures of powders of thermoplastic 
biopolymers with specific plasticisers. At a certain temperature (called gelation point), the biopolymer melts and gets 
dissolved into the plasticiser, which forms a solid film upon cooling. The obtained prints had an outstanding abrasion 
resistance (>100.000 cycles according to EN ISO 12947) and degraded very fast in soil (oil burial BS 6085-2, 14 days), 
but had poor barrier properties. 
Beyond the SoA, PRESERVE will develop a sustainable scale -up fermen tation process to obtain mcl -PHA, the 
appropriate grade for coatings, from agricultural waste . In order to increase its durability and barrier properties, 
different formulations of PHA will be developed. AIMPLAS will optimize its solvent formulation by mod ification of 
PHA by the aid of plasticizers, its blending with additives and its chemical modification using bio-based 10-undecenoic 
acid from ARKEMA. This will also provide antimicrobial properties, crosslinking capability, and reduce its “aging” with 
time. It will be  applied by lamination or printing technologies. It is seen as particularly relevant for biodegradable 
substrates like paper where composting can  be a valid EoL, but due to its value, PHA re/upcycling will also be 
developed in the project to obtain new coatings. Besides solvent-based coatings, CTB will further optimise its solvent-
free plastisol  technology to reach suitable barrier properties for the intended uses. Where needed , FA grafting,  
protein coatings or eBeam treatments will be combined with the PHA coating. 
Moulded Pulp and other formed fibre-based packaging 
Moulded pulp items are normally produced from a 96%-4% water-fiber/pulp mixture, whereby either wood pulp or 
pulp made from recovered waste paper/paperboard is used 19. Subsequently, this mixture is processed by suction 
moulding or pressure moulding. Due to the lack of barrier properties, untreated moulded pulp is so far mostly used 
for packaging of non-food products or as secondary/tertiary food packaging material. Consequently, there are limited 
applications of this packaging material with direct food contact such as fruits and eggs. However, due to the economic 
and ecological advantages  of this material, such as low cost of production and complete recyclability, 
functionalization of moulded pulp for instance by applying thin polymer films or barrier coatings is considered. So 
far, only polymer films , either bio -based PEF or recycled or biodegradable PET 
films, are used as barrier layer in pulp moulded products20. Furthermore, moulded 
pulp bottles have also started appearing on the market using a PLA liner21. Likewise, 
other approaches like PaperSealTM or PLA extrusion coated paper trays and cups 
are increasingly used  in food packaging and food service sectors to replace fully 
crude oil-derived solutions and match single use plastics law requirements (fig 1.4).  
Beyond the SoA, PRESERVE will develop sustainable pulp moulded or formed fibre-based products such as cups, trays 
and bottles using PHA-based coatings with greater barrier properties than current options that will be applicable as 
food & beverage packaging material to substitute fossil fuel derived packaging and could be delaminated or directly 
repulped at EoL. 
Surface finish to reduce microplastics release from textiles 
As further discussed in section 2.1, microplastics are not migrating from packaging but due to the pollution at other 
levels of the food chain (e.g. due to water pollution). As such, t o date, the majority of the research activities have 
focused on the main source of  primary microplastics: microfibres released during washing. In Europe, 35 billion 
laundry loads are done every year  and in each of them 3 g of microfibres (or 500.000 microfibres) are produced 22, 
the majority of which are non-biodegradables; this means a staggering release of 105 kt microfibres/y in European 
washing machines. Microfibres are not easily removed in the Waste Water Treatment (WWT) plant so most of them 
are ultimately released in fields, rivers or seas. Microfibres are of concern for the enviro nment, as they potentially 
also transport hazardous chemicals that were added during the ir processing and finishing. Aquatic organisms 
throughout the food chain end up consuming microfibres. These particles have been found to cause physical and 
chemical impacts, resulting in starvation and reproductive consequences in aquatic species. They ha ve also been 
found in abiotic ocean products like sea salt 23,24. However, less work has been performed regarding the elimination 
of microplastics release taking into cons ideration design and production aspects  for example based on the 
application of functional finishing treatments in the last years. A treatment based on pectin, a natural hetero -
polysaccharide, as protective coating on the surface of synthetic fabrics has been reported to reducing the amount 
of microfibres shed during the processing25 by up to 90%. Furthermore, another technique to reduce the microplastic 
 
19 Kirwan, M.J. 2012. Handbook of Paper and Paperboard Packaging Technology, Wiley  
20 https://www.carlsberggroup.com/newsroom/carlsberg-issues-latest-green-fibre-bottle-update/  
21 https://paperwaterbottle.com/, Patent US8701905B2 Environmentally friendly liquid container and method of manufacture 
22 Lassen et al. (2015). Microplastics : Occurrence, effects and sources of releases to the environment in Denmark (Danish Environmental Protection Agency) 
23 Microplastics from washing machine wastewater are polluting beaches, "Science for Environment Policy": European Commission DG Environment News Alert Service, 
edited by SCU, The University of the West of England, 2012. 
24 http://www.gesamp.org/site/assets/files/1275/sources-fate-and-effects-of-microplastics-in-the-marine-environment-part-2-of-a-global-assessment-en.pdf 
25 De Falco et al. (2018). Pectin based finishing to mitigate the impact of microplastics released by polyamide fabrics. Carbohydrate polymers, 198, 175-180. 
 
Figure 1.4 GPI’s paper-based pressed 
bowls replacement for PET trays 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 11 of 70 
release was developed using an ElectroFluidoDynamic method26 to obtain homogeneous coatings of biodegradable 
PLA and poly (butylene succinate-co-butylene adipate), on polyamide surface, without affecting the fabric hand and 
wettability. It i s possible to apply homogeneous functional bioderived/biodegradable PLA based coatings onto 
commercial polyamide fabrics, without compromising their morphology and their peculiar properties27. 
Beyond the SoA, PRESERVE will investigate, develop, and implement a novel methodology for application of a 
functional bio-based finishing treatment to reduce the release of microplastic s that will be tested with our durable 
SRM demons trators such as reusable textile bags used e.g. for shopping . This functional bio-based coating 
formulation will provide long -term durability and high performance even after several washes, thus avoiding the  
microfibre release/detachment. The eBeam effect will also be tested  for the first time  for that purpose . As such, 
PRESERVE contribute to the microplastics EU restriction dossier by assessing the release of microplastics as stated in 
the COM (2018) about the European Strategy for Plastics in a Circular Economy.  
eBeam treatment of biopolymers 
Electron irradiation (eBeam) of a given polymeric material can enhance the cross -linking of the material thereby 
improving mechanical and barrier properties. Notably, during electron irradiation as well as ir radiation in general, 
two different processes occur in parallel: chain scission and cross -linking. The dominant process  depends on the 
characteristics of the irradiated material as well as the irradiation conditions, such as dose, current and irradiation 
atmosphere. In addition, it can improve the compatibility of polymer blends 28. Therefore, it is used as a curing 
technique in several industries to facilitate polymerization and coating adhesion to substrates29 but also for making 
materials hygienic. Concerning biopolymers, for example for PLA or PLA/PHA blends respectively, increase of barrier 
properties by 10 and 22%, and of mechanical properties by 18 and 43% (tensile strength)  have been reported30’31. 
Initial trials at ASU performed on whey protein castings also showed a barrier improvement by up to 35%. Vegetable-
oil-based biopolymers showed enhancement in Young’s modulus and tensile strength 32. In combination with 
antimicrobial agents such as trans-cinnamaldehyde, eBeam treatment can even enhance antimicrobial activity33. In 
contrast, at extreme doses, eBeam treatment can also enhance delamination34 by inducing brittleness.  
Beyond the SoA, PRESERVE will carry out a systematic study on the effect of eBeam treatment on biopolymers for 
decontaminating bioplastics, for improving their mechanical and barrier properties and the compatibility of blends 
while maintaining their recyclability. Optimal irradiation conditions will be determined in order to avoid biopolymer 
degradation induced by the irradiation process. The process will be optimized for a semi-industrial scale eBeam unit 
available in the consortium. The effect of natural additives on eBeam induced crosslinking will also be studied. 
Reinforcement of bi-component biopolymers 
In self -reinforced polymer composites (SRPCs), also referred to as single -
phase or homo-composites35 the same polymer or polymer family forms both 
the reinforcing and the matrix phase. These materials use a highly -drawn 
polymer fibre to reinforce the matrix, making it lighter, more impact resistant 
and improving recycling possibilities. SRPCs based on po lyolefins and other 
synthetic polymers, e.g. PET, PA and PMMA, are well established . However, 
biobased SPRCs are only emerging on the market. 
In the Bio4Self project SRPC , biobased prototypes 
based on PLA were demonstrated and these results 
are being comme rcialised. The potential of this 
approach is illustrated by BIO4SELF winning the 
2019 Global Bioplastics Award 36. The principle of 
reinforcement could also be used to upgrade recycled materials such as rPLA.  
With the aim of reaching the desired properties with respect to shelf  life, a lot of packaging materials are 
multicomponent materials. Currently these coextruded materials like PA/PE films, which are much used for example 
for modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) or to provide puncture resistance of vacuum food packaging,  are in the 
best case recycled as blends with inferior mechanical properties even after compatibilization. Processing polymer 
blends by applying a high draw ratio and creating a microfibrillar structure can be of large interest since a remarkably 
 
26 De Falco et al (2019). Novel finishing treatments of polyamide fabrics by electrofluidodynamic process to reduce microplastic release during washings. Polymer Degradation 
and Stability, 165, 110-116. 
27 De Falco et al. Design of functional textile coatings via non-conventional electrofluidodynamic processes. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 541 (2019) 367-375 
28 International Atomic Energy Agency, 2014. Radiation processed materials in products from polymers for agricultural applications 
29 Mehnert et al. 1995. Ebeams in research and technology. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms 105, 348-358 
30 Zembouai, Ebeam radiation effects on properties and ecotoxicity of PHBV/PLA blends in presence of organo-modified montmorillonite, Polym. Degrad. Stab, 132 (2016), 117  
31 Salvatore, Effect of Ebeam irradiation on the properties of PLA/montmorillonite nanocomposites for food packaging applications, J. of App. Polym. Sc, 133.2 (2016), 1-12 
32 M. Thunga, Y. Xia, U. Gohs, G. Heinrich, R.C. Larock, M.R. Kessler Macromol Mater Eng, 297 (2012), pp. 799-806 
33 Han et al (2006). The influence of ebeam irradiation on the effectiveness of trans-cinnamaldehyde coated LDPE/polyamide films. Journal of Food Science, 71(5), E245-251 
34 S.R. Choi, J.W. Hutchinson, A.G. Evans (1999). Delamination of multilayer thermal barrier coatings. Mech. Mater., 31 (7), p. 431 
35 Chengcheng et al. Progress in polymer science, Vol. 37, 6, June 2012 P 767-780 
36 https://www.bioplasticsmagazine.com/en/news/meldungen/20191203-Bio4Self-project-captures-the-2019-Global-Bioplastics-Award.php, accessed 06.12.2019 
Figure 1.6 Production of these composites via combination of a low melting 
PLA grade and a high stiffness, high melting PLA reinforcing fibre 
Figure 1.5 Principle micro fibrillation 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 12 of 70 
broad spectrum of properties can be obtained without having to develop a new polymer. Increased mechanical and 
barrier properties can be obtained. In the project Fibriltex (table 1.3), a PP plate with PET microfibrillar reinforcement 
was produced, having properties in the same range as self-reinforced composite materials. Thus, intimate blending 
enables to outperform the existing homopolymers and to develop materials with tailored properties.  
Beyond the SoA, PRESERVE will develop bio -based SRCP based  on high melting PLA in standard PLA matrices and 
demonstrate their use in packaging applications  such as jars, bottles and films . Further, we will demonstrate the 
broad spectrum of packaging material properties that can be obtained by developing polymer blends for 
microfibrillar reinforced films, textiles and composites of (r)bioPET or (r)bioPA into (r)bioPE. Bimaterials that were 
considered unrecy clable so far could be reused as added value MRPC with improved mechanical and barrier 
properties, dyeability, reduced shrinkage vs. PE while conserving recyclability at EoL to be converted back into added 
value MRPC (if properly sorted as given MRPC or mixed with other PE waste streams as will be addressed in WP4).  
Delamination for recycling 
Mixed plastic waste fractions, such as multilayer packaging, are generally currently incinerated or landfilled at EoL. 
In general multilayer-recycling can be achieved by separation of the different components, either by delamination 
or a selective dissolution –reprecipitation technique or by compatibilization of non-miscible polymer types. Within 
PRESERVE, we focus on the separation by delamination. The mechanism of multilayer delamination can be induced 
physically by the dissolution of macromolecules and mechanically or chemically by the decomposition of an interlayer 
or by reactions at the interface. In the literature, sev eral 
methods of chemical delamination by decomposition of 
interlayers are  reported37 such as an approach being 
upscaled to TRL5 in the BIOnTop project where the use of 
ca. 2% enzymatic detergents in the washing bath in the 
recycling facility allows separating the different polymers 
in multilayers empl oying protein barrier coatings . 
Moreover, this approach does not significantly negatively 
affect the recovered materials’ mechanical properties in 
terms of stress at yield, stress and elongation at break.38 
Beyond the SoA, PRESERVE will deliver a delamination pilot plant and adjust and upscale the different steps of the 
new recycling process to the materials developed especially in terms of delaminating protein coatings and adhesives 
as well as the initial sorting via advanced photonic and artificial intelligence approaches. 
Enzymation 
Enzymation comprises the embedding of encapsulated enzymes into polymeric materials via compounding. 
Compounding of polymeric packaging materials with additional constituents serves several functions. It is 
preferentially used for the mixing and/or blending of copolymers with additives. Amongst others, it can confer 
preferable properties onto the used packaging material, or it can be used in active packaging 39. Notably, several 
classes of enzymes show the ability to degrade polymeric packaging materials40. However, the use of theses enzymes 
is rather limited and, so far, not applicable for example for fibres, bottles, flexible films or applications having a high 
thickness with barrier properties.  
Beyond the SoA , PRESERVE will adju st and further improve enzymated PLA formulations , building further on a 
patented process (table 1.5),  so that it meets the requirements for food contact applications and enhance 
compostability so that it is  not limited to high temperature and humidity com posting conditions. This will unlock 
home composting or soil biodegradation as valuable EoL where material recycling can be limited. 
Enzymatic recycling 
Hydrolytic enzymes are known to degrade some polymeric structures, in particular polyesters such as PLA, PCL, PET, 
PBF and PEF leading to the release and possible recovery of oligomers and monomers. The degree of hydrolysis, the 
chemical structure of the polymer 41, the substrate specificity 42, e.g., the preference for endo - or exo-scission, and 
the reaction type43, e.g., hydrolysis or glycolys is, may influence the composition of the depolymerization products. 
These factors should be controlled to obtain optimal products for a following chemical repolymerization.44 This 
approach stresses integration of biotechnol ogy processes, based on microbial or enzymatic transformations, with 
chemical processes offering a potential production route for (bio-based) building blocks and plastics. It provides tools 
 
37 Kaiser, K.; Schmid, M.; Schlummer, M. (2018) Recycling of Polymer-Based Multilayer Packaging: A Review. Recycling, 3, 1 
38 Cinelli et al. A. (2016) Recyclability of PET/WPI/PE Multilayer Films by Removal of Whey Protein Isolate-Based Coatings with Enzymatic Detergents. Materials 2016, 9, 473 
39 Bastarrachea, L.J.; Wong, D.E.; Roman, M.J.; Lin, Z.; Goddard, J.M. (2015) Active Packaging Coatings. Coatings, 5, 771-791.  
40 Kawai, F., Kawabata, T. & Oda, M. (2019) Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 103: 4253. 
41 Perz et al. (2016) Substrate specificities of cutinases on aliphatic–aromatic polyesters and on their model substrates. New Biotechnology 33: 205-304.  
42 Gigli et al. (2019) Enzymatic hydrolysis of PBTF and PBF films: A comparison of mechanisms. Environment International 130: 104852 
43 Castro et al (2018) Enzyme-catalyzed simultaneous hydrolysis-glycolysis reactions reveals tunability on PET depolymerization products. Biochem. Eng. Journal 137:239-246 
44Debuissy et al (2018). Biotic and Abiotic synthesis of of renewable aliphatic polyesters from short building blocks obtained from biotechnology. ChemSusChem 11:3836-3870 
Figure 1.7 Whey protein coating removal to 
allow recycling of multilayer films 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 13 of 70 
for all steps, fro m the first step of material deconstruction to s impler entities to the production of building blocks 
and polymers45,46,47,48. 
Beyond the SoA, PRESERVE will develop a controlled enzymatic recycling process for polyesters (e.g. PLA) in order to 
break only so me covalent links along the macromolecular chains an d supply oligomers , benefitting from the 
knowledge being produced by the enzymatic degradations carried out in the Terminus project. These oligomers will 
be characterized and chemically modified or polyme rized to obtain the molecular structures requested f or the 
specific applications. In particular, PRESERVE will focus on the production of new polymers through chemical 
reactions with multifunctional monomers for uses in coating or as adhesives. PRESERVE wi ll thus demonstrate that 
bioplastics, at the end of their life, can become a novel source of building blocks and, then, new polymeric structures, 
validating the full strategy of combination of biotechnology and chemistry to upcycle plastics. 
Use of recycled biopolymers for packaging, textiles and composites 
Biobased packaging based on PLA, starch , etc. have been successfully placed on the market. Recycling test s have 
been performed but very few recycled biopolymers are on the market and there are legal limitations preventing their 
use as food packaging materials (with a few exceptions such as bottle -to-bottle PET). On the one hand, t he use of 
biopolymers in textile applications via extrusion is nowadays estimated at 100 kton per year 49 consisting mainly of 
virgin PLA50. On the other hand, the use of recycled po lymers from packaging is a well -established upcycling route 
for fossil polyesters r-PET in textile and personal care packaging applications.  
Beyond the SoA, PRESERVE will demonstrate the use of upcycled bio-based materials as a very impactful way to 
decrease the environmental impact of various end user industries, however improvements in their functionality and 
properties are required to fill performance and price gap s with fossil and virgin materials that generally hampers 
their replacement. Therefore, PRESERVE will deliver cosmetic packaging and textile/ composite demonstrators of the 
upcycling-ability of recycled biopolymers based on self-reinforcement.  
Innovation potential 
Building on the previously described advances beyond the SoA, PRESERVE provides high market prospects in rigid 
and flexible packaging based on bioplastics matrices, films and coatings combined between each other as well as 
with paper/board. The specific market sizes and trends for each segment are broadly discussed in section 2.1. 
Focusing on the main demonstrators that will be delivered for our end users and will be used as business cases from 
the project, Table 1.4 (next page) shows a benchmarking of how we expect our results to comply with th e industry 
& consumer needs  vs. conventional fossil-based counterparts based on set project KPIs targeting at least similar 
functional performances (further details are given in related table in task 5.1) . Specific attention is also paid to 
improving the respective EoL routes vs. the current scenarios. The multilayer film recycling will be enabled by means 
of enzymatic delamination of the protein coating layer, which acts both as a barrier layer, and a delamination/primer 
layer for the bio-based PU-adhesive, which intrinsically is not easily degradable. Complementarily, the upcycled PLA 
compounded with enzymes provides biodegradability in mild solutions and the microfibrillar reinforcement allow 
reprocessing SRM of dual natures whereas the enzymatic recycling allows recovering oligomers that can be used in 
functional coating and adhesives for new packaging. The knowledge on the injected formats from SRMs tested with 
non-food contact applications can be easily t ransferred to virgin bio plastics for packing food . The total 
representativeness of our benchmarks is over 70% of the packaging market. This potential will be harnessed in our 
2030 roadmaps and most KERs are expected to reach the market by date as discussed in section 2.2. The overall 
potential economic i mpact of our results upon full deployment is therefore above bn€ 200 51. The ability for 
substituting conventional packaging by PRESERVE solutions is enhanced by the presence of SUDPACK, GPI and SIBO 
in the consortium who are leaders in the plastics/ fibre-based flexible and rigid packaging segments and already have 
some bioplastics solutions in their product lines.  Moreover, we also have leading end users (DANONE, MLDZ and 
BDF) in the consortium and CocaCola52 among many other food packers in the ESG, who will play a key role in quickly 
reaching broad markets in many complementary sectors. Furthermore, the improved processes and support systems 
developed along the project will result in additional growth (see all key exploitable results in table 2.5).  
To maximise our innovation’s commercial potential, beyond the definition of the new value chains and outreach 
activities, a comprehensive series of measures including consumer perception, standardisation and regulatory 
 
45 Tsuge, Y. et al. (2016). Engineering cell factories for producing building block chemicals for- biopolymer synthesis. Microb. Cell Factories. 15,,:, 19  
46 Pellis, A. et al. (2016). Renewable building blocks for sustainable polyesters: new biotechnological route for greener plastics. Polym Int. 65:861-871. 
47 Dishisha, T. et al.  (2015). Bio based 3-hydroxypropionic acid- and acrylic acid production from biodiesel glycerol via integrated microbial and chemical catalysis. Microb. Cell 
Factories. 14, 200. 
48 Kobayashi, S. (2015). Enzymatic ring-opening polymerization and polycondensation to green synthesis of polyesters ,Polym Adv Technol.26:677-686. 
49 http://www.european-bioplastics.org/market/applications-sectors/ accessed 10.11.2019 
50 L. Ruys et al.New developments in agrotextiles based on the results of the FP7 project: “BIOAGROTEX” – Unitex, nr 5, p 4-7, 2012. 
51 Global Flexible Plastic Packaging Market 2019-2023, www.researchandmarkets.com/reports/4771760/plastic-packaging-market-growth-trends-and#rela1-362133, 06.12.2019 
52 , in our AB, has been active in the proposal preparation and will closely follow (and where possible guide) the aspects related to drink packaging with the view 
that the results obtained for liquid containers and injected bottles could be transferred to their products in the future. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 14 of 70 
aspects, as well as business planning  and knowledge /IPR management will be undertaken  in WP7. The knowledge 
and IPs generated by the project will be exploited by partner companies, in order to improve their competitiveness, 
differentiating their products on the market, thereby tapping into i ncreasing market and consumer demand for 
environmentally friendly packaging, composites and textiles with high performance compared to traditional 
petroleum-derived counterparts and improved EoL options. Freedom to operate (FTO) has been given due attention 
as a vital forerunner for the commercial exploitation of the results, and a patent search has been performed around 
each of our main technologies reflected in the SoA.  
Table 1.5 reflects  the most relevant patents (includ ing some from partners) and highlight s the differences with 
PRESERVE. The prior art is rich but there is space for further innovations beyond the stat e of the art that could be 
patented. In particular, we expect to generate at least 2 patents from the proj ect, especially in the area of : novel 
multifunctional delaminable bio-based adhesives and primers used in recyclable-by-design structures, combination 
of eBeam and barrier layers for outmost barrier improvements, use of microfibrillar reinforcement for han dling bi-
material wastes, enzymatic degradation coupled with functionalisation of oligomers for specific applications, etc. 
Table 1.4: Benchmarking of our planned food and drinks packaging demonstrators vs. commercial solutions and respective primary and 
secondary upcycling routes followed 
 Demonstrators Standard (fossil) solutions53 
 
Materials structure (all of 
them generally 0% bio 
content); current EoL54 
PRESERVE solutions 
 
Materials structure55 
All of them: >85% bio-based and 
recyclable (see upcycling approach on the 
right), similar barrier properties as 
benchmark 
Protein coatings / adhesives 
PHA coatings 
eBeam treatment  
Microfibrilar reinforcement 
Delamination for recycling 
Enzymation 
Enzymatic recycling 
Packaging market share56 
Bio-based packaging for food and drinks (primary upcycled bioplastics)  
 
Film, tray for e.g. dairy, meat 
packaging57 
High barrier lidding film: 
aluminium foil / sealing 
lacquer; landfilled/ incinerated 
BO-PLA / protein / met / bio -adhesive / 
protein / PLA (sealing) 
x  x  x X x 17.5* % 
Medium barrier lidding film: 
PE/PA, landfilled/ incinerated 
bioPA/ bioPE   x x    14.1 % 
BO-PLA print / protein / bio -adhesive / 
protein / PLA (sealing) optional FA grafting 
x  x  x X x 
Tray/cup: PP, landfilled/ 
incinerated 
Self-reinforced PLA / barrier protein / 
hotmelt / Self-reinforced PLA optional FA 
grafting 
x   x x X x 6.3 % 
Snack flowpack  Non metallised  film: 
PET/PE/EVOH/PE, landfilled/ 
incinerated 
bioPET (optionally metallized) / protein / 
bio-adhesive / protein / bioPE 
x  x  x   Included 
above*  
 
Pouch PET / Al (8 µm) / PA / LDPE film 
landfilled/ incinerated 
bioPET / Protein (met) / PHA  x x   x   Included 
above* 
Beverage brick Board/ optional aluminium/ 
adhesive/ PE; board re cycled, 
rest incinerated 
board / hotmelt (optionally metallised)  / 
protein / PHA  
x x x  x   8.4 % 
Pulp moulded  
packaging (e.g.  
bottle, cup)   
PP+ in -mould labelling, 
possibly recycled  (with 
downgrading) 
Moulded pulp / PHA x   x X   4.9% 
SRM upcycling into cosmetic packaging, textiles and composites 
 
Personal care  
flowpack 
PET/PE/EVOH/PE, landfilled/ 
incinerated  
rbioPET / protein (opt. met.) / bio -
adhesive / protein / (opt. met) r-bioPE 
x  x x X   Included 
above* 
Personal care  
injected jar 
PP, possibly recycled (with 
downgrading) 
r-PLA, r -bioPE with PET fibrils, 
microfibrillar reinforcement 
  x x   x 4.4 % 
Small injected  
bottles  
HDPE, in -mould labelling, 
possibly recycled (with 
downgrading) 
Fibrillar reinforced rPLA  / (in mould PHA 
labelling) 
x   x   x 4.9% 
 Packaging textile  
(e.g. reusable  
shopping bag) 
PP woven / non -woven, 
landfilled/ incinerated 
r-PLA / microfibrillar reinforced, 
enzymated r -PLA, bioPE, bioPET / 
microfibrillar reinforced; coating for 
reducing microplastics 
  x   X  <2.3 % 
Composites (e.g. 
transport boxes) 
Virgin polymers + textile fibers, 
landfilled/ incinerated 
r-biopolymers (rPLA, rPET…) , recovered 
fibres / microfibrilar reinforcement 
  x x  X  NA 
Total share of packaging materials for which PRESERVE is relevant :  71% 
 
 
 
53 Biobased solutions already exist in case of trays and bottles but have minor market presence, and PRESERVE materials will have improved properties in comparison. 
54 Kunststoffe international 8/2015; G.L.Robertson (2011). Chapter 20 Manley’s Technology of Biscuits, Crackers and Cookies (Fourth edition) 
55 The gradual replacement of PE or PET by the current drop in bioplastics counterparts and then by upcycled PHA and PLA as their volumes grow and price decrease helps 
initially securing a realistic high market share while in the future further helping reduce microplastics release on case if accidental littering in complement to finishing treatment. 
56 Figures for different product types adapted from “Flexible food packaging in Europe, rep ort of GVM, 2017”, “AMI Multilayer flexible packaging conference 2019, V ienna; 
Borealis / Peter Niedersüß”, https://blog.euromonitor.com/smaller-is-better-as-global-packaging-growth-is-shaped-by-variation-in-pack-sizes/, accessed 29.11.19, 18:00 
57 Meat will be considered in link with the ESG members and in particular Manor farm 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 15 of 70 
Table 1.5: Results of the patent search focused on the main innovation area to be generated in PRESERVE 
Patent (title, reference, status) Relevance to Preserve Impact on PRESERVE 
Whey protein coated films, PCT / IB 2011 / 05327, granted EU and 
JP  
Patented process to coat proteins 
while maximising barrier properties  
Exclusive joint license to IRIS 
securing FTO and exploitation. 
Polypeptide having a polyester degrading activity and uses thereof 
PCT/EP2015 /074222 & PCT/EP2016/055348; Method for recycling 
plastic products PCT/EP2014 /078877 & PCT/EP2013/074173; 
Process of recycling mixed PET plastic articles PCT/ 
EP2015/060521, granted in some countries 
Different approaches to facilitate 
degradation of polymers including 
the embedding of enzymes 
Patents from Carbios, shareholder 
of partner CARB, therefore giving 
a cutting edge to the consortium 
Concrete reinforcement with fibers. BE patent application resulting 
from private project with inventors from CTB (HBC.2016.0344) 
Use of microfibrils for materials 
reinforcement 
Specific for concrete so not 
blocking our novel upcycling 
approach. No other patent 
returned on the use of self-
reinforcement. 
Degradation of biologically degradable polymers using enzymes. 
PCT/ EP1998/000585, granted EP March 2008 
Use of (certain fungal and yeast) 
enzymes for degradation  
Patent from Bayer using different 
classes of enzymes than those 
planned in PRESERVE. 
Method for enzymatic depolymerization of PLA and method for 
producing PLA using depolymerization product 
PCT/JP2003/009676, EP withdrawn  
Enzymatic depolymerization of PLA 
and subsequent repolymerization 
Patent specific on a process 
different to PRESERVE's and 
withdrawn, FTO not at risk. 
Belgian patent application 2020/5152 “Dispersion aqueuse de 
biopolymères thermoplastiques”, March 2020 
Solvent-free PHA coating 
formulations Background from partner CTB 
Patent: 6,025,028, Polyhydroxyalkanoate Coatings, expired in 2018  
PHA tested for paper coating 
applying molten PHA as sealing 
layer on paper but with limited 
barrier properties 
Different process (extrusion 
coating) with a low industrially 
feasible process 
Biodegradable coated substrates PCT/US2001/018746, EP 
withdrawn 
PHA applied on paper, fabric, 
thread, yarn 
Different process: extrusion 
coating, lamination 
Multilayer film having an active oxygen barrier layer with radiation 
enhanced active barrier properties. PCT/US2008/073620, pending 
eBeam treatment to improve 
oxygen barrier 
Patent specific for multilayer films 
using active O2 scavengers so 
different technology 
PLA adhesive compositions and methods for their preparation and 
use. PCT/US2013/070399; Use of polylactide and methods of 
manufacturing a heat-sealed paper or board container or package. 
PCT/IB2015/050489, granted in some countries 
Adhesives or adhesives eBeam 
crosslinking 
Specific on PLA as adhesive or 
coating, which is normally not the 
format we will use PLA. 
Self-adhesive of renewable origin with temperature-stable 
adhesive power, EP2865728, granted; PSA of renewable origin with 
temperature-stable adhesive power EP2865694, granted- 
Biodegradable hot-melt adhesive composition. EP2245102, 
withdrawn  - Two-component lamination adhesive of renewable 
origin. EP2917256, granted. - HMPSA for removable self-adhesive 
label. EP2164916, granted- Adhesive composition for removable 
pressure sensitive adhesive label. EP2109647, granted. 
Different adhesives technologies 
based on renewable materials , 
biodegradable composition based 
on PLA , vegetable oil or non bio -
based adhesives for easy label 
removal 
Owned by BOSTIK, know-how 
related to PRESERVE- some 
adhesives developed for 
PRESERVE may build on these 
patent 
2. Impact
2.1 Expected impacts  
PRESERVE will deliver high socioeconomic impacts for the food packaging value chain, in addition to environmental 
and health impacts for our society  as the result of industry adoption of new advanced bio -based packaging with 
upcycled EoL. Table 2.1 highlights PRESERVE contributions to the expected impacts in the addressed call topic. 
Table 2.1 How PRESERVE will generate the impact expected in the CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 topic 
Impact  How PRESERVE addresses the expected impacts 
Viable 
roadmap to 
prove that by 
2030 60% of 
the plastics 
still to be used 
for packaging 
of foods and 
drinks with 
short-shelf life 
will be 
produced 
from 
renewable 
sources; 
A detailed strategy outlining the steps to develop the PRESERVE solutions from TRL6+ to TRL9  will be 
established capturing the key findings a nd remaining knowle dge gaps arising from the project. This 
document will conclude with a set of concrete recommendations contributing to a viable European 
roadmap for food and drink packaging upcycling and production from renewable sources. As discussed 
in terms of innovation potential (section 1.4), to maximise the quick market entry of our solutions, we 
have selected among drop-in bioplastics that are upgraded by coatings, enzymes or other approaches 
and which will be easily integrated in existing product ion lines and expan ded to other bio -based 
materials. We cover the needs of short (refrigerated juice, milk, yogurt, cheese , meat…) and longer 
(chocolate, snacks) shelf life products with our end users DANONE, MDLZ, BDF, but also, in our 
preliminary ESG: Manor Farm, CocaCola5 and the members of associations reaching out to many SMEs 
like FlandersFood, Pack4food, Packcluster, IVLV, ZLV, who all together manufacture a broad range of 
food & drink products with different requirements an d major market shares. Their early adoption of 
PRESERVE solutions will serve as a lighthouse for other segments of the value chain and smaller brand 
owners to shift to upcycled bioplastics. Following our exploitation strategy (which will be developed in 
WP7), we expect our PRESERVE solutions to reach the market and have the technical potential to 
substitute more than 60% of the packaging materials by 2030 (see Table 1.4). KPI-I1: prototypes of 
PRESERVE packaging demo nstrators successfully produced at TRL5/6 representative of >60% of the 
market needs, KPI-I2: PRESERVE 2030 roadmap for bio-packaging sector upcycling reflects the partners’ 
exploitation intentions and is validated by external experts in the ESG in terms of viability. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 16 of 70 
Increase in 
new upgraded 
waste 
recycling 
facilities via 
bio-
technological 
or biochemical 
methods; 
The PRESERVE EoL scenarios (including reprocessing after enzymatic delamination but also enzymatic 
recycling and functionalization of recovered oligomers or enhanced biodegradation through 
enzymation) will contribute to innovative routes for biotechnological recycling met hods. In addition, 
the ability to sort the different developed materials will be demonstrated combining innovative 
photonic approaches and a pilot plant for tailored multilayer material delamination will be built in WP4. 
This, in turn, will guarantee that our circular renewably sourced packaging solutions and derived 
upcycled applications can contribute to reduce resources depletio n and improve environmental 
sustainability by being not only recyclable but also actually recycled  (see more details in the 
Environmental Impact section). KPI-I3: sorting feasible for at least 90% of the developed materials; KPI-
I4: 3 new bio-enabled recycling routes established at TRL5-6 
Increased 
awareness 
among 
European 
citizens of 
products and 
materials 
upcycling 
capacity; 
The PRESERVE consumer perception and acceptance studies , our illustrative ecolabels as well as our 
consumer training material and  educational events will increase the awareness of European 
consumers about (upcycling of) bio -based packaging materials and thus raise their commitment to 
purchase responsibly and to motivate them to properly collect, sort (if needed), and dispose of their 
packaging. The project upcycling food and drink packaging results w ill be made available to final 
consumers, scientific and industrial community  through a comprehensive series of dissemination 
activities and events (which will also include social media con tent dissemination, which is highly 
effective for reaching the citi zen) but also consumer perception studies in WP7. Thus, the social and 
environmental awareness of the citizen community will be enhanced. Furthermore, safety aspects will 
also be highlighted. Along its core mission, EUBP, covering the provision of required biopolymers-based 
solutions, will also help in raising public and societal environmental awareness and policy outreach 
that could further encourage the adoption of our new bio -based solutions (see more details later in 
section 2.1 Impact on consumers and consumer choice ). KPI-I5: At least 4 educational and 
dissemination events involving >200 consumers, scientific and industrial community members. 
Novel 
standards and 
certification 
schemes to be 
applied 
together with 
market pull 
measures such 
as public 
procurement 
and tax 
exemptions; 
The relevant and applicable standardisation and certification landscape will be thoroughly assessed as 
further listed and discussed in the paragraph “Standardisation as essential tool to reach the market” 
in section 2.2 and in task 7.2. In terms of policy and regulation, the project will promote the uptake of 
novel standards for environmentally sustainable bio-sourced food and drink packaging, based on the 
results obtained in the project  from non-food competing primary resources or SRM . PRESERVE will 
also promote the selection of materials with zero release of plastics  (thanks to incentives towards 
recycling) and microplastics (thanks to the use of biodegradable plastics, enzymation and finishing 
treatment such as eBeam and surface coatings ) during their life cycle. This will be coupled with 
recommendations addressing government and policy makers for the implementation of certification 
and bonus/malus schemes for more environmentally sustainable products at a viable cost for the 
society over their complete life cycles. In terms of food contact approval, which is often a bottleneck 
for the introduction of new materials on the market, we will study if fast tracking and financial support 
for the preparation of the dossier  could be proposed for ecodesigned packaging providing 
demonstrated improved environmental credentials contributing to reaching the goals of the EU Plastic 
strategy in a Circular Economy. Novel certificates and ecolabels  to be used by both producers and 
retailers will be designed. The DSS developed in the project will also greatly serve this objective as it 
will include a ‘policy’ user type. Targeted outreach and communication actions & events and a set o f 
recommendations included in the PRESERVE roadmap will also support this goal. KPI-I6: Delivery of at 
least 2 fact-based, scientifically backed white papers on PRESERVE materials vs. current benchmarks 
and advantages of considering upcycling strategies in  waste management reaching out to  EU policy 
decision-makers. 
Indicators and 
metrics, with 
baseline 
values, 
including 
demonstration 
activities 
stated  
The developed upcycling approach will be upscaled and applied in the production of at least 10 
packaging formats (of which 5 will be from SRMs) that will be validated for packing food, drin ks and  
personal care products as well as “secondary/tertiary” durable transport packaging and will serve as  
flagships for the packaging, the biobased and the recycling com munities. KPI-I7: see targeted KPIs in 
section 1.1, progresses beyond SoA in section 1.4 and the market and technical metrics for each 
demonstrator detailed in Table 1.4 and table in task 5.1 respectively. 
Support the 
European 
Strategy for 
Plastics in a 
CE. […] 
participate in 
joint activities 
[…] such as 
clustering of 
projects, 
participation 
in workshops, 
exploitation 
and 
dissemination 
etc.  
PRESERVE builds upon a number of past and ongoing projects (Table 1.3) which are supporting the BBI 
and European Strategy for Plastics in a Circular Economy objectives. As part of task 7.4, PRESERVE will 
aim at clustering with projects fund ed under the topic BIOTEC -09-2020, as well as proj ects funded 
under related topics ( SC1-BHC-36-2020; SFS-21-2020; BG-07-2020; FNR-06-2020; FNR-05-2020; CE-
SC5-24-2020; CE -SC5-28-2020; CE -SC5-25-2020; CE -SC5-29-2020, CE -SC5-30-2020…). This task will 
foresee the implementation of common dissemination activities among others including workshops, 
conferences, etc. Furthermore, the project will contribute to the continuity of different plastic 
multipliers initiatives and build upon the vi rtual community “Circular Plastics Helix”  that has been 
launched by CHX wi thin the MultiCycle project (also coordinated by IRIS). In addition, PRESERVE will 
engage with the relevant policy and standardization bodies to act as a catalyst for innovation-related 
actions but also with selected associations beyond the consortium (ESG) to foster the creations of cross 
sectorial connections with PRESERVE project results, supporting the transition to a post -petroleum 
society by use of sustainable bio -based materials across the whole bio -based value chain. Finally, we 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 17 of 70 
will also link to other activities of BBI-JU, as well as to the SPIRE PPP, SUSCHEM, CEFIC, Plastics Europe, 
etc. (see more details in the Environmental Impact section) KPI-I8: Interactions with at least 15 relevant 
projects and organization/participation in at least 4 joint events. 
Cross-cutting 
Priority: Socio-
economic 
science and 
humanities 
(SSH) 
PRESERVE will include the SSH dimension and gender aspects from the project definition up to project 
implementation, in order to improve consumer acceptance, raise awareness and increase consumer 
preferences towards purchasing and recycling food and drink products with bio -based packaging. 
Interestingly, the consideration of environmental factors on material selection vary depending on the 
gender, as well as the concern on their EoL58. It is especially relevant as women are still predominantly 
involved both in the purchase and wa ste sorting of packaging at household level . Furthermore, in 
terms of societal and environmental impacts of the new materials, a SLCA and LCA will be performed. 
SSH research indeed offers unique insights into how consumers’ environmental values are shaped and 
represented as well as on the symbolism and feelings associated with sustainable bio-based packaging 
debates. It can also help to develop creative ways to support enhanced engagement with diverse 
audiences and communities about bio -based packaging challenges. The project will hos t co-creation 
and ‘knowledge days’ and include presentations and a discussion with scientific, industrials and 
consumers’ communities. The Circular Plastics Helix will involve and transfer relevant knowledge 
among all potential stakeholders. 
Cross-cutting 
Priority: Blue 
Growth 
In line with the CE Package, the bioeconomy and plastics strategies, and Europe’s Green Deal 59, 
PRESERVE will contribute to reducing marine litter (especially though upcycling routes that, thanks to 
concerted efforts along the value chain, can create value from SRM and therefore incentive the 
prevention of accidental littering, which through the degradation of abandoned items is responsible 
for at least 69% of secondary microplastics60) and to reducing microplastics release throughout the life 
span of products. Since migration tests in short shelf life packed products show a limited microplastics 
release during the food storage itself, we chose to co ncentrate on solutions for the upcycled durable 
demonstrators to reduce microfibres detachment from textile ( laundering of synthetic clothes lead s 
to 35% of primary microplastics) whose fate is then to pollute the sea and come back to our food chain 
through salt, tap water or fish consumption. Furthermore, marine biodegradation tests will be carried 
out to understand which of our solutions could mitigate marine littering.  
PRESERVE is therefore aligned with the EU Marine Strategy Framework Directive 61, aiming to protect 
the marine ecosystem, and the Commission Communication on International Ocean Governance62. To 
maximise its impact, PRESERVE will cluster with the Blue Growth EU Funded projects (some of which 
with partners’ participation) aiming to reduce le akages of plastic to the marine environment and the 
marine litter across all stages of the waste hierarchy and product lifespan: SEALIVE, PERSEUS, CleanSea, 
MARLISCO, DEVOTES, etc. (see more details in the Environmental Impact section).     
Innovation and Economic Impact:  
The project, through a systemic and multidis ciplinary approach, will test and demonstrate possibilities to increase 
the performance of bio-based packaging and of the recovered materials thereof to establish new viable supply and 
value chains in the bio-based economy. To this end biopolymer suppliers, packaging converters to end users of the 
new biobased products, waste management companies, and technological support are involved in the consortium.  
The market for innovative bio-based products in Europe possesses immense potential for growth to 2030 and beyond 
especially as a replacement for fossil-based products (chemicals, plastic, etc.) . This growth will predominantly be 
driven by rising consumer awareness in relation to the sustainable use of resources and environmental protection. 
PRESERVE aims at boosting the competitiveness of the industries involved in the transformation of sustainable, EU-
sourced primary and secondary raw materials to positively impact the EU economy and society.  
Bio-based polymers produced in PRESERVE target various high-volume end-use packaging applications including 
dairy film trays, drink containers, snack flow packs, personal care jars/ bottles and flow packs, packaging textiles and 
composites e.g. for transport boxes. As such, the PRESERVE project addresses an extremely wide range of industries 
including biopolymers (e.g. biomass production and conversion), plastics manufacturing and converting, packaging, 
food, drink and personal care industries, etc. 
Based on a recent study published by McKinsey63 on how the COVID-19 crisis will likely impact the packaging industry, 
PRESERVE relevance is expected to increase : i) More focus on hygiene aspects, less on re -usable packaging: this 
implies that more items will only be used once, thus increasing the need for recycling and upcycling; ii) Increased e-
commerce, thus increased need for packaging linked to delivery of groceries and other goods: PRESERVE upcycled 
‘Carrier boxes’ are a sustainable solution to fill this need; iii) Disrupted supply chains, need to avoid the reliance on 
importing fundamental goods: PRESERVE uses bio-based polymers for which the feedstock is sourced locally and will 
strengthen the EU production capacity . In contrast, the oil prices decrease makes the competition harder for bio-
 
58 OECD Reports 38/2011: Gender differences in environmental related behaviour 
59 https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/european-green-deal-communication_en.pdf  
60 https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/society/20181116STO19217/microplastics-sources-effects-and-solutions 
61 https://ec.europa.eu/info/research-and-innovation/research-area/oceans-and-seas/eu-marine-strategy-framework-directive_en 
62 https://ec.europa.eu/maritimeaffairs/sites/maritimeaffairs/files/join-2016-49_en.pdf 
63 McKinsey & Company ‘The packaging industry and the coronavirus pandemic’ (April 2020) 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 18 of 70 
based materials and is a  disadvantage for PRESERVE but it is not 
expected to continue till PRESERVE market entry. 
Bioplastics & Biopolymers: Bioplastics currently represent about 1-
2% of the c.a. 320 million tonnes of plastic produced annually  
globally. However, as demand is rising and with more sophisticated 
biopolymers, applications, and products emerging, the market will 
experience steady growth. Europe is the largest bioplastics & 
biopolymers market and is one of the major producers of plastics 
(Fig.2.164,65). According to the latest m arket data compiled by 
European Bioplastics  (EUBP) in cooperation with Nova -Institute, 
global bioplastics production capacity is set to increase from around 
2.05 million tonnes in 2017 to approximately 4.5 million tonnes in 2022. Today, the European bioeconomy sectors 
are worth €2 trillion in annual turnover and account for 22 million jobs in the EU, which is 9% of the EU’s workforce66. 
Bioplastics have been designated a lead market by the EC. In line with the green movement, we are seeing 
manufacturers increasingly shift from traditional plastics to bioplastics, and analysts show bioplastic market growth 
at impressive CAGRs of 17.5% or more between 2016 and 202067. At the current stage of technology, it is estimated 
that 5-10% of the current plastics could be substituted by bio-based plastics, whereas by 2030 a replacement as high 
as 85% could be achieved thanks to upcycling strategies for bioplastics68. PRESERVE developed materials will help to 
replace popularly used multilayer petrochemical packaging products that are very difficult to recycle. Increased use 
of bio-based products can help accelerate the shift towards a more sustainable EU economy  (in line with Europe’s 
Green Deal), creating both jobs and growth, where dependency on fossil-
based carbon is reduc ed and in turn CO2 emissions. In making this 
transition, bio -based goods will increasingly offer consumer products 
with enhanced sustainability profiles and new functionalities. PRESERVE 
will boost the future market uptake of high -performance sustainable 
innovative bio-based packaging products with enhanced properties for 
food & drink, personal care, textile and composite solutions.  
The food and drink packaging sector, the main target of PRESERVE, covers 
58% of the total bioplastics market 69. The share of consumer goods 
(including the expected use of  PRESERVE SRMs for personal care 
packaging) sits at around 16% of the total bioplastics market70.  
Bio-based Coatings Market:  Sustainability is a key objective for Europe’s coatings industry to allow the sector to 
sharply reduce its CO 2 emissions by switching to materials with a minimum carbon footprint and help to  conserve 
resources through reuse and recycling of products and their ingredients. In line with the legislation, the EU coatings 
supply chain is stepping up its efforts to ensure that a much higher proportion of its products are derived from bio 
or renewable sources. The EU has set a target for 30% of existing petrochemical-derived chemicals and materials to 
be replaced by bio-based and biodegradable alternatives by 2030. This objective is in line with the long-term aim in 
Europe of establishing low -carbon, circular economies with substantial reductions in CO 2 emissions and greater 
reliance on its own raw materials with increased recycling (in some cases coated items can be recycled directly due 
to the low amount of coating, but in other cases, the coating removal needs to be done first, as increasingly studied, 
e.g. in the H2020 Decoat project, table 1.3 ) and reuse of mater ials to achieve zero waste. Demand  for bio-based 
coatings and its corresponding European and global market is on the rise.  
The global packaging coatings market was estimated at around US$ 2.9 billion in 2017, and is expected to reach US$ 
3.9 billion by 20 23, registering a CAGR of 4.6% fro m 2017 to 2023 71. The major factors driving the growth of the 
market are the increasing demand for functional foods packaging and the ability in some cases for more resource 
efficient coated flexible packaging to replace rigid counterparts.  
Barrier Coatings segment: The global transparent barrier films market is valued at US$ 8.7 billion in 2020 and is 
expected to reach US$ 10.9 billion by the end of 2026, corresponding to a CAGR of 3.2% during 2021 -202672. 
Transparent barrier films , using e.g. eBeam physica l vapor deposition and plasma -enhanced chemical vapo ur 
 
64 https://www.european-bioplastics.org/new-market-data-2019-bioplastics-industry-continues-dynamic-grow-over-the-next-five-years/ 
65 https://www.greendotbioplastics.com/growth-bioplastics-industry-means-investors-economy/ 
66 Source: European Bioplastics Association 
67 http://energyandgold.com/2016/03/10/an-enormous-investment-opportunity-in-a-rapidly-growing-space/ 
68 PRO BIP study conducted by the University of Utrecht in 2009 https://docs.european-bioplastics.org/publications/EUBP_FAQ_on_bioplastics.pdf 
69 http://www.pci-mag.com/features/featureall-wrapped-up-canadean-analyses-the-global-packaging-market-4571485/featureall-wrapped-up-canadean-analyses-the-global-
packaging-market-4571485-466171.html 
70 http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/global-bioplastic-packaging-market-2014-2018-237009271.html 
71 https://www.alliedmarketresearch.com/packaging-coatings-market 
72 https://www.marketwatch.com/press-release/global-transparent-barrier-films-market-2020-industry-outlook-top-countries-data-comprehensive-insights-growth-and-forecast-
2026-2020-02-05 
  
Figure 2.1 Breakdown of the biobased 
polymers industry per application sector  
 
Figure 2.2 Global Production capacity of bioplastics 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 19 of 70 
deposition and coating technologies, prevent permeation of gases including water vapo ur. Thanks to the barrier 
layer, these products exhibit extended shelf life and are less susceptible to environmental factors such as moisture 
and UV radiation. Furthermore, food packed in barrier packaging contains lower amounts of preservatives compared 
to canned goods, which responds to the increasing health awarenes s of consumers. Japan has the largest global 
export volume and manufacturers in the transparent barrier films market, while Europe was the second sales volume 
market for these films in 2016. Notably, the major restraint that could hinder the market growth is the competition 
with substitutes such as aluminu m foil. The food segment accounted for the largest share of barrier coatings in 
201673. In addition to increased consumption of processed and ready to eat food products, rapid urbanization or 
even the recent COVID crisis leading to greater hygiene requirements for served products, are all drivers boosting 
consumer demand for packed food. PRESERVE will be applying previously developed oxygen barrier bio -based 
coatings that will be used in new materials combinations to increase their posterior recyclability and biodegradability. 
Bio-based Adhesives Market: The bio-based adhesives market 
(Fig.2.374) is growing across the globe due to the demand by 
various industries such as packaging, pharmaceutical, 
woodwork and construction, severe environmental 
regulations fo r petrochemical adhesives, the instabilities in 
the rate of petrol -based ingredients and environmental 
considerations at EoL, such as biodegradability . The market 
for bio -based adhesives  is expected to grow at a CAGR of 
more than 4% until 202575. Plastic and fibre-based packaging 
and are the most important application industry for bio-based adhesive, where they are used for manufacturing rigid 
cardboard boxes, multilayer films, tapes and labels, etc. as bio-based adhesives increase the performance of product, 
binding strength, durability and elasticity. Regulations increasingly supporting  the use of bio -based products 
influence the market. The technological innovation and research in the biotechnology industry supports the global 
adoption of bio-based adhesives for packaging and promotes the entry of new suppliers and vendors into the bio -
based adhesive for packaging market76. PRESERVE will develop removable biobased PU and protein adhesives to be 
applied in new packaging structures to replace fossil-based counterparts.  
Food & Drink Packaging: It is by far the widest market for polymers (approximately 40% of the worldwide polymer 
production goes into these applications77). Since most of the polymers used in packaging are derive from fossil-based 
sources, the consumption of these sources in this field along is enormous. Globally, the packaging industry is growing 
at a 4% CAGR78. The growing scope of packaging in various products, especially in consumer goods and the food & 
beverages industr ies, is estimated to fu rther drive growth of the globally bio -based packaging market  as an 
alternative to conventional polymers, a source  of non -finite resource s but also thanks to  better and improved 
properties and minimised environmental impact. The consortium 
expects that the materials developed in PRESERVE, thanks to their 
superior proper ties, have the potential to substitute more than 
60% of the food & drinks packaging currently produced from fossil 
plastics by 2030 (see table 1.4). A detailed strategy outlining the 
steps to  advance the PRESERVE results to the market will be 
developed under Task 7. 9, together with a set of 
recommendations contributing to a viable European roadmap for 
the PRESERVE project results market uptake and in general for 
food and drink packaging upcycl ing and production from 
renewable sources. 
Personal Care (PC) and Cosmetic Packaging Market:  The global personal care 
and cosmetic packaging market was valued at US$ 29.20 billion in 2019 and is 
projected to reach a value of US$ 48.91 billion by 2030, with  a CAGR of 4.8% 
from 2020-203079. Efficient and suitable packaging is essential for all types of 
cosmetics80. Personal Care and Cosmetic packaging players need to diversify 
their product portfolio  following c onsumer preferences, product 
 
73 https://www.marketresearchfuture.com/reports/transparent-barrier-packaging-films-market-4098 
74 https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/bioadhesive-market-16386893.html 
75 https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/bio-based-adhesives-market 
76 https://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/bio-based-adhesives-packaging-market.html 
77 https://matmatch.com/learn/material/materials-used-in-food-packaging 
78 https://www.packaging-labelling.com/articles/different-types-of-packaging-methods  
79 https://www.nextmsc.com/report/cosmetics-packaging-market 
80 https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/cosmetic-packaging.asp 
 
Figure 2.5 Personal Care & Cosmetic 
packaging market value share by material 
 
Figure 2.4 Global packaging Market forecasts 
Figure 2.3 Global bioadhesives market by region (US$ Bn) 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 20 of 70 
characteristics, and material compatibility. Globally, some of the plastic packaging products that are widely used by 
manufacturers of cosmetics are bottles, jars, squeezable tubes and containers. In terms of volume, hair care, 
deodorants, and personal care segments are the largest contributors to this market. The demand for tamper-evident 
closures, sprays, and pumps is expected to lead to demand for materials with high-barrier properties that can provide 
greater protection, such as plastics, which will drive the growth of this market. The inert and flexible nature, as well 
as compatibility for versatile design options, have led plastic to be an ideal choice for packaging manufacturers, given 
the highly dynamic and demanding nature of the PC packaging industry. Our PRESERVE upcycling strategy will boost 
bio-based packaging fr om primary and especially secondary resources  for non-food contact applications , while 
improving properties and application potential. Thanks to the synergies with food & drink packaging, it is expected 
that PRESERVE will provide a significant amount of materials and a massive impact on the packaging of personal care 
& cosmetic products. 
Bioplastic Textiles Market: The g lobal bioplastic textile 
market revenue is set to cross  US$ 1.4 billion by 2025 achiev ing 
4%+ CAGR from 2019 to 2025. Biodegradable plastics such as 
polylactic acid, poly(glycolide), and polyhydroxyalkanoate are in 
massive demand across the textile sector  due to the growing 
customer demand for biodegradable items and the international 
trend fo r curbing environmental pollution 81. The textile and 
clothing industry is under pressure to demonstrate that its 
products and production processes are sustainable. A significant 
role is played by the raw materials (feedstocks/fibres) used and 
how they are produced and sourced. Currently the EU textile 
industry is over 90% dependent on non -EU sourced fibres and 
feedstocks. Most synthetic fibres, if not directly sourced from 
outside Europe, are made from non-European fossil feedstocks or 
from cotton, wool and silk. With an inevitable shift from fossil -
based to more renewable, bio -based fibres and the advent of 
more circular and local value chain models, the EU textile industry 
is in need of a sound long-term strategy for a sustainable, safe 
and cost -effective s upply of local bio -based fibres and 
feedstocks. Many opportunities exist both in the field of 
natural fibres through revival of traditional fibre crops (e.g. 
hemp) as well as through bio -processing of renewable 
feedstocks including waste from agri- or aquaculture, forestry, 
food or even CO 2 capture and use, as well as from the use of 
recycled materials . However, the current higher cost for 
production of bioplastics compared to fossil -based o nes 
represents an obstacle for wider market entry; this could be 
mitigated by innovations in bioplastics processing and recycling and the decline in the price of bioplastics82. Europe 
is the largest bio -based product consumer, which is driven by strong government support . The massive use of 
bioplastic in textiles will also be motivated by its functionalities and biomass utilities. The clothing end-user segment 
will hold a prominent share of over 45% of the global bioplastic textile market in 202583. PRESERVE has the ambition 
to substitute conventional plastics by (preferably) recycled bio-based ones in consumer products such as textiles 
packaging (woven and non-woven shopping bags for example), some of those having home composting compatibility 
and using a surface finish to reduce the release of microplastics, a common limitation with conventional textiles.  
Bioplastic Composite Market: The Global Bioplastic Composites Industry was valued at US$ 21,340 M in 2018 and it 
is further estimated to grow at a 11% CAGR to reach US$ 44,980 M by 2025 84. Since sustainability aspects are 
increasingly important in society, politics and business , bio-based plastics are also increasingly taken into 
consideration in a wide variety of industries. The positive properties of bio -based composites include their special 
appearance, touch and low weight. However, the main motivation for the rising interest in bio-based plastics is their 
sustainable image due to their extremely small carbon footprint . Bio -based composites have three principal 
applications. They are relatively widespread in the construction sector, preferably used as a material for terrace 
decking, fences and also façades. In the automotive sector bio-based composites are primarily used for saving weight 
 
81 https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/bioplastic-textile-market-value-to-hit-1-4-billion-by-2025-global-market-insights-inc-300859385.html 
82 https://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/bioplastic-textile-market.html; https://www.zionmarketresearch.com/report/bioplastic-textile-market 
83 https://www.marketwatch.com/press-release/bioplastic-textile-market-statistics-2019-2025-share-forecasts-trends-growth-drivers-2019-09-05 
84 https://www.marketwatch.com/press-release/bioplastic-composites-market-outlook-2025-size-forecasts-demand-competitive-analysis-growth-factors-key-players-2019-11-12 
 
Figure 2.6 Bioplastic Textile Market, 2019-2027 
 
Figure 2.7 Bioplastic Textile Market, 2018-2025 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 21 of 70 
in car interiors. In shop-fittings and furniture-making, they score assets with their appealing touch as well as attractive 
design. Quite a number of consumer goods today already consist of bio-based composites and are manufactured by 
injection moulding or 3D printing. Overall, it is estimated that the market share of bio -based composites in Europe 
will rise from an annual volume of over 400,000 t in 2017 to more than 800,000 t by 2027 85. PRESERVE will take a 
small but relevant share in this biocomposites market. While most biobased composites are composed of natural 
fibres, PRESERVE will focus on composites in which both the reinforcement fibre as well as the matrix consist of bio-
based thermoplastics. These types of composites offer numerous advantages such as low weight, easy recyclability, 
greater ease of processing, improved impact resistance, etc.  
Contribution to improving the innovation capacity and the integration of new knowledge:  
PRESERVE addresses a range of industries, including biomass/chemicals/polymer sectors, plastics converting and 
manufacturing, materials designers, packaging manufacturers and end-users, all of them benefiting from the project 
results. Polymer manufacturers and converters are the primary beneficiaries of the results. In Europe they represent 
around 50,000 companies- the vast majority of which are SMEs- and directly employing over 1.6 million workers. 
With the results of the PRESERVE project, the packaging industry will have the possibility to switch to more 
environmentally friendly and less hazardous materials, resulting in products with equal performance and improved 
properties and sustainability. This will result in great business opportunities reinforced by current bioplastics market 
trends, the growth in our target end use sectors , increased visibility, and policy aw areness and support for such 
solutions. Indeed, we tap into the massive EU plastic business (€350 billion turnover per annum). Plastics demand in 
Europe is ca. 50 million tonnes  (MT), almost 40%, or ca. 20 MT, of this is used for packaging , of which 17.3% is for 
food trays and films 86. Worldwide, over 90 MT of textile are produced, ca. one quarter  goes to technical textiles. 
Within the technical textiles where EU has a leading position, so-called packtex, represents ca. 8%, which means that 
worldwide around 2 MT of textiles are used for packaging (assumed at 30% in EU)87. PRESERVE estimates to reach a 
market penetration of 0.5% of these plastic segments (totalling a potential of 4 MT per year) in 2030 in EU, generating 
already close to €40 million turnover and ~175 new jobs88 (later justified in table 2.5) within a previously discussed 
much greater potential once sufficient production capacity is reached  (see section 1.4 ). Such figures would be 
reinforced at the downstream (end users and upcyclers) level who benefit from new unique products. Besides direct 
partners’ exploitation, broad deployment will be achieved through further licensing  and business alliances with  
additional converters. Estimates about how partners respectively expect to grow their business and create jobs with 
the new solutions  are provided in section 2.2. By being first to market, the derived packaging producers gain an 
invaluable head-start ahead of the global competition, and Europe will secure a strong foothold in the market with 
a strong branding that is scientifically backed (as a result of this RIA). 
From a socio-economic point of view, the European bioplastics industry has the potential for immense employment 
growth potential. From 23,000 employees in 2013, the b ioplastics industry is expected to  grow to 300,000 high -
skilled jobs in 2030 according to EUBP89. The bioplastics industry could provide new impulses for the development 
of rural areas in Europe by presenting diversification opportunities for the agricultur al sector and consequently 
contribute to the reindustrialization  and employment growth in Europe. PRESERVE is targeted towards boosting 
European competitiveness and impact on society.  
Through the development of new high -performance biobased packaging, PRESERVE will have a positive impact on 
various manufacturing sectors, such as packaging, textiles and composites fields, as well as recycling companies and 
the overall plastic industry , the  circularity of which  will greatly progress given the high share of t he targeted 
applications. According to Plasti csEurope85, in 2018, 32.5% of plastic waste was recycled in Europe; nevertheless,  
landfill and incineration are still dominant treatments for plastic post -consumer waste. The recently adopted EC 
Plastics Strategy aims at decoupling plastics production from  virgin materials, reducing their leakage into the 
environment, improving the economics and uptake of recycling to support the transition from a linear to a circular 
economy model with a target of reaching 55% r ecycling of packaging by 2030  (among 100% of the recyclable 
packaging being put on the market by then). PRESERVE improvements to enable the recycling of complex packaging 
will contribute to reach this target.  
According to recent market reports, the global  plastic recycling market, which was valued a t US$ 34 billion , is 
expected to reach a figure of US$ 60 billion by 202790, a 6.8% CAGR vs. 2019. Europe is also expected to show steady 
growth in the global market due to stringent laws pertaining to the use of  plastic in the region , awareness about 
environmental protection and restrictions o n wastes exports. In 2018, out of the 29.1Mt of plastics collected for 
 
85 https://www.composites-europe.com/en/Bio-Based-Pavilion/1034/ 
86 https://www.plasticseurope.org/application/files/6015/7908/8734/Plastics_the_facts_2019.pdf  
87 https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2019/633143/EPRS_BRI(2019)633143_EN.pdf 
88 Based on a new job being created for every €230k of growth, taking into account an estimated sales price of ca. 2€/kg  
89 https://www.european-bioplastics.org/faq-items/how-many-jobs-could-be-created-in-the-bioplastics-industry-until-2025/ 
90 https://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/plastic-recycling-market.html  
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 22 of 70 
recycling in Europe, 9.5 Mt were recycled and 12.4 Mt were incinerated  which corresponds to 38.8% of p lastic 
packaging waste85 contributing to global warming and failing to capture embedded resources . It is estimated that 
there are around  1000 recyclers employing roughly 30,000 employees  in Europe. Despite the rapid growth , the 
European plastic recycling market is saturated and has huge potential for adopting new efficient technologies if they 
are proved economical viable  especially when shifting from a recycling to an upcycling mindset to maximise the 
economic viability of the sector in line with an increa sing demand for higher per formance SRM proven in added -
value applications. Besides direct returns  from SRMs, there will also be savings due to diverting from taxed EoL 
options. Table 2.2. shows the gate fees in selected 
representative consortium countries : c omparing 
composting to (the currently common) 
incineration and landfill for e.g. multilayer 
packaging clearly shows that waste treatment fees 
would reduce in case of applying alternative 
PRESERVE EoL options91. 
Impact on consumers and consumer choice:  
With the growing consumer awareness towards greener and wiser choices from the environmental point of view, 
more attention is paid to products with a lower environmental impact. While this concerns the product as a whole 
(e.g. textiles and composites, also used in distribution chains and lacking good EoL options), it is also increasingly the 
case for packaging material, which is especially critical in the case of food, drink and personal care products. These 
products are sold  in massive quantities for short term use and the packaging must be light, resistant and 
impermeable to gases and liquids, maintain the organoleptic properties of its contents while keeping compatibility 
with existing recycling options. In terms of impact on consumers and their preferred choices, PRESERVE is expected 
to address the following aspects: 
1) favour the selection of products that are packed in biobased, recycled and/or upcycled polymeric materials, 
which per se (or on the monomeric state) do not pose a safety risk to human health d ue to migration effects ; 
Moreover, the PRESERVE packaging solutions accommodate the growing demands of green- and health- 
conscious consumers concerned about the environment92.  
2) consumers will benefit from high-quality products due to the improved preservation properties of the new 
packaging formulations developed in the PRESERVE project limiting the use of additives in the food.  
3) favour the use of natural materials to counteract consumers’ concerns about synthetic additives and substances 
migrating to food such as phthalates or bisphenol A. 
4) consumer expectations regarding recycling/upcycling, reduction of pa ckaging waste and environmental side 
effects of mishandled packaging will be fulfilled93.  
Environmental impact:  
The growth of the world economy and the  rising global population (9 billion people by 2050) are placing increasing 
pressure on the Earth’s natural resources, which are being rapidly depleted . Resources need to be managed more 
efficiently throughout their life cycle, from extraction, transport, transformation and consumption to the waste  
management step. Resource efficiency is an imperative. This requires more effective management, producing more 
value using less material and consuming  more responsibly in order to limit the risks of sc arcity and to limit the 
negative environmental impacts on our planet. A more efficient use of resources will help to achieve many of the 
EU's objectives. Circular economy strategies such as reusable resources, renewable resources, lifetime extension, 
durability, among others, must be adopted to reach an overall resource efficiency  in every sector (food being in a 
key contributor to global CO2 footprint). It will be key in making progress to deal with climate change and to achieve 
our target of reducing EU g reenhouse 
gas emissions by 80 to 95% by 2050 (1 
metric ton of bioplastic generates 
between 0.8 and 3.2 fewer MTs of CO2 
as compared to 1 MT of petroleum -
based plastics , fig 2.9  94,95). The 
advantages of bio plastics is not only 
restricted to the reduction o f 
greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs) but 
 
91 Costs for Municipal Waste Management in the EU , Final Report to Directorate General Environment, European Commission, Ecotec, 2017  
92 About 80% of European consumers want to buy products with a minimal impact on the environment (Eurobarometer survey, EC, 2013).   
93 For about 95% of European consumers, it is important that the design of products/packaging facilitates plastic recycling (Special Eurobarometer 501 Survey, 2019) 
94 Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Bioplastics and Bioelastomers 
95 www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/sustainability-and-resource-productivity/our-insights/the-new-plastics-economy-rethinking-the-future-of-plastics  
Table 2.2: Comparative EoL costs in €/T (including treatment costs minus 
revenues from products/energy obtained)  
Gate fees 
(€/T) 
Composting  Anaerobic 
Digestion 
Incineration  Landfill 
Germany 62 (40,000 tpa), 
56 (60,000 tpa) 
109 250 (50 ktpa and below) 105 
(200ktpa), 65 (600ktpa) 
35-220 
Italy 25-43 (20,000 tpa) -- 41-93 70-75 
Netherlands 80 (10,000 tpa), 
30-60 (50,000 tpa) 
50-84 70-134 107-164 
 
 
Fig.2.9 Production energy consumption and GWP of PLA compared to fossil-based polymers 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 23 of 70 
also to lower energy requirements than conventional plastics96. Life cycle analyses show that biobased plastics enable 
a significant CO 2 saving – up to carbon neutrality or even as carbon sink – compared to conventional plastics, 
depending on the feedstock, the source of energy for processing, the product and the application. This is needed to 
protect valuable ecological assets, the services they provide and the quality of life for present and future generations. 
Beyond the sourcing  phases, the PRESERVE technology will  also lead to improvements in terms of environmental 
footprint of the EoL phase. Indeed, according to the EC DG ENVI Plastic waste in the environme nt97, plastic film 
recycling could potentially save 0.74 kg CO2 eq./kg recycled plastic in comparison to landfill (>50%). In case of organic 
recycling, a drastic reduction of the carbon footprint and GHG emissions is also observed (and even more in the case 
of home composting thanks to savings in transport). The captured CO2 during biomass growth stays in the material 
over its whole lifecycle and is released at the end of its life (by biodegradation processes) closing the carbon loop.  
The PRESERVE project will contribute to decreasing the environmental Impact  of packaging goods,  textiles and 
composites by: 1) developing new bio-based polymers, coatings, adhesives and packaging materials be applied in 
different fields (food and drinks packaging, textile and composites), conferring improved performances compared to 
currently availa ble products (gas barrier and mechanical proper ties); 2) increasing, where considered the best 
approach, the biodegradability in mild conditions (e.g. home compostability of textile packaging) of the bioplastics 
and bio-packaging versus currently available products; 3) enabling recyclability thanks to delamination of adhesives 
or coatings or through enzymation and developing high end secondary applications, 4) the impact of enzymation as 
well as functional finishing treatments and eBeam treatment on the prevention of microplastics release in the 
environment as a result of littering will also be assessed; The versatile compatibility of our solutions with different 
existing and enhanced EoL options is key to adjusting to diverse packed products and formats as well as very variable 
waste management infrastructures across Europe to ultimately significantly reduce landfill, incineration and 
pollution; 5) all in all, the replacement of at least 85% of non-renewable based plastics and packaging by renewable 
resources in our new PRESERVE packaging and secondary applications is a significant step towards sustainability. LCA 
(in accordance with ISO 14040) will be used to evaluate the environmental impact over the lifecycle of t he product 
and to support focusing the efforts on efficient processing technologies already in the development phase.  
Climate Action: Action on plastics was identified as a priority in the Circular Economy Action Plan (CEAP)98, to help 
European businesses and consumers to use resources in a more su stainable way. While the CEAP will guide the 
transition of all sectors, action will focus in particular on resource -intensive sectors such as textiles, construction, 
electronics and plastics. The first-ever European Strategy for Plastics in a Circular Economy99 adopted in 2018 aims 
to transform the way plastic products are designed, used, produced and recycled in the EU. The Commission will 
develop requirements to ensure that all packa ging in the EU market is reusable or recyclable in an economically 
viable manner by 2030 , as well  as a regulatory framework for biodegradable and bio -based plastics, and will 
implement measures on single use plastics. In line with these targets, PRESERVE activities will focus on replacing 
finite resources with renewable ones and  promoting the recyclability and biodegradability of the developed bio -
based plastics and packaging . The escalating problems resulting from climate change and especially the 
environmental impacts of anthropogenic activities are receiving exponential attention. This is reflected in the political 
direction of the recently established European Green Deal. Th e European Commission’s Communication entitled 
“The European Green Deal ” (COM (2019) 640) 59 clearly outlines t he mid -term and long -term objectives  for 
“transforming the EU into a fair and prosperous society, with a modern resource-efficient and competitive economy 
where there are no net emissions of greenhouse gases in 2050 and where economic growth is decoupled f rom 
resource use”. The European Green Deal provides a roadmap with actions to boost the efficient use of resources by 
moving to a clean, circular economy; and restore biodiversity and cutting pollution. 
A sustainable product policy also has the potential to reduce waste significantly. Where waste cannot be avoided, its 
economic value must be recovered and its impact on the environment and on climate change avoided or minimised. 
This requires new legislati on, including targets and measures for tackling over -packaging and waste generation. In 
parallel, EU companies should benefit from a robust and integrated single market for secondary raw materials and 
by-products. This requires deeper cooperation across value chains, as in the case of the Circular Plastics Alliance100, 
which aims to boost the EU market for recycled plastics to 10 million tonnes by 2025. The alliance covers the full 
plastics value chains and includes over 175 organisations representing indust ry, academia and public authorities.  
PRESERVE will cooperate and align with the Circular Plastics Alliance by promoting the different parallel routes for 
the upcycling/ recycling of our circular renewably sourced packaging solutions and derived upcycled applications.  
Sustainable Development Goals impacts: The EU is rapidly becoming a leader in the global culture shift away from 
 
96 (F. Gironi a & V. Piemonte (2011). Bioplastics and Petroleum-based Plastics: Strengths and Weaknesses.) 
97  http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/studies/pdf/plastics.pdf  
98 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/pdf/new_circular_economy_action_plan.pdf 
99 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/pdf/plastics-strategy-brochure.pdf 
100 https://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/policy/circular-plastics-alliance_en 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 24 of 70 
wasteful plastic and is best placed to lead the transition to the plastics of the future. As part of the EU plastic strategy, 
Europe became the first continent to start banning many ty pes of single use plastic by 2021. The Commission will 
follow up on the 2018 plastics strategy focusing  on, among other s, measures to tackle intentionally added mic ro 
plastics (to stop the use of most microplastics and microbeads being added to cosmetics, paints, detergents, some 
farm, medical and other products) and unintentional releases of plastics, for example from textiles and tyres 
abrasion. In this context, the PRESERVE project will contribute to the prevention of microplastics release through the 
impact of enzymation and finishing treatments.  
PRESERVE actions and end-products will contribute to establishing the European Union as a global leader in tackling 
plastic pollution, while making a tangible contribution to reaching the Paris Agreement and th e 2030 Sustainable 
Development Goals 101 (SDG 12: ensuring sustainable consumption and production patterns , SDG 13: Take urgent 
action to combat climate change and its impacts  and SDG 14: conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas 
and marine resourc es, among others to which we will contribute more indirectly like SDG 2, 3, 4, 9, 15 and 17 ). 
PRESERVE will support Europe's transition towards a circular economy and the global climate commitments and the 
EU's industrial policy objectives. This project will contribute to protect our environment, reducing marine litter and 
it will support more sustainable an d safer consumption and production patterns for plastics. As discussed in table 
2.1, PRESERVE will also contribute to Blue Growth aligned initiatives and goals. 
Eco-Design: The PRESERVE project will promote a strong collaboration between application 
producers/developers/designers and recyclers, increasing knowledge of material, product and production design for 
a better subsequent reuse and recycling , thu s contributing to the promotion of circularity -by-design. As will be 
implemented through eco-design tasks and assessments in WP5 and 6, a specific Eco-design model will be developed 
in the project to reach the following goals: 
• raise a better understanding of the need to control the purity of bio-based plastic materials over their lifetime by 
applying circularity-by-design (i.e. multilayer materials which layer separation can be triggered during recycling). 
The amount of contamination at the end of a lifecycle highly determines the possibilities for re-use in a secondary 
lifecycle. Focus areas for possible re-use are: i) material selection vs. application conditions, ii) design for re-use, 
iii) design for disassembly, iv) collecting high volume waste streams, v) closed loop material streams. 
• decrease the knowledge gap between technical performance of bio-based plastic materials and their ability to be 
recycled: the project will demonstrate the use PRESERVE upcycled materials in the eco -design of recyclable 
multilayer laminates converted into a number of showcase products, e.g. pouches as well as cups, wraps/ flow 
pack as well as trays overall serving the needs of both drinks and solid food, but also in a range of SRM applications. 
Therefore, PRESERVE will guara ntee the eco -design of its final products, which will contribute to reduce the use 
phase environmental impacts and guarantee easy disassembling and low contamination with other materials. 
According to DENIMX, upcycling specialist, measures such as better eco-design and waste prevention and reuse can 
bring net savings EU -wide to businesses of up to €604 billion or 8% of their annual turnover, while reducing total 
annual greenhouse gas emissions by 2-4 %. 
Exploitation of Agricultural Wastes: PRESERVE will encourage the recycling and recovery of waste, and will generate 
public and industry awareness on considering wastes (and not solely limited to the case of plastic packaging ) as 
valuable resources as opposed to being a disposal burden. In fact, in PRESERVE the fermentation process from rice 
waste to middle chain length (mcl) PHA will be upscaled and several coatings and adhesives will also consider proteins 
from food-processing by-products. Therefore, the technological solutions proposed in PRESERVE project will enhance 
the transition towards a circular economy.  
Current programs on the management of bio -waste and renewable energies throughout Europe are basically 
coordinated a t the national level. According to the VOICES (Views, Opinions and Ideas of Citizens in Europe on 
Science) Project102, the concept of using Residues as a resource is one of the main Citizens’ ideas on how to achieve 
a ‘zero waste society’. The poor management and disposal of waste is not only a major challenge for our cities but 
also contributes to climate change, air pollution and directly affects ecosystems and species. PRESERVE contributes 
to the promotion of EU economy by a number of mechanisms: i) Valorization of waste from food/agro production 
and plastics developing innovative solutions for radical change of handling, processing and upcycling urban solid 
waste; ii) Minimization of economic resources  consumption associated with non-avoidable waste processing; iii) 
Promotion of the development of bio-based plastics  and packaging industry in the EU with high preservation 
performance to reduce food wastage  
Impact on EU policies: 
In recent years, the European Union has set important economic, environmental and societal goals which have been 
 
101 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300 
102 http://www.voicesforinnovation.eu/ 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 25 of 70 
integrated into European policies: the European Commission's Roadmap on a resource efficient Europe 103(EC, 2011), 
the Bioeconomy Strategy104 (EC, 2012) and the EU Action Plan for the Circular Economy105 (EC 2015) and the Circular 
Economy Package launched in 2017 including the aforementioned EU Strategy for Plas tics. The production of bio -
based plastics and packaging fits in all these policies a s it is expected to consume less energy and emit less carbon 
dioxide than fossil-based products. The new concept of PRESERVE takes a significant step towards the efficient  use 
of bio-based material resources and their economically viable production, thus contributing to reach the targets of 
the above-mentioned policies. In PRESERVE, bio -based raw materials will be upgraded into renewable alternatives 
to petroleum-based polymers, with bio-based plastics and packaging development technologies that will be bas ed 
on energy efficient processes and on ecological approaches and green chemistry. The 7 th Environment Action 
Programme106 (EAP) advocates for a major effort in transforming  the EU into a resource -efficient, low -carbon 
economy. It includes a special focus o n more prevention, reuse and recycling. The project is fully in line with these 
objectives. The project is also in line with the objectives of the Eco-innovation Action Plan107 (EcoAP), which focusses 
on boosting innovation that results in or aims at reducing pressures on the environment and on bridging the gap 
between innovation and the market. Considering the European Environmental Technology Action Plan 108 (ETAP), 
PRESERVE contributes to the goals of  the action plan by developing eco -efficient ways to convert bio -based raw 
materials and wastes into bio-based plastic products and supporting the development of eco-technologies promoting 
foreign investments in environmental technologies leading to increased employment and economic growth in EU.  
PRESERVE proposal objectives are consistent with the priorities indicated in the “European recycling society”109, the 
long-term vision of the thematic Strategy on the prevention and recycling of waste. It seeks to promote a ‘recycling 
society’ in Europe and provides the framework for a comprehensive revision of EU waste policy in view of the 
priorities set on prevention and recycling in the EAP. The strategy calls for the existing legal framework to be clarified, 
simplified, streamlined and also modernized with the introduction of a life-cycle analysis in policymaking. It stresses 
that progress requires a renewed emphasis on full implementation of existing legislation and better knowledge and 
information on the current situation and best practice. More ambitious waste prevention policies and common 
reference standards, as will be investigated in PRESERVE, for recycling are also needed to prevent the threat of ‘eco-
dumping’ in Europe.  
The project is also in line with the European Lead Market Initiative for bio-based products110 which points to the need 
for the fast growth of the industries producing environmentally friendly solutions and approaches, and the necessity 
for the industry to satisfy va rious end-user requirements at a competitive cost during their entire life cycle. In line 
with the Waste Framework Directive (2008/98/EC)111 and Directive 1999/31/EC on Landfill112, the proposal takes into 
account the waste hierarchy to maximize recovery and r educe waste focusing on an  eco-innovative technological 
process for a circular economy . This will help to move to a circular economy model, seeking to improve wastes 
recycling and to use waste as a resource, reducing the environmental landfills burden. Finally, the proposal is in line 
with Directive 94/62/EC113 on Packaging and Packaging Waste114 as it directly contributes to preventing or reducing 
the impact of packaging and pack aging waste on the environment and to ensur ing the functioning of the Internal 
Market. In addition, the directive contains provisions on the prevention of packaging waste, on the reuse of packaging 
and on the recovery and recycling of packaging waste. 
Barriers, obstacles and framework conditions:  
The consortium has adequately examined all the known factors that may prevent it from achieving the project’s 
goals. The success of the project and the exploitation of the results depend on  many external facto rs. The most 
important is the changing prices of the raw materials and final products, as well as energy costs. Pricing depends on 
a number of factors that are difficult to estimate, for example geopolitical crises or financial factors.  The primary 
risks/barriers related to project implementation are covered in section 3.2. The longer -term barriers and obstacles 
towards achieving impact relate to scaling the project results from TRL5-6 (for the recycling processes and packaging 
materials respectively) into widespread market replication, as following:  
1. Post -project financing . A key component of WP7 will be to prepare the case for post project financing from 
commercial or public funding sources to ensure we can complete the journey over the Innovation Gap a nd then 
 
103 https://www.eea.europa.eu/policy-documents/com-2011-571-roadmap-to 
104 https://ec.europa.eu/research/bioeconomy/index.cfm?pg=policy&lib=strategy 
105 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52015DC0614 
106 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/action-programme/ 
107 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/ecoap/frontpage_en 
108 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/ecoap/about-action-plan/etap-previous-action-plan_en 
109 https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/d70870cf-86d2-4ffb-8e88-35045db901ec 
110 https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/biotechnology/bio-based-products_en 
111 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/framework/ 
112 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A31999L0031 
113 European Parliament and Council Directive 94/62/EC of 20 December 1994 on packaging and packaging waste, Official Journal L 365 , 31/12/1994 P. 0010 – 0023, 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31994L0062:EN:HTML  
114 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX%3A31994L0062 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 26 of 70 
swiftly on through the Valley of Death. This will be supported by Life Cycle Costing (LCC) activities undertaken in WP6 
(Safety, Environmental and Economic Sustainability assessments). KNEIA is experienced in securing commercial  
investment from long term sources of finance for innovative technologies . This experience has contributed to the 
structure of the proposed plan of work. It has identified the required demonstration scales required for the various 
pathways, the setting of cost targets that mu st ultimately be based against  commodity traded fossil fuel market 
prices and, of the continual requirement to monitor and mitigate risks as they arise (both technical and economic) 
which will be undertaken in WP8 (Project Management).  
2. Technical barriers. The technical risks and mitigation strategies associated with the project delivery are covered in 
section 3.2. Any scale-up and industrialization of a technological process involves a certain level of risk. However, in 
addition there are risks that competing actions could result in protected IP that could limit the proposed innovation 
strategies. Freedom to Operate is fundamental for future exploitation.  Initial IP searches undertake n in the 
preparation of this proposal (see section 1.4) have shown that there is no existing IP conflict and that the consortium 
in fact has a rich IP portfolio to build upon in the project . However, throughout the project, as part of task 7.7, the 
consortium will employ due diligence to ensure that any future identified IP risks do not become barriers to progress.  
3. Political and regulatory environment , mainly for food contact materials (FCM) . As noted previously, various 
European directives implemented at national levels have set binding targets on coun tries to reduce their GHG 
emissions among other targets that could positively influence the uptake of the project results. Europe depends on 
imports for a significant proportion of its energy (and petroche mical derivatives) demand, especially for transport . 
Increasingly these import supplies are through state owned enterprises and employed as a foreign policy tool. The 
ambition of this project is to enable Europe to move closer towards greater independence of fuel supplies and to 
achieve this domestically at local levels across Europe. 
In addition, Plastic materials for food contact, fall within the scope of the inertia principle laid down by the article 3 
of the EC Framework Regulation No 1935/2004, which provides the harmonized legal framework by setting o ut 
general principles and safety requirements for all kinds of food contact materials (FCM). More specifically, FCMs and 
articles made out of plastics are covered by the Regulation (EU) No 10/2011 (last amendment by Regulation (EU) No 
2017/752). It sets ou t rules on the composition of the plastic FCMs by establishing a positive list of substances 
approved for use in the manufacture of plastic FCMs (‘Union list’) and lays down migration limits (a generic overall 
migration limit as well as specific migration limits for individual substances). Compliance with regulatory demands is 
essential for putting new packa ging materials on the market. As such, we have limited the possible impact of the 
legal requirements on FCMs by selecting for PRESERVE materials and substances that have been previously approved 
for such purpose (substances such as glycerol, FCM 103, lacti c acid, FCM 99, acids, fatty from animal or vegetable 
food fats and oils, FCM 12, pectin, FCM 546 or casein, FCM 548 ). As a food ingredient, whey protein is recognized 
safe for food contact according to scientific principles and/or can also be used provided that migration is below ppb 
levels as used behind a functional barrier that is approved115. The same applies to other proteins or polysaccharides, 
which will be selected to develop our new materials and food contact approval of the enzymes used for enzymation 
is being elaborated by CARB.
2.2  Measures to maximise impact 
a) Dissemination and exploitation of results  
In addition to placing an emphasis on excellence in science that will result in novel packaging materials, we will place 
equal emphasis on excellence in communication, dissemination and exploitation, which is anchored in early user and 
stakeholder engagement, taking into account  their needs and inputs, and ensuring we are on track to deliver a 
tangible economical payback and societal dividends as a result of public investments.  
Dissemination plan 
Our dissemination plan encompasses a comprehensive series of  actions to broadcast the non -confidential results 
generated during the project to the widest and most relevant audience possible. The goal is to heighten awareness 
about the results, to contribute to knowledge building in Europe, and to ensure that as many stakeholders as possible 
have access to these  results. This includes: the relevant industrial sectors (biobased packaging, biopol ymers and 
packaging, chemical sector, etc.), retailers, market actors (environmental consultancies, etc.), policy makers, 
researchers and the academic community, mass media  (TV, radio and the written press) and multipliers for 
addressing the general public, as well as other targeted stakeholders (other H2020, EC and national R&D initiatives, 
ESIF stakeholders, etc.). The most appropriate dissemination tools and channels will  be selected for targeting each 
audience and to accomplish the expected impacts of o ur dissemination activities defined  below. Importantly, the 
consortium will actively disseminate project results with a multi-faceted approach. The partners have an excelle nt 
track record in scientific publications, conference presentations and a strong hi story of engagement with 
 
115 http://www.wheylayer.eu/files/2012/08/Safety-compliance-letter.pdf 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 27 of 70 
biopolymers and bio-based packaging professionals, scientists, regulators, managers, commercial organisations, and 
citizen outreach and communications. All research results will be disseminated to the scientific community, using 
multiple approaches: via scientific journals, conferences, the project website and regular newsletters. 
 
This section includes the preliminary version of the Plan for the Dissemination and Exploitation of the Project’s results 
(PEDR), which will be expanded on and updated during project  implementation. The purpose of the PEDR is to 
provide a formal planning document for using and disseminating knowledge throughout the project.  
The dissemination strategy reflect s the broad expertise of the consortium and the diverse nature of the project 
results and related work packages. In keeping with the general profile of each target audience, the most appropriate 
dissemination tools and channels will be selected for targeting each and the expected impacts of our dissemination 
activities will also be further defined. Within the framework of WP7, the partners will build on and execute this 
dissemination plan following a process of analysing : Why – the purpose of the dissemination action; What will be 
communicated – the message; To whom – the audience; How – the method/channel; When – the timing. Performance 
indicators (metrics), extending on those initially outline d in table 2. 3., will be est ablished as part of the upgraded 
plan, such as number of citations (for publications), number of hits on web, number of downloads (for electronic 
documents/materials), number of industry consultations (from tradeshows/exhibitions), number of policy -maker 
engagements, etc. They will be used to track the success of our dissemination activities. 
 
A comprehensive Communication and Dissemination Plan as part of the Plan for the Dissemination and Exploitation 
of the Project’s results  will be developed by Communication and Dissemination Manager (Christian Schulz from 
EUBP), to ensure high visibility of the funded actions and help to maximise the impact of the PRESERVE results. The 
plan will facilitate a common understanding of the aims of the dissemination activiti es and will ensure that they do 
not interfere with the IPR m anagement, but rather serve it.  As such  the plan will be consulted with the IPR & 
Exploitation Manager (Cristina Barragan from KNEIA) - also acting as WP7 leader - with a view to ensuring that the 
exploitation potential is safeguarded at all times. A  confidentiality policy will underpin the dissemination activities, 
and based on  consortium experience in collaborative projects which points towards the most effective default 
position being that all inf ormation is confidential unless otherwise agreed as non -confidential (through an agile 
process for effective agreement on publishable information).  In accordance with any IPR restrictions, the 
dissemination plan, aims at divulging the main innovative aspec ts which evolve during the development of the 
project. In line with the above considerations , all partners will be involved in the definition of the  dissemination 
strategy, which will be included in the detailed dissemination plans that will be issued at t he end of month 6 of the 
project. These plans will give clea r measures and priorities of how to disseminate the solutions elaborated by the 
project consortium to the end users. 
Our dissemination channels ( include existing tools from EUBP (e.g. newsletter, Bioplastics magazines and yearly 
conference addressing preliminarily industry) and CHX (online platform addressing a broad range of users but with a 
majority of research profiles) that are already established to reach relevant stakeholders of the project. It will include 
conferences (papers and posters), tradeshows (with exhibition space), publications in peer -reviewed journals, 
dissemination in industry magazines, newsletters, as well as more vanguard channels, such as social media platforms, 
project blogs, etc. It will be complemented by a professional communication campaign (discussed below). This board 
approach, counting on several tools and channels for the dissemination of the project results summarized in the 
following table, will contribute to efficient coordination and dissemination of the project outputs across the relevant 
European and international communities to promote the project. Moreover, the dissemination strategy will also 
consider how it can best be used to maximise the future exploitation of the results of the research.  
Table 2.3. Overall dissemination targets 
Type of dissemination Target audience Estimated amount (target KPIs) 
Leaflets Industry, academia, policy-makers 2 versions, distributed copies >1000 
Press releases All stakeholders 2, published at least by 6 medias 
Public website All stakeholders 1, visits >5000 
Newsletters Industry, academia, policy-makers 3, distributed to at least 500 people 
News on social media (LinkedIn, Twitter, Youtube, SlideShare…) All stakeholders 48, target > 1000 followers 
Project Blog Industry, academia, policy-makers 1 (with at least 24 posts) 
Articles in technical journals Industry 6-10 
Articles at market oriented and economic journals Industry, consumers 6-10 
Peer reviewed scientific papers Academia 12-20 
Presentations at (online) scientific conferences Academia 15-25 
Presentations at technical conferences and exhibitions Industry 15-25, some possibly online 
Webinar Academia and industry 2 
Project symposium Academia and industry 2 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 28 of 70 
The dissemination activities will be carried out through publications of technical papers based on the project results 
in journals specialized on recycling/sustainability, bio-based packaging, biopolymers, food packaging related journals. 
Targeted journals include:  Bioplastics magazine, International Polymer Science & Technology, Plastics & Recycling 
Technology, Advances in Materials Science and Engineering, Polymers, Polymer Degradation and Stability, Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science, Polymer T esting, Materials, Packaging Technology and Science, Food Packaging and Shelf 
Life, International Journal of Polymer Science, Wa ste Management World, Bioplastics newsletter and magazine, 
Journal of coatings technology and research, Surface and Coatings Tec hnology, European Coatings Journal, Journal 
of Polymers and the Environment., Biomacromolecules, Frontiers in Materials, Journal  of Renewable Materials, 
Coatings, Progress in Organic Coatings, Packaging Technology and Science, Packaging Europe, Packaging J ournal, 
Green Chemistry, Chem Sus Chem, Bioresource technology, etc. among the others. All these publications reach a wide 
spectrum across the scientific, public administration and technical communities. Priority will be given to journals that 
allow Golden and Green Open Access options (for more details see Data Management section).  
Table 2.4 Potential scientific and technical publications 
Topic Estimated month Target groups 
Review on (recycled) bio-based packaging materials  M3-5 Research and academic stakeholders, early stage researcher, 
recycler, upcycler, textile producers, industry multipliers- sectorial 
associations, cosmetics & personal care companies, other 
packaging users  
eBeam for upcycling M13-16 Research and academic stakeho lders, early stage researcher, 
recycler, upcycler, textile producers, cosmetics & personal care 
companies, other packaging users  
SRM for packaging – a study on consumer perception M46-48 Research and academic stakeholders, early stage researcher, 
recycler, upcycler, textile producers, cosmetics & personal care 
companies, other packaging users  
Composition monitoring of novel bioplastics 
formulation 
M30 Recyclers and Converters of plastics 
Digital tools to support the implementation of the 
circular economy in the packaging sector 
M42 Packaging converters, recyclers, end users, etc 
Controlled biodegradation of polyesters to valuable 
building blocks 
M36 Scientific/engineering community 
New polymeric structures from enzymatically 
biodegraded polymer sources 
M48 Scientific/engineering community 
A new approach in the sustainable re-use of bio-
based packaging 
M24 Scientific/engineering community 
Protein based adhesive and delamination systems – a 
review 
M3-5 Research and academic stakeholders, packaging engi neers, 
adhesive industry 
Novel biobased adhesives for food packaging  M15-20 Research and academic stakeholders, packaging engineers, 
adhesive industry 
Biobased materials for food packaging – a case study M36-40 Research and academic stakeholders, packaging and food industry 
PHA coatings M18-M20 Research and academic stakeholders, early stage researcher, 
packaging users. 
Health and safety aspects in the development and 
use of coatings and solutions for microplastic release 
M36 Textile and packaging processors 
 
The publication and presentation activity of PRESERVE focuses on interdisciplinary dissemination (e.g. biotechnology, 
materials sciences, engineering, environmental science, SHH…) addressing the whole value chain , which highlights 
the achievements that were possible thanks to the critical mass of experts who come together in the context of 
PRESERVE. Following Horizon 2020’s open access policy, the consortium will ensure that peer -reviewed scientific 
publications resulting from the PRESERVE project will be deposited in repositories and made open access, meaning 
free of charge online access for any interested reader (for more details see Data management section). 
An important feature of our dissemination strategy is the “PRESERVE Roadshow”: an agenda of events that will be 
mapped out for the duration of the project to maximise resources and to bring mutual benefit to events being 
organised by third parties. PRESERVE will schedule out the trade fairs, exhibitions, workshops, seminars, conferences, 
round tables, etc. of relevance in Europe and internationally that PRESERVE consortium members can attend. Our 
target is to have PRESERVE present in at least 48 events in Europe and internationally (some possibly online) over the 
course of the project. Finally, PRESERVE will gratefully take advantage of specific dissemination events organized by 
the EC to present the project and its results such as Horizon2020 Bio based Industries, Environment and Circular 
Economy Info Days Workshops, and specific events organiz ed by other projects funded under the same or related 
topics. PRESERVE dissemination activities will link with the broader dissemination strategies of the BBI JU, EIP -Raw 
Materials, EU Bioeconomy stakeholder panel, EUBP and other relevant industrial association at pan-European level. 
We will aim to couple PRESERVE with meeting and events of these initiatives, to contribute to efficient coordination 
and dissemination of the project outputs across the relevant European and international communities to promote the 
project. All in all, a philosophy of ‘not wasting’ any dissemination opportunities will be instilled in the consortium and 
partners will be encouraged to capitalise on the relevant marketing and dissemination events they are attending or 
organising to plan a dissemination activity for PRESERVE.  
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 29 of 70 
A preliminary selection of relevant c onferences/events includes: SPE Conferences (Society of Plastics Engineers), 
World Congress on Polymer Science and Engineering, Annual Materials Scientists Meeting, Annual C onference and 
Expo on Biomaterials, International Conference on Bio -based Materials, International Conference o n Biobased 
Materials and Composites ICBMC, International conference on bio -based building materials, World Biomaterials 
Congress, European Biopla stics Conference, International Symposium Frontiers in Polymer Science, International 
Seminar of bioplastics an d composites, IAPRI's Symposium, Conference on Bio -based Polymers and Composites 
BiPoCo, Innovations in Food Packaging shelf life and food safety , European Biopolymer Summit, Plastics recycling 
world exhibition Europe, European Polymer Congress, Annual Wor ld Congress on Bio -Polymers and Polymer 
Chemistry, European Coating Symposium and fairs like Interpack, Anuga Food Tec, K-Fair, Fakuma, Kunststoffen fair, 
Ecomondo, Techtextil, Meetingpack, CHEMPLAST, INTERPACK, EMPACK, HISPACK, Fachpack, JECWorld, etc. 
 
Furthermore, PRESERVE plans to host a final conference in month 48, organised by EUBP, to release the fully validated 
results of the PRESERVE project to all stakeholders. In addition, CHX will organize an intermediate workshop around 
M36 with the aim of outlining and discussing the PRESERVE 2030 Roadmap, involving the relevant stakeholders and 
investors. Furthermore, CHX, who  has a proven track reco rd in the successful organisation of webinars, will also 
organise two webinars to present intermediate PRESERVE results around M30 and M40. This approach will allow to 
reach a wider audience limiting the costs of organisation. Given the partiality of results to be presented at those points. 
external experts will also be invited to give a complementary overview the latest innovations and context in the sector.  
 
PRESERVE will launch a dedicated website immediately after project kick -off (M3 at the latest), p opulating it with 
regular non -confidential content on our progress and a real -time “scoreboard” for our indicators. Each of the 
consortium members will leverage their own websites and other online presence (e.g. social media, project blogs, 
newsletters and on-line platforms) to disseminate information about the project and increase visibility of the project’s 
website. All consortium members will leverage their networks to publish press releases stating the project objectives 
and expected impacts to drive early adoption and interest. PRESERVE will also use s ocial media and dissemination 
channels to maintain the momentum until preliminary results can be published. In addition, the project will gratefully 
make use of any dissemination route offered by the European Commission, including publication of our project brief 
on CORDIS and Horizon Europe online magazine.   
Additionally, we will use the Circular Plastics Helix to maximise the engagement of relevant stakeholders in a spirit of 
open innovation. Hosted by t he Crowdhelix Platform, the Helix was launched in t he frame of the ongoing project 
MultiCycle. It is managed by Crowdhelix, an international network which links excellent researchers and innovative 
businesses to help deliver pioneering collaborative projec ts under Horizon 2020. With members in 44 countries , 
Crowdhelix is uniquely placed to increase the visibility of the project and disseminate its findings across the research 
and innovation landscape. At the moment the Circular Plastics Helix, which constit utes both a stakeholder meeting 
point and a knowledge sharing place, comprises 146 experts from 76 organisations and reaches further 2000 users of 
the Crowdhelix platform with its posts. The Helix is expected to double its community of cross-disciplinary and cross-
sector actors across Europe by the end of the MultiCycle project (2021). In the frame of PRESERVE, we aim to onboard 
further 100 organisations to the Helix with a specific focus on bioplastics and how they can help improving circularity. 
 
As further discussed in terms of our communication activities later in this section, t he project will also develop a 
comprehensive strategy for activities with the general public as part of WP7. This strategy will include public 
engagements, press releases, commun ication campaigns and publica tion of articles in newspapers and popular 
magazines; all to be used to communicate the potential impact of PRESERVE results for the economy, the 
environment and the society at large. Television is considered a very valuable ch annel in this sense, for this  reason 
local channels will be contacted to explore the possibility to participate in dissemination programs. Featuring among 
“Futuris” documentaries broadcasted in the Euronews channel will also be considered for a wider cover age. EUBP 
will make available the support of its communication unit, specialised in maximising the media and public outreach 
as well as in building targeted dissemination tools for research and innovation results. 
Finally, as PRESERVE (if successful) will be funded under a topic that is in support of the European Strategy for Plastics 
in a Circular Economy , we will endeavour to participate in joint activities  (common dissemination activities, 
workshops, etc.) with other projects selected under this topic as well as projects selected under other topics in H2020 
supporting the Plastics Strategy.  
Business Plan and Exploitation of the results 
PRESERVE will develop and implement (from technical, environmental and socio-economical standpoints) an upcycling 
strategy to boost bio-based packaging and polymers, while improving their properties for applications in food & drink 
packaging, textile and composite products among the others. As such, our project outputs are highly relevant for 
future market exploitation. The exploitable results include the different materials highlighted in table 1.4 but also the 
processes and services supporting their market presence across their lifecycles. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 30 of 70 
A preliminary exploitation/business plan has been drawn up  considering the contribution of the results to patents, 
new or existing products, services, infrastructures, knowledge bases and standards, to ensure the project innovations 
are delivered to the market. Our intention is to realise all the exploitation pathways for the results combining: 
a) Commercial exploitation- a key exploitation route will be the industrial use of the project knowledge and 
technology developments, for the creation of new products, new processes (or improvement of existing 
ones) and advisory services to deliver high competitiveness and growth impacts.  
b) Further research- providing the knowledge and skills for future spin-out research and development projects 
will have a high impact for raising the European knowledge base to prepare bio -based packaging, textile, 
composites and biopolymers industry sectors to transition to the green economy; 
c) Contribution to standards- the project results will contribute towards a regulation and standard development 
in the field of sustainable upcycling of bio-based polymers and packaging. 
 
Table 2.5 gives a summary  description of the exploitable knowledge, products or technologies, result ing from 
PRESERVE. The majority of PRESERVE Key Exploitable Results ( KERs) will be protected  where possible during the 
project ( or directly after  it), while their exploitation will be 
pursued within 3 -5 years of the project end. In particular, in 
view of the value chain dependence of the results, we estimate 
the exploitation of PRESERVE results related to the compounds, 
coatings & adhesives will be achieved in a 2 years’ timeframe 
from the end of the project, those related to the laminates and 
derived packaging will be achieved in 3 years’ time from the 
end of the project, while those related to the use of SRM and 
final packed products will be achieved 4-5 years’ after the end 
of the project progressively extending to new products of the 
same categories as tested in the project . Beyond the 2030 
horizon, further applications of our  materials will be explored 
such as in the packaging of pharma products, service packaging 
and tableware, mulching films and agro-textiles as well as other 
textiles and composite applications that could benefit from our 
new use functionalities and enhanced EoL. 
Table 2.5 PRESERVE Key exploitable results (KERs) 
KERs Proposed IPR tool                   WP Owners Potential end users 
PHA coatings with enhanced water barrier 
properties including CTB patent pending 
technology on biobased plastisol inks and 
coatings.  
Patent, licensing to industry 2 BIOPOL, CTB, 
AIMPLAS,  
Coatings producers, packaging converters 
like SUDPACK, plastic converters and 
recyclers. 
Metallization on protein coatings for improved 
oxygen barrier 
Patent, licensing to industry 2 IVV, ASU Packaging converters like SUDPACK 
Coating formulation to improve or prevent 
microfibre release on textile and improved tests 
regarding efficiency 
Patent or trade secret. 
Licensing to interested 
companies 
2 ITENE, CTB Textile companies or finish producers. 
HSI/NIR monitoring  systems for EoL plastics 
identification for their proper sorting/ recycling, 
coating, release of microplastics and 
microfibrillar reinforcement processes 
monitoring  
Patent, licensing to 
interested companies 
2, 3, 
4, 5 
IRIS Plastic recyclers like ROMEI, machine 
producer as OEM like PLATO, packaging 
converters like SUDPACK 
Protein based coatings for plastic and paper 
substrate with oxygen barrier 
Possible patent on 
improvements owned by 
IRIS, licensing to industry  
2, 5  IVV, ASU, IRIS  Packaging converters like SUDPACK, GPI 
Bio-based adhesive systems for enzymatic 
delamination 
Patent, licensing to industry 
or own exploitation 
2, 5 IVV, BOSTIK Packaging converters like SUDPACK, GPI 
Coating combinations in multilayer structures  Patent, licensing to industry 
or own exploitation 
2, 5  SUDPACK, GPI, 
ASU, IVV, 
AIMPLAS 
Other packaging converters 
Method for the production of fibrillar or self -
reinforced biopolymers 
Secret know-how & IP used 
for offering consulting or 
licensing 
3 CTB, AIMPLAS Companies active in  processing of 
bioplastics, plastic converters like SIBO, 
plastic recyclers including SILON. 
Electron-beam induced cross -linking to 
improve barrier properties and mechanical 
performances 
Licensing to interested 
companies 
3 ASU, NTT Companies offering eBeam treatment 
service; packaging manufacturers 
SUDPACK, SIBO, GPI… 
Method for enzymatic controlled 
biodegradation of polyesters and/ or for 
repolymerization from building blocks obtained 
by biodegradation of polymers to new polymers 
Patent, licensing to 
interested companies 
4 UNIBO Recyclers/ Producer of polymers and 
derivatives like BOSTIK  
eBeam treatment for upcycling of recycled 
materials and blends 
Patent, licensing to 
interested companies 
4 ASU, NTT Upcyclers like DENIMX, producer of 
recycled bio-based materials for non-food 
contact use like SILON, ROMEI 
 
Figure 2.8 Market deployment of PRESERVE solutions 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 31 of 70 
Knowledge on biodegradation behavior of 
PRESERVE materials and potential use of results 
for improved standards for biodegradation 
testing 
Secret knowhow, 
contribution to Standard 
4 OWS Increase OWS po sitioning and test 
portfolio for its customers as producers 
and converters of new PRESERVE 
materials 
Method for multilayers separation in recycling 
plants 
Licensing of plant design, 
services 
4 PLANET, 
PLATO, ROMEI 
Other recyclers 
Upcycled reprocessing of recycled (bio)plastics  Knowhow, service, licensing 
to industry 
4 PLANET, 
ROMEI, SILON 
Other recyclers 
New upcycling methods, systems  and/or 
technologies including new composite recipe 
and applications 
Licensing to interested 
companies 
5 DENIMX, 
SILON 
Producer of packaging, consumer goods, 
fashion, OEMs, etc. 
Eco-design of packaging materials and SRM 
applications  
Patent, licensing to industry 5 SÜDPACK, 
DENIMX, RTOs  
Other packaging converters and end users 
like MDLZ, DANONE, BDF and beyond 
DSS for selecting the most sustainable/ optimal 
circular use of the new materials  
Software protected by a 
code, licensing to 
interested companies 
6 IRIS Stakeholders along the value chain, 
especial focus on upcyclers like DENIMX 
New knowledge on Health and Safety 
assessment of specific PRESERVE materials 
Publications. Consulting 
Services 
6 ITENE Materials producers, converters and food 
packers in the consortium and beyond 
 
Partners will be involved in identifying and addressing the target groups for PRESERVE and also future target groups. 
A set of measurable indicators will be established to account for the progress during the implementation of the 
PRESERVE project and to measure the effect/impact after the project ends (in the medium long run). Additionally, in 
order to promote the adoption of the project’s solutions after its end, the final exploitation plan will include a socio-
economic impact study that will be performed towards the end of the project  and a 2030 Roadmap will also be 
delivered. The partners will analyse and validate the primary and secondary market potential, and structure a market 
penetration & development plan accordingly. Cooperation with regulatory bodies and third -party sales and 
distribution licensees in the field of biobased packaging and bi opolymers will be implemented. This process has 
already begun through the concept development and pre-project market validation work carried out by the partners 
within their existing customer bases. The final Exploitation and Business Plan (as part of the PEDR), will be released 
in month 48 including information resulting from: 
• Knowledge in the bio-based packaging and polymers field; 
• Evaluation of possible industrial outcome for the research results obtained during this project; 
• Estimation of the economic impact of the processes developed under the project; 
• Observation of market trends and positioning of project results; 
• Market analysis (actual market needs and size in Europe). 
The PRESERVE exploitation team will periodically review current and future indust rial b io-based packaging and 
polymers technologies (market and technology watch) to estimate evolving opportunities and threats for the 
product’s positioning on the market and to ensure that exploitation strategies are up to date. 
Exploitation Intentions of the Consortium Members: The partners have indicated their exploitation intentions for the 
PRESERVE exploitable results as summarized in Table 2.6. The resulting growth in staff and turnover have also been 
estimated: new jobs figures are calculated based on the assumption that 1 new job will be created for each €230k 
increase in turnover (according to plastic industry standards in EU). The turnover increase is the foreseen increase 5 
years post project as consequence of the exploitation of the project resu lts compared to the current turnover  
depending on the business of each partner based on a progressive market introduction starting by niche products. 
Table 2.6 Exploitation interests and expected growth 5 years post project for business partners 
Partner Exploitation strategy per partner Turnover 
Increase 
New 
Jobs 
IRIS Commercialisation of waste composition monitoring systems or the specific chemiometrics package to be installed 
in existing recycling plant to enable the sorting of the new bioplastic. Commercialisation of monitoring systems for 
coating application and microfibrillar reinf orcement processes. Validation of new applications of our monitoring 
devices to the detection of microplastics. Further development (customization service) of the sustainability 
optimisation models and licensing of the derived app. Use of the knowledge gen erated from previous results but 
also in the support of the validation of the packaging materials in further projects and services. 
10% 3-4 
ASU Further knowledge in eBeam treatment and FA-grafting gained and extended throughout the project will be used 
in future projects and R&D activities; scientific knowledge will be exploited in scientific publications and academic 
didactical activity. Know-how will be used in future project and research activities. Furthermore, ASU will use the 
project results and expertise gained during the project to expand its portfolio of services offered to industry. 
NA, non profit 
CTB Offering consultancy, pilot facilities and test ing services in the domain of biopolymers for textile, plastic and 
composite applications. Extending future portfolio in research and development projects for biopolymers in 
textile, plastic and composite applications.  
NA, non profit 
AIMPLAS Expertise re garding PHA formulation and its applications will be used in future projects, R&D activities and 
consulting service to companies. The knowledge gained in relation to the production of micro fibrillated and self-
reinforced biopolymers will be offered as consulting services to companies as well as in future projects. The results 
of PRESERVE project will help AIMPLAS to expand its portfolio of services offered to industry across EU, 
contributing to AIMPLAS internalization. 
NA, non profit 
IVV Know-How gained i n PRESERVE will be used in future project and research activities. Furthermore IVV will use 
project results and expertise gained during the project to expand its portfolio of services offered to industry and 
NA, non profit 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 32 of 70 
is aiming at licensing IPR. 
ITENE Exploitation strategy will be defined during the project according the results. Patent or trade secret. Licensing to 
interested companies, Licensing Coating formulation to improve or prevent microfibre release on textile. Open 
access publications and con sulting services. Strengthen its position as analytical and consulting service provider 
across EU, specifically for Food contact materials compliance and testing protocols. 
NA, non profit 
NTT Expertise that is gained throughout the project will be used in future projects and future R&D activities; scientific 
knowledge will be exploited in scientific publications and possible participation to initiatives related to a trademark 
with the consortium. 
NA, non profit 
UNIBO Expertise gained throughout PRESERVE will be used in future projects and R&D activities; scientific knowledge will 
be exploited in scientific publications and academic teaching activity. Know-how will be used in future project and 
research activities. UNIBO will use the project resul ts and the gained expertise to expand its portfolio of services 
offered to industry. Patent and marketing of polymer biodegradation techniques to get valuable building blocks 
for new polymeric structures produced in the project. 
NA, non profit 
BIOPOL Develop and license and /or commercialize mcl PHA biotechnology optimized for coating. 5% 3 
PLANET Offering pilot facilities and production of plastic mix compounds, with recycled or virgin plastic for blends and 
composites. Offering expertise in compound formulation a nd processing, use of additives (strengthening 
nucleating, reactive plasticizers, fillers and nanofillers).  
20% 3 
BOSTIK Extending market of bio-based adhesives. Develop and commercialize bio-based adhesives allowing delamination 
and therefore recycling of multilayer packaging.  
0.01% 27 
CARB Extend the range of enzymated PLA to FCM approved and self-reinforced grades 10% 2 
SUDPACK Sell multilayer flexible packaging films and sheets that are biobased and recyclable as a differentiating offer on the 
marketplace better complying the packaging policies 
0.4% 8 
GPI Commercialization of fibre-based barrier packaging (moulded pulp, paperseal trays and beverage cartons) that are 
fully biobased and recyclable organically as well as by repulping or delamination  
0.1% 26 
SIBO Sell upcycled biobased injected packaging and secondary raw materials to serve personal care sector and post 
project extension to use of upcycled primary bioplastics in food sector and beyond 
5% 4 
DANONE Commercialization of dairy products p acked in sustainable materials (dairy pouch, cardboard -based beverage 
bricks, pulp moulded packs) 
0.02% 17 
MDLZ Mondelez is interested in uptaking and exploiting the bio-based packaging, developed in PRESERVE, for different 
formats like for example the Philadelphia tray and chocolate bar packaging. 
0.0001% 29 
BDF Commercialisation of personal care products packed in sustainable materials (personal care flowpack, personal 
care injected jar, small bottles). Extension to cosmetic products. 
0.0001% 28 
OWS Gained knowhow on biodegradation behavior of new materials and compounds. Expertise on new 
biodegradation test standards (especially marine environment) 
15% 3 
PLATO Expertise in plants design and production, licensing the plant for multilayers separation, i ncrease company 
turnover, exploit the plant.  
6% 3 
ROMEI Commercialization of PRESERVE SRM and compounds. Offering expertise, licensing the plant for separation of 
multi-layers, expand company portfolio and increase company turnover.  
10% 3 
DENIMX Commercialisation of textile products packed in sustainable materials (packaging textile, composites). Know-how 
will be used in future project and research activities. Use of project results and expertise gained during the project 
to expand its portfolio of services offered to industry. Strengthen its position as consulting service provider across 
EU, specifically for upcycling services, building small/local value chains and creating sustainable, long lasting 
product solutions. 
20% 2 
SILON Extending market of bio-based compounds (possibly from SRM) and staple fibres with tuned biodegradability. 3% 3 
KNEIA As dissemination and IP valorization expert, KNEIA is interested in take full advantage of the knowledge to be 
developed in terms of market mapping, and providing full services of technology valorisation in relation with future 
exploitation of the developed solution. 
10% 1 
CHX Expansion of the Circular Plastics Helix and maintenance of the Plastics Circularity Multiplier will lead to further 
growth and development of the network's membership base 
10% 1 
EUBP Promoting the increasing use of innovative bio-based and recycled or upcycled polymeric materials and supporting 
research into the further development of bioplastics with the goal of creating performance -improved & more 
sustainable applications 
NA, non profit 
Foreseen business approach: The PRESERVE project is a market and exploitation-oriented research and development 
initiative: our proposed Exploitation Strategy follows a 4-Step approach, as summarised fig 2.9. The expected impacts 
can only be realised through a robust post -project exploitation strategy. During the implementation of the project, 
the most promising results will be identified (building on the preliminary list of potential KERs in Table 2.5.).  
 
The exploitation strategy will start with a comprehensive market analysis, which will be conducted among the wide 
network of PRESERVE partners and their close contacts from the biopolymers/packaging community. Several inputs 
(market latency, market potential, adoption rate or uptake, etc.) 
from the market analysis will be used for the consecutive 
analysis, in which an economical evaluation using a “cost -
benefit” model will be performed. Consequently, several 
alternative strategies will be prepared and prioritized: choices 
will be made so as to propose the most appropriate business 
model, which will hopefully maximize future growth and return 
on investment for the technologies developed by PRESERVE. We 
will also make use of different tools to support the  
understanding of the exploitation context for PRESERVE results 
including PESTLE, Porter 5 forces and SWOT analyses. 
 
 
Figure 2.9 The four steps of our exploitation strategy 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 33 of 70 
The business plan has three main goals: 
• to established an alignment between the  PRESERVE solutions with existing market needs (a prelimina ry 
version has already been drafted at proposal phase); 
• to identify a model(s) for an economically feasible exploitation of the different PRESERVE results;  
• to identify the optimal approach  for ownership and exploitation of project results  (in joint modes where 
applicable), according to the individual business strategies, in strict correlation with the PRESERVE 
consortium agreement and PEDR. 
 
The Business Model Canvas 116 methodology has been used as an effective lean approach to defining our initial 
business model including : value proposition; key partners, activities and resources; customer relationships; cost 
structures, revenue streams, value-delivery channels (Table 2.7). This initial Canvas summarizes aspects relevant to 
the exploitation of the upcycled bio-based packaging from primary and secondary resources  along the supply and 
value chain, as the  core results of our project, but further business model canvases will be established during the 
project for each of the packaging type as well as for the other promising KER. 
Table 2.7 Business Model Canvas 
Key partners Key activities  Value propositions Customer relationship Customer segments 
• PRESERVE 
Consortium 
members 
• Biobased 
packaging 
production 
specialists and 
Plastic/Bioplastic 
Industry 
• Raw feedstock, 
management and 
logistic specialists 
• Sustainable 
products 
enhancers (i.e. 
EPD® International 
System)   
• Scientific 
community 
• Investors (bio-
packaging and 
bioplastics sector) 
• European 
Bioplastics and BBI 
PPP consortium 
members 
• Environmental consulting services 
of biobased packaging and 
biopolymers materials and 
PRESERVE manufacturing 
technologies 
• Cost evaluation of PRESERVE 
packaging products 
• Economic feasibility analysis of 
PRESERVE and market application 
• Social impact: Social acceptance 
monitoring  
• Tailored Business strategy: 
Exploitable Results and 
Technological Implementation 
Plan 
• Effective and efficient 
bio-based packaging 
and polymers 
development 
technologies 
• Increased knowledge 
on bio-based 
packaging and 
polymers quality and 
possible applications 
• Increased 
understanding of 
environmental 
impacts  
• PRESERVE systems 
techno-economic 
viability 
• Social and socio-
economic benefits 
information 
• Contribution to 
International 
Standards and 
regulations of 
sustainable recovery 
of bio-based raw 
materials 
• Effective dissemination and 
marketing activities  
• Organisation of workshops, 
seminars and training sessions  
• Online platform  
• Customer-based exploitation 
strategies 
• Strategic partnerships 
 
  
 
• Biobased industries 
• Packaging, polymers 
and coating 
industries, textile 
and composites 
companies  
• Bioplastic Industry  
• Biopolymer research 
agents 
• Environmentally 
conscious end users 
• Waste managers 
• Engineering and 
consultancy 
companies 
• Entrepreneurs, Spin-
offs, Start-ups 
Channels 
• Website  
• Academic journals and key 
magazines 
• Periodic newsletter 
• Direct contact with the key 
stakeholders (meetings, email, 
etc.)  
• Presence at the key national 
and international conferences  
• Conferences and workshops at 
national and EU level 
• Established network of project 
partners 
Key resources 
• PRESERVE bio-based solutions  
• Technical and financial capability 
• Effective dissemination and 
marketing plan and strong 
presence in the EU R&D 
community 
• Already available client portfolio in 
the EU market 
• Continuous and monitored R&D 
activities to upgrade models 
Cost structure Revenue Streams 
• Working staff  
• Raw materials 
• Design and prototyping and adaptation of equipment  
• Software and database requirements 
• Travelling expenses for dissemination 
• Installation sales 
• IP Licensing and Royalties by agreement 
• Direct sales of the products 
• Services (Operation, consulting, maintenance) 
Intellectual Property, knowledge protection and regulatory issues 
Strategy for the management and protection of knowledge and intellectual property rights: To pave the way forward 
for commercial exploitation and dissemination of the project results, the consortium will implement an integral 
strategy for the effective management of the knowledge. The selection of the IPR & Exploitation Manager (KNEIA) 
has been carefully made and the partners will also contribute to the management of IPR if necessary, based on their 
respective resources and competences related with the different exploitation routes envisaged. The project results 
will be continually assessed in terms of novelty, patentability and protection as part of an effective knowledge 
management strategy. For the results obtained, ownership, protection and use will be considered in detail. Ownership 
of patents will be clearly defined and governed by the Consortium Agreement that partners will sign. Results shall be 
owned by the participant generating them. To avoid doubt or confusion over ownership, a protocol of procedures will 
be defined, which will be followed by each partner to clearly show the development of the generation of knowledge 
or results. In cases where the results are generated jointly (i.e. where the separate parts of some resul t cannot be 
attributed to different participants), it will be jointly owned. The allocation and the terms of exercisi ng this joint 
ownership will be agreed in Joint Ownership Agreements. However, an overriding principle will be  that the 
participating industry partners are always provided with the access that they need to the results to exploit them in 
accordance with the needs and strategy of their business. As such, access rights to results for implementing the project 
 
116 Business Model Generation, A. Osterwalder, Yves Pigneur, Alan Smith, and 470 practitioners from 45 countries, 2010, Wiley published. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 34 of 70 
will be granted on a royalty-free basis. Access rights for use purposes will be granted either royalty-free, or on fair 
and reasonable conditions (these conditions will be established in Exploitation Agreements that will be negotiated 
between the requester and granter if the access rights). Different potential business models  for the broad 
deployment of the results are considered, such as licensing, that could be conditioned by IP laws of each country.  
Data Management 
A variety of research data will be generated/collected (respecting the GDPR rules where applicable) in the project 
including (but not limited to): materials characteristics data, processes and product data, process and product testing 
data, consumer survey data. We will be generating new datasets and developing new insights from existing data 
sources. A detailed Data Management Plan (DMP) will be prepared by M6 within the activities of WP8 (Pro ject 
Management). Access to project data for the part ners will be via the shared area of the project website’s shared 
area. The project coordinator, in collaboration with the WP7 leader in terms of public data and following the GA 
mandate, will take all the appropriate measures to make selected data (i.e. with exception of data that could lead to 
IPR and which diffusion would be against commercial interest) openly available and usable for third parties for study, 
teaching (according to task 7.4 training activities) and research purposes via licensing or other means.  
At the beginning of the project, the consortium will decide and agree on the tasks, roles, responsibilities and rights 
relating to data collection, dataset management and data use in the DMP. During the project, the data will be used 
by the research consortium members. After the end of project, all requests for further use of data will be considered 
carefully and whenever possible approved by each partner. Permission for data use will be granted provided there 
are no IPR or confidentiality issues i nvolved or any direct overlap of research questions with the primary research. 
Ownership of datasets will belong to the project consortium and in particular to the partner generating them. 
The common metadata schema Dublin Core will be used to store the data providing an easier data discovery and re-
use. Once ready and checked, a copy of the datasets will be deposited in a secure server at the coordinator’s facilities 
(IRIS). In addition, also a common re pository service (e.g. CERN’s Zenodo) will be used to  enhance long-term open 
data accessibility. Possibility for follow -up utilization of the data will be ensured by documenting data collection 
methods as well as the contents of the datasets. Although personal and business data are not expected to be core 
in the project, where applicable, privacy of all sensitive data will be secured. Besides storing separately from the data 
all direct identifiers of any respondents or subjects (e.g. names and contact information of persons and organisations) 
-also indirect references to e.g. lines of businesses, branches or industries- will be removed and destroyed after the 
anonymised dataset has been checked and validated. 
PRESERVE will provide open access to the project research results according to the following main conditions:  
• Universal access will be given to all peer reviewed research upon publication for academics and the public alike 
to the final published versions of articles by depositing them into on line repositories. 
• Provide this open access to the articles with a delay (embargo) of 6-12 months as maximum  
• Publication costs’ payment will therefore be shifted away from readers.  
Standardisation as essential tool to reach the market 
To ensure the long-term sustainability and widest possible use of PRESERVE outcomes, dissemination via 
standardisation is considered as another important element of the project. In terms of pre-normative analysis, we 
will contribute to the discussio n on emerging standards for recyclin g and upcycling, including the case of 
biodegradation in specific environments that are still under construction as a harmonized EU framework as well as 
contributing to the discussion on a new standard , and to that end, we will provide a number of recyclin g and 
upcycling test results. Adherence to and compliance with agreed standards and best practices is essential for the 
market introduction of new materials and products. Therefore, the relevant and applicab le standardisation and 
certification landscape for PRESERVE will be thoroughly assessed covering: i) applicable standards for biodegradation 
such as ISO 14855 (biodegradation), EN 13432 (industrial composting of packaging) or NF T 51 -800 (home 
compostable plastics) and relevant certification schemes such  as OK compost ; ii) applicable standards for 
determining bio-based content (e.g. EN 16640, EN 16785) and relevant certification schemes  such as OK biobased 
or in terms of sustainable sourcing of bio-based materials; iii) current developments, e.g. in the CEN working groups 
CEN/TC 411 (Bio-based products), CEN/TC 249/WG 9 “Characterisation of degradability”, ISO/TC 61/SC 14 “Plastics 
- Environmental aspects”, CEN/TC 249 (Plastics), CEN/TC 261 and ISO/TC 122 on “Packaging” and; iv) the legislation 
applicable to food contact materials as previously discussed. We will identify areas in which PRESERVE can contribute 
to the improvement and development of standards  for example regarding recycled content in materials. Related 
and new ecolabels will also be leveraged  and proposed. In order to bring any relevant findings of the PRESERVE 
action to bear on the field of standardisation and certification, the consortium will engage in an in-depth exchange 
with the relevant standardisation bodies, in which EUBP is involved,  and with the most important independent 
certifiers in the field of bioplastics, namely TÜV AUSTRIA Belgium and DIN CERTCO, who are also EUBP members.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 35 of 70 
b) Communication activities 
One of the keys to successfully gaining impact is through our ability to secure stakeholder ‘buy-in’, i.e. the 
cooperation or positive participation of our key stakeholders. As such, communication activities will form an important 
aspect of the project, to ensure that we effectively engage stakeholders and that we promote our project, its outputs, 
its benefits and impacts to them. It is relevant that citizens (and indeed consumers of packed food and use of other 
results from PRESERVE) are aware of the developments and the societal benefits, especially in the context of the 
positive impacts for bio-based packaging and biopolymers development and sustainability, and the improvement in 
the production and processes, the economic growth and jobs related to the project implementation, etc. Moreover, 
it is important to communicate the societal benefits as the project is made possible thanks to tax-payers’ contributions. 
Through our communication activities we have an opportunity to ensure that citizens are informed and genuinely feel 
like they are getting value for money.  
 
Through WP7, we will plan out our communication activities and develop the necessary communication tools (project 
website, leaflet, posters, social media accounts, etc.), to guarantee that communication activities will be effectively 
intertwined with the project dissem ination effort. Stakeholders and general public engagement and support are 
crucial to increase the impacts of the project in terms of industrial competitiveness, environmental protection and a 
transition to the green bio-based economy in Europe.  
To maximise the impact of PRESERVE communication activities the communication plan will follow these steps: 
1. Identify and list all possible stakeholders - the target audiences of our dissemination activities will be used as 
the starting point (in addition to any other stakeholders that might be considered important). 
2. Organise our stakeholders - following a stakeholder analysis, the target audience of our communication activities 
will be categorised into “communities of support” for helping PRESERVE to realise its ambition, goals and impacts.  
3. Development of the PRESERVE brand - in order to help us in engaging with our stakeholders the principles behind 
the PRESERVE brand (visually identified through its logo) will be further elaborated and documented. The ability 
to further tap into existing and new ecolabels (e.g. in terms of biobased and/or recycled materials contents) to 
identify PRESERVE packaging will also be studied in WP7. 
4. Design and implementation of effective communication campaigns (and supporting tools and materials) - our aim 
is to generate understanding within the different communities of support as to what PRESERVE is seeking to 
achieve. We will ensure regular communication to our stakeholders through these campaigns, which will involve 
the use of emails, face -to-face meetings (in the case of policy -makers), leaflets, posters, the website and social 
media, etc. A press and media relations campaign will be implemented throughout the project to ensure media 
interest and coverage. This will include direct briefings  for selected key publications whilst providing them with 
additional materials to ensure that high levels of coverage are achieved. The impacts of these campaigns will be 
regularly assessed to enable any modifications or improvements to be made to ensure our communication efforts 
are effective. The effectiveness of the campaign will be further enhanced by adjusting the messages to the outcome 
of the task 7.1 Study of consumer perception and taking into account gender aspects as relevant. 
Table 2.8 Stakeholders targeted by the project 
Stakeholder PRESERVE Benefits and Communication strategy 
Bioplastics and 
biopackaging producers: 
Scaling up of the production of bio-plastics and new markets. They will be contacted through EUBP in as much 
as possible through the established direct channel of the association. 
Packaging material 
companies 
 
Access to new technologies and improvement in the services offered to packaging industry. They will be 
contacted through direct communication methods such as mailings or in events and congresses or even by 
contacting their suppliers, since they may be closely related to some members participating in PRESERVE. 
Packaging, products 
designer 
Use of innovative, sustainable products. They will be contacted through direct communication in specific 
online forums or by other traditional methods such as mailing or in events and congresses. They may also be 
reached by advertising in sector related magazines 
Packaging converters and 
final users 
Use of innovative, sustainable products with optimal food preservation.  They will be contacted through 
direct communication methods such as mailing or in ad-hoc fair trades and congresses, articles in specialized 
journals and magazines. Sectorial conferences. Posters/Oral Presentations. 
Packaging, products 
recycling companies 
Innovative process and quality of SRMs. These may be contacted thanks to sector networking events or sector 
related fairs and conferences because of their close relationship with the activities undertaken in this project. 
Biobased Materials industry 
& upcycling technology 
They will be contacted through direct communication in specific online forums or by other traditional methods 
such as mailing or in events and congresses. They may also be reached by advertising in sectoral magazines. 
Chemical industry Innovative highly functional bio-based coatings, adhesives and biopolymers for specific purposes. They will be 
contacted through direct communication in specific online forums or by other traditional methods such as 
mailing or in events and congresses. They may also be reached by advertising in sector related magazines. 
Food industry Novel sustainable bio-based polymers and packaging. They will be contacted through direct communication in 
specific online forums or by other traditional methods such as mailing or in events and congresses. They may 
also be reached by advertising in sector related magazines. 
Policy makers  Incentives for sustainable packaging. White Papers, Project reports and organization of bilateral meetings. 
EU-funded projects Plastics Circularity Multiplier, social media 
Academia Articles in specialized journals and magazines. Sectorial conferences. Posters/Oral Presentations. 
Associations and networks Press releases, events, social media, Circular Plastics Helix 
General public Public website, ecolabel, appropriate training, awareness raising materials, educational events  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 36 of 70 
Target groups: In particular, the project will develop a specific communication strategy towards each of the target 
groups of PRESERVE listed in Table 2.9. A number of stakeholders have already been identified and contacted in the 
proposal preparation phase (see annex after section 5) but more will be contacted during the project on a need basis. 
Table 2.9 Communication table 
Target Audience Communication Objectives Major channels that will be used 
Experts in plastic 
packaging, 
circularity, recycling 
Dissemination of the project's findings, creation of new forms of 
collaboration and innovation, strengthening a sense of community 
and inclusion among experts who are pursuing a shared vision 
Circular Plastics Helix 
Industry value 
chains- raw 
materials, 
equipment and 
technology suppliers   
To generate industry awareness of the project aims and expected 
impacts and to stimulate interest in future adoption and investment 
in the project results. Coatings, finisher and packaging solutions will 
lead to reduced environmental impacts and are competitive in 
terms of price with fossil-fuel based commercial counterparts and 
will comply with regulation and the highest quality, environmental 
and safety standards. 
Professional social media channels (thought 
leadership, blogs, business/case studies 
(documented around the performance, feasibility 
and benefits of our product prototypes and their 
pilot processes). 
Articles in technical magazines and journals. 
Participation (presentations/ exhibition space...) in 
tradeshows and exhibitions 
PRESERVE Workshops and demo days. 
Packaging 
converters and users 
To demonstrate the benefits of the new materials as well as their 
recyclability and increased sustainability throughout the value chain 
Articles in specialized journals and magazines. 
Sectorial conferences. Posters/Oral Presentations. 
Research 
community & 
Academic 
stakeholders 
Inform on the objectives of the project and the progress Articles in specialized journals and magazines, 
sectorial conferences, posters/oral presentations, 
open day at Universities, researchers' nights, 
knowledge open festivals 
High school and 
University students 
Inform on the objectives of the project and the progress Seminars and university lectures 
Policy Makers To engage with policy makers in order to contribute to standards 
and to ensure a favourable regulatory environment to stimulate 
future adoption of the project results across the value chains. 
Participation in working groups, face-to-face 
meetings, white papers. 
Other EU funded 
projects focused on 
circular plastics 
Identification of synergies between projects and improvement of 
value chain collaboration 
Plastics Circularity Multiplier and Circular plastics 
Helix 
Consumers and 
citizens 
To increase consumer awareness and understanding about the 
differences between conventional plastic products and bioplastic 
products. To ensure that consumers and citizens are aware of the 
developments and the associated societal benefits, especially in the 
context of the positive impacts for quality of life, health and 
wellbeing, as well as environmental sustainability, not to mention 
the favourable impacts for growth and jobs, etc. 
Mass media (press releases) 
 
Social media (facebook, twitter)- use of powerful 
infographics and pictograms. 
3. Implementation
3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables  
Brief presentation of the overall structure of the work plan  
A competitive work plan has been devised in order to deliver on the objectives of the Preserve project providing 
circular renewably sourced bio-based packaging solutions and derived upcycled applications with tailored end of life. 
This will preserve our environment a nd resources but also meet the expectations of green -minded consumers as 
well as the society and regulatory demands. The project objectives have been used as the starting point for planning 
the work to be implemented within the project (Section 1.1). All the required actions for meeting these objectives 
have been collectively analysed by the interdisciplinary consortium. It was agreed how best to distribute the 
workload among the various expert s in keeping with their relevant fields of knowledge, capacity, infrastructure, 
resources and in the context of bioplastics supply, packaging textile industry value chains, as well as waste 
management companies. This bottom -up planning process has greatly facilitated the task of arriving at a clear, 
comprehensive and realistic work plan (see Gantt Chart and Pert Diagram), whereby all partners have ownership.  
Our work plan is split into 8 WPs that are logically distributed along the value chain, each with c lear tasks that will 
enable the project’s objectives to be fulfilled through a coherent structure that will also facilitate project. To ensure 
the clear focus towards the target application of this RIA building upon past successful research, most WPs, except 
WP2-3 dedicated to initial material development, are led by i ndustrial partners. Different phases are included to 
support the transition from TRL 4 to 6 as discussed in section 1.3. The first phase (WP1) deals with industry -led 
specification definition to guide the following innovation work to match the market needs. The second phase (WP2, 
3) deals with the lab scale development and upscaling of the multifunctional bio-based barrier coatings and adhesives 
to meet the goals of tailored properties and EoL for each packaging application. In WP3, different strategies for the 
upcycling of core materials and blends  are assessed to provide upcycling processes for following WPs. In the third 
phase (WP4, 5), WP4 focuss on biodegradation, compostability and recycling of the materials developed in WP2 and 
WP3 to provide inputs to the transition from phase 2 to WP5. WP5 deals with the pilot production and validation of 
the newly designed materials for different food and personal care end uses. WP4 also receives materials from WP5 
to confirm the suitable EoL to the final demonstrat ors. The forth phase (WP6, 7) consist of transversal activity that 
focus respectively on the environmental and economic sustainability  and other assessment towards the safe and 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 37 of 70 
regulatory compliant uptake of the new process by the industry and on the economic viability performance of all the 
developments as well as the innovation impacts evaluation, exploitation and dissemination activities to prepare the 
market uptake and maximise the project impact. Finally, WP8 is an overarching phase that will ensure the successful 
management of the project for the seamless delivery of the proposed developments in line with defined objectives.  
As the work plan is clearly linked to the objectives set out in Section 1.1 , the consortium is confident that this work 
plan is robust to ensure that the project’s S&T and innovation goals are fulfilled. The research and development work 
is encapsulated in a comprehensive risk assessment and management strategy, sound communication and training 
to heighten the impact of the knowledge generated, as well as knowledge management to pave the way for planning 
and implementing the project’s exploitation and dissemination pathways, and robust project coordination and ISO 
certified project management procedures. The work packages and tasks form a complex inter -woven matrix of 
actions, many interdependent, with very close interaction between the WP and  task leaders, which is essential for 
the delivery of the full suite of outputs. During the work planning stage, consideration has been given t o logistical 
matters, such as the time needed for ordering parts/components, the time needed for shipping of prototypes from 
development to test sites, installation times, the ‘what if’ scenarios of parts not arriving, installation work throwing 
up challen ges, delays in samples, delays in necessary inputs/results from feed in tasks or subtasks, etc. The link 
between WPs in terms of needed output material/sample quantity required by next activities were also accounted 
for. As this is a highly experienced dev elopment team, and in particular with many members of the consortium 
experienced in applied R&D under tight timeframes, as well as experience in integration work at industrial sites, the 
work planning has benefited from this ‘on the ground’ pragmatic experience, especially in terms of consideration of 
interdependencies and timings. The potential risks have been identified and contingency plans proposed, which are 
discussed in Section 3.1 under “Critical risks and mitigation measures”. Importantly, the colle ctive planning of the 
work plan has achieved the ‘buy-in’ of all the project developers and participants and an early understanding of the 
importance of a team effort, team planning and active communication among all WP and task leaders. Moreover, it 
is felt that the one-page Gantt itself (which also includes all the deliverables and milestones) serves as an effective 
tool for high level control and obtaining a “helicopter overview” as part of an effective project management.  
Pert diagram of the components showing their interdependencies  
 
 
Table 3.1a: List of work packages 
WP 
No Work Package Title No 
Lead  
Lead 
Participant  PMs Start 
Month 
End 
month 
1 Definition of specifications for the upcycled bio-based packaging  26 EUBP 41.4 1 4 
2 Development of bi o-based coatings and adhesives for tailoring packaging 
properties and EoL  4 AIMPLAS 155.0 3 24 
3 Upcycling of core materials and blends 3 CTB 91.0 3 24 
4 Biodegradation, compostability and materials recycling  17 OWS 202.0 6 48 
5 Upscaling and Validati on of upcycled packaging, textiles and composites from 
primary and secondary raw materials  13 SUDPACK 186.0 19 48 
6 Safety, Environmental and Economic Sustainability assessments  7 NTT 100.9 1 48 
7 Value chain roadmap and innovation impacts  22 KNEIA 102.9 1 48 
8 Project Management  1 IRIS 66.3 1 48 
Total person- months (PMs)   945.5   
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 38 of 70 
Gantt chart showing the timing of the different WPs and their components outline 
 
No WPs and Tasks Del. & MS 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48
1 #
1.1 Updated review of the state-of-the-art ■
1.2 Specifications of target bio-based packaging for food contact ■
1.3 Specifications of target recycled bio-based packaging and other recovered polymers applications ■ 
2 # # # # #
2.1 Development and processing of barrier protein coatings ■
2.2 Development and processing of water barrier PHA coatings ■ ■