2.3 Development and processing of bio-based adhesives ■
2.4 Surface treatments ■ ■
2.5 Development and characterization of multilayer structures ■ ■ 
3 # # # #
3.1 Development of  biodegradable PLA biomaterials using enzymes ■
3.2 Radiation treatment for selected materials and blends ■
3.3 Development and characterization of self- reinforced PLA materials ■
3.4 Development and characterization of micro fibrillated reinforced materials ■
4 # # #
4.1 Protocols to detect automatically the different Preserve materials ■
4.2 Material separation via coating removal ■
4.3 Upcycled reprocessing of mono- and multimaterial biopolymers using standard upgrading 
approaches and microfibrillar reinforcement ■
4.4 Enzymatic recycling and material upcycling ■
4.5 Biodegradability assessment in different environments ■
4.6 Organic recycling and home composting ■ 
5 # #
5.1 Novel Eco-design approaches for improved recycling and biodegradation of plastics for 
packaging, textiles and composites ■
5.2 Upscaling of food packaging production and functional characterisation ■
5.3 Validation of novel food and drinks packaging using upcycled materials ■
5.4 Processing and Validation of SRM into textiles, composites and packaging for personal care ■ 
6 # #
6.1 Environmental Life Cycle assessment (LCA) and eco-design ■
6.2 Life Cycle Cost and cost-feasibility ■
6.3 Social LCA assessments ■
6.4 Circularity assessment and DSS ■
6.5 Identification and assessment of regulatory requirements ■ 
7 #
7.1 Study of consumer perception ■
7.2 Standardisation, Policy & Regulatory framework
7.3 Communication Activities ■   ■
7.4 PRESERVE Dissemination and Training ■
7.5 Multi-Stakeholders Platform and the Circular Plastics Helix ■
7.6 PRESERVE Clustering
7.7 Innovation and IPR Management
7.8 Exploitation of results and Business model development ■ ■
7.9 Roadmap towards 2030 ■ 
8 Project Management ●ᴥ ¤ ●ᴥ¤ ¤ ●ᴥ ¤ ¤ ●ᴥ ¤ ¤ ●ᴥ ¤ ¤ ●ᴥ ¤ ¤ ●ᴥ ¤ ¤ ●ᴥ ¤ ¤ ●ᴥ ¤
8.1 Management of project resources ■
8.2 Implementation of the management procedures ■ ■
8.3 Coordination with and Reporting to the EC
D6.1-D6.5; 
MS14,17
D3.1-D3.4; 
MS4, 5, 7, 8
■ Deliverable / # Milestones ●Steering Committee Meetings / ¤ Technical Committee Meeting  / ᴥ Exploitation Committee Meeting
D1.1-D1.3; 
MS1
D4.1-D4.6; 
MS9, 12, 15
Value chain roadmap and innovation impacts
D5.1-D5.4; 
MS13, 16
D7.1-D7.8; 
MS18
D8.1-D8.3
Definition of specifications for the upcycled bio-based packaging
Upcycling of core materials and blends
Biodegradability, organic and material recycling and upcycling
Upscaling and validation of upcycled packaging, textiles and composites from primary and secondary 
raw materials
Safety, Environmental and Economic Sustainability assessments
Development of bio-based coatings and adhesives for tailoring packaging properties and EoL
D2.1-D2.8; 
MS2, 3, 6, 
10, 11
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 39 of 70 
Table 3.1b: Work packages description  
 
Objectives  
• To perform an updated review of the technical literature with attention to patents dealing with the target 
products and processes  
• To define specifications for the materials & processes for bio-based food-contact material (FCM)  
• To define specifications for the materials & processes to upcycle SRM via tailored PRESERVE approaches 
Description of work  
Task 1.1 Updated review of the state-of-the-art 
Leader: ASU-Partners involved: each partner will provide respectively scientific or industrial information relevant to 
his field 
An up -to-date review of scientific literature (peer reviewed journals and magazines), patents and company 
brochures will be carried out to ensure that all relevant research in the area is identified and that any 
developments since proposal preparation stage are included. This task will complement and update the State-of-
the-Art presented in Section 1.4 and  will map any competitive commercial approaches. This will also include a 
market survey and benchmarking of existing solutions and in development state. Special focus will be given to bio-
based plastics and their improvements routes in terms barrier properties, use of coatings, graftings, etc. as well as 
conversion processes and EoL options including biodegradation, upcycling, etc. Furthermore, the current offer and 
gaps in recycled biopolymers will be particularly surveyed. The results of this task will feed into review paper(s) 
that will be published in open access scientific journals of high reputation. 
Task 1.2 Specifications of target bio-based packaging for food contact 
Leader: EUBP-Partners involved: ASU, AIMPLAS, CTB, UNIBO, CARB, SUDPACK, GPI, DANONE, MDLZ, ITENE, IRIS, 
PLANET, ROMEI 
Materials specifications will be defined for each food -associated packaging application preselected in table 1. 4 
(defining in fu rther details the demonstrators’ requirements and types for packing dairy pro ducts, drinks and 
snacks) based on the participating packaging manufacturers’ as well as end users’ expertise and the properties of 
the materials currently used that will be consi dered as benchmarks. Other specific market requirements for the 
implementation of new materials will be defined (e.g. cost, regu latory / conformity and environmental aspects, 
processability, as well as ability to sort and recycle each packaging type, etc.). The available processes along the 
value chain of research and industrial partners will be mapped to support a smooth transfer of the results between 
WP2-3 and 5. In link with WP6, the safe by design (SdD) approach will be applied to the materials selecte d for 
further research in the following WPs. Initial knowledge on consumer acceptance of bio -packaging will be 
considered by ASU in link with WP7. 
Task 1.3. Specifications of target recycled bio-based packaging and other recovered polymers applications 
Leader: EUBP- Partners involved: ASU, AIMPLAS, CTB, UNIBO, CARB, SUDPACK, SIBO, BDF, DENIMX, IRIS, PLANET, 
SILON 
Materials specifications will be defined for each SRM application preselected in table 1.4 targeted to be obtained 
from recovered food packaging materials (defining in further details the demonstrators’ requirements and types 
for packing personal care products, for bags and for composites) based on the properties of the materials currently 
used that will be considered as benchmarks. Other specific m arket requirements for the implementation of new 
materials will be defined (e.g. tolerance to impurities r esulting from the recovery step, cost, regulatory / 
conformity and environmental aspects, processability, as well as ability to sort and recycle each packaging type, 
etc.). The available SRM processing capabilities along the value chain of research and ind ustrial partners will be 
mapped to support a smooth transfer of the results between WP2 -3 and 5. Moreover, the general consumers’ 
acceptance of upcycled polymers for packaging applications will be initially assessed by ASU in link with WP7. 
Deliverables  
D1.1 Report on the state -of-the art review  (M2) - written report made public after an embargo time allowing  
preparing review paper(s) to be published in the subsequent months. D1.1 will include up to academic literature, 
patent and commercial information and is linked to task 1.1  
D1.2 Specifications for bio -based packaging materials for food contact (M4)- written report including target 
Work package number 1 1 4 EUBP
Work package title
Participant number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
Participants
IRIS
ASU
CTB
AIMPLAS
IVV
ITENE
NTT
UNIBO
BIOPOL
PLANET
BOSTIK
CARB
SUDPACK
GPI
SIBO
DANONE
MDLZ
BDF
OWS
PLATO
ROMEI
DENIMX
SILON
KNEIA
CHX
EUBP
PMs per participant 5.0 3.0 1.0 1.0 1.5 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.9 1.0 3.0 1.5 1.5 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 6.0 41.4
Definition of specifications for the upcycled bio-based packaging 
Total
Start month End month lead beneficiary
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 40 of 70 
properties, processing and EoL aspects linked to task 1.2 
D1.3 Specifications of target recycled bio -based packaging and other recovered polymers applications  (M4) - 
written report including target properties, processing, processing and EoL aspects linked to task 1.3 
 
 
Objectives  
• To optimize the fermentation process of mcl-PHAs in order to increase their hydrophobicity.   
• To optimize the formulation of water-based and solvent based PHA coatings with enhanced water vapour 
barrier properties.  
• To fine tune protein coatings and adhesives for new multilayer structures with delamination potential.  
• To optimize coatings to avoid microfibre release from upcycled materials. 
• To improve the mechanical and barrier properties of biopolymers with eBeam treatment.  
Description of work  
For the tasks in this WP, commercially available bio-PE, bio-PET, moulded pulp trays will be sourced according to 
WP1 specifications, BO -PLA films will be provided by SUDPACK and different tailored paper and board will be 
provided by GPI for coatings/ adhesives application trials whereas the partners involved in developing the EoL 
solutions for delaminating the developed coating will follow the inputs for WP4 (ROMEI, PLATO). 
 
Task 2.1. Development and processing of barrier protein coatings 
Subtask 2.1.1. Coating Optimization and upscale of protein coatings to the project targets- Leader: ASU   Partners 
involved: IVV 
Based on prior developments, aqueous protein -based coating formulations will be optimized regarding their 
barrier and mechanical properties and tailored for target paper and polymer substrates. Commercially available 
whey protein with high performance and purity will be used. The protein dry matter in the formulation is typically 
between 5 and 20 % (w/w). Thermal treatments such as denaturatio n to make functional groups available for 
cross-linking will be considered during the drying process or as a preliminary step. Adequate amounts and nature 
of plasticisers will be mixed to obtain the desired properties.  
Coatings application trials after surface activation by corona treatment of polymer substrates will be initially done 
using a lab scale coating automat (CUF 5 Sumet Messtechnik). Thereby coating parameters will be varied and 
optimized (e.g. temperature of the formulation, wet coating weight, coating speed as well as drying temperature 
and time). The coated sheets will be characterized regarding the relevant properties such as flexibility, mechanical 
stability and barrier properties (OTR, WVTR). The availability of surface functional groups (e .g. hydroxyl-, amino- 
and thiol-groups), which are necessary for maintaining adhesive forces in the foreseen laminat ion step (subtask 
2.3.1 and 2.5.3), will be monitored by FTIR, Raman and fluorescence spectroscopy of isocyanate -linked 
fluorophores. Following the requirements defined in WP1, this subtask also includes iteratively adjustments of the 
formulation / process in compliance with the envisaged demonstrators to ensure scalability.  
Subtask 2.1.2. Grafting with fatty acids to improve water vapour barrier- Leader: ASU   Partners involved: SUDPACK 
To obtain water vapour barrier appropriate for the envisaged demonstrators, FA grafting will be performed at lab 
scale by ASU. Pre-existing formulas developed in past and ongoing projects will be further optimized for application 
on the intended (coated) bio -based polymer films . This includes adjusting the formulas where needed to the 
polymer substrate, e.g. PLA, protein coatings etc., and optimiz ing the grafting process itself. Subsequently the 
water vapour barrier as well as the oxygen barrier will be analysed  as well as liquid repellency to determine the 
potential to generate possible easy emptying effects to reduce product wastes in the package. The most promising 
formula will then be selected for the subsequent tasks and upscaling at SUDPACK in WP5. 
Subtask 2.1.3 Metallization of protein-based coatings- Leader: IVV    Partners involved: ASU 
Inorganic barrier layers are used to improve the barrier properties of protein coatings (OTR < 1 cm 3 /m2 d bar, 
WVTR < 1 g /m 2 d). Where needed, planarization layers to smoothen the substrate surface will be applied. The 
process is divided in i) drying to <2.5% water content; ii) physical vapour deposition (PVD); iii) equilibration at 50% 
RH to maintain protein plasticity.  Inorganic barriers are very thin metals (Al) or metal oxides (Al 2O3, SiOx) layers 
with thicknesses down to 80 nm. They will be deposited by eBeam evaporation in a high vacuum chamber in a roll-
to-roll process (coating width ~30 cm). Inorganic barrier layers will be characterized regarding permeability (OTR, 
WVTR), surface morphology, layer homogeneity and thickness (electron microscopy, AFM). 
   
Work package number 2 3 24
Work package title
Participant number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
Participants
IRIS
ASU
CTB
AIMPLAS
IVV
ITENE
NTT
UNIBO
BIOPOL
PLANET
BOSTIK
CARB
SUDPACK
GPI
SIBO
DANONE
MDLZ
BDF
OWS
PLATO
ROMEI
DENIMX
SILON
KNEIA
CHX
EUBP
PMs per participant 10.0 11.0 7.0 30.0 18.0 23.0 0.0 10.0 22.0 0.0 18.0 0.0 3.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 155.0
Development of bio-based coatings and adhesives for tailoring packaging properties and EoL 
Total
Start month End month AIMPLASlead beneficiary
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 41 of 70 
Task 2.2. Development and processing of water barrier PHA coatings 
Subtask 2.2.1. Optimization of the PHA fermentation process - Leader: BIOPOL    Partners involved: AIMPLAS 
The objective of this subtask is to provide enough PHA material for the PHA coatings in the subsequent subtask. 
We will take advantage of modified strains and fermentation processes developed in  the previous REFUCOAT 
project, adapting the processes based on the feedback from subtask 2.2.2. 
Synthesis of PHA modified with lipids groups in order to increase the PHAs hydr ophobicity. The different 
production pathways of the selected Pseudomonas and ot her bacterial strains will be exploited. The main 
monomer in this case will be 3-hydroxydecanoate, but 3-hydroxy-5-dodecenoate and 3-hydroxy-7-tetradecenoate 
will also be produ ced. When lipids are employed, the mcl -PHA is produced through the β-oxidation pathway. In 
this case, the structure of the precursor is recovered in the resulting mcl -PHA. In order to obtain higher 
hydrophobicity in the mcl -PHA, mutants of Pseudomonas strains in the β-oxidation pathway will be employed. 
Other functionalities will be obtained by combination of substrates and modified strains. A range of different 
modified mcl-PHA will be obtained and their composition will be analyzed by GC-FID and GC-MS.  
Down-stream process. Isolation and purification procedures will be a pplied: biomass concentration, cell 
disruption, polymer extraction and polymer precipitation, will be developed initially in lab scale trials by using low 
toxicity bio-based solvents that c an be recycled during several cycles. The molecular weight and poly dispersity 
index will be analyzed by GPC.  
Scale-up production. Based on previous developments, the fermentation and downstream processes will be 
scaled-up to 300-L with the most promising polymer. At least 10 kgs of PHA will be delivered to subtask 2.2.2. 
Subtask 2.2.2. Optimization of the PHA water vapour barrier coatings formulation - Leader: AIMPLAS - Partners 
involved: CTB, BIOPOL, BOSTIK 
In this task, the optimization of formulation of the PHA coating will be carried out following two different strategies 
based on ongoing projects: solvent -based formulations by AIMPLAS and recently patented plastisol technology 
(solvent free) by CTB. Both formulations will be optimized to reach the specific project target defined in WP1 to 
obtain minimal water vapour pe rmeability and an increased durability. This can be achieved by increasing the 
crystallinity with nucleating agents, adding hydrophobicity w ith different additives (fatty acids, waxes) and by 
crosslinking the PHA. Both conventional food contact approved crosslinkers, such as polymeric carbodiimides and 
polyisocyanates as well as novel biobased crosslinkers based on starch aldehydes, citric acid or itaconic anhydrides 
will be investigated. PHA modifications with bio -based 10 -undecenoic acid that could provid e antimicrobial 
properties from BOSTIK will be studied as well. Also, a variety of plasticisers will be tested as they can heavily 
influence the biodegradation, flexibility and durability of the coatings. Additives will also be added to the 
formulation to provide specific characteristics and adequate conditions for the drying process, as well as to 
improve the printing quality on the polymer substrate or the compatibility with the protein coatings and adhesives 
developed in tasks 2.1 and 2.3. Substrate pre-treatment with corona or plasma will be considered to improve the 
printability.  
The different coatings obtained with both strategies will be printed at lab -scale at different application weights. 
Parameters like drying temperature and time will be iterati vely modified to get the correct evaporation of the 
solvent. The quality of the printed samples will be validated by adhesion and abrasion tests according to ISO 2409 
and ISO 105 -X12 respectively. Furthermore, the WVTR and OTR will be measured. The obtaine d values will be 
decisive for the selection of the appropriate grammage to apply,  as well as in selecting the most suitable 
formulations for the different demonstrators in WP5. Cobb tests for liquid and grease resistance will be also 
performed following the requirements defined in WP1. Subsequently, printing tests will be carried out a t the 
laboratory level of the selected formulations using different coating methodologies depending on the process 
requirements defined in WP1 for the final demonstrators (fle xography, dip -coating, gravure -coating, slot-die 
coating, spray-coating, etc.). The application parameters and the viscosity will be optimized.  
   
Task 2.3. Development and processing of bio-based adhesives  
Subtask 2.3.1. Polyurethane wet -chemical coating adhesives - Leader: BOSTIK (Arkema), Partners involved: IVV, 
UNIBO 
The wet- chemical adhesives will be developed for laminat ing substrates, which are already coated with protein 
barrier coating or primer in Task 2.5.1 (so called face-to-face lamination). The adhesives will be polyurethane (PU) 
based. Their application process will be by means of gravure, reverse-roll or kiss-coating process. Covalent bonds 
with the protein functional groups will be formed with developed isocyanate-functionalized pre-polymers. A high 
availability of isocyanate groups in the branched pre -polymer is k ey to maintain strong adhesion to the protein 
coatings. The prepolymer backbone will originate from >50% biobased monomers (e.g. vegetable oil polyols) and 
will be developed by polycondensation during a non-aqueous process. 
Oligomers obtained via enzymatic recycling in task 4.4 and modified with specific functional groups will also be 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 42 of 70 
investigated as prepolymer source. The amount of partly bio-based adhesive used for lamination is generally low 
(dry layer thickness ~3g/m 2 substrate) allowing meeting the target bio-content for the laminated. Adhesives will 
be characterized by SEC-GPC, FTIR and possibly NMR where necessary. Initial lamination tests with coatings from 
subtask 2.1.1 will be performed and laminate bond strength will be measured according to standards used by the 
flexible packaging industry (e.g. T-peel-test ASTM D 1876 / DIN 55529 ) according to the specifications defined in 
WP1. A typical strength of 4 N / 15 mm is expec ted to be achievable. Based on these results , at least one 
formulation will be selected, upscaled (>10 L) and tested on the roll-to-roll coating pilot plant at IVV in WP 2.5. 
Subtask 2.3.2. Hot melt adhesives - Leader: IVV -Partners involved: BOSTIK, UNIBO 
A biodegradable hot melt adhesive based on casein will be developed by IVV for lamination of polymeric tray 
sheets (for further thermoforming) and as planarization layer on paper/cardboard substrates. Casein powder will 
be compounded using a co -rotating t win screw extruder (Dr. Collin, 24 D, 25 mm diameter) with selected 
plasticizers (20-80% of water, glycerol, urea, other sugar alcohols, PEG,  …) or further plant -based proteins (e.g. 
soy or sunflower). Oligomers obtained in task 4.4, and, if necessary, che mically modified, will also be tested for 
their use as plasticizers for adhesive formulations. The melt processing temperature of the plasticized protein 
mixture is typically at ~ 80-120°C, which should be below the substrate melting temperature and below the protein 
degradation temperature. Produced compounds will be characterized thermally ( by DSC) and mechanically 
(Young’s modulus, tensile strength, elongation at break).  
   
Task 2.4. Surface treatments.  
Subtask 2.4.1. Optimization of the formulation of Functional Finishing treatment to reduce microplastics -Leader: 
ITENE - Partners involved: UNIBO, IRIS, CTB 
Our target is to provide a functional coating for the durable textile SRM applications showing long-term durability 
and high-performance even after several washings, thus avoiding the microfibre release/detachment. Different 
chemical compounds and polymers, specifically the upcycled polyesters produced in task 4.4 will be evaluated as 
solutions improving the abrasion resistance and avoiding fibre breakage. Lab scale reactors and mixing equipment 
will be used to optimally formulate the finish or coating. This development will be performed at laboratory scale 
using different techniques previous to upscaling.  
A preliminary stage to determine the coating effectiveness will be to determine the level of microplastics and/or 
nanoplastics release during the intended conditions of use for  standard uncoated upcycled non-woven fabrics 
provided by SILON. To test both coated and uncoated fabrics, two main approaches will be followed: a) washing 
trials (based on ISO 105 -C06:2010) evaluating released fibres, and b) mesocosm (internally developed 
methodology by ITENE) studies in freshwater and marine water to simulate a direct release into the environment, 
with either a continuous point-source discharge, and accidental discharge. In both cases, several physico-chemical 
analyses will be performed to assess release, morphology of particles, using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) 
for samples collected in filters and Dynamic light scattering (DLS) (UNIBO) for water samples. Further studies using 
FTIR, Raman,  and eventually X -ray photoelectron (XPS) characterization will be conducted to have a better 
understanding of the composition of released fibers and particles. IRIS will also apply high resolution hyperspectral 
imaging as a fast detection method to determine the size and composition of the released microplastics. 
Subtask 2.4.2. eBeam treatment to improve surface properties- Leader: ASU -  Partners involved: NTT 
Selected materials, e.g. protein coated and FA-grafted bio-based polymer films or coated textiles from tasks 2.1-
2.4.1, will be irradiated by electron beam (eBeam) treatment at lab scale by ASU in order to further impr ove the 
mechanical and barrier properties or stability by crosslinking. As electron irradiation can induce both crosslinking 
and chain scission, the process parameters such as dose, voltage and atmosphere will be iteratively chosen to 
ensure crosslinking a s dominant eBeam effect. Irradiated films wil l then be analysed regarding mechanical and 
barrier properties (WVP, OTR) at ASU and compared to the untreated samples by the material provider. Hygienic 
and/ or antimicrobial effects in presence of selected add itives will also be checked. Treated materials will be 
provided to WP4 to ascertain the effect on the materials reprocessability. Furthermore, where relevant, the effect 
of eBeam regarding the release of microplastic will be analysed by ITENE in the previo us subtask . The most 
promising results and process parameters will then feed in Task 2.5 and WP5. 
   
Task 2.5. Development and characterization of multilayer structures  
Subtask 2.5.1. Coatings application and characterization of the coated film - Leader: AIMPLAS-  Partners involved: 
ASU, IVV 
The formulation of the different coatings (protein and PHA) as well as the adhesives will be upscaled and applied 
on different substrates at pilot plant scale to test their lamination and further convertibility where required.  
Regarding the formulation of PHA, two formulations, one for each strategy, will be selected to be upscaled based 
on the characterization results obtained in Task 2.2. Batches of up to 30 L will be obtained in 50 L glass reactors. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 43 of 70 
Once prepared, the coating will be applied at pilot scale usin g different printing technologies depending on the 
defined demonstrators. At least 100 m of PHA -coated films will be produced to check the coating performance. 
Mechanical and barrier properties will be measured at this point. 
Regarding the protein coatings, based on these results obtained in task 2.1.1., at least one formulation per protein 
will be selected and upscaled (3-5 L) for tests on the roll-to-roll coating pilot plant at IVV. The process parameters 
will be iteratively adjusted and optimized in compliance with the envisaged demonstrators to ensure scalability in 
WP5. This includes, inter alia, the analyses of mechanical and barrier properties. FA grafting will be applied when 
needed as indicated in Table 1.4 to reach higher barrier properties and or surface repellence properties. 
Regarding the adhesive formulations, selected adhesive formulations from task 2.3 will be upscaled at BOSTIK (5-
10 kg): the urethane-based crosslinking system that will be applied by means of wet -chemical coating (between 
protein-coated polymer substrates) and the protein -based hot -melt thermoplastic that will be applied by co -
extrusion lamination process (on thermoformable polymer sheets or on cardboard). 
Materials will be provided to WP4 for the biodegradability tests. If th e biodegradation rates are not enough, 
modification on the different formulations will be performed.  
Subtask 2.5.2. Application of a functional fi nishing treatment to reduce microplastics - Leader: ITENE- Partners 
involved: CTB 
On this subtask, processing steps and methodologies considered on subtask 2.4.1 will be upscaled. Jacketed 
reactors with a maximum capacity of 100L will be used to perform required mixing/reaction steps for the selected 
formulations for this task and WP5. CTB will perform application test on different textile substrates on pilot scale 
machines (width 50 cm). Both coating (application with knife coating, transfer coating, …) and finish (dipping and 
full impregnation) technologies will be tested. Characterization tests will be performed based on aforementioned 
2.4.1 tests. 
Subtask 2.5.3. Production and characterization of multilayer structures- Leader: IVV -   Partners involved: BOSTIK, 
AIMPLAS, ASU, IRIS 
Preliminary multilayer structures defined for the initial demonstrators from WP5 wi ll be produced and 
characterized. The focus will be given to the processability of the novel materials coming from Tasks 2.1 to 2.4, 
their machinability, thermoformability w here required, compatibility between the layers, adhesion to the 
substrates, final laminate quality, and barrier performance. For the processes involving new coatings with resulting 
properties highly depending on the homogeneity of the application, IRIS wi ll apply spectral reflectance 
measurements as a support to process optimization. Feedback will be given to Tasks 2.1-2.4 in case improvements 
are needed. The best performing and most applicable formulation and combination thereof in each multilayer 
structure will be identified as input for upscaling in WP5. The wet chemical coating and lamination roll-to-roll pilot 
line at IVV and AIMPLAS will be used for the production of the multilayer structures based on barrier coatings and 
PU adhesives. The thermoplastic hot melt adhesive lamination will be performed using the co-extrusion lamination 
process at IVV (for polymeric substrates) and AIMPLAS (for cardboard substrates).  
The different structures will be characterized in terms of laminate bond strength between the layers, OTR, WVTR, 
as well as regarding sealability, mechanical and optical pr operties in order  to assess whether the required 
properties are met. Where applicable , contact angle measurements will be performed to address repellence 
properties (IVV, AIMPLAS, ASU…). Furthermore, for the tray demonstrators, preliminary thermoforming tests will 
be carried out at IVV. Parameters such as the heating power, heating and cooling time and vacuum will be 
optimized. The best structure obtained w ill be characterized in terms of mechanical and barrier properties to 
evaluate the effect of the process on the properties of the structure.   
Likewise, for cosmetic packaging bottles, preliminary test of injection blow moulding  will be carried out  by 
AIMPLAS. Since the melting temperature of PHA is low and can degrade during processing, a laminated structure 
PLA/PHA/PLA will be obtained first. Next, in-mould labelling labels with the proper geometry and dimensions to 
completely cover the prototype mold will be produced. Parameters such as temperature and air pressure will be 
optimized to ensure good integr ation. For moulded pulp packaging, a similar labelling approach  and/or spray 
coating will be tested. For the spray coating application , different coating techniques such as high-volume low 
pressure and/or airless spraying will be tested depending on the coating materials selected.  
The effect of eBeam will be tested on selected structures (ASU). 
Materials will be provided by M18 to WP4 for EoL analysis and sufficient amount of the different selected coatings 
and adhesives will be available by M24 for WP5.  
Deliverables  
D2.1 Development of barrier protein coatings.  (M15)- report on barrier coating development, grafting and 
metallization strategies linked to task 2.1. 
D2.2. Optimization of PHA fermentation process. (M12) – report on the optimization of the P HA fermentation 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 44 of 70 
process linked to task 2.2 
D2.3. PHA coating formulation.  (M15)- report on water barrier PHA coating formulations linked to task 2.2 
D2.4. Development of bio -based adhesiv es. (M18) report on wet chemical coating adhesives and hot melt 
adhesives linked to task 2.3 
D2.5. Functional textile finishing coating to reduce microplastics. (M18) report on the results with different surface 
coatings of textiles linked to task 2.4. 
D2.6. eBeam Treatment. (M15) report on eBeam treatment of coated/ grafted bio-based material, linked task 2.4. 
D2.7. Production of multilayer structures. (M18) report on the production of multilayer structures according to the 
final demonstrators linked to task 2.5. 
D2.8. Upscaling of coatings and adhesives. (M24) report on the upscaling process of formulation and application 
of coatings and adhesives linked to task 2.5. 
 
 
 
 
Objectives  
• Development of biodegradable PLA and PLA blends in mild conditions by using encapsulated enzyme 
formulations to obtain home compostable biobased materials 
• Set up of eBeam treatment to improve the properties of selected materials and blends 
• Development and characterization of self - and micro fibrillated reinforced biobased materials with 
improved mechanical and barrier properties 
Description of work 
In this WP, core materials and blends will be upcycled improving the material properties by using  enzymes, 
radiation treatment and/or by applying microfibrillar and self -reinforced structures. A stepwise strategy will be 
followed: the research will start at lab scale allowing a fast screening. The most promising routes will be 
investigated at pilot scale, finally resulting in a selection of upcycled materials to be evaluated at semi -industrial 
scale in textiles, packaging and composites in WP5 to be injected or used as substrates for laminates. 
Task 3.1 Development of biodegradable PLA biomaterials using enzymes 
Leader: CARB -Partners involved: OWS, ITENE, CTB (for all subtasks) 
CARB has developed enzymated masterbatches enabling to reach home compost ability for PLA materials and 
packaging, especially when recycling has so far been difficult due to multilayer structure  or soiled packaging. In 
this task , enzymated masterbatches developed by CARB will be introduced in PLA and rPLA to tackle the 
applications where organic recycling may be preferable. 
Subtask 3.1.1 First generation of enzymated biomaterials 
CARB will provide the partners with a first generation of enzymated masterbatch enabling PLA biodegradation in 
home composting conditions. Small scale p lastics materials will be produced in order to evaluate the optimum 
concentration of the enzymated masterbatch that needs to be introduced according to the final materials 
requirements (e.g. thickness). Analytical and screening methods will be used in a fi rst intention to control and 
validate the enzyme activity within the tested compounds.  This first generation of enzymated masterbatch will 
neither be approved for Food Contact by EFSA, nor by FDA and will be thus used either for experimental purpose 
or being used behind a functional barrier, as an exception already approved by the packaging regulations both in 
Europe and in the US. Its application will be also considered for packaging personal care products as well as for 
textiles and transport packaging using SRM from WP4. As such, additional testing will be able to be conducted for 
fiber applications in relation with CTB.  
Subtask 3.1.2 Second generation of enzymated biomaterials 
By M24, CARB will produce a second generation of self -degrading PLA masterbat ch, hav ing enhanced 
thermostability and for which a Food Contact Authorization will have been requested both at European level with 
EFSA but also in the USA. Additional volumes of enzymated masterbatch will be provided for validation on pilot 
lines (or ind ustrial, depending on the application targeted) to enlarge the potential markets to food packaging 
applications which will be validated in WP5.  
The enzymated masterbatches will be provided to WP 4 to test the most effective EoL, including home composting 
and soil biodegradation conditions. After this initial validation, masterbatches will be produced at up to hundred 
kilo scale to be tested on the plastic processing lines of the partners in WP5. 
Work package number 3 3 24 CTB
Work package title
Participant number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
Participants
IRIS
ASU
CTB
AIMPLAS
IVV
ITENE
NTT
UNIBO
BIOPOL
PLANET
BOSTIK
CARB
SUDPACK
GPI
SIBO
DANONE
MDLZ
BDF
OWS
PLATO
ROMEI
DENIMX
SILON
KNEIA
CHX
EUBP
PMs per participant 14.0 11.0 16.0 15.0 0.0 0.0 3.0 0.0 0.0 10.0 0.0 18.0 2.0 0.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 91.0
Total
lead beneficiaryEnd monthStart month
Upcycling of core materials and blends
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 45 of 70 
Task 3.2 Radiation treatment for selected materials and blends 
Leader: ASU - Partners involved: NTT, ITENE 
As tested for the coating in WP2, r adiation treatment will also be applied on the core bio-based packaging 
materials with the aim to improve their barrier properties and me chanical performance. Samples to treat will be 
provided by tasks 3.1 and 3.1. The conditions for eBeam treatment will be iteratively set -up at lab scale by ASU. 
To identify the optimal conditions, a broad range of doses and different atmosphere conditions will be surveyed. 
Optimal conditions defined at lab scale from ASU will then be transferred on the semi-industrial scale available at 
NTT facility. The reliability of the process will be assessed by running the process in continuous mode and by 
defining the final parameters to be implemented a t large scale. The effect of eBeam radiation on the properties 
of biopolymers will be assessed. This will include the characterization of the mechanical and barrier properties 
(WVTR, OTR) as well as determination of degree of crosslinking, colour analyses and contact angle measurements 
at lab scale at ASU. Moreover, radical species generated during the irradiation will be monitored by EPR 
spectroscopy to identify and characterize the recombination mechanism inducing pol ymer chain crosslinking. 
Enzymatic deg radation and reprocessing of samples will be carried out in WP4 to prove that the crosslinked 
polymers is still recyclable mechanically and/or organically. 
Task 3.3 Development and characterization of self- reinforced PLA materials 
Leader: CTB - Partners involved: ASU, AIMPLAS, SILON, SUDPACK 
In this task, PLA materials with both low and high melting temperatures (Tm) will be selected, which will in a next 
step be combined to a self-reinforced composite. The materials will be analysed according to their processability 
in foil (CTB, AIMPLAS) and  textile filament (CTB, SILON) extrusion for corresponding processing conditions, e.g. 
high draw ratios and extruder temperatures of about 200-240°C. This includes preliminary evaluation of the flow 
behaviour via structural and rheological measurements in order to achieve good processing properties, but also 
to reach the mechanical requirements. An evaluation of the potential for extrusion / melt spinning will be done 
using a pilot scale extrusion process. Full characte risation of the produced foils / yarns  will be performed. The 
characterisation tests include mechanical analysis (tensile strength, modulus, elongation at break), determination 
of the materials density (correlated to molecular structure and composition), s hrinkage triggered by heat, and 
resulting shift in mechanical properties, and DSC (crystalline structure, melting temperature).  
After extrusion, the low and high melting foils / filaments will be combined in different structures and transformed 
into self-reinforced thermoformed sheets, foils to be used in injection moulding applications (in mould labelling 
technology in WP2/5 ) or preforms usable for extrusion blowing. A first screening and quality control of the 
produced PLA foils and filaments will be per formed using film stacking and filamen t winding respectively, and 
compression moulding to manufacture unidirectional composite sheets, for mechanical tests and back-calculation 
of the properties of the PLA reinforcement sheets.  Sheets and films will be pr ovided to task 2.5. SILON, with the 
support of CTB and AIMPLAS, will upscale the PLA self -reinforced materials and provide self -reinforced sheets, 
films or textiles to WP5, which quality will be assessed by SUDPACK to ensure further convertibility. 
Task 3.4 Development and characterization of micro fibrillated reinforced materials 
Leader: CTB - Partners involved: ASU, IRIS, ITENE, AIMPLAS, PLANET, SILON (for all subtasks) 
While task 3.3 is focusing on PLA as matrix, other biopolymer matrices such as bio -PE, bio-PET and bio-PA could 
be considered as well. As those materials are typically used for the production of multilayered structures in order 
to reach the desired propert ies, polymer blends and their possibility to form micro -fibrillated structures will be  
considered using virgin materials in this task as a basis for the use as EoL upcycling option for coextruded structures 
in WP4. Only well -chosen polymer pairs have suita ble characteristics so that a fibrillar polymer structure will be 
formed. Three biopol ymer grades will be selected: bio -PET, bio -PA and bio -PE. The bio -PE will be selected as 
reference matrix polymer. As a microfibril forming phase, bio-PET and bio-PA will be chosen. In this task, a selection 
of suitable biobased grades will be made based o n a detailed characterization of rheological behavior (capillary 
and rotational rheometry) and thermal properties (DSC, MDSC and TGA). Based on the results of these tests  and 
the selection rules for microfibril formation, grades that have the potential to form microfibrils will be selected for 
each of the reference polymers. 
Subtask 3.4.1 Compounding trials with integrated drawing at low speed 
Firstly, a study at laborator y scale of different polymer pairs will be carried out by AIMPLAS using a BRABENDER 
torque rheometer, which is a discontinuous mixer to adjust additive ratios and processing conditions of the 
selected formulations. The rheometer consists of a 55 cm 3 mixing chamber with twin screws . This unit sets the 
temperature of the mixing chamber and the screws speed. During the mixing process, the evolution of the torque 
and processing temperature versus time is recorded, allowing to study the influence of the differen t parameters 
and of the specific formulation on the viscosity and stability of the compound. This procedure will obtain different 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 46 of 70 
formulations of compounds in batches of around 40-50g. 
Polymer pairs which have appropriate rheological and thermal properties  will be evaluated on a 
compounding/drawing line at CTB. The compounding section will be followed by a drawing stage allowing to 
produce thick stretched filaments with a limited speed. This extrusion setup will be used to confirm the formation 
of a microfi brillar phase with each of the selected polymer pairs. To increase the adhesion betwee n the two 
polymers, different compatibilizers will be tested. The extrudates will be characterized by standard analysis 
techniques to evaluate the extrusion process: rheo logy (MFI and capillary rheology), transitions in polymer 
structure (DSC and MDSC) and microscopic structure (microscopy and SEM). A small DOE (design of experiments 
including the influence of extrusion screw speed, extrusion temperature, roller speed, dra wing ratio, type and 
concentration of compatibilizer, etc.) may be needed to optimize the extrusion process in terms of microfibril 
formation, fibril size and shape.  
Once the correct polymer grades, concentration and preliminary extrusion conditions have been selected, CTB will 
produce pellets with microfibrillated morphology by pelletisin g the extrudate from their extrusion line. The 
production of the precompounded micr ofibrillar reinforced formulation will be further upscaled by PLANET to 
supply to WP5. 
Subtask 3.4.2 Further processing of precompounded microfibrillar reinforced formulation 
The materials generated in task 3.4.1 (pelletized compounds with bio-PET and bio-PA microfibrils) will be evaluated 
in terms of their processability in different plastic processing lines: injection moulding, foil extrusion and textile 
fibre extrusion. Care should be taken that the microfibrillar structure produced during the compounding step is 
not destroyed in the new melt process. This implies that the processing tempe rature will be kept considerably 
lower than the melting temperature of the fibrils (PET or PA). The extrusion temperature is in this case moderate 
(ca. 200 -240°C). The presence of the non -molten microfibrillar structures in the polymer melt might cause 
extrusion problems especially at filters and in the die or spin -packs where the polymer h as to pass through fine 
cross sections. It can be required to adjust the die or the spin-packs or to remove the filters to obtain an acceptable 
processability. The amount  of PET or PA in the formulation in this subtask will be limited to maximum 10% to 
minimize this risk. It also needs to be evaluated if drawing of the foil / filament is still possible to the same extent 
as drawing of a homopolymer foil / filament without breaking the microfibrils or disturbing the internal matrix 
structures (creation of vo ids). Following parameters are important in the optimization process: temperature 
profile, shear rate, mass flow, draw ratio etc. The formed injection moulded products, f oils and filaments will be 
fully characterized with a focus on the property improvemen ts thanks to the fibrillar reinforcements (tensile 
strength & modulus, creep, barrier properties, impact resistance, etc.). Films/ sheets will be provided to task 2.5.  
Subtask 3.4.3 In-line formation of the microfibrillar structure 
In the case of foil and filament extrusion, the development of a fibrillar polymer structure would preferentially be 
obtained via a single -step extrusion process, without the need of a prelimin ary compounding step. This process 
will start from a dry blend of both polymers (and a  compatibilising agent) that is dosed in the feeder of the 
extrusion line.  
The same grades of matrix and fibril-forming polymer as used in task 3.4.1 will be selected. Next to the formulation 
with up to 10% fibril-forming polymer, also formulations with a  higher amount will be selected (e.g. 60:40). In 
contrast to task 3.4.2, the temperature of the screw and the die or the spinneret should be high enough to allow 
melting the polyester/polyamide fraction. Consideration will be paid to avoid thermal degradat ion of matrix 
polymer. If needed, extra stabilized grades will be used. CTB and AIMPLAS will produce foils/sheets and textile 
filaments that will be further stretched on the extrusion line in order to induce the fibril formation. Maximizing 
elongation and orientation of the fibrils is crucial. The produced foils and filaments will be again fully characterized 
as in task 3.4.2 and supplied to task 2.5 in order to produce multilayer structures.  
Subtask 3.4.4 Monitoring strategy for microfibrillar structure analysis 
In this task IRIS will develop an optical monitoring system to monitor the formation of the microfibrils within the 
composites as the morphology is a key parameter to the obtained performances. It is envisaged to test first the 
direct imaging possibly with polarization enhancement. In case such vision system cannot reach the required size 
resolution, indirect approaches such as extinction or laser diffraction that could correlate the microfibrils’ 
diameters across the analyzed filament section will be tested and calibrated against off line tests (e.g. TEM/SEM…). 
Tests will be performed in static (off line) configuration on sample materials with different microfibril sizes 
provided by CTB. After an initial design phase for a suitable test rig, the com ponents (light source, beam shaping 
and imaging optics, detector and data acquisition hardware) will be selected from commercially available options 
whenever possible and customized when necessary. The software needed for driving the device, processing the  
data and delivering the results will be designed. The right modelling/ imag e analysis package will be embedded. 
The initial results will allow a quick detection of the morphology “at line” but the techniques will be selected for 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 47 of 70 
their potential to be transferred post project to an inline monitoring configuration. 
Deliverables  
D3.1 Enzymated PLA to reach biodegradation under mild conditions (M24) Report linked to task 3.1 and related 
samples: first generation by M15 and second Food Contact compliant generation by M24  
D3.2 eBeam treatment of polymeric material  (M15)- report on the outcome of task 3.2 including eBeam -treated 
primary bioplastics to obtain barrier and mechanical properties similar to virgin alternatives. 
D3.3 Self-reinforcement of PLA (M24) Report describing the effect of self-reinforcement for PLA and samples 
D3.4 Microfibrillar reinforcement (M24) Report describing the effect of processing conditions and blend 
composition on the formation of microfibrils and the characteristics of microfibril containing end products as well 
as samples for WP5 
 
 
Objectives  
• To set-up sorting protocols for the different developed materials 
• To develop delamination technologies for PRESERVE multilayer films 
• To set up reprocessing of monomaterials using standard upcycling approaches and applying the principle 
of microfibrillar reinforcement for reprocessing multimaterial biopolymers 
• To develop enzymatic recycling approaches for polyesters and delamination  and to recover polyesters 
monomers/oligomers which will be reused to obtain new copolymers with targeted properties for specific 
applications 
• To examine the biodegradation of the developed coatings, adhesives and compounds in different 
environments in order to define biological EoL options and impact of accidental spill and to demonstrate 
increased biodegradability of PLA with embedded enzymes 
• To investigate the suitability of organic recycling by composting and/or anaerobic digestion 
Description of work  
Task 4.1. Protocols to detect automatically the different PRESERVE materials  
Leader: IRIS - Partners involved: ROMEI and materials providers from WP2, 3 and 5 (IVV, AIMPLAS, CTB, SUDPACK, 
GPI, SIBO…)  
The goal is to prove the ability to sort the novel materials developed in PRESERVE from other conventional 
commodities plastic ending together in the plastic waste stream s, so they can then be handled through their 
respectively adequate organic or mechanical recycling stream (multilayer with different coatings that may trigger 
delamination, MR PC, enzymated blends, e tc.), e .g. in case of mixed recyclable wastes or of inaccurate initial 
organic fraction separation at the consumer level. Samples will be supplied along the fine-tuning of the materials 
in WP2-3 and IRIS will use near infrared spectroscopy (NIR), hyper spectral imaging (HSI in the visible/ short wave 
IR and NIR ranges) and other photonic techniques as required to test the accuracy of the distinction among 
different materials thanks to digital image processing and chemometric analysis of the obtained spectra  initially 
established for each mate rial and system independently. For meeting the requirements of all materials under 
study, the combination of results from different sources is expected to be required. The most suitable approach 
will be discussed with ROMEI and recommended for post project implementation in waste managers or recyclers’ 
sorting line. Once final materials are available from WP5, their correct identification will be verified.  
Task 4.2. Material separation via coating removal 
Leader: PLANET - Partners involved: ROMEI, IRIS, PLATO, CTB, GPI (for all subtasks) 
Subtask 4.2.1 Optimal conditions for material separation 
PLANET will be testing different water-based solutions with salts, and enzymatic detergents at different 
temperatures and pH in or der to establish the most performing conditions such as time, temperature and 
concentration of detergents versus the amount of plastic , which layers have to be separated, in terms of 
efficiency/cost/sustainability. First, PLANET will optimize the treatments in laboratory tests, on hundreds grams of 
the selected plastic multilayers from WP2, alone and in mixture with other plastic waste (e.g. monolayer films), 
allowing the separation of the layers while keeping with best potential for future industry transfe r thanks to 
greater materials availability. ROMEI will shred the plastic waste in their facilities and then provid e it to PLANET. 
The separation of the layers in films including whey -protein barrier coatings was previously achieved by washing 
Work package number 4 6 48 OWS
Work package title
Participant number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
Participants
IRIS
ASU
CTB
AIMPLAS
IVV
ITENE
NTT
UNIBO
BIOPOL
PLANET
BOSTIK
CARB
SUDPACK
GPI
SIBO
DANONE
MDLZ
BDF
OWS
PLATO
ROMEI
DENIMX
SILON
KNEIA
CHX
EUBP
PMs per participant 14.0 6.0 8.0 19.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 61.0 0.0 22.0 0.0 2.0 1.0 3.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 25.5 24.0 12.0 1.0 3.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 202.0
Total
Start month End month lead beneficiary
Biodegradation, compostability and materials recycling 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 48 of 70 
out the coatings with tepid water (37 ° C) and/or water at room temperature (20 °C) with enzymatic detergents. 
Alternatively, hot water (50 °C), or water containing specific salts, selected by PLANET could be used. Tests will be 
done with the different types of coatings /primers/adhesives combina tions that shall be removed to find , if 
possible, a versatile process. The different layers will then be tentatively separated by density  or hydrocyclone 
separation, at PLATO facilities, and the different polymeric layers will be characterized in terms of their molecular 
weight, rheological and thermal properties in order to estimate their possible performances in re-processing. CTB 
will support in screening the composition of the materials, and optimization of water bath, in terms  of selection 
of detergents or salts to be added to improve materials separation, applying Hansen Solubility Parameters to 
predict the dissolution capacity of the different adhesives among polymer layers. In the case of coated board and 
pulp packaging, rep ulping trials will be perf ormed at GPI before and after coating removal to devise the best 
approach in terms of compromise between process effectiveness and quality of the recovered fibres . The 
separated PHA will be reformulated as new coating tested in the production of the shampoo bottles in WP5. 
Subtask 4.2.2 Design and production of a pilot for material separation 
Using PLANET’s results from previous subtask, PLATO will design a specific pilot for the delamination and 
multilayers material density separation that will then be placed at ROMEI facilities. The plant will have a capacity 
of up to 10 Kg of plastic materials per batch to be treated, with raw multilayer material at the entry and separated 
monolayer materials at the exit. PLATO will also analyze the liquid water streams at the exit from the plant. ROMEI 
will use the pilot plant in their facilities to treat the PRESERVE materials initially from WP2 and provide them to 
PLANET for testing in laboratory scale for chemical, thermal, and morphological properties.  
Consequently materials, in the order of a few kilos per type,  coming from the pilot trials in WP5 and adequately 
sorted in task 4.1 will be recovered in the pilot to compare the properties with virgin polymers and define which 
treatment for multilayers separation optimally preserve the properties of the polymers for being re-processed for 
the production of new materials  (iteration with task 4.3)  based on known standard for plastic recyclates and 
market requirements. The easy removal of labels glued on packaging via the new adhesives will also be shown at 
PLATO. Scaling up options and process/products potentialities will be assessed by ROMEI with the help of PLATO 
on the basis of the achieved results. 
Task 4.3 Upcycled reprocessing of mono - and multimaterial biopolymers using standard upgrading approaches 
and microfibrillar reinforcement 
Leader: CTB  -Partners involved: SILON, AIMPLAS, PLANET, ASU, ROMEI (for all subtasks) 
In this task, the newly developed packaging materials will be evaluated for their recyclability. Different mechanical 
recycling routes will be investigated. For monomaterials (including those delaminated in the previous task), 
standard upgrading approaches will be used . For the bi - and multi -materials that cannot be separated,  the 
principle of the fibrillar reinforcement will be considered to upcycle the properties of the materials as described 
in WP3 for virgin materials. Mixed plastic waste will be treated in such a w ay that fibrillar structures are formed 
and that the recyclability of these more complex material combinations can be guaranteed. Compounds from this 
task will be provided to WP5 to produce the demonstrators from SRMs. 
Subtask 4.3.1 Reprocessing of monomaterials using standard upgrading approaches 
For the raw monomaterial streams, the materials optionally provided by ROMEI from the previous task will, when 
necessary, be shredded and reprocessed either in injection moulded test bars to evaluate their usabili ty in 
injection moulding applications (CTB) and in extruded foi ls (CTB, AIMPLAS) to evaluate the closed loop recycling 
back into foils to be used in new packaging applications. Besides injection moulding and foil extrusion, fiber 
spinning tests will be per formed by CTB and SILON. Both mono - and multifilament extrusion  trials will be 
performed (open loop recycling). The produced textile fibers will be processed into small textile structures in order 
to evaluate their properties. 
The rheological and the mechanical properties of all materials will be measured and compared with the properties 
of the virgin polymers. Since reprocessing might lead to a decrease in mechanical properties, the addition of 
additives will be tested in order to guarantee the mechanical properties and to obtain properties comparable with 
the properties of the virgin biopolymers. In order to perform a fast screening, PLANET will perform tests with a 
Haake Minijet extruder, working on few grams of material. Different chain extenders such as  Joncryl, nucleating 
agents such as LAK, PDLA, functional molecules such as epoxy plasticizers, functionalized oligomers of lactic acid, 
will be tested. 
Moreover, eBeam treatment as described in WP3 will be applied by ASU to upcycle the recycled biopolymers. The 
study of  eBeam effect will start with standard reprocess ed plastics available at ROMEI and SILON before the 
materials recovered from the project are ready. 
The introduction of high mechanical strengths PLA fibers, specific for PLA matrices will be investigated by CTB to  
create PLA waste matrix self -reinforced structures as described in WP3, aiming to upgrade PLA packaging waste 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 49 of 70 
into materials with high added value.  
Subtask 4.3.2 Reprocessing of bi-materials 
When reprocessing bi - and multimaterials, typically lower mecha nical properties are obtained due to a poo r 
compatibility of the different polymer types. Co -extruded foils will be initially prepared by CTB: bio -PET and bio-
PE, bio-PA and bio-PE. In a later stage, they will come from WP5 demonstrators. These coextruded materials will 
be recycled as blends, with out separation of the different materials. Recycling as such would lead to inferior 
mechanical properties even after compatibilization. In contrast, p rocessing these polymer blends by applying a 
high drawn ratio and creating a microfibrillar structure will create a remarkably broad spectrum of properties. The 
principle of microfibrillar reinforcement as described in WP3 will be applied on recycled biopolymer blends in 
order to increase significantly the mechanical and barrier properties and to upcycle to biobased waste polymers. 
The different processing routes as described in WP3 will be evaluated: injection moulding after precompounding 
in order to generate a microfibrillar reinforced formulation (CTB), and direct formation of a microfibrillar structure 
using foil extrusion (CTB, AIMPLAS) and textile fiber extrusion (CTB, SILON). Additionally, compatibilisers will be 
added (PLANET) and an eBeam treatment will be applied by ASU as described in WP3 in order to enhance the 
polymer compatibility and the resulting properties. 
Task 4.4. Enzymatic recycling and material upcycling  
Leader: UNIBO  - Partners involved: AIMPLAS 
Initially, the enzyme screening and development of the depolymerization protocol will be carried out on pure PLA. 
Then, prototypes obtained in other WPs will be used to further optimize the protocol. A number of commercially 
available hydrolytic enzymes (esterases, lipases, cutinases, etc.) will be screened to identify those able to degrade 
the selected target bioplastic. To this aim, thin polymer  films will be used and their degradation rate evaluated 
through gravimetric weight loss measurement, while the enzymes preferential cleavage activity  (endo- and/or 
exo-) will be assessed via analysis of monomers release (via HPLC-MS) and oligomers release (via solvent extraction 
and 1H-NMR) in the solution. Those exhibiting the highest degradation rate and a prevalent endo-cleavage activity 
will be selected for the development and optimization of the process for the production and recovery of polyesters 
oligomers. In particular, the average MW of the produced oligomers (via GPC), as well as the amount of monomers 
released (via HPLC -MS) will be evaluated after different reaction times under different pH and temperature 
conditions. In addition, the hydrolysis reaction will be investigated using water/organic solvent biphasic systems. 
Enzyme immobilization/protection st rategies will also be taken into account in order to increase the enzyme 
stability in the biphasic system. Purification protocols of the release d by-products from biodegradation will be 
settled up. The enzymatic degradation process will be upscaled (AIMPLAS) in order to obtain sufficient amount of 
extracts for the further activities. 
Indeed, monomers and/or oligomers so obtained will be characterized and chemically modified in order to obtain 
macromolecular structures that can fit the requests of specific a pplications, adhesives and coatings for textiles, 
that will be developed in WP2. Oligomers at moderate molecular weights with controlled terminal groups will be 
prepared and copolymers with multifunctionalities will be synthesized. The continuous flow of i nformation with 
partners of WP2 and WP5 working in the preparation of prototypes will allow UNIBO to improve the design of 
polymeric structures suitable for the chosen applications. 
Task 4.5. Biodegradability assessment in different environments  
Leader: OWS  -Partners involved: Partners of WP2 and WP3, especially CARB 
The coatings and adhesives developed in WP2 and compounds of WP3 as well as der ived films will be evaluated 
for biodegradation according to international standards in different environments such as for example freshwater 
(ISO 14851), soil (ISO 17556), mari ne (ASTM D6691), compost (ISO 14855) and anaerobic digestate (ISO 15985). 
This will allow to determine possible biological end -of-life options (e.g. composting) and suitable applications of 
developed products, but also will indicate the impact of accidental litter into the environment. One of the 
innovative outcomes of the project is to develop a PLA material with embedded enzymes in order to increase the 
biodegradation rate and moreover establish biodegradation in mild conditions. As biodegradation testing  takes 
time, these developed PLA compounds will be evaluated early in the proje ct to degrade in compost at ambient 
temperature (28°C) and, when positive, in other environments at mild conditions. The maximum allowed test 
duration to obtain complete biodegr adation is 1 year for home composting. The results will be directly 
communicated to partners of WP2 and WP3 in order to perform modifications if needed to ensure sufficient 
biodegradation rates. Selected formulations meeting the respective biodegradation criteria for organic recycling 
or home composting where applicable will be recommended for scaling up of the demonstrator solutions in WP5. 
Task 4.6. Organic recycling and home composting  
Leader: OWS  -Partners involved: Partners of WP5 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 50 of 70 
Selected packaging demonstrators from WP5 will be evaluated for suitability for organic recycling by industrial 
composting in line with EN 13432 Requirements for packaging recoverable through composting and 
biodegradation - Test scheme and evaluation criteria for the final acceptance of packaging (2000) and by home 
composting in line with NF T 51 -800 Plastics – Specifications for plastic suitable for home composting  (2015) (no 
standard on European level is yet available), which is similar to the certification systems OK compost HOME of TÜV 
AUSTRIA Belgium and DIN-Geprüft home compostable. This does not only involve biodegradation testing, but also 
material characteristics (mainly heavy metals), disintegration and effect on plant toxicity. Disintegration, which is 
the physically falling apart of a material, is strongly influenced by thickness and density and will be carefully 
examined and therefore the partners will be requested to provide a range of samples with variable attributes. 
Results will be communicated to WP5 partners. Furthermore, the new concept of organic recycling by treatment 
in industrial b iogasification plants will be evaluated. Therefore, not only the biodegradation, but also the 
disintegration under anaerobic conditions will be evaluated with the option of subsequent aerobic composting to 
represent industrial biogasification plants with additional composting step.  
Deliverables  
D4.1 EoL material monitoring (M36)- Report on the capacity to automatically sort the new materials for the correct 
waste management and recommendation for future use in sorting facilities, linked to task 4.1  
D4.2 Enzymatic recycling (M36)- Report on enzymatic degradation; linked to tasks 4.4 
D4.3 Biodegradation of developed materials in different environments under home composting and anaerobic 
conditions (M36)- Interim report on biodegradation behavior linked to task 4.5  
D4.4 Material separation (M36)- Report on pilot plant for materials separation and resulting recovered materials, 
linked to task 4.2  
D4.5 Recycling of biomaterials (M42)- Final report on the upcycling routes for recycled biobased packaging waste 
from WP5 including upgraded reprocessing,  microfibrillar-reinforcement and final enzymatic re cycling routes as 
well as eBeam effect to upcycle SRM but also resulting upcycled SRM samples for WP5, linked to task 4.3 and 4.4  
D4.6 Biodegradation, organic recycling of packaging by industrial and anaerobic digestion and home composting 
(M48)- Final report on biodegradation behavior, organic recycling and home composting linked to tasks 4.6 
 
 
Objectives  
The WP focuses on processing WP2, 3 and 4 (SRM) materials to convert into final packaging with bio-content >85% 
at pilot scale. The reprocessed materials will also be tested for processing into textiles and composites with less 
than 15% of added virgin materials. The main objectives of this WP are: 
• To develop novel eco-design concepts for the production of the multilayer structures for packaging, and 
for textile/composites applications, with the focus on sustainability and recyclability 
• To appropriately combine the previously developed upcycling approaches and to produce single and 
multilayer packaging materials for final prototype packaging with upcycled bio-based materials  
• To evaluate their functional performance, compare it to those of the packaging materials produced using 
the fossil-based counterparts and to validate the suitability of the upcycled materials for food packaging 
• To produce textiles and composites from secondary raw materials coming from WP4 and to validate the 
quality of the upcycled materials for non-food packaging applications. 
Description of work  
Task 5.1. Novel Eco-design approaches for improved recycling and biodegradation of plastics for packaging, textiles 
and composites 
Leader: IVV   Partners involved: AIMPLAS, IVV, SUDPACK, ASU, CTB, SIBO, MDLZ, GPI, DANONE, DENIMX  
Novel eco-design approaches will be provided for the packaging and textiles in close collaboration with task 2.5 
activities. Eco-design means a useful combin ation of different materials to maintain desired techno -functional 
properties (e.g. barrier to assure shelf -life of  packed food), but also preferred end -of-life route such as 
biodegradation or material recycling. Initially planned packaging (food and cosme tics), textiles and composites 
that are to be taken into consideration for the final demonstrators are shown in the table below. The structures 
for the packaging will be revisited under the lead of IVV based on WP1 requirements and WP2/3/4 results as well 
as taking into account the preliminary LCA/LCC results from WP6. The results of the WP4 as well as the DSS will be 
Work package number 5 19 48
Work package title
Participant number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
Participants
IRIS
ASU
CTB
AIMPLAS
IVV
ITENE
NTT
UNIBO
BIOPOL
PLANET
BOSTIK
CARB
SUDPACK
GPI
SIBO
DANONE
MDLZ
BDF
OWS
PLATO
ROMEI
DENIMX
SILON
KNEIA
CHX
EUBP
PMs per participant 12.0 7.0 10.0 6.0 18.0 11.0 4.0 1.0 0.0 2.0 0.0 1.0 36.0 12.0 16.0 5.0 15.0 18.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 6.0 4.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 186.0
Total
SUDPACKlead beneficiaryEnd month
Upscaling and Validation of upcycled packaging, textiles and composites from primary and secondary raw materials 
Start month
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 51 of 70 
used by DENIMX to lead the further definitions of the durable textiles/ composites upcycled applications.  
Demonstrators Targeted requirements PRESERVE structures Production 
Partners (TRL) 
Upcycling 
partners (TRL) 
EoL partners WP5 
(TRL) 
Bio-based packaging for food (primary bioplastics)  
Dairy film, 
tray 
 
(MDLZ) 
Philadelph
ia cheese 
OTR (cm3/pack d bar) < 
0.1 
(OTR (cm3/m2 d bar) < 10) 
High barrier lidding film:  BO-
PLA / protein / met / bio -
adhesive / protein / PLA 
(sealing) 
IVV (TRL 5) 
SUDPACK (TRL 6) 
eBeam: 
ASU/NTT (TRL 5) 
Delamination for 
recycling: 
PLANET, ROMEI (TRL6) 
 
Enzymatic recycling: 
UNIBO, AIMPLAS 
(TRL5) 
 
Alternative organic 
recycling supported 
by enzymation: OWS 
(TRL5) 
OTR (cm3/pack d bar) < 1 
(OTR (cm3/m2 d bar) < 
100) 
Medium barrier liddin g film:  
BO-PLA print / protein / bio -
adhesive / protein / PLA  
(sealing) optional FA grafting 
IVV (TRL 5) 
SUDPACK (TRL 6) 
OTR (cm3/pack d bar) < 5 Tray / Cup: Self-reinforced 
PLA / barrier protein / 
hotmelt / Self-reinforced PLA 
optional FA grafting 
IVV (TRL 5) 
SUDPACK (TRL 6) 
SRPC/MRPC: 
CTB (TRL 5) 
Film for 
vacuum 
pack 
Meat 
product 
from ESG 
OTR (cm 3/m2 d bar) from  
10 (MAP) to 50  
bioPA/bioPE  IVV (TRL 5) 
SUDPACK (TRL 6) 
eBeam: 
ASU/NTT (TRL 5) MRPC : CTB/SILON 
(TRL 5/6) 
Snack pack 
(MDLZ)  
Nut-
chocolate 
bar, 
instant 
cocoa 
powder 
OTR (cm3/m² d bar) < 0.1 Flowpack: bioPET (opt. 
metallized) / protein / bio -
adhesive / protein / bioPE 
IVV (TRL 5) 
SUDPACK (TRL 6) 
eBeam: 
ASU/NTT (TRL 5) Delamination for 
recycling: 
PLANET, 
ROMEI (TRL6) 
Dairy pouch  
(DANONE) 
Liquid 
yoghurt 
OTR (cm3/m² d bar) < 500 
WVTR (g/m² d) < 5 
Opaque for light 
protection 
Mechanical stability 
Lactic acid resistance 
Dairy Pouch: bioPET / Protein 
(met) / PHA 
IVV, AIMPLAS 
(TRL 5) 
SUDPACK (TRL 6) 
eBeam: 
ASU/NTT (TRL 5) 
Delamination for 
recycling: 
PLANET, 
ROMEI (TRL6) 
 
 
 
 
 
Drink pack  
 
(DANONE)  
Juice  OTR (cm3/m² d bar) < 10 
WVTR (g/m² d) < 1.5 
Full opacity for the 
preservation of vitamins 
Shelf life: 60 days 
No lactic acid resistance 
Cardboard-based beverage 
bricks: board / hotmelt 
(optionally metallised) / 
protein / PHA  
AIMPLAS (TRL 5),  
GPI (TRL 6) 
eBeam: 
ASU/NTT (TRL 5) 
Delamination for 
recycling: 
PLANET, 
ROMEI (TRL6) 
Alternative organic 
recycling: OWS 
(TRL5) 
Dairy 
products 
(milk, 
yoghurt) 
  
OTR (cm3/m² d bar) < 100 
WVTR (g/m² d) < 10-50 (to 
protect both sides of 
board from moisture, i.e. 
from product  and cold 
storage conditions). 
Grease resistant 
<25% light transmission 
Lactic acid resistance 
Short shelf life (15 days) 
Pulp moulded pack (e.g. small 
bottles for liquid yoghurt, 
cups) Moulded pulp / PHA 
AIMPLAS (TRL 5) 
GPI (TRL 5-6) 
DANONE (TRL 5-
6) 
SRPC PLA: 
CTB (TRL 5) 
Repulping:  
GPI (TRL5) 
 
Alternative organic 
recycling: OWS 
(TRL5) 
SRM upcycling into cosmetic packaging, textiles and composites 
Cosmetic 
packaging, 
personal 
care 
 
(BDF) 
Oil in 
water 
emulsions  
OTR (cm3/pack d bar) < 1 Personal care injected jar: r-
PLA, r -bioPE with PET fibrils, 
microfibrillar reinforcement 
AIMPLAS (TRL 5) 
CTB (TRL 5) 
SIBO (TRL 6) 
eBeam: 
ASU/NTT (TRL 5) 
SRPC/MRPC: 
CTB (TRL 5) 
Enzymatic recycling: 
UNIBO, AIMPLAS (TRL5) 
Labelling, printability Small bottles ( injection blow 
moulding): Fibrillar 
reinforced rPLA / (in mould 
PHA labelling) 
AIMPLAS (TRL 5) 
CTB (TRL 5) 
SIBO (TRL 6) 
BDF (TRL 6) 
SRPC/MRPC: 
CTB (TRL 5) 
Wet-wipes  OTR (cm3/m² d bar) < 1 Personal care Flowpack:  r-
bioPET / protein (optionally 
metallized) / bio -adhesive / 
protein / (opt. metallized) / r-
bioPE 
IVV (TRL 5) 
SUDPACK (TRL 6) 
eBeam: 
ASU/NTT (TRL 5) 
 
SRPC/MRPC: 
CTB/SILON (TRL 
5/6) 
Delamination for 
recycling: 
PLANET, ROMEI (TRL6) 
Packaging 
Textiles 
 
(SILON) 
Shopping 
Bags  
(multi-use) 
TBD in task 5.1 depending 
on specific application 
non-woven / needle -punch 
textiles: r-PLA / microfibrillar 
reinforced, enzymated r-PLA, 
bioPE, bioPET  / microfibrillar 
reinforced; coating for 
reducing microplastics 
CTB (TRL 5) 
SILON (TRL 6) 
eBeam: 
ASU/NTT (TRL 5) 
 
Organic recycling 
supported by 
enzymation: OWS 
(TRL6)  
Composites 
 
(DENIMX) 
 
Carrier 
boxes and 
cases 
TBD in task 5.1 depending 
on specific application 
r-biopolymers (rPLA, rPET , 
rPA…) and recovere d fibres / 
reinforcement 
CTB (TRL 5) 
DENIMX (TRL 6) 
eBeam: 
ASU/NTT (TRL 5) 
SRPC/MRPC: 
CTB/ SILON (TRL 
5/6) 
Task 5.2. Upscaling of food packaging production and functional characterisation 
Leader: SUDPACK   Partners involved: DANONE, MDLZ, IVV, CTB, PLANET, ROMEI, PLATO, OWS, DENIMX 
The structures defined in Task 5.1 will be produced for testing the upscalability  in packaging of the upcycled 
compounds and coatings from WP3 and 2 respectively. Flexible food packaging production at TRL 5 will initially be 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 52 of 70 
performed by IVV and AIMPLAS. IVV will perform the coating of protein/PHA, metallization on bio -plastics (bio-
PET, PLA) and on protein coatings and bio-adhesive lamination processes. Optionally, FA grafting will be applied 
as indicated in Table 5.1. AIMPLAS will perform the compounding, extrusion of films and, coatings on cardboard. 
The coating and lamination processes of selected structures will be upscaled to TRL 6 at SUDPACK for flexible bio-
based food packaging on an inline roll -to-roll coating line and GPI for the board -based laminates. SUDPACK will 
process the PLA as a sealing f ilm using blown -film extrusion, providing a smooth surface for sealing and also 
optional metallization (performed by IVV) for the high -barrier lidding film of the dairy product (P hiladelphia 
Cheese, product of MDLZ).  IVV and SUDPACK will also coextrude bio PE/bioPA films subsequently at TRL 5 and 6 
respectively. They will also thermoform the trays where applicable. GPI will upscale the fibre-based cups/trays at 
TRL 6 and DANONE will obtain from their related business partner pulp moulded bottles , which will be coated 
using optimized PHA formulations coming from WP2. ASU/NTT will treat some of the obtained packaging by eBeam 
(see Table in Task 5.1)  and they will be compared to untreat ed counterparts. When applicable, labels will be 
applied on packaging using patented biobased adhesives from BOSTIK. 
The upscaled packaging materials will be characterized in terms of their gas (DIN 53380) and water vapour (EN ISO 
15106-3) barrier, and mechanical performance (e.g. adhesion, laminate bond, sealing seam strength after testing). 
The packaging will be provided to next task for validation but also to WP4 for performing the respective organic 
and/or materials recycling approaches  (which efficiency will be evaluat ed by ROMEI, PLATO, OWS, etc.) and to 
WP7 for consumer acceptance tests.  
Task 5.3. Validation of novel food and drinks packaging using upcycled materials  
Leader: MDLZ   Partners involved: DANONE, SUDPACK, IRIS, AIMPLAS 
Trays and films produced in Task 5.2 will be used to pack the different food products. Carton beverage bricks and 
cups/small bottles will be used for the drinks. In each case, a benchmark representing the currently used packaging 
material will be used for comparison. The following food and drink packaging applications are targeted in this Task:  
- Snack pack for nut-chocolate bar, instant cocoa powder by MDLZ  
- Tray and lid for dairy products (Philadelphia cheese) by MDLZ, PA/PE films for MAP or vacuum-packed meat 
- Flexible pouch for dairy products (liquid yoghurt) by DANONE 
- Paper pulp moulded small bottles for dairy products (yoghurt and milk) by DANONE 
- Cardboard-based beverage bricks for juice drink pack by DANONE 
In terms of packaging validation, IRIS will perform the initial trials (and support the subsequent test campaigns 
especially in case of DANONE or the ESG members) and once the solutions are improved as needed/ pre-selected, 
the final series of tests of the final packaging prototypes will be handled by the industrial end users. The shelf life 
will be tested (via physical-chemical, microbiological and organoleptic studies). At several storage periods, analyses 
of different parameters (appearance, colour, odour, pH, moisture content, lipid-oxidation, etc.) will be carried out. 
Easy emptying effect of FA-grafting will be tested for cheese and possibly other products if needed. Depending on 
WP2 results, also antimicrobial properties of the grafted PHA coatings will be tested. DANONE and MDLZ will then 
validate the final packaging on the tested food to follow the product shelf life. The performance assessments will 
be performed with the packages using various products; such as water, fatty, acidic and neutral products, in 
storage conditions at least for about two months. Recommendations for further improvements in task 5.2 in case 
shelf life is not reaching the targets will be provided in terms of the process, structure/formulation. 
Recommendations will be given in terms of the suitability of the developed solutions for packagin g different 
products including those from ESG members such as CocaCola (e.g. PRESERVE drink containers and bottles) and 
Manor (in terms of validating the PA/PE films for packing chicken based products ) and application notes 
summarising the main findings will be prepared for the relevant associations in the ESG.  
Task 5.4 Processing and Validation of SRM into textiles, composites and packaging for personal care 
Leader: SILON -Partners involved: CTB, ITENE, BDF, DENIMX 
The SRM resulting from the recycling of the food packaging from the previous tasks will be provided by WP4 where 
the r-bio PE and r-PLA will be upcycled by CTB, r-bio PET and r-bio PE will be compounded by PLANET and ROMEI 
(TRL 6) from delaminated materials and, from the latter, cast films will be produced by SUDPACK.  
The following textile and composite applications are targeted in this task for validation.  
- Packaging produced by SIBO for cosmetics and personal care products (BDF) 
- Packaging textiles (non-woven bags) (SILON, CTB) 
- Composites (Carrier boxes and cases) (DENIMX) 
The flexible packaging from SRM for personal care will include r-bio PET and r-bio PE as substrate and sealing film, 
respectively (IVV TRL5, SUDPACK TRL6). The production of rigid cosmetics packaging will initially be performed by 
injection moulding process at AIMPLAS / CTB and will be upscaled finally at SIBO  for personal care injected jars, 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 53 of 70 
and by injection blow moulding for the small bottles in combination with in-mould PHA labelling process. Cosmetic 
jars, bottles and flowpacks will be characterized in terms of oxygen and water vapour permeability and mechanical 
properties (see task 5.2).  
BDF will validate the final packaging on their products (cosmetic jars and bottles - oil in water emulsions; flowpacks 
- wetwipes) following the product shelf life by looking at weight loss of the product, stability to light, perfume loss 
testing, product appearance and functionality (tests can last up to 8 months at different temperatures). 
More complex polymer combinations, which could not  be separated into individual polymers will be processed 
into textile fibres using high drawn processes leading to the formation of microfibrillar structures. First pilot scale 
textile fibre extrusion test will be performed  at CTB  and once its performance is verified, upscaling will be 
performed by SILON in order to produce textile fibers and non-woven materials. The textiles will be coated by CTB 
in order to reduce the release of microplastics as developed in WP2 and manufactured into shopping bags. Fibers 
and final textile products will be tested (strength, creep behavior, appearance, …). Textile proper performance and 
validation of possible microfibre release will be characterized by ITENE (following WP2 approach). 
Recycled PLA materials will be upgraded by self-reinforcement (CTB). Highly-drawn PLA reinforcing fibres and films 
will be combined with a matrix of the same polymer family, making it lighter, more impact resistant and improving 
recycling possibilities. As such, SRPC bio-based composite prototypes based on PLA will be produced by CTB and 
further upscaled and demonstrated by DENIMX into carrier boxes and/or cases. The performance will be compared 
to the performance of the currently used materials such as a standard  PP transport boxes. Analyses of different 
parameters (appearance, colour, odour, impact resistance, mechanical strength, …) will be carried out. 
Deliverables  
D5.1 Eco-designed food packaging structures (M27) - report on applied eco-design approaches linked to task 5.1 
D5.2 Performance of upcycled materials used in  food and beverage packaging (M36) - report on u pscalability 
testing of up cycled compounding, and coatings, as well as the processability for at least  5 food and beverage 
packaging demonstrators from the project linked to task 5.2 
D5.3 Validation of upcycled materials for food packaging  (M45) - report on suitability tests of upcycled bio -
packaging demonstrators for packing food and drink including shelf life trials and benchmarking linked to task 5.3  
D5.4 Validation of upcycled SRM materials for textiles, composites and packaging for personal care (M48) - report 
on ecodesign, production and validation  testing of upcycled bio -recyclates with at least  5 demonstrators  for 
cosmetics packaging, textiles and composites from the project linked to tasks 5.1 and 5.4  
 
 
Objectives  
• To address the environmental Life Cycle assessments of the developed materials and final packaging products 
through their value chain and support eco-design principles implementation.  
• To determine the CAPEX a nd OPEX of the different stages associated with  the development of the target 
materials and production of new packaging products.  
• To identify and assess social aspects and overcome any possible related issues.  
• To define indicators that will be assessed f or determining how circular the value chain of the materials and 
products developed within PRESERVE is.  
• To assess health and safety risks aligned with applicable laws and regulations to guide the project 
implementation according to industry best practices. 
Description of work  
Task 6.1 Environmental Life Cycle assessment (LCA) and eco-design  
Leader: NTT - Partners involved: all to provide required inputs 
In this task, the potential environmental impacts of the new materials and packaging will be performe d. The LCA 
analysis will involve the following stages: definition of scope and goal, development of relevant inventory inputs 
and outputs, assessment of their potential impacts and interpretation of results within the context of proposed 
new materials and products. The LCA will be carried out considering the guidelines of ISO 14040/14044. The 
environmental impact categories that will be analyzed include: global warming potential, human toxicity, 
ecotoxicity, resources use and depletion, energy demand among others. After checking the sensitivity  and 
reliability of the study, relevant conclusions and recommendations will be drawn. The LCA will be performed with 
Work package number 6 1 48
Work package title
Participant number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
Participants
IRIS
ASU
CTB
AIMPLAS
IVV
ITENE
NTT
UNIBO
BIOPOL
PLANET
BOSTIK
CARB
SUDPACK
GPI
SIBO
DANONE
MDLZ
BDF
OWS
PLATO
ROMEI
DENIMX
SILON
KNEIA
CHX
EUBP
PMs per participant 20.0 3.0 2.0 1.0 0.5 31.0 27.0 1.0 1.0 2.0 0.2 1.0 1.0 0.5 0.5 0.2 1 1 0.5 1 1 2 0.5 1 0 1 101
Total
Safety, Environmental and Economic Sustainability assessments 
Start month End month lead beneficiary NTT
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 54 of 70 
the specialized software Simapro 8. The participation of technology developers and demonstrator´ leaders will be 
required to provide infor mation for the inventories of LCA Analysis. It is envisaged that the results of this study 
will demonstrate the positive environmental impacts of implementing PRESERVE materials into new packaging 
products, compared with their counterparts on the market, at the demonstrators’ level. Eco-design principles will 
be implemented  in link with task 5.1  based on environmental impacts´ outcomes. Eco -design will enable 
incorporating environmental considerations into the new produ cts design as well as other p rinciples like 
recyclability, potential secondary use. The entire life cycle of the new materials and products will be considered, 
and recommendations for eco-design will be applied early in the product development process (alt hough 
continuous improvement of all processes will be performed  based on i dentified hot spots). As such, an interim 
LCA will be delivered by mid-term to guide the selection of the materials for the final demonstrators.  
 
Task 6.2 Life Cycle Cost and cost-feasibility  
Leader: NTT - Partners involved: all to provide required inputs 
This assessment will measure and analyze the capital, operational costs and cost variations resulting from applying 
the proposed technologies for each of the stages in the materials life cycle and packaging product’s supply chain. 
This analysis will be done by performing a Life Cycle Cost analysis (LCC). The LCC will present a similar structure 
and will be conducted in parallel to the LCA (in terms of functional unit and approach). The analysis will be 
developed in two basic steps: cost identification and a cost benefits analysis. Therefore, as soon as the process 
chain for the manufacturing of the new materials and their corresponding packaging are established, cost models 
can be set up to estimate the product costs as a function of various parameters including volume of the batches, 
processes used, type of materials, supplies and other inputs etc. This model will also guide the process 
optimization e.g. by identifying possible bottl enecks in the process chain. Specific experiments will be designed 
and conducted to obtain parameters for the model or to compare different technologies for a particular step. The 
results of this analysis will make it possible to compare the proposed new materials and products with alternative 
ones, from an economical point of view, and to determine the overall reduction of costs that could be achieved 
using this model in the packaging products value chains. Based on obtained CAPEX and OPEX that will be simulated 
at scales up to 50 times that of the project (as a typical throughput in commercial mechanical recycling plants, 
process for the primary and secondary material), we will conclude in which conditions and for processing which 
materials the proposed production lines are economically feasible to reach to the market. 
 
Task 6.3 Social LCA assessments  
Leader: NTT - Partners involved: all to provide required inputs 
In this task, the social and socio-economic benefits of implementing the proposed new packaging products will be 
addressed. To this end, the Social LCA (S -LCA) methodology will be applied. The S -LCA is an innovative 
methodology that integrates traditional LCA methodological steps while having social impacts as focus, namely: 
(1) defining goal and scope of the assessment; (2) inventory of the drivers which may lead to an impact; a life cycle 
inventory is elaborated for indicators (e.g. number of jobs created) linked to impact categories (e.g. local 
employment) which are related to five main stakehol der groups (e.g., [i ] worker, [ii] consumer, [iii] local 
community, [iv] society and [v] value chain actors); (3) impact assessment based in the selection and calculation 
of proper indicators of impacts; and (4) interpretation of the results. The S-LCA methodology proposed embeds a 
detailed inventory method tailored on real data, collected directly from the field of application thanks to 
customized surveys that allow modelling the life cycle of the proposed technologies. S -LCA makes use of generic 
and site-specific data, can be quantitative, semi-quantitative or qualitative, and complements the environmental 
LCA and LCC. Categories such as health and safety; jobs creation; working conditions; well-being among others will 
be addressed. The envisaged positive results will constitute valuable inputs to stimulate preferences for these new 
materials and packaging technologies and will also be used as part of the baseline information aimed to design an 
adequate strategy to increase job opportunities, stakeholders and consumer’s acceptance. 
 
Task 6.4 Circularity assessment and DSS  
Subtask 6.4.1 Scoping of the data and scenarios - Leader: ITENE – Partners involved: NTT, IRIS 
In a first stage, identification of opportunities for circular value capture will be addressed. This activity will include 
the searching of technical, economic, social and environmental opportunities that allows promoting a circularity 
approach of PRESERVE’s materials and related packaging products. In a second stage, a circular KPIs assessment 
will be realized, as a  first step, appropriate circular economy indicators will be defined for PRESERVE technology 
through the complete value chain to assess how circular the PRESERVE’s materials flows are. The analysis will start 
at raw materials procurement stage and finalize at the end of life scenarios. Feedback from the technical WPs will 
be needed to establish the required KPIs, such as the amounts of raw materials, the masses of unrecoverable 
waste and the utility factor indicator. As a second step, co mplementary indicators that will allow addressing 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 55 of 70 
additional impacts and risks will be considered. Those include material price variation, supply chain risks, scarcity 
among others. As a third step, the transition towards a circular economy in the new mate rials development and 
packaging products production value chain will be measured and evaluated. Finally, in a third stage, different 
circularity scenarios will be evaluated. Potential scenarios will be analysed in -depth to improve the PRESERVE 
circularity. The four ways of circular value creation will be addressed: (1) the power of short cycle, (2) the power 
of long cycle, (3) the power of cascades and (4) the power of pure circles. This last stage will receive feedback from 
task 6.1 related to eco -design outcomes and from WP 4 and WP5. Policymakers’ recommendations including 
design for circularity, use of primary and secondary materials, recycling/ upcycling routes will be provided. 
Subtask 6.4.2 Sustainability enhancement decision support system (DSS) -Leader IRIS, Partners involved: NTT, 
ITENE, DENIMX 
This task will combine the information gained from 6.1 and 6.2 and scenarios developed in the previous subtask 
to support the decisio ns of the different stakeholders involved along the value chain towards sus tainability 
optimization and the best upcycling approach thanks to the development of a user-friendly automatic tool (app). 
Using advanced artificial intelligence techniques, IRIS w ill design a  multiparametric DSS to help in the materials 
and EoL/secondary application selection. Based on data at different levels of the value chain, it will simulate 
different linear and circular pathways and allow identifying the best routes along the life cycle of the new materials 
taking into account the confidence factors for each scenario, the perspectives of the different stakeholders, as 
well as their priorities for optimisation. The DSS derived app will allow to provide tailored information to t he 
PRESERVE product development to reduce environmental burden and increase  resource efficiency among the 
tested cases. In particular, the alpha version of the app will be tested by DENIMX to support the final ecodesign of 
the demonstrators from SRM in WP5  which results will be taken into account to obtain the final version. 
Conclusions and recommendations to decision -makers (e.g. materials formulators and products designers, 
recyclers and end users’) will be provided as readily understandable, complete and consistent presentation of the 
impacts and sustainability.  
 
Task 6.5 Identification and assessment of regulatory requirements  
Subtask 6.5.1. Evaluation of the legal framework regarding the risk assessment of the prototypes packaging (Safe 
by Design concept integration) - Leader: ITENE – Partners involved: all to provide required inputs  
The aim of the European Food Law is to ensure a high level of protection of human life and consumers’ interests 
regarding food. So that, there is a need to assess the compliance with applicable regulations to food contact 
materials. In order to achieve this objective, the safe -by-design methodology will be applied and implemented 
throughout the project, which will enable the integration of anticipated safety impacts of any material or additive 
into the design or production phases of the prototypes. This task will consist of  three stages:  (i) developing and 
improving methodologies for materials design considering toxicity and other life cycle aspects, (ii) using thematic 
research, development and innovation to overcome challenges where safer alternatives have been difficult to find, 
and (iii) creating an environment that enables the concept through knowledge exchange, education, and supply 
chain cooperation.  
Additionally, legislation applicable to the developments resulting from the project will be identified, to ensure the 
compliance with food contact materials legislation. In order to release the new development at commercial scale, 
legal requirements need to be fulfilled and evaluated over a final product produced at industrial scale. Considering 
this, it might be required to proceed with specific documentation to ensure the food contact safety of developed 
materials. Therefore, it is considered to carry out some work in advance in this task with the materials developed 
within the project to characterise its behaviour, providing a preliminary evaluation. This evaluation will be finished 
by each one of the developers or owners before arriving to commercial scale, falling out of the scope and work of 
the project. This task will particularly support the collection of trials linked to the food contact approval of 
enzymated compounds from task 3.1. This task will be carried out based on results from WP1 and 2.  
Subtask 6.5.2. Compliance of the prototypes with EU Food Contact Materials regulations Leader: ITENE  
Migration analyses of the prototypes will be conducted to verify compliance with food contact materials 
regulations. In this sense, overall migration, specific migration of additives, metals and primary aromatic amines, 
as well as NIAS evaluation (non-intentionally added substances) will be studied during the assessment. These 
analyses will be carried out by ITENE according to the information and materials provided by the partners 
developing the prototype packaging. 
Deliverables  
D6.1 LCA, LCC and  Social LCA goal and scope definition  (M18) – Definition of system boundaries and functional  
units related to tasks 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3 
D6.2 Preliminary LCA, LCC and Social LCA  (M32) Report on Screening test and first recommendations in terms of 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 56 of 70 
material selection for WP5, related to tasks 6.1, 2 and 3 
D6.3 Final LCA, LCC and Social LCA: Final results and recommendations  (M48) – Report on environmental, social 
and economic assessment results and recommendations, related to tasks 6.1, 2 and 3 
D6.4 Final DSS and report on circularity assessments (M48)- App to support the decision of the stakeholder on the 
upcycling approach and results of use to s upport ecodesign of SRM application in WP5 , as well as r eport on the 
initially established scenario, validation of the DSS and resulting data for policy briefing, linked to task 6.4 
D6.5 Legal and Regulatory and Safety Requirements  (M48) - Identification of regulatory requirements and 
migration tests results for food contact materials related to task 6.5 
 
 
Objectives  
The overall objectives are:   
• To study consumer perception and acceptance of the newly developed (upcycled) bio-based packaging  
• To document undertaken and proposed dissemination and communication activities.  
• To ensure clustering and coordination with other related EU/National projects. 
• To ensure the project results reach all the relevant stakeholders who will use and implement them and to 
attract business partners to maximise their exploitation potential.  
• To ensure that the findings from the project are widely communicated to the scientific community and the 
general public and promote policy recommendations 
• To guarantee IPR management according to European Commission Guidelines and Consortium Agreement 
• To establish initial circular value chains to pave the way to the future deployment of the PRESERVE solutions. 
Description of work  
Task 7.1: Study of consumer perception  
Leader ASU - Partners involved: EUBP, KNEIA, NTT, DANONE, MDLZ, BDF, External Stakeholders Group (ESG) 
Consumers will be targeted to anal yse their perception and to assess their confidence in PRESERVE innovative 
solutions. This will ensure the sustained alignment of PRESERVE to real market needs to help decreasing time-to-
market of the proposed soluti ons, i.e. the developed demonstrators. A parallel goal will be to verify that the 
consumer requirements defined in WP1 are perceived accordingly. For this purpose, expert interviews, literature 
research, brand owner surveys will be applied as multipliers to extrapolate consumers’ perception and consumer 
acceptance tests will be performed with the developed PRESERVE demonstrators . This will complement the 
societal assessment (s-LCA) performed in WP6 by NTT. The analysis of the results will consider the gender of the 
respondents to profile the differences in the perception and acceptance of bio-packaging by females vs. males. 
Task 7.2: Standardisation, Policy & Regulatory framework 
Leader EUBP - Partners involved: all to provide required inputs 
The aim of this task is to evaluate the current EU poli cies and regulations related to bio -based packaging, their 
recycling and upcycling, and the sustainability of bio-packaging products throughout their life cycle with a view to 
proposing the incorporation/modification of these policies to ensure that they take into account environmental, 
social and economic considerations in link with the outcomes of WP6. Relevant standardisation and certification 
landscape for PRESERVE will be continually assessed at international, EU and national level. PRESERVE findings will 
be captured by EUBP for fueling the evolution of different standard s (e.g. regarding recycling, biodegradation, 
recycled and/or bio-based content, etc .), certification (e.g. sustainable sourcing fo r bio -based materials) and 
labelling schemes. An in -depth exchange will be established with the relevant standardisation bodies, technical 
committees (CEN/TC 411 - Bio-based products and CEN/TC 249 - Plastics), and with the most important 
independent certifiers in the field of bioplastics (Vinçotte and DIN CERTCO). EUBP will curate the provision of policy 
recommendations regarding resource efficiency improvement, waste management, recycling and EoL scenarios 
tuned for specific applications, that could be used by standardization bodies in the reflection about new/ improved 
standards. In terms of safety, in link age with WP6, our safe by design approach will consider food contact 
legislation from the project outset and we will also perform migration tests on the  primary as well as secondary 
materials from the project. Incentives such as the fast track approval of the dossier of new food contact bio and / 
or recycled materials with demonstrated reduced environmental impacts will also be assessed as well as proposals 
for related financial support . The outcome of the ev aluation of the project results, especially in terms of 
Work package number 7 1 48
Work package title
Participant number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
Participants
IRIS
ASU
CTB
AIMPLAS
IVV
ITENE
NTT
UNIBO
BIOPOL
PLANET
BOSTIK
CARB
SUDPACK
GPI
SIBO
DANONE
MDLZ
BDF
OWS
PLATO
ROMEI
DENIMX
SILON
KNEIA
CHX
EUBP
PMs per participant 4.0 5.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 1.7 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 1.2 2.0 2.0 1.0 2.0 2.0 1.0 2.0 35.0 10.0 10.0 102.9
Total
Value chain roadmap and innovation impacts 
KNEIAStart month End month lead beneficiary
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 57 of 70 
recyclability, biodegradation tests and LCA, will also be used in position papers addressed to relevant actors 
identified in task 7.6. New incentives schemes, e.g. in order to support the repositioning of recycled materials on 
the market (and therefore the economic viability of their actual recycling) by accounting for the real environmental 
cost of using non -recyclable materials in the tax systems , and ecolabels for biobased plastics with tuned EoL  or 
regarding the use of SRM, will be also proposed and pushed at EU and national level.  
Task 7.3 Communication Activities  
Subtask 7.3.1. Communication Plan and reporting on communication activities - Leader KNEIA - all partners to 
provide required inputs  
As discussed in Section 2.2, we will draw up a Communication Plan that will be effective in engaging with our 
targeted stakeholders during the project, to mobilise their interests and secure their buy -in and support for the 
project. This plan will be close ly linked with the project dissemination activities and it will follow the steps of a) 
identifying all possible stakeholders (CHX, in link with task 7.5); b) organise the stakeholders into “communities of 
support” for helping us to present our ambition, go als, objectives and impacts (CHX); c) Development of the  
PRESERVE brand as a powerful marketing and communications tool (KNEIA); and, d) design and implementing an 
effective communication campaign (KNEIA, EUBP and CHX). An exhaustive mapping of stakeholders will be carried 
out in the initial phase of the project to help design the social media activities, expand the Circular Plastics Helix 
and plan timely clustering ev ents. The analysis will be led by CHX but all partners will strongly contribute by 
reaching their existing stakeholder networks.  In addition to planning and designing our Communication campaign, 
communication reports at project interim and at the end of t he action (D7.2) will document the communication 
activities that have been implemented, an d all associated communication materials will be annexed. An update 
on the results of the project will be provided to the relevant multipliers in order to diffuse the project results 
through both newsletter and presentations within relevant events (e.g. General meetings, Workshops). 
Subtask 7.3.2 Project website - Leader KNEIA - all partners to provide required inputs 
The project website (D7.1) architecture will be car efully planned to effectively cater for the different target 
audiences who, from the central landing page, will be able to navigate easily to dedicated sub-sites depending on 
their particular area of interest. The website will serve as a powerful communica tion tool to all our target 
audiences (it will also house a restricted access area for par tners to store information and facilitate file sharing 
and internal communication). The public site will present the project brand and will contain well-presented non-
confidential project information: project concept, its partners, its core objectives, rel ated literature, easy to 
understand infographics presenting the strategic, competitive and economic benefits of the project, information 
about Horizon 2020, the ‘PRESERVE Green Channel’ of open access publications, links to other relevant websites, 
networks, projects, communities, conferences, etc. The platform will also serve as a tool to disseminate the non-
confidential results of the project (public reports and deliverables, publications as part of our green open access, 
etc.). It will incorporate videos  (official project video and subsequent videos produced by other partners to 
describe parts of the process). At the project end, the relevant public information and results will be available from 
the website, which will be maintained as a central virtual hub for our post-project activities well into the future.  
Subtask 7.3.3 Communication and promotional materials- Leader KNEIA - all partners to provide required inputs 
Project leaflets, posters, project video, newsletters and promotional materials (gadgets for tradeshows, etc.) will 
be designed in order to support project communication and branding efforts. These materials will be reported and 
Annexed to the Communication Reports (D7.2).  
Subtask 7.3.4 Social / digital media channels -Leader EUBP - - Leader KNEIA - all partners to provide required inputs  
This subtask will capitalise on the tremendous potential of reaching some of our targeted audiences through social 
media channels. Informed by the stakeholder analysis, a social media grid will be drawn up to identify the most 
appropriate social media channel/sites for specific audiences. Appropriate pages will be designed for each channel 
and a content maintenance plan will be put in place for managing the streams of information across these channels 
to sec ure and maintain followers. Social and digital med ia will be particularly powerful in helping to create 
‘communities of support’ for the project. Community creation will be achieved via tools such as: Google Meet, 
Reddit, Pinterest and other social media networks such as Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn and YouTube. The project 
will create interest on social media and digital platforms by using visual media, videos, animations, icons and info-
graphic imagery, and importantly, mobile enabled content and richer content experiences for users of any of the 
digital platforms. EUBP will work closely with CHX to make sure that the appropriate resources are relayed into 
the Circular Plastics Helix. 
Task 7.4: PRESERVE Dissemination and Training  
Leader EUBP - Partners involved: all to provide required inputs 
This task will ensure that the results and impact of the project are  fully disseminated to all relevant audiences: 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 58 of 70 
industry, policy, research and academic communities. A dissemination plan  building on the preliminary p lan in 
Section 2.2 will be developed. The following activities will be executed and reported among others: 
• Publishing at least 8 scientific articles in journals and conferences (subject to the IP protection);  
• Organizing special sessions and scientific workshops as a part of large conferences with high impact;  
• Targeted placement of articles and features in relevant trade and industry focused publications;  
• Organisation of the “PRESERVE Roadshow” of events - an agenda of relevant European and international events 
that will be planned for the 48-month duration of the project according to the table 2.3 in section 2: trade fairs, 
exhibitions, workshops, seminars, conferences, round tables, etc., that the consortium is already planning to 
attend or organising as part of their ongoing activities. PRESERVE is expected to capitalise on these existing events 
(target: 18 events), as well as the organisation of dedicated  PRESERVE workshops. 2 workshops are envisaged, 
one on M36 of the project that will be organized by CHX to address and discuss the 2030 Roadmap for upcycled 
bioplastics (linked with task 7. 9), and a Final  PRESERVE workshop/conference (M48) that will be organised  by 
EUBP to showcase the project results and impacts at the end of the project; other dissemination and networking 
opportunities will be planned (demo and training events). CHX will organize 2 additional webinars during the last 
two years of the project. 
• Trainings: EUBP, together with ASU, will consolidate and share training contents and methodology, and propose 
enriched contents to be shared on the Multi -Stakeholders Platform and the project website at the end of the 
project. A minimum of 3 thematic knowle dge transfer workshops will be organised at M20, M32 and M44 in 
addition to further training w ebinars (D7.4). The first will allow exchange of inner practices/technical expertise 
between the RTD centers, to ensure circularity and cross -sectoral approach. T he second will allow transfer 
competences from the personal of the RTD centres to the companies in the consortium, and the last one will be 
opened to a broader audience. ASU will complement these activities by educational training activities, such as 
using the project and its results in teaching, in course materials and as a subject for theses in universities. 
Task 7.5 Multi-Stakeholders Platform and the Circular Plastics Helix  
Leader CHX - Partners involved: all to provide required inputs 
This task will be directed towards community building and stakeholder engagement through the Circular Plastics 
Helix, a virtual community of experts in plastic packaging, circularity and recycling. In the frame of PRESERVE, 
Crowdhelix will expand the already existing community and onboard further 100 organisations working in the area 
of bioplastics into the Circul ar Plastics Helix. The Helix will ensure the engagement, inclusion and active 
participation of all relevant stakeholders  (research centres, universities, corporat es, SMEs, networks and 
associations) and their diverse perspectives. The platform can also act as an instrument for knowledge sharing and 
engagement with other successful projects under the Horizon 2020 call CE-BIOTEC-09-2020, and other H2020 and 
future Horizon Europe projects. One of t he roles of th e platform will be to collect the information pro vided by 
industry stakeholders identified during the project in order to define common development campaigns aimed to 
unlock the potentials of PRESERVE strategies in different EU Countries. The Helix will be nourished through reports, 
publications, press briefings and newsletters on project results and other relevant information. In particular, the 
Circular Plastics Helix  will help to define a set of relevant topic s influencing the take -off of biopackaging 
technologies and solutions. Among them, a special focus will be dedicated to: standardization issues, supply chain 
facilitating measures, sustainability criteria development for PRESERVE products. The involvement of stakeholders 
and the valuable inter-communication management strategy will be a crucial aspect to be carried out by all project 
partners. The active collaboration of PRESERVE identified actors will be the basis to achieve the final target.  
Task 7.6: PRESERVE Clustering  
Leader CHX - Partners involved: all to provide required inputs 
This task will ensure that PRESERVE is networked with all relevant national and international projects, initiatives 
and networks in the EU  and internationally . The primary goals of the clustering activities will be to identify 
synergies in projects’ implementation, work on policy recommendations together, and identify areas for potential 
future projects and exploitation across the actors.  Importantly, and in line with the call text, we will ensure a close 
interaction with the other proposals selected for funding under  the same (CE-BIOTEC-09-2020) or related topics 
(see table 1.4) . This task will foresee the implementation of common dissemination activities among others 
including workshops, conferences and exchange of the newsletters from the other connected projects. T he 
networking plan will take into account relevant projects within international stakeholders and other EU / national 
projects (some of which are identified in Section 1.3). It will also focus on networking between consortium partners 
and their respective areas. Most of the project partners are members of relevant networks, groups , associations 
and initiatives such as the Plastics Circularity Multip lier, Circular Plastics Alliance, Bio -based Industries Joint 
Undertaking (BBI -JU), the SPIRE PPP, SUSCHEM, CEF IC, Plastics Europe, etc. These memberships will be 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 59 of 70 
instrumental to promote cooperation and integration with PRESERVE. In particular, we will build on the synergies 
already identified by the Plastics Circularity Multiplier - an initiative bringing together 21 EU-funded projects in the 
field of plastic circularity which aims to pool resources and expertise in order to amplify key messages. The efforts 
to boost the impact of the PRESERVE project through the Multiplier initiative will be coordinated by Crowdhe lix 
and supported by other partners (several already involved in the initiative). EU resources and supports will be used 
where applicable throughout the project to support the networking, dissemination and standardisation activities. 
Members of the Consortia of the networked projects will be invited to the Workshops organized in Task 7.4 and 
exchange of (non-sensitive) information with such Consortia will be implemented (e.g. by exploiting the newsletter 
and/or through dedicated meetings). At least 3 dissem ination events in cooperation with other related projects 
will be organised and included in the PRESERVE Agenda developed in Task 7.4. 
 
Task 7.7. Innovation and IPR Management  
Leader KNEIA - Partners involved: all to provide required inputs (all subtasks) 
Subtask 7.7.1. Innovation Notification System Register  
The objective of the Innovation Management process will be the implementation of a systematic approach for the 
mapping, evaluation and definition of the protection strategy options for the key exploitable results KERs, based 
on an expected impact orientation approach. The mapping includes the monitoring of the evolution of the results 
towards market readiness via the review of the TRL evolution of each KER, as well as that of the completion of the 
impact KPIs defined in table 2.1 , while the evaluation implies a) the identification of innovation enablers/driving 
factors and b) determining the link between technical results and market demand, being the main outcome the 
identification of business opportun ities, the related customer segments and which v alue propositions they 
require/need, that will be further developed in the business plan of task 7.8.  
It will be based on an internal Innovation Notification System Register (INSR), as the tool for capturing  and 
managing the research results. On the INSR, each result identified as potentially exploitable will be assessed with 
the support of the Innovation Committee, and will implement also procedures of risk management based on the 
activities described on Tas k 8.2. The IPR  and Exploitation Manager will mak e recommendations concerning the 
need of protection of each output and possible routes. The identification of the results to be protected will be 
discussed briefly in the meetings of the Project Steering Comm ittee in order to assure that no activity to be 
performed might interfere with the protection strategy. 
Subtask 7.7.2. IPR management   
The IPR management strategy for each KER identified in the previous subtask will be defined, and rules will be 
formalized for the use of foreground and required background and its distribution within the project as well as the 
rules for handling sensitive or confidential information. This IPR strategy will be specially focused on the protection 
of the innovations and knowle dge developed within the project, to help on max imizing the returns on the 
investments. On the basis of the outputs of subtask 7.7.1, the main activities to be developed on this subtask are: 
• Identification of ownership of the results, whether individual or joint: Proposals for the division of share of such 
results and base conditions for their exploitation will be proposed by the IPR  and Exploitation Manager. The 
proposals will be made in line with the conditions set out in the CA.  
• Patent search : systematic patents search and analysis will be performed  throughout the project in order to 
ensure the monitoring of technology developments potentially relevant in terms of freedom to operate  and 
results patentability. This search will also allow the detection of overlaps and new potential partners and 
collaborators in terms of implementation of the business plans.  
• IP Protection strategy: for each KER, and considering the business plans developed on task 7.8, the protection 
strategy will be outlined in order to determine the best options to get the full market potential. Each partner will 
be responsible to apply the knowledge protection measures proposed  (as such patent agent fees have been 
budgeted by many partners, see section 3.4). 
Task 7.8 Exploitation of results and Business model development  
Leader KNEIA - Partners involved: all to provide required inputs 
For each of the KERs, a business plan will be drawn up. A draft of these Business Plans, as part of the PEDR, will be 
delivered at M24 (D7.5) and final Plans in M48 (D7.8). Built on the information already provided in Section 2.2, the 
Business Plans will be structured as follows:  
• Planned key exploitable results and their expected key applications: development status, facts and figures that 
facilitate the assessment of the potential impact, differences from existing competing products/services, main 
IPR issues in link with previous task;  
• Exploitation team: partners involved in the exploitation activities providing information on their previous 
experience and business interests, complementing external resources if not in the consortium;  
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 60 of 70 
• Market Potential: the potential geographical and economic size of the market, market trends, main competitors 
and competitive advantage;  
• Business model: marketing strategy, ma in clients; fo llowing inputs from business models in terms of biobased 
packaging and manufacturing technology market supply  
• Financial projections: sales forecasts, investment needed for covering the costs, additional funding that will be 
identified through e.g. ESIF, national programs, private funding sources, complementary or parallel projects;  
• Commercialization roadmap: the steps planned before the product is ready for the market (i.e. proof of concept, 
prototyping, demonstrations of technological perfo rmance and cost effectiveness field trials, pilots, validation 
and standardisation issues, regulatory requirements).  
Task 7.9: Roadmap towards 2030  
Leader EUBP - Partners involved: all to provide required inputs  
In line with our exploitation strategy, and based on the assumptions in tables 1.4 and 2.5, we expect our PRESERVE 
solutions to be have shown the potential to substitute more than 60% of the packaging materials by 2030. As such, 
based on the roadmaps of the individual KERs defined in the previous task, a detailed strategy outlining the steps 
to move the PRESERVE solutions from TRL6+ to TRL 9 will be prepared capturing the key findings and remaining 
knowledge gaps arising from the project as well as the interdependences across the supply and value chain. The 
draft version will be discussed in a project-wide event organized by CHX around M36 to get stakeholders feedback 
(task 7.4). This document will end with a set of recommendations contributing to a viable European roadmap for 
the PRESERVE project results uptake and in general for food and drink packa ging upcycling and production from 
renewable sources. Possible transfer of technology to other sectors will also be considered. 
Deliverables  
D7.1 Project Website (M3) 
D7.2 Communication Plan (M6 and updated every reporting period) 
D7.3 Training Plan (M12 and updated every reporting period) Plan for knowledge transfer and educational sessions 
D7.4 Multi-Stakeholder Platform (M12) CrowdHelix Circular Plastics Helix updated for bioplastics stakeholders  
D7.5 Draft Plan for the dissemination and exploitation of the project results (M24) PEDR including business plans 
for all KERs with annexes regarding IPR management, joint ownerships and exploitation agreements 
D7.6 Report on consumer perception aspects  (M48) report on consumer perception and acceptance of the 
developed demonstrators linked to task 7.1  
D7.7 Innovation Roadmap towards 2030  (M48) supply and value chain strategy for post -project deployment of 
PRESERVE results 
D7.8 Final Plan for the dissemination and exploitation of the project results (M 48) Updated version of D7.5 
 
 
Objectives  
• To carry out comprehensive project management activities for managing and optimising  the application of 
resources in this large, multicultural and multidisciplinary consortium by creating an appropriate management 
framework linking together all the project components and ensure that the contractual communication & 
reporting requirements are met 
• To coordinate the bodies involved in the project management structure (see fig. 3.1 in the next section) 
• To ensure the project management procedures are implemented 
• To coordinate with and report to the European Commission 
Description of work  
The structure of the management system is discussed in detail in Section 3.2. It will involve the integration of effort 
between all partners. IRIS will lead this WP and all partners will be involved to ensure smooth running of the 
project. Note: this WP do es not involve the scientific and technical management of individual WPs, which is 
performed as an integral part of each WP. 
 
Task 8.1: Management of project resources 
Leader: IRIS. All Partners involved. 
The activities that will be involved in the management of the project resources include: i) Coordination and careful 
monitoring of the ac tivities of the project (with the assistance of a project management tool); ii) Organising the 
Work package number 8 1 48
Work package title
Participant number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
Participants
IRIS
ASU
CTB
AIMPLAS
IVV
ITENE
NTT
UNIBO
BIOPOL
PLANET
BOSTIK
CARB
SUDPACK
GPI
SIBO
DANONE
MDLZ
BDF
OWS
PLATO
ROMEI
DENIMX
SILON
KNEIA
CHX
EUBP
PMs per participant 20.0 3.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 1.0 2.0 2.0 1.3 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 1.0 2.0 2.0 1.0 2.0 2.0 1.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 66.3
Total
IRISlead beneficiary
Project Management 
End monthStart month
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 61 of 70 
dates, agenda and documenting the minutes of all the meetings of the Project Steering Committee; iii) Overseeing 
the different managerial positions ( Scientific & Technical Manager, IPR & Exploitation Manager, Communication 
& Dissemination Manager) and the  Innovation Committee and Scientific and Technical Committee; iv) Ensuring 
that the Decision making procedures for the different management bodies of the manageme nt structure (as 
defined in Section 3.2) are respected at all times; v) Tracking and reporting progress; vi) Financial administration 
of the project and its funds; vii) Administrative management of the project; viii) Ensuring all partners adhere to 
the contractual obligations of the Grant Agreement; iix) Maintaining the Consortium Agreement.  
IRIS will lead this task and a ll partners will be involved to ensure the robust management of resources. A project 
management tool will be set up at the start of the p roject and it will be used for facilitating the management of 
the project resources and progress of the work plan (Deli verable 8.1). Each partner must ensure effective use of 
their own resources through careful internal project management. Internal reports  will be prepared at regular 
intervals (at least quarterly) by the WP leaders to facilitate internal monitoring of progress, and to foment a culture 
of continuous reporting that will facilitate the contractual reporting to the EC in Task 8.3.  
 
Task 8.2: Implementation of the management procedures 
Leader: IRIS. Partner(s) involved: All 
ISO 9001:2008 certified processes and UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems for R&D&I certified procedures 
are implemented by IRIS in the management of all their projects and  they form part of their continuous quality 
improvement processes. The project man agement procedures that will be followed are: Technical Work Plan 
Review and Update Procedure; Issues Management Procedure; Scope Management Procedure; Risk Management 
Procedure; Conflict Management Procedure; Communication Management Procedure; Document M anagement 
procedure; Quality Management procedure. The necessary templates and documentation for implementing these 
procedures are available in IRIS and will be shared with the partners in a Project Management Handbook at project 
launch. The Project Coordi nator will ensure that all partners are fully briefed on each procedure, how it works, 
and their role in its implementation.  
Different critical project management procedures will be managed in dedicated aspects: 
Risk Management- Risk Management procedures will be in place, whereby the status of the Critical Risks identified 
in Table 3.2b will be continually reviewed, and additional risks and mitigation strategies will be devi sed as 
appropriate. Contingency plans will be brought into play in an early and ti mely fashion, in consultation with the 
Project Steering Committee.  
Data management – According to the data management plan set up in Section 2.2, which will be further refin ed 
in the project management handbook, all data, both for internal curation (e.g. list of samples, nomenclatures, 
standards followed and testing equipment used, trials data, data for LCA, LCC, sLCA and modelling activities in 
WP6 that will be gathered in a  dedicated data basis, etc.) will be hosted in the project intranet and those 
benefitting from Open Access (publications, selected LCA and validation results among others, but also process 
data under a license) for public distributions will be available fr om the project website as well as in OpenAire or 
Cordis among others respectively in case of publications and deliverables. GDPR best practices will be followed 
whenever personal data are involved. The data management will be led by IRIS with support from WP7 leader in 
terms of data relevant to IPR & open access data. 
Responsible research and innovation (RRI) management including ethical aspects involving the following tasks:  
i) Overseeing ethical and societal issues related to the research activities cond ucted within the project (that will 
include the proper handling of data from consumer perception studies- see section 5.1- and the fulfilment of any 
ethical requirements raised during grant preparation);  
ii) Checking the proper implementation of the regulatory aspects pertaining to the validation in WP5-6 and liaising 
with WP7 in terms of checking the proper outreach to policy makers, public and training;  
iii) Overseeing the promotion of gender equality in the project.  
In addition, the proper implementation of the Innovation & Knowledge Management activities will be checked: in 
linkage with WP7, the Coordinator will assist the IPR & Data manager, review progress and proceedings with regard 
to IPR protection, sharing... 
Task 8.3: Coordination with and Reporting to the EC 
Leader: IRIS. Partner(s) involved: All will assist in reporting  
The Coordinator is the sole point of contact between the EC and the project consortium. The Coordinator will 
ensure that all milestones are met and that all reports are prepar ed and delivered to the EC in accordance with 
contractual requirements. IRIS will execute this task that will be greatly facilitated by the internal management 
plan and reporting from the previous tasks. 
Deliverables (in addition to the contractual reporting established in the Grant Agreement) 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 62 of 70 
D8.1 Project Management Tool (M2)- intranet platform restricted to the consortium for communication and 
document sharing 
D8.2 Project management handbook (M3)- defines the project monitoring, conflict, risk management, deliverable 
review procedures and templates, etc. to be used by the consortium for a smooth project implementation 
D8.3 Data management plan (M6)- defines how the project results will be curated, made accessible where 
applicable and includes a data basis for fueling the LCA, LCC, SLCA and modelling in WP6 
Table 3.1c: List of Deliverables  
Nº Deliverable name WP Lead 
participant Type Dissemination 
level 
Delivery 
date  
D8.1 Project Management Tool 8 IRIS OTHER CO 2 
D1.1 Report on the state-of-the art review  1 ASU R PU 2 
D7.1 Project Website  7 KNEIA OTHER PU 3 
D8.2 Project management Plan 8 IRIS R CO 3 
D1.2 Specifications for bio-based packaging materials for food contact  1 EUBP R CO 4 
D1.3  Specifications of targeted recycled bio -based packaging a nd other recovered 
polymer applications 
1 EUBP R CO 4 
D7.2 Communication Plan 7 KNEIA R PU 6 
D8.3 Data management Plan 8 IRIS R CO 6 
D2.2 Optimization of PHA fermentation process 2 BIOPLO R CO 12 
D7.3 Training Plan  7 EUBP R PU 12 
D7.4 Multi-Stakeholder Platform  7 CHX OTHER PU 12 
D2.1 Development of barrier protein coatings 2 ASU/IVV R CO 15 
D2.3 PHA coating formulation 2 AIMPLAS R CO 15 
D2.6 eBeam Treatment 2 ASU R CO 15 
D3.2 eBeam treatment of polymeric material  3 ASU R CO 15 
D2.4 Development of bio-based adhesives 2 BOSTIK R CO 18 
D2.5 Functional textile finishing coating to reduce microplastics 2 ITENE R CO 18 
D2.7 Production of multilayer structures 2 AIMPLAS R CO 18 
D6.1 LCA, LCC and Social LCA System boundaries and functional units 6 NTT R PU 18 
D2.8 Upscaling of coatings and adhesives 2 AIMPLAS R CO 24 
D3.1 Enzymated PLA to reach biodegradation under mild conditions  3 CARB R CO 24 
D3.3 Self-reinforcement of PLA   3 CTB R CO 24 
D7.5 Draft Plan for the dissemination and exploitation of the project's results (PEDR)  7 KNEIA R CO 24 
D3.4 Microfibrillar reinforcement 3 CTB R CO 24 
D5.1 Eco-designed food packaging structures 5 IVV R CO 27 
D6.2 Preliminary LCA, LCC and Social LCA  6 NTT R PU 32 
D4.1 EoL material monitoring 4 IRIS R CO 36 
D4.2 Enzymatic recycling 4 UNIBO R CO 36 
D4.3 Biodegradation of developed materials in different environments under home 
composting and anaerobic conditions  
4 OWS R CO 36 
D4.4 Material separation  4 PLANET R CO 36 
D5.2 Performance of upcycled materials used in food and beverage packaging 5 SUDPACK R CO 36 
D4.5 Recycling of biomaterials  4 CTB R CO 42 
D5.3 Validation of upcycled materials for food packaging 5 DANONE R CO 45 
D4.6 Biodegradation, organic recycling of packaging by industrial and anaerobic digestion 
and home composting  
4 OWS R CO 48 
D5.4 Validation of upcycled SRM materials for textiles, composites and packaging for 
personal care 
5 DENIMX R CO 48 
D6.3 Final LCA, LCC and Social LCA: Final results and recommendations  6 NTT R PU 48 
D6.4 Final DSS and report on circularity assessments  6 ITENE R PU 48 
D6.5 Legal and Regulatory and Safety Requirements  6 ITENE R PU 48 
D7.6 Report on consumer perception aspects  7 ASU R CO 48 
D7.7 Innovation Roadmap towards 2030 7 EUBP R PU 48 
D7.8 Final Plan for the dissemination and exploitation of the project's results (PEDR)  7 KNEIA R CO 48
3.2 Management structure, milestones and procedures 
Organisational structure and decision-making  
The project will be managed by the experienced Project Coordin ator (PC), IRIS. IRIS follows proven project 
management procedures, which adhere to ISO 9001:2008 certified processes and UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management 
Systems for R&D&I. The organisational structure (Fig. 3.1) consists of the Project Coordinator (the interface with the 
EC), who is supported by a Project Steering Committee in the strategic management of the project. At executive 
management level, the PC is supported in the implementation of the w ork by a Scientific & Technical Committee 
(S&TC) on the one hand and an Innovation Committee (IC) on the other, the roles and decision -making capacity of 
which are discussed below. This is a balanced structure that distributes governance between various pa rtners 
according to their background to allow a good balance in decision and management of different aspects. An External 
Stakeholders Group (ESG) is also included, which consists of a voluntary group of industry actors and stakeholders 
who will engage wit h the project at different points along the work plan.  This bo dy has no voting rights and a 
Confidentiality Agreement will be in place with all ESG members. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 63 of 70 
Project coordinator  
The Project Coordinator ( Dr. Elodie 
Bugnicourt from IRIS ) is responsible for 
the day to day running of the project, and 
for ensuring that t he work programme 
adheres to its schedule, fulfils its 
objectives, and that the project meets 
the needs and expectations of all t he 
partners. She will be active in steering the 
evolution of the project by closely 
monitoring the work performed by each 
partner. She is responsible for ensuring 
that the project management procedures 
are correctly implemented and that all 
deadlines and o bligations are met. She 
will also act as the communication and 
administrative interface with the EC, to 
carry out the reporting and overall administrative management of the project. Appropriately, she will also in many 
instances act as the public face for the project e.g. in networking events between EU projects or when the project 
receives enquiries by external actors such as press or policy makers. As this is also a leadership role, it requires a 
profile that is sufficiently experienced and capacitated  to supervise the execution of the work programme and 
delegation of the technical and innovation implementation, and having strong communication, team-building, 
motivational, collective problem solving and analytical skills.  
As an organisation, IRIS has demo nstrable experience, the available technical and administrative resources (with a  
long-established and well qualified Project Management Office that will provide support to the Project Manager in 
administrative, financial and contractual management tasks),  linguistic and communications skills to successfully 
perform project management coordination tasks. In terms of the competence  of Dr. Bugnicourt to successfully 
execute this role, she brings a wealth of project management experience from both private cont ract research and 
funded EC projects. In FP7, she leveraged her industry knowledge and expertise to the coordination two “Resea rch 
for SMEs” projects: DURAWOOD (GA nº 232296); and, OPTIJECT (GA nº 262623), as well as an NMP project OliPHA 
(GA nº  280604): Among others, she was also technical manager and heavily involved in the General Steering 
Committee for the “Research for SME As sociations” project, WHEYLAYER ( GA nº 218340-2) and follow up 
Demonstration Activity project WHEYLAYER2 (GA nº 315743). In H2020, she also managed an NMP-Pilots project 
OPTINANOPRO (GA nº 686116) and a SPIRE project called Multicycle (GA nº 820695). Elodie is assertive and capable 
of leading la rge multi -disciplinary and multi -actor teams with proven results. She is very familiar with all the 
modalities and administrative procedures involved in the management of EC research projects, from the grant 
preparation process, preparing and maintaining t he Consortium Agreement, monitoring work, reporting 
requirements, the use of tools for communication with the EC, etc. Prior to this, she has successfully managed R&D 
projects in the chemical industry, and in particul ar in the development of nanocomposites  as well as FRP  and bio-
sourced resins. She has shown herself to be a motivational leader, a fair and intelligent facilitator, with a sound 
understanding not only of materials science but also of process and associated industries. In addition to having been 
involved in some of the projects feeding into Preserve, Elodie is driven by a genuine green awareness, is passionately 
involved in sustainable materials and processes for 10+ years, and she is also the leader of the Innovation Unit in IRIS 
giving her invaluable experience in relation to Innovation Management. 
Project Steering Committee 
To ensure that the project is implemented according to the needs and requirements of all the project partners, and 
to empower each pa rtner organisation with a role in the s trategic management of the project, a Project Steering 
Committee (PSC) is established. It consists of a key representative of each of the beneficiaries. The PSC will meet 
every 6 months - physically or remote ly, where physical meetings are not possible- and extraordinary (remote) 
meetings may be convoked by the Project Coordinator in the event of urgent matters that may arise). PSC Meetings 
will be facilitated through the chair of the Project Coordinator. Through the PSC the partners will closely monitor and 
control the work performed, following the principles of “quality, time, cost”. The Project Milestones (Table 3.2a) will 
be used as a valuable tool for evaluating critical performance and determining whether or not th e project is on 
schedule. In terms of decision making mechanisms , when strategic decisions need to be taken, such as action to 
solve conflicts, action to mitigate critical risks to project implementation, action to manage changes in the work plan, 
decisions in relation to IPR and e xploitation, etc., it will be the responsibility of the Project Coordinator to seek 
 
Fig. 3.1: Overview of PRESERVE Management Structure 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 64 of 70 
consensus with the PS C, whereby each beneficiary will be assigned one vote . Decisions will be taken by simple 
majority. In the event of a tie situ ation, the Coordinator will take the final decision. Each representative of the PSC 
will be responsible for mobilising and coordinating the active and coherent participation of the other personnel from 
their organisation who are involved in the project team, and they will also ensure that reporting and cost statements 
from their organisation are submitted on time and correctly.  
Table 3.2a: List of milestones  
Nº Milestone name Related 
WP(s) 
Due date 
(M) 
Means of verification 
MS1 Specifications for the upcycled 
bio-based packaging  1 4 Targeted properties of materials & processes to upcycle by tailored PRESERVE 
approaches defined for at least 10 industrial applications and value chains.  
MS2 PHA fermentation upscaled 2 12 At least 10 kg of PHA available 
MS3 PHA-coated films  2 15 100 m of PHA coated films available for further characterisation and conversion 
MS4 Enzymated PLA available 3 15 10 kg of enzymated  PLA ready for further upcycling and testing of 
biodegradability/ microplastics release in soil  
MS5 eBeam treatment of PRESERVE 
bioplastics 3, 4 15 eBeam-treated primary or secondary bioplastics showing properties similar to 
fossil or virgin alternatives, respectively 
MS6 PRESERVE laminates available 2 18 At least 100 m of films ready for further ch aracterisation and conversion with a 
bio-based content >85% 
MS7 Self-reinforcement as 
recycling route for bilayers 3, 4 18 Self-reinforced materials from recycled bilayer packaging characterisation  show 
superior properties and high potential for reuse 
MS8 Upscaled SRPC /MRPC 
compounds 3 24 50 kg of compound ready for conversion into final packaging  
MS9 Automatic identification of  
PRESERVE materials 4 24 Sorting ability towards the suitable EoL treatment proven 
MS10 Successful upscale of PHA -
coating 2 24 25 kg of PHA coating available for conversion into final packaging 
MS11 Successful upscale  of protein 
coatings and adhesives 2 24 25 kg of protein coating and adhesives ready for further characterisation  and 
conversion into final packaging 
MS12 Enzyme-enabled recycling 
upscaled 4 36 Enzyme-enable recycling processes in place for pilot scale  
MS13 Production of PRESERVE 
demonstrators 5 36 At least 5 demonstrators of upcycled bio-packaging available for further validation 
with food and for recycling into personal care packaging, textiles and composites 
MS14 DSS developed 6 40 DSS first version ready to support the ecodesign of SRM applications in WP5 
MS15 SRM compounding upscaled 4 42 50 kg of compound ready for conversion into final SRM applications 
MS16 PRESERVE demonstrators 
validated 5 48 Potential of the PRESERVE solutions to substitute at least 60% of fossil plastic 
packaging materials demonstrated 
MS17 Sustainability of PRESERVE 
solutions 6 48 Reduced environmental impact and viability of PRESERVE solutions demonstrated 
MS18 Successful dissemination and 
exploitation 7 48 
2030 roadmap in place including a plan to integrate PRESERVE in waste 
management practices and circular value chains. Patent applications filed. All 
relevant stakeholders reached and policy/regulatory recommendations disclosed. 
Scientific & Technical Committee  
The Scientific & Technical Committee (S&TC) is established to take care of scientific and technical (S&T) issues and 
for supporting the Project Coordinator in ensuring th at the S&T objectives and activities of the project are 
successfully accomplished in a  timely manner, taking into account the interdisciplinary approach and the 
interdependence between the technical tasks of the work plan. The S&TC is composed of the WP and task leaders in 
WP1-6 allowing the needed interactions across the WPs developing the key individual technical results.  
The S&TC is chaired by the Scientific &Technical Manager, who will preside over the WP leaders : Prof. Dr. Markus 
Schmid, a Senior Researcher from ASU, whose research specialises in the field of sustainable packaging and who has 
already occupied that role in numerous EU-projects. 
The appointment of the S&TC will greatly facilitate the implementation of his work, especially in view of th e 
ambitious, highly interdisciplinary nature of the activities involved. Whereas the WP leaders, who will themselves be 
fuelled by their task contributors and their teams, will assume responsibility for the implementation of the work 
towards the fulfilment of the associated Project Objectives (and milestones related to the WPs), the S&TC will ensure 
the consistency (selection of processes suitable for later scale up at end users) and compatibility (e.g. amount of 
materials needed for different purposes of v alidation) among WPs within their thematic through the proper 
engagement of the partners and entrusting to the WPs leaders. The Scientific & Technical (S&T) Manager will act as 
facilitator for the integration of the transversal knowledge without losing the  benefit from synergies among the 
different packaging applications and upcycling approaches that can be used both for primary and secondary materials 
thanks to the common partners involved. The S&T Manager will also ensure the seamless integration of the r esults 
by convoking meetings on a regular basis with the implementation teams (virtual ly or on -site meetings will be 
scheduled as appropriate). It is expected that this structure will increase the potential for early identification of inter-
WP scientific or technical risks and WP deviations level that could impact other activities in their thematic to enable 
effective and timely management. Each WP leader will report on the status and progress of the work involved in their 
WP to the Project Coordinator in monthly remote and biannual presential meetings of the S&TC (chaired by the S&T 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 65 of 70 
Manager). While the S&TC will have the mandate to take decisions that relate to the implementation of the workplan, 
any decisions that could affect the scope of the work, its bu dget, or have a strategic impact on the project will be 
escalated via the Project Coordinator to the PSC for voting and decision taking.  
Innovation Committee  
The Innovation Committee (IC) is responsible for identifying and managing innovation from the pr oject. A key goal 
will be to ensure that the project results are effectively protected and exploited to the full for future industrial growth 
and competitiveness. The IC consists of a qualified representative from each beneficiary.  
The I C assumes the impo rtant role of Innovation Management in the project , and as such will manage the 
implementation of the innovation cycle, and the feedback linkages to the development work. It will evaluate the 
knowledge as it is generated in line with its market impacts. It will also ensure that the project results are effectively 
protected and exploited to the full for future industrial growth and competitiveness. Key strategic issues, such as IPR 
protection mechanisms, IPR sharing and routes to exploitation will be discussed extensively during the IC meetings. 
The IC will also ensure that Business and Exploitation Plans are further developed based on the draft in Section 2.2.  
The IC will be chaired by the IPR & Exploitation Manager , Cristina Barragan (KNEIA) who will lead the partners in 
effective management of the innovation cycle of t he project. She will also act as a driver for the industrial partners 
in defining the post-project concerted value chain commercial strategy and for assisting the partners in identifying 
and managing innovation from the project, advising on the scope and potential IPRs arising from the project. She has 
a master in Communication Sciences and more than 15 years of experience in innovation management, which is a 
core mission of KNEIA, company she founded, therefore a perfect background for this role. She will be supported by 
Dr. Christian Schulz (EUBP) who will also act as Communication & Dissemination Manager–his biopolymer/ renewable 
resources management  scientist education, strong track record in leading dissemination and deployment 
programmes in collaborative environments will strengthen his capacity for accurate communication fundamental for 
the role which is very aligned with the main mission of EUBP in the transfer of knowledge to the process industry. He 
will be responsible for leading the consortium in further planning and implementing the project Communication and 
Dissemination activities, as well as ensuring the project reaches out to different audiences in the most effective way, 
and will also ensure the confidentiality of the results is safeguarded until the IP is protected.  
The IC will meet regularly (at least every 6 months) and pay attention to discerning IP at regular checkpoints. The IPR 
& Exploitation Manager supported by the Communication & Dissemination Manager will have holistic view of the 
innovations arising out of the project, and will advise individual partners on IPR and funding strategy, with the aim of 
maximizing the commercial potential of the innovations created. IP ownership will belong by default to the partner’s 
creating it, and will be subject to terms and conditions outlined in the Consortium Agreeme nt. The Innovation & 
Exploitation Manager will update the Project Coordinator of the innovations arising, and recommendations for next 
steps on how best to handle it. In relation to decision making, the IC will decide on all matters with regard to IPR and 
exploitation, whereby each beneficiary can decide how best to protect and own its own IP, and joint IP will be decided 
by the beneficiaries involved, with each beneficiary in this case being assigned a vote (and decisions being taken by 
simple majority). The IC will have the ability to take decisions that relate to the implementation of the WP7, but any 
strategic decision such as those in relation to IPRs that affect the consortium, etc. will be raised to the PSC for voting. 
Moreover, in meetings of the PSC, the IPR & Exploitation Manager on behalf of the IC will report on the status of 
Innovation Management Activities.  
Appropriateness to the complexity and scale of the project 
This organisational structure is considered appr opriate for the management of this project, in view of its size, 
multidisciplinary nature and its S&T scope and ambition, and its expected innovation impacts. With key roles and 
responsibilities, each body within the structure ensures that there is dedicated and qualified management and skills-
sets mobilised at the different levels, as opposed to a centralised, one -dimensional management approach, which 
would be highly unlikely to deliver the necessary versatility. To this end, there is an integral approach  to the 
management of the project, ensuring:  
• effective management of the day-to-day running of the project & its resources, appropriate interfacing with the 
EC (Project Coordinator) 
• all participants have a stake in the strategic management of the project (Project Steering Committee) 
• effective management of the execution of the interdisciplinary work plan and its ability to deliver impact, 
whereby 2 executive-level Committees have been planned : the Scientific &  Technical Committee will be 
responsible for ensuring the project achieves its research objectives through sound management of the overall 
S&T work and it s potential risks; the Innovation Committee will be responsible for effective dissemination and 
management of the knowledge and data generated, IPRs, as well as other innovation-related activities required 
to deliver market exploitable results and to map out further research in order to build on the project results. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 66 of 70 
Innovation management  
A key objective of publicly-funded research is that it should lead to the exploitation of results, which goes one step 
further th an the mere production and dissemination of new scientific knowledge 117. As described , our project 
envisages an Innovation Committee and an IPR & Exploitation Manager in its organisation structure and we also have 
a dedicated Task 7.7. Innovation and IPR Management, which will be closely linked with the IP and Knowledge 
Management work in Ta sk 7.8 Exploitation of results and Business model develo pment. Our IPR & Exploitation 
Manager, Cristina Barragan, has the necessary entrepreneurial spirit to foment the conditions for an innovation eco-
system to flourish. She has a deep business understanding, along with a strong technical background for ensuri ng 
creative ideas are anchored to the required market, regulatory and performance requirements. In addition to IP 
protection, our Innovation Management activities will pivot around the implementation of an innovation cycle, which 
is a vital component for ensuring success in market-oriented research projects. Close interaction with the S&TC will 
be promoted to facilitate co-creation and fluid interaction between the development teams and our industry en d-
users. Open brainstorming, idea management, and the fact that WP1 will contribute to a deep understanding of the 
market needs, industry constraints and regulatory/standards framework  at the outset of the project for further 
activities to build upon. Thereafter, and in particular through WP2-3-4, the processes will be selected based on their 
capability to be upscaled to produce the new materials in sufficient amounts for WP5 whereby validation for ours 
end users case studies will be performed. The market s trive will accompany the entire work plan and the 
development teams will be guided by feedback loops from fellow developers, end-users and market insights to fuel 
an innovation cycle that leads to exploitable project results for a successful project outcom e in terms of innovation 
impacts. In addition to the mar ket drive of the technical development, we are in fact embedding our innovation 
strategy in a quadruple innovation helix model by contextualizing it within number of inputs from/ and outcome to 
the ‘natural environments of society’ as well as ‘media-based and culture-based public’ and ‘civil society’ by involving 
interactions with governmental/policy makers as well 
as stakeholder s including consumers again 
contributing to a multiplying effect for our innovation 
potential and impact (fig. 3.2). The Circular Plastics  
Helix also provide s an open innovation 
environment to generate new collaborations. 
Critical risks and mitigation measures 
Risks can be categorised as follows; technology related risks, market related risks and transversal risks (environment 
related risks and organisation related risks) 118. Technical risks will be managed by the Scientific & Technical 
Committee. Market-related risks and environment related risks will be closely analysed by the Innovation Committee, 
and organisational -related risks will be managed by the Project Coordinator supported by the Project Steering 
Committee and will be embedded in the close monitor ing of the evolution of the work. Table 3.2b shows the main 
risks identified to date, their probability of occurrence, the severity of the problem (impact), the actions to mitigate 
the risk and foreseen contingency actions. Through Task 8.2, a continuous p rocess of risk identification and 
management (of risks below and any newly identified risks) will be implemented based upon the principles and 
guidelines of the FERMA (ISO 31000 related) Standard 119. Agreement sought for risk -related contingency actions 
from the S&TC (in relation to technical risks) and the IC (in relation to market- and environment-related risks) will be 
taken by the PSC.  
Table 3.2b: Critical risks for implementation  
Description of risk (probability & impact levels: 
Low (l)/ Medium (m)/High (h)) WP Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
Technical risks 
Not accurately detailed requirements for the 
envisaged applications, Proba.: l. Impact: h. 1  
This risk is highly mitigated by the focus on large markets and applications where 
partners already have great experience. Nevertheless, as the expected 
demonstrators are very broad, if needed, priorities will be set in terms of formats 
and/or products to be packed for each target barrier and/or EoL improvements. 
Metallization layer on protein coatings shows 
defects/cracks leading to insufficient barrier 
improvement, Proba.: m. Impact: m. 
2 Choose alternative planarization coating before applying PVD on protein coatings to 
equalize mechanical stress due to hygroexpansion 
Bio-based dry-laminating adhesives do not reach 
necessary laminate bond strength, Proba.: l. 
Impact: h. 
2 
Alternative formulations with some non-biobased components developed by BOSTIK 
(still in line with KPI of having >85% bio content in resulting structure). Surface 
treatment of the film prior to laminating, to improve adhesion. 
Materials not providing required morphology or 
properties, or required quality in case of recycled 
materials, Proba.: m. Impact: m. 
2, 
3, 
4, 
Re-evaluate applied techniques, use of alternative compatibilising agents or 
processing parameters, for recycled materials: Promote milder treatment for 
separation, add chain extender and nucleating agents. Mix recycled material with 
 
117 Innovation. How to convert research into commercial success story? Part 3: Innovation Management for Practitioners. European Commission. Directorate-General for 
Research and Innovation, 2013. Nanosciences, Nanotechnologies, Materials and New Production Technologies (NMP) 
118 Kasap et.al. Risk Management in R&D Projects. Management of Engineering and Technology, Portland, US. 5-9 Aug 2007. ISBN: 978-1-8908-4315-1 
119 Federation of European Risk Management Associations (www.ferma.eu)  
    Fig. 3.2: Quadruple innovation helix embedding our innovation management 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 67 of 70 
5 virgin one in optimal ratio.  
Plasticizer leaching into interfaces leading to 
reduced lamination bond strength and to 
delamination, Proba.: l. Impact: h. 
2, 
5 
Formulation adjustment by replacing external plasticizers by internal plasticizers such 
as low molecular weight protein fractions. 
FA grafted layer does not provide sufficient heat-
sealing properties, Proba.: m. Impact; h. 
2, 
5 
Process adjustment and partial grafting approaches. Alternative sealing techniques 
could be alternatively used to accomplish the sealing seam. 
The quantity of PHA produced in insufficient 
and/or too expensive, Proba.: l. Impact: h. 
2, 
5 
In case of mcl-PHA, further process scale-up to higher fermentation volume can be 
done or blends with other commercially available biopolymers (e.g. low cost PLA with 
FA grafting as being developed in BIOnTop project). This risk is highly mitigated by 
the use of commercial PHA in CTB’s PHA coatings as well as for the alternative 
application technique planned for moulded pulp packaging (in-mould labelling).  
Poor water vapour barrier of PHA coating, Proba.: 
m. Impact; h. 
2, 
5 
Increase coating thickness or coating solid content of the formulations. Combination 
with protein coatings. Dispersion of laminar nanoparticles into the PHA formulation. 
Low protection to microfibre release, Proba.: m., 
Impact: h. 2, 5 Reformulation of coatings, use of eBeam and/or increased coating weight. 
Insufficient mechanical p roperties of the textiles 
and composites using recycled biopolymers , 
Proba.: m. Impact: m. 
3, 
4, 5 
Reformulation of the materials, additional reinforcement and additives to improve the 
properties. Search for alternative applications. 
Self-reinforced PLA with insufficient mechanical 
properties, Proba.: m. Impact: m. 
3, 
4, 
5 
Re-evaluate different materials (high tenacity PLA fibers/foils and matrix polymers), 
re-evaluate processing conditions. Demonstrators: adapt application depending on 
the obtained mechanical properties 
Degree of crosslinking too high after eBeam 
treatment or unknown reactions between 
biopolymers & coatings, difficulties in recycling, 
Proba.: m. Impact: m. 
3, 
4 
This risk is considered as medium as eBeam parameters will be carefully chosen. 
Additional round of eBeam treatment prior to recycling to induce brittleness for 
enhancing the recycling process  
Enzymated PLA insufficiently compostable in mild 
conditions, Proba: l. Impact: m. 3, 4 
This risk is unlikely due to the current SoA. Adaptation of the enzyme masterbatch and 
improved compatibility with the matrix. Industrial composting or anaerobic digestion 
at thermophilic conditions as an alternative biological recycling option  
Time and conditions for layers separation hard to 
be economically sustainable in industrial plant, 
Proba.: m. Impact: h. 
4,7 
Improve shredding of the multilayers before of the washing, and increase mechanical 
action and mixing in the washing system, eventu ally use enzymatic or other 
detergents. 
Low enzymatic biodegradation rate and low yield 
of polyesters into oligomers, Proba.: m Impact: m 4 Use chemical degrading routes as alternative or commercial model compounds for the 
upcycling 
Business risks 
No data available from certain processes for 
developing LCA, LCC. Proba.: l., Impact: m. 6 The needed data will be collected by means of surveys, interviews industrial partners 
outside the project and getting data from literature. 
LCA and/or results are not positive vs. current 
solutions at the scale of the project  and/ or not 
comply with the environmental objectives of the 
project. Proba.: m. Impact: m. 
6 
This risk has an increased probability due to the pilot scale processing/recycling of the 
materials. Nevertheless, the impact of this risk is mitigated by the fact tha t there are 
no similar biobased solutions on the market. Early screening LCA shall flag p otential 
obstacles for reaching set environmental goals; readjustment of research plan, if 
needed to meet goals 
Food contact safety is concerned , Proba.: l., 
Impact: h. 6  Re-evaluate compounds used to improve properties and processing routes 
New biopolymers upcycling solutions reaches the 
market during the project duration. Proba.: m. 
Impact: m 
7 
In terms of competing with our overall results, this risk is significantly mitigated by our 
combination of novel approaches, background IP and the planned improvements 
aimed at being protected. The partners will perform systematic technology watch to 
identify new processes early and therefore devise, if needed, areas of inter vention to 
go beyond, e.g. higher technological content or lower cost. 
Difficulty to reach decision and policy makers 
reducing lobbying effect. Proba.: m. Impact: m. 7, 8 
Risk mitigated by the presence in the consortium of market leaders with high influence 
and of partners such as EUBP with existing network with policy makers and experience 
in such outreach. Whereas the planed lobbying to regulate around increased used of 
sustainable and recyclable materials would surely boost the market entry of our 
solution in line with CE efforts, the excellent packaging performance and the provision 
of cost competitive SRMs will allow gaining shares over current linear plastic use. 
Confrontation among partners for IPR issues. 
Proba.: l. Impact: h. 7, 8 
This risk is considered low as it has been mitigated by establishing IPR rules at project 
stage as is documented in Section 2.2. In addition, before project start all the partners 
sign the Consortium Agreement that will address project IPR. The IPR & Exploitation 
manager with support from the Project Coordinator, with the assistance of consortium 
members, will control the proper exploitation of project results and associated IPR 
issues and when required a voting procedure is in place. 
Transversal risks 
Discrepancies in the technical approaches. Proba.: 
l. Impact: h. all 
Regular communication among WP leaders to solve all technical issues. The Technical 
Manager with support from the Project Coordinator, with the assistance of consortium 
members, will control this issue and when required a voting procedure is in place. 
Problems in respecting the planned activities and 
resource allocation. Proba. m. Impact: h.  all This risk will be mitigated by the implementation of the Technical Work plan Review 
and Update Procedures. 
Management issues in relation to the coordinated 
execution of the technical tasks due to the multi -
disciplinary nature of the Project and its 
challenging scope. Proba.: m. Impact: h.. 
all 
Constitution of a Science and Technical Committee that will be chaired by the Scientific 
& Technical Manager, with relevant representatives of the most relevant disciplines in 
order to assure the required leadership supported by 2 industry focused working 
groups. 
As will be further defined in the Consortium Agreement, in the event of the emergence of a significant unexpected 
risk requiring a quick decision, an emergency/ extraordinary meeting of the relevant committee will be called by its 
responsible. In addition, as described, a decision procedure has been defined within ea ch committee, where each 
member has a vote. To avoid the case where the corrective/decided action is blocked due to disagreements between 
the different committees, all transversal decisions as well as decisions of strategic importance to the Project will be 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 68 of 70 
the mandate of the PSC, acting above the other committees.
3.3  Consortium as a whole  
Bringing together public and private organisations across Europe  and involving cooperation among actors in the 
supply chain, from producer to final consumer, and from rese arch to policy makers  is key for the interdisciplinary 
approach needed for Circular Economy based innovation. The Preserve consortium is made up of 26 partners from 
9 countries: 8 EU countries (Belgium, Spain, Germany, France, Czech Republic, Italy, Netherlands, UK, Slovenia), as 
well as a Germany-based European association with significant policy outreach capacity. We have an integrative 
consortium covering a broad geography and including from small Eastern EU-firms to world leading blue-chip Global 
corporates. Our team constitutes a pan-European eco-system that unites the necessary infrastructure, knowledge, 
expertise, services and industry value chain to succeed in delivering on the project’s objectives to realise the expected 
impacts of the topic CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 - Upcycling Bio Plastics of food and drinks packaging.  
As illustrated in fig. 3.3, the consortium brings together comprehensive interdisciplinary pockets of knowledge. There 
is solid scientific presence  covering all relevant fields (AIMPLAS, FR AUNHOFER, CTB , ASU, UNIBO, ITENE, NTT ), 
combined with strong industrial and commercial involvement (10 SMEs including an industry association and 9 large 
enterprises) to ensure that the value chain of commercial actors can progress swiftly towards the intr oduction of 
new viable circular bio -based packaging solutions. RTOs will work closely with technology and service providing 
companies ( OWS, PLATO, IRIS , DENIMX), polymer , coatings and adhesive  producers ( BOSTIK/ARKEMA, BIOPOL), 
compounder specialised in recyclable plastics (PLANET, CARB), packaging manufacturer (SUDPACK, GPI, SIBO), end 
users (Danone, MDLZ, BDF), recyclers/upcyclers (SILON, ROMEI), as well as the largest biopolymer association EUBP. 
To strengthen impact, complementary partners have been included in terms of transversal activities and to ensure a 
business-driven and market-focussed approach to the project: innovation  and exploitation planning , IPR & Data 
management (KNEIA), Dissemination (CHX/ EUBP). In short, this is a complete storyboard of actors. 
Importantly the consortium will draw on the voluntary and 
objective advice, exper tise and support of External 
Stakeholders Group (ESG ), in order to complement the 
consortium’s industrial and technical insight in relevant fields. 
ESG members inclu de CocaCola, Manor Farm, Pack4Food, 
FlandersFood, PackCluster, CEFLEX, IVLV, ZLV, and more to be 
liaise with during the project . Each will provide invaluable 
insights into different applications that could use bio -based 
materials or that could use SRM, or could act as strategic 
adopters obtaining a license for the developed technologies.  
As a condition to generate growth, this is an industry-oriented 
project. It is coordinated by the highly experienced technology 
SME, IRIS, and a number of the WP leaders a re also from 
industry. The industry participants have been instrumental in 
helping to shape this proposal, and Preserve is considered a 
highly strat egic for assisting them in gaining a competitive 
edge and in being a pioneering group in driving forward 
Circular Economy-enabled innovations in the field of plastics. 
Each industry participant will be able to grow their businesses 
and improve their competitiveness in line with their position on the value chain. Fig. 3.3, where partners are clustered 
according to their positioning on the supply and value chain, shows how each partner is relevant and complementary.  
Finally, in relation to the gender dimension of our consortium, our team of researchers, technologists, industrialists, 
business experts, and policy influencers has a good participation of females. A number of the key management and 
decision-making positions within the project organisational structure have been assigned to highly qualified women, 
not least the roles of the Project Coordinator (Dr. Elodie Bugnicourt) and the IPR & Exploitation Manager (Dr. Cristina 
Barragan), as well as number of WP and task leadership roles. Interestingly, females are among the key drivers of 
this proposal (Elodie Bugnicourt, Jana Kadlecová, Esra Kucukpinar, Lorena Rodríguez, Isabel De Schrijver, Patrizia 
Cinelli, Sophie Macedo, Kristina Eißenberger, Annamaria Celli, Lola Gómez, etc.). Recommendations regarding 
recruitment for securing future researchers and development profiles for the project will be overseen by the Project 
Coordinator in WP8 to ensure a reasonable level of balance between the sexes (gender balances will be considered 
as a selection criterion between equally qualified candidates).  
Other countries : N/A (UK committed to fund the participation in H2020 for  all its entities until the end of the 
  
Fig. 3.3: PRESERVE consortium partners types and locations 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 69 of 70 
framework programme so the role of CHX is not considered at risk).
3.4  Resources to be committed 
The project budget has been built using a bottom-up methodology. There is a logical budget distribution among the 
partners and each has mobilised the necessary staff/person months (Table 3.4a) and infrastructure to get the job 
done in a competitive timeframe. The necessary personnel resources reflect the realistic efforts required to deliver 
the project objectives, and have been costed up based on actual costs for staff for each partner organisation (in line 
with average staff costs within the sectors and r eflected the differences in cost of living between the different 
participating EU regions). Equipment costs included in the project are for depreciation only. A reasonable budget has 
been allocated to mobility of developers and industrialists between sites, which is important for knowledge exchange 
and building excellence among multidisciplinary and international teams, as we ll as for practical on -site testings 
across partners as needed. Minimal subcontracting costs have been budgeted as the consortium has the internal 
resources and knowledge to perform the work.  
The OG&S (OG&S) that need to be contracted have also been included (and a breakdown of these costs are provided 
in Table 3.4b (for partners whose Other costs exceed 15% of personnel costs).The SMEs and industry partners occupy 
a sufficient portion of the budget ( 36% of the EC contribution goes to SMEs , 27% to large  companies and 37% to 
RT0s), ensuring a practical research-industry partnership for high competitive impact. There is an appropriate budget 
allocated to communication , dissemination, IP and knowledge management and business planning activities . 
Considering th at there are 26 partners in the project, and a competitive 48-month work plan that will output 
knowledge, upscaled processes, a pilot recycling plant for enzymatic delamination-enabled by biopolymer coatings 
and at least 10 demonstrators of different packaging formats including films, trays, liquid containers, textiles and 
composite from virgin bioplastics and SRM s as well as combining them with paper and board, for packing food, 
beverages, personal care and generic transport of products, resulting in mater ials with high transferability to other 
industries, a requested EC Contribution below 8M€ is very good value for high impact. 
Table 3.4a: Summary of staff effort 
Nº Participant Short Name WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 WP8 Total PMs 
1 IRIS 5.0 10.0 14.0 14.0 12.0 20.0 4.0 20.0 99.0 
2 ASU 3.0 11.0 11.0 6.0 7.0 3.0 5.0 3.0 49.0 
3 CTB 1.0 7.0 16.0 8.0 10.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 48.0 
4 AIMPLAS 1.0 30.0 15.0 19.0 6.0 1.0 2.0 2.0 76.0 
5 IVV 1.5 18.0     18.0 0.5 2.0 2.0 42.0 
6 ITENE 1.0 23.0     11.0 31.0 2.0 2.0 70.0 
7 NTT 1.0   3.0   4.0 27.0 2.0 2.0 39.0 
8 UNIBO 1.0 10.0   61.0 1.0 1.0 2.0 1.0 77.0 
9 BIOPOL 1.0 22.0       1.0 2.0 2.0 28.0 
10 PLANET 1.0   10.0 22.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 41.0 
11 BOSTIK 1.9 18.0       0.2 1.7 1.3 23.1 
12 CARB 1.0   18.0 2.0 1.0 1.0 2 2.0 27.0 
13 SUDPACK 3.0 3.0 2.0 1.0 36.0 1.0 2.0 2.0 50.0 
14 GPI 1.5 1.0   3.5 12.0 0.5 2.0 2.0 22.5 
15 SIBO 1.5   1.0   16.0 0.5 2.0 2.0 23.0 
16 DANONE 1.0      5.0 0.2 1.2 1.0 8.4 
17 MDLZ 1.0       15.0 1.0 2.0 2.0 21.0 
18 BDF 1.0       18.0 1.0 2.0 2.0 24.0 
19 OWS 1.0     25.5   0.5 1.0 1.0 29.0 
20 PLATO 1.0 1.0   24.0 1.0 1.0 2.0 2.0 32.0 
21 ROMEI 1.0 1.0   12.0 1.0 1.0 2.0 2.0 20.0 
22 DENIMX 1.0     1.0 6.0 2.0 1.0 1.0 12.0 
23 SILON 1.0   1.0 3.0 4.0 0.5 2.0 2.0 13.5 
24 KNEIA 1.0         1.0 35.0 2.0 39.0 
25 CHX 1.0           10.0 2.0 13.0 
26 EUBP 6.0         1.0 10.0 2.0 19.0 
Total Person months 41.4 155.0 91.0 202.0 186.0 100.9 102.9 66.3 945.5 
Table 3.4b: ‘Other direct cost’ items (travel, equipment, OG&S (other goods and services), large research infrastructure)120 
1 IRIS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 25000 20k in travel costs* + 5k for inviting stakeholders 
to events 
OG&S 
130000 
80k for consumables for tuning prototypes 
monitoring systems in WP2, 3 and 4 (optical, 
mechanical and electric components) and 10k in 
consumables for packaging validation tests, 10k in 
 
120 Equipment included only for partners for whom it is relevant. No infrastructure costs are reported.       
*Travel costs depends on the number of people involved per organisation and accessibility of journeys’ origin - include travel to project meetings (up to 17 meeting in 4 years, 
depending on the location, travel costs will be used by the host for organising meetings where applicable), dissemination events and other partners visits.   
outsourced analysis of morphologies and other 
analysis, 30k for cloud servers, training, external 
advisory on DMP, software licenses, audit 
certificate, shipments, dissemination material and 
events registration and IP protection 
Total 155000   
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 70 of 70 
2 ASU Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20000 travel costs* 
OG&S 
75000 
cost of IPR protection, dissemination material and 
events registration, publication fees for open 
access journal, cost of audit certificate (total 16k), 
consumable for eBeam device and other lab 
equipment (15k), external supply of pulp moulded 
sample (5k), Software licences (2k), shipment costs 
(2k), consumables (35k) 
Total 95000   
4  AIMPLAS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20000 travel costs* 
OG&S 
51000 
Bioplastics, additives, commercial bio-based films, 
consumables for compounding and extrusion lines, 
lab consumables, reactants, gases. Cost of IPR 
protection, dissemination material and events 
registration, publication fees for open access 
journal, cost of audit certificate. 
Total 71000   
6 ITENE Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 17000 travel costs* 
OG&S 
54000 
4K cost of IPR protection, dissemination material 
and events registration,  publication fees for open 
access journal, 19K solvents, standards, vials for 
chromatography, columns for LC, GPC and CG, 
syringes, septums, filters, etc finisher formulation: 
16K: Chemicals + Consumables for finisher 
production ,External services of characterization , 
analysis 15000€: Chemicals ; consumables (Filters, 
etc.)  External characterization services. 
Total 71000   
7 NTT Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 18000 travel costs* 
OG&S 
36000 
cost of IPR protection, dissemination material and 
events registration, publication fees for open 
access journal, consumables for the 
characterisation of the crosslinking and 
components for pilot scale Ebeam; databases and 
literature for LCA, LCC and S-LCA 
Total 54000   
8 UNIBO Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 16600 travel costs* 
Equipment 28167 rotavapor, lyophilizer, IR spectrophotometer 
depreciation 
OG&S 
38000 
cost of IPR protection, dissemination material and 
events registration, conference fees, publication 
fees for open access journal, consumables 
(enzymes, solvents, chemical reagents, gas, 
glassware for lab), sample shipping costs    
Total 82767   
9 BIOPOL Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 16000 travel costs* 
Equipment 14460 Depreciation of 2 centrifuges, scale up fermenters 
(from 1 to 300L), DSP equipment 
OG&S 
59000 
46k€ for trials (enzymes, microorganisms, 
substrates for fermentation, reagents, labware, 
consumables for analysis), 3k for dissemination 
material and events registration and eventual IP 
protection, 10k for external analysis and tests 
Total 89460   
10   PLANET Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 16000 Travels (8 meeting, 2 additional technical 
meeting), travel to conferences, workshops, fairs  
Equipment 
23000 
Depreciation of equipment for Comac extruder, 
mixer for compounds, heat Deflection 
temperature, and thermal gravimetric analysis 
OG&S 
16000 
Consumables (10k): additives for plastic 
processing, strengthening agents, nucleating 
agents etc, DPI for workers, liquid nitrogen for 
tests, SEM analysis; Trainings, conferences fees, 
publications in open access journal, participation 
to fairs, workshops, meeting (6k) 
Total 55000   
12 CARB Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20000 travel costs* 
Equipment 13400 depreciation for industrial and pilot lines 
OG&S 
50000 
35k in cost of consumables for materials 
development (polymers, enzymes…) and validation 
tests including outsourced analytical where 
needed, 15k in sample shipment, dissemination 
material and events registration, IP protection 
Total 83400   
13 SUDPACK Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20000 travel costs* 
OG&S 60000 50k for consumables for building a prototype 
packaging production and for validation tests, 
some outsourced analysis, 10k for audit certificate, 
IP protection, dissemination material, events 
registration  
Total 80000   
14 GPI Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20000 travel costs* 
OG&S 
30000 
10k€ for consumables for trials and benchmarks 
materials, 10k for dissemination material and 
events registration and eventual IP protection, 10k 
for external analysis and tests 
Total 50000   
15 SIBO Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20000 travel costs* 
OG&S 
55000 
10k for consumables for trials and benchmarks 
materials, 30k for a test mould, 5k for external 
analysis and tests, 10k for dissemination material 
and events registration and eventual IP protection  
Total 75000   
16  DANONE Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20000 travel costs* 
OG&S 6000 cost of IPR protection, dissemination material and 
events registration, consumables for tests 
Total 26000   
17 MDLZ Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20000 travel costs* 
OG&S 
10000 
cost of consumables for validation tests, sample 
shipment, outsourced analytical, dissemination 
material and events registration 
Total 30000   
18 BDF Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20000 travel costs* 
OG&S 8000 cost of consumables for validation tests, 
dissemination material and events registration 
Total 28000   
20 PLATO Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20000 travel costs* 
OG&S 
100000 
90k€ for consumables for building a prototype 
delamination pilot line (mechanical and electric 
components) and for validation tests (e.g. plastic 
films and enzymes), as well as external analysis of 
discharged water, 10k for software licenses, 
dissemination material and events registration and 
eventual IP protection 
Total 120000   
21 ROMEI Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20000 travel costs* 
OG&S 
27000 
20k€ for consumables for reprocessing and 
recycling trials, 7k for dissemination material and 
events registration and eventual IP protection 
Total 47000   
22  DENIMX Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20000 travel costs* 
OG&S 
18000 
cost of IPR protection, dissemination material, 
events registration - material production, 
processing and evaluation (non-wovens, 
laminating, thermoforming, finishing, determining 
material specifications) 
Total 38000   
23 SILON Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 20000 travel costs* 
OG&S 
46000 
40k€ of energies, material, cleaning, preparation 
and line time for sampling (for 3 fibre trials, 6 
compounding trials). 6k€ of IPR protection, 
dissemination material and events registration 
Total 66000   
24 KNEIA Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 16500 travel costs* 
OG&S 
18000 
Outsourced graphic design for Project Identity Set, 
Project web, Dissemination materials (poster 
+leaflets+ pen drives), Video editing, Conference 
attendance fees 
Total 34500   
25 CHX Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 7000 travel costs to project meetings and other partners 
visits and travel to dissemination events 
OG&S 10000 cost of events organisations (1 per year), 
dissemination material and events registration 
Total 17000   
26 EUBP Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 17000 travel costs* 
OG&S 10000 cost of events organisations, dissemination 
material and events registration 
Total 27000   
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 1 of 68 
Table of Contents 
4.  Members of the consortium ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  2 
4.1. Participants (applicants) ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  2 
1. IRIS Technology Solutions S.L (IRIS) / Spain ...................................................................................................................2 
2. Albstadt-Sigmaringen University (ASU), Germany ........................................................................................................5 
3. CENTRE SCIENTIFIQUE & TECHNIQUE DE L'INDUSTRIE TEXTILE BELGE (CTB) / Belgium  ............................................7 
4. ASOCIACION DE INVESTIGACION DE MATERIALES PLASTICOS Y CONEXAS (AIMPLAS)/ Spain  ...................................9 
5. FRAUNHOFER GESELLSCHAFT ZUR FOERDERUNG DER ANGEWANDTEN FORSCHUNG E.V. (IVV) / Germany  ....... 12 
6. INSTITUTO TECNOLOGICO DEL EMBALAJE, TRANSPORTE Y LOGISTICA  (ITENE) / Spain ......................................... 16 
7. NEXT TECHNOLOGY TECNOTESSILE SOCIETA NAZIONALE DI RICERCA R L (NTT)/Italy  ............................................ 19 
8. ALMA MATER STUDIORUM - UNIVERSITA DI BOLOGNA (UNIBO)/ Italy ................................................................... 21 
9. BIOPOLIS SL (BIOPOL)/ Spain ....................................................................................................................................... 23 
10. PLANET BIOPLASTICS SRL (PLANET) / Italy .................................................................................................................. 25 
11. Bostik SA (BOSTIK) / France ......................................................................................................................................... 27 
12. CARBIOLICE (CARB) / France ........................................................................................................................................ 29 
13. SÜDPACK VERPACKUNGEN GMBH & CO.KG (SÜDPACK) / Germany ......................................................................... 31 
14. Graphic Packaging International (GPI) / Belgium ....................................................................................................... 33 
15. SIBO G d.o.o (SIBO) / Slovenia ..................................................................................................................................... 36 
16. Groupe Danone SA (DANONE)/ France ....................................................................................................................... 38 
17. MONDELEZ DEUTSCHLAND R&D GMBH Germany (MONDELEZ)/Germany  ............................................................. 39 
18. Beiersdorf AG (BDF)/ Germany ................................................................................................................................... 41 
19. ORGANIC WASTE SYSTEMS NV (OWS) / Belgium ....................................................................................................... 42 
20. Pla.to GmbH (PLATO)/ Germany ................................................................................................................................. 44 
21. ROMEI SRL (ROMEI) / ITALY ......................................................................................................................................... 46 
22. DENIMX B.V. (DenimX)/ The Netherlands ................................................................................................................... 48 
23. Silon s. r. o. (SILON)/ Czech Republic .......................................................................................................................... 50 
24. KNEIA SL (KNEIA)/Spain ................................................................................................................................................ 51 
25. CROWDHELIX LIMITED (CHX) /UK ............................................................................................................................... 53 
26. EUROPEAN BIOPLASTICS EV (EUBP)/Germany ........................................................................................................... 55 
4.2. Third parties involved in the project (including use of third party resources) ................................ ................................ ......... 56 
5. Ethics and security ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 59
5.1 Ethics ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  59
5.2 Security ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  59 
ANNEX: Support letters from External Stakeholders Group  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 2 of 68 
4.  Members of the consortium 
4.1. Participants (applicants) 
 
Participant no. 1 Name (shortname)/ Country IRIS Technology Solutions S.L (IRIS) / Spain 
Description of the legal entity  
  
IRIS Technology Group (http://www.iristechnologygroup.com/) is an advanced engineering Group that was 
established in Barcelona in 2007. IRIS Technology Solutions S.L, located in Barcelona, specialises in the manufacture 
and integration of Process Analytical Technology (PAT)-based real-time quality monitoring solutions for the process 
industries and IoT systems for smart manufacturing, predominantly targeted at the food, pharmaceutical and 
chemical industries. In particular, our product line comprises proprietary state-of-the-art IR analysers for at-line and 
in-line process monitoring.  
On the one hand, our solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics in the fields of MEMs, Near 
Infrared Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral Imaging, and Raman. On the other hand, we leverage ICTs, whereby we apply 
Machine learning, Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining techniques for predictive and active control, as well as for 
decision support systems. In addition to photonics -based analysers, we also work with IoT se nsors for enabling 
equipment and machinery for smart manufacturing and transitioning industry to the Industry4.0 paradigm. Our 
solutions are cloud-based for mobility, remote monitoring and multi-site applications.  
Our Innovation Division which is governed  by an Innovation Committee comprising Senior Management, and an 
Innovation Unit for managing and executing the company’s innovation roadmap, has 3 core strategic lines, for 
shaping the Factory of the Future: 
1. New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process optimization 
2. ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms) 
3. Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorization 
In addition to running an internal R&D programme, as well as carrying our various joint private projects with industry 
partners, our Innovation Division is highly experienced in working in collaborative R&D projects in H2020 (both as 
coordinators and partners), principally in  the SPIRE, FoF, and BBI programmes. The company was established in 
2007 and currently employs 60+ staff with a turnover of € 5 M. It is equipped with engineering workshops (3), food 
testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an electronics /telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 
9001:2008 certified and also is certified under UNE -EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i. We are also 
certified by the local (Catalonian) government as a provider of technological R&D services (Tecnio Certification).  
IRIS is a member of the following sectorial networks: SPIRE, SPIE and SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial 
collectives such as Smart Space (association of companies and organisations that specialise in the ‘smartification’ 
of industry). 
Main tasks 
Using its core photonic competences, IRIS will have a strong role in terms of developing the right approach for 
demonstrating the sorting ability of the new materials developed in the project (WP4), in terms of process 
monitoring for the materials m orphologies obtained via self -reinforcement and for the control of the coatings 
application/ microplastics release  (WP2, 3, 5). In WP5, they will  support the food packaging validation trials by 
comparative shelf life assessments. In WP6, they will develop a DST to support the selection of the optimal upcycling 
route by the stakeholders. In WP7, they will also contribute in terms of IPR, innovation and knowledge transfer and 
training activities. Finally, IRIS will act as Project Coordinators (WP8) and they have extensive expertise at this level, 
and in particular in the context of industry-driven FP7 and H2020 projects, and private contacts with the industry. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
IRIS has a matrix of multidisciplinary knowledge groups in the company with strong expertise in engineering and 
science. With its team and resources, including electronics, mechatronics, mechanical, optical, industrial design 
engineers, as well as speciali sts in system engineering, application programming and web development etc., IRIS 
can carry out full system design and engineering, including electronic design and assembly, firmware and software 
development, electrical harnesses and interconnections, mech anical design for enclosure and prototype 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 3 of 68 
integration, as well as installation, validation and industrialisation of prototypes and equipment in production 
plants. In addition to this broad cross-disciplinary engineering team, IRIS’ research team consists of data scientists, 
chemiometricians, chemists and physicists, among others, who have the expertise to validate the technologies 
developed, with specific insights in biopolymers and their use in packaging. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Dr. Ing. ELODIE BUGNICOURT. (female) Masters in Material Science & Engineering (2002), PhD in Polymers and 
Composite Materials (2005), both from National Institute of Applied Science (INSA), Lyon, France. Leader of the Eco-
Materials business unit in IRIS since 2009. Coordinated several Europe an projects in the fields of bio -based 
packaging materials development, process monitoring, surface treatment. Previous industry experience: R&D in 
chemical industry especially related to reactive polymer formulations: i) Arkema (ex. Cray Valley, 2002, Spain) in the 
field of polyester powder coating; Wacker Chemie (2002-2005, Germany and France), Silicone division that funded 
her PhD thesis: development of nanocomposites based on an epoxy matrix and silica; iii) Ashland (2006 -2009, 
located sequentially in US, Spain and France) in the Composite Polymers division, focussing on bio -sourced resins, 
flame retardant resins, SMC resins, PU and epoxy structural adhesives. Led and participated in many R&D projects 
aimed at developing new formulations, understanding m echanisms and structure -properties relationships, 
developing new analytical methods and modelling (for improved quality management); as well as collaborations 
with academic labs and other players in the supply and value chain. Author of several papers in peer-reviewed and 
technical journals, and has presented her work in numerous international conferences.  
Dr. INMACULADA CAMPOS  (female). Degree in Chemistry, Master in Occupational Risk Prevention and PhD in 
Electrochemistry. Bio-electrochemistry researcher with a background in chemistry, electrochemistry and statistical 
data analysis. 7 years of experience developing electrochemical sensors for electronic tongues, using statistical data 
analysis such as PCA, PLS or ANN charted using Matlab and R. 2 years of  experience developing and crafting 
semiconductors biosensors. Hardworking, self -motivated, excellent team player, with complete ability to deliver 
results under pressure. Familiar with communicating results both in writing and orally at international conferences.  
Dr. CRISTINA FERNANDEZ (female). Senior Food Scientist. PhD in food science from the University Autonomous of 
Barcelona (Spain) and the University of Guelph in Ontario (Canada). Dr. Fernandez is a food scientist and nutritionist 
with expertise in food emulsions. Dr. Fernandez has published over 7 papers in reputed journals and 1 book chapter 
and has been working in emergent non -thermal and thermal technologies scalable to the food and nutraceuticals 
industry. 
Dr. LAURENT PHILIPPET (male). Optical Engineer. Bachelor’s degree in science, speciality applied physics (Université 
Paris Sud). Engineer’s degree in Optical Science (Institut d’Optique Graduate School). PhD in Optical Science 
(University Paris XIII). Theoretical and experimental skills in laser physics, spectroscopy techniques, micro scopy, 
interferometry and optical design. Expertise in the development of optical engineering solutions for real -time 
Process Analytical Technology (PAT)-based solutions for industrial integration in processing (food, pharma, chemical 
and bio processes).  
Dr. JOHANNES ZIEGLER (Male) Senior Optical Engineer. He holds a PhD in Optical Engineering at the University of 
Linz. He is a physicist with a passion for optics and photonics. His background is in fundamental research where he 
gained profound experience i n a broad range of state -of-the-art technologies. He enjoys implementing optical 
setups as well as exploring novel concepts and want to apply my skills and expertise to advance cutting -edge 
innovations for industry. Besides, He has strong experience working with NIR, spectroscopy and with programming 
languages such as C++, Python and Java. 
Dr. CUAUHTEMOC ARAUJO (male). Chemometrician. Degree in Physics, Master Degree in Material Sciences, and 
Doctorate Degree in Applied Sciences. Throughout his scientific c areer, he conducted research in the fields of 
materials sciences, optical spectroscopies and chemometrics. 20+ years of experience working on a wide range of 
biological and non -biological applications of vibrational spectroscopies (i.e. Raman, MIR and NIR) . He has also 
worked closely with other characterisation techniques such as: UV/Vis and fluorescence spectroscopies. 
DIANA GALILEA (female). Senior Programmer. Bachelor’s degree in Industrial Engineering with specialty in Industrial 
electronics from the Universidad of La Rioja. Her professional background comprises technical experience in the 
areas of embedded microcontrollers programming for wireless communicati ons working with different range of 
sensors. Software expertise including Matlab, Visual Studio, Autocad, Protel DXP. Programming skills including C++, 
C#, .NET among others. Experience in developing software for chemometric analysis, translating chemometr ic 
algorithms from researchers’ source code, such as R or Matlab to C++ or C# in order to integrate it with a user 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 4 of 68 
interface that carries out the analysis, and controls the system. She also has been working in monitoring systems 
where information about sensors and actuators are displayed on the user interface. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
1. Processing and Validation of Whey -Protein-Coated Films and Laminates at Semi -Industrial Scale as Novel 
Recyclable Food Packaging Materials with Excellent Barrier Properties"; E. Bugnicourt , M. S chmid, O. Mc. 
Nerney, J. Wildner, L. Smykala, A. Lazzeri,  P. Cinelli.; Advances in Materials Science and Engineering, vol. 2013, 
Article ID 496207, 10 pages, 2013. 
2. State of the art in the development and properties of protein-based films and coatings and their applicability to 
cellulose based products: an extensive review; E. Bugnicourt*, M.B. Coltelli*, F. Wild*, P. Cinelli, M. Lindner, M. 
Schmid, V. Weckel, K. Müller, P. Rodriguez, A. Staebler, L. Rodrigu ez, A. Lazzeri; Coatings  2016, 6, 1. 
doi:10.3390/coatings6010001 
3. Whey protein layer applied on biodegradable packaging film to improve barrier properties while maintaining 
biodegradability, Patrizia Cinelli, Markus Schmid, Elodie Bugnicourt, Jessica Wildne r, Agostino Bazzichi, Irene 
Anuillesi, Andrea Lazzeri, Polymer Degradation and Stability. 07/2014; DOI: 
10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2014.07.007 
4. Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA): Review of synthesis, characteristi cs, processing and potential applications in 
packaging, Elodie Bugnicourt, Patrizia Cinelli, Vera Alvarez, Andrea Lazzeri, eXPRESS Polymer Letters 06/2014; 
8(11):791-808 
5. MONITORING INNOVATION: Optical systems to support the production of surfaces with advanced 
functionalities”. Elodie Bugnicourt, Severine Philippe, Tim Kehoe, Laura Rodriguez, Simona Neri, European 
Coatings Journal, 06 – 2019, pp 42-48 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. OLI-PHA, FP7, GA 280604 -2, A novel and efficient method for the production of polyhydroxyalkanoate 
polymer-based packaging from olive oil waste water 
2. WHEYLAYER 2, FP7-DA, GA 315743, Barrier biopolymers for sustainable packaging 
3. BIOBOARD, FP7, GA 315313, De velopment of sustainable protein -based paper and paperboard coating 
systems to increase the recyclability of food and beverage packaging materials 
4. BIONTOP, H2020 BBI, GA 837761, Novel packaging films and textiles with tailored end of life and performance 
based on bio-based copolymers and coatings 
5. MULTICYCLE, H2020 SPIRE, GA 820695, Advanced and sustainable recycling processes and value chains for 
plastic-based multi-materials 
IRIS coordinator in all except BIONTOP where they are executive board manager. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, a FTIR -ATR (Interspectrum), 2 UV -VIS 
(PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), an Extended-SWIR (StellarNet) and a NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as well as 
a SWIR Hyperspectral imager (Specim-Xenics). The associated staff are properly trained and skilled in chemometrics 
modelling by using a commerci al suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non -commercial 
chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes). 
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up -to-date hardware and tools: 
signal generators, wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for 
programming microcontrollers, CNC-milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD software 
[SolidWorks], among others.   
Our optical engineers work with ZEEMAX software for optimally designing of optical systems and to setup the 
designs by means of advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light 
sources and related “opticalware”). 
Food and wet chemistry lab equipped with a DSC, a Surface Energy analyser, an HPLC, a Cobb tester, microbiological 
equipment, microscope and microtome for structural analysis, migration cells, colourimeter (for colour and opacity 
measurement), Ford cup viscometers, water vapour permeation cells, turbidimeter, climatic chambers, manual and 
automatic coaters, electrospray, different drying technologies, plasma surface activation, etc. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 5 of 68 
 
 
Participant no. 2 Name (shortname)/ Country Albstadt-Sigmaringen University (ASU), Germany 
Description of the legal entity  
 
Food technology & nutrition is the core part of the education programme and the applied research in the faculty of 
Life Sciences of Albstadt -Sigmaringen University. Its activities belong to food product & process innovation (e.g. 
research projects in optimisation of food processing, functional & nutritional properties of food and food packaging) 
and production of cosmetic products with botanical extracts. Business innovation modelling is also a central part in 
the faculty of Business Science & Management of ASU. Advanced materials are the core research and teaching field 
for the faculty of Engineering. Within the faculty of Life Sciences, new sustainable packaging concepts are the 
research focus of the newly founded Sustainable Packaging Institute (SPI). The SPI delves into research and teaching 
in the area of biogenic raw materials, process technology and process design, functional materials, smart packaging, 
preservation and packaging as well as bioeconomy and sustainability. ASU is a project partner in the  field of 
safeguarding food quality & sustainable food packaging and in the field of developing new business models. It aims 
to expose students & scientific staff to real world problems in an EU-scale, thus enabling them to interact with other 
skilled actors in an international environment. 
Main tasks 
ASU will support in WP1 to define the specifications for the Preserve solutions to be developed. Moreover, ASU will 
contribute to WP2 regarding the development, processing and testing of combinations of proteins/ PHA coatings 
and adhesives (together with I VV) and FA grafting technologies. In this WP, ASU will also give input regarding the 
development and characterisation of films with tailored structures and barrier properties. In WP3, ASU lead the lab 
scale set-up of eBeam treatment for selected materials and blends. This will include the characterisation of the 
treated materials regarding mechanical, barrier (WVP/OTR), optical (colour) and chemical (degree of crosslinking) 
properties. As results from WP2 and WP3 feed in WP5, ASU will also be involved in this WP and will support in the 
coating scale-up and the trials with moulded pulp. Additionally, ASU will take the lead for the consumer perception 
and acceptance studies conducted in WP7. 
ASU act as project scientific and technical manager. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
At ASU the faculty of Life Sciences scientific staff is very experienced in the development and characterisation of 
food and food packaging. This includes the surface modification of bio -based films as well as the incorporation of 
active packaging constituents and the full characterisation of packaging relevant properties. They can perform 
sensory testing of food contact materials with respect to their interactive processes and compliance with food 
regulation. The faculty of life sciences has the intense know-how about degradation reactions of food during storage 
trials. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Prof. Dr. Markus Schmid  (male) is a graduate in business administration. He holds a diploma degree in Food 
Technology and a master degree in Food Processing from the University of Applied Sciences Fulda as well as a 
Doctor´s degree from the Technical University of Munich, Germany. As Professor at Albstadt-Sigmaringen University 
his major research and teaching areas are in the field of Process Technology and Process Design in Life Sciences 
with emphasis on food preservation and food packaging technology. He is actively involved in prepar ing project 
proposals and works as project manager in food packaging related public founded and industrial projects. He is 
author and co-author of more than 50 peer-review publications in journals of high repute and is regularly invited to 
speak at workshops and conferences. He was involved in several National and European projects dealing with the 
use of residue derived fractions in food packaging. (e.g. ThermoWhey: EraNet-ManuNet 02PN2020; Bio4MAP: FP7- 
606144, BioBoard: FP7- 315313, ProgRESS: CorNet). Mo reover, he is Head of the Sustainable Packaging Institute 
(SPI). 
Prof. Dr. Astrid Klingshirn  (female) holds a diploma degree in Home Economics and Nutrition from the Technical 
University of Munich as well as a Doctor´s degree from the University of Bonn, Germany. As Professor at Albstadt-
Sigmaringen University her major research and teaching areas are in the field of Physical Food Analysis, Sensory 
Analysis, Food Product Development and Innovation Management, Appliance and Food Service Technology, with a 
special focus on the impact of food preparation and storage technologies on physical and sensory food quality 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 6 of 68 
parameters. She is currently actively involved in research projects driving the standardization of home appliances 
and professional catering equipment related to performance parameters (e.g.: IEC SC 59 M/WG 4, CENELEC/TC 59X 
WG18). 
Dr. Corina Reichert (female) holds a master degree in Food Science and Technology as well as a Doctor’s degree 
from the University of Hohenheim, Germany. During her doctoral studies, she focused on bio-based food additives 
and encapsulation systems. At the Albstadt -Sigmaringen University, her major research area is in the field of bio -
based packaging material and she is involved in the preparation and writing of project proposals. Her active current 
work as technical project manager is within the EU project BIOnTop (GA 837761) aiming to develop techniques to 
prepare bio-based packaging material with enhanced barrier properties.  
Kristina Eissenberger (female) holds a bachelor and master degree in Biology from the Ludwig-Maximilian University 
Munich. As PhD candidate of University of Hohenheim, she has a strong background in food microbiology. As 
researcher at Albstadt-Sigmaringen University, she is actively involved in several microbiological studies as well as 
studies on the effect of eBeam irradiation on the properties of bio-based polymer films. Additionally, she is involved 
in the preparation and writing of research proposals in the field of sustainable packaging concepts. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
1. ”Grafting of Fatty Acids on Polyvinyl Alcohol. Effects on Surface Energy and Adhesion Strength of Acrylic Pressure 
Sensitive Adhesives” Germek E.; Schmid M.; Lindner M.; Frontiers in Material (2020) 6, 335, S. 1 -10; 
doi.org/10.3389/fmats.2019.00335 
2. “Natural Polymers from Biomass Resources as Feedstocks for Thermoplastic Materials“ Mueller, K., Zollfrank, 
C., Schmid, M.; Macromol. Mater. Eng. (2019),  
3. “Recycling of Polymer -Based Multilayer Packaging: A Review.” Kaiser, K., M. Schmid and M. Schlummer; 
Recycling (2018) 3(1): 1. 
4. “Whey protein layer applied on biodegradable packaging film to improve barrier properties while maintaining 
biodegradability” Cinelli P., Schmid M., Bugnicourt E., Wildner J., Bazzichi A., Anuillesi I., Lazzeri A.; Polymer 
Degradation and Stability (2014); DOI: 10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2014.07.007 
5. “Dispersion and Performance of a Nanoclay/Whey Protein Isolate Coating upon its Upscaling as a Novel Ready-
to-Use Formulation for Packaging Converters” Bugnicourt, E., Brzoska N., Kucukpinar E., Philipp e S., Forlin E., 
Bianchin A., Schmid M.; Polymers (2019) 11(9): 1410. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. Biontop (H2020 BBI, in grant preparation): Novel packaging films and textiles with tailored end of life and 
performance based on bio-based copolymers and coatings, 2019-2023 
2. Humidity Loss of Fresh Produce in Refrigerator Storage Compartments: Evaluation of test method options with 
high repetitious accuracy on behalf of the European Committee of Domestic Equipment Manufacturers 
(APPLiA), 2016. 
3. Scientific evaluation of test methods for Refrigerated Food Storage Quality Performance on behalf of the 
European Committee of Domestic Equipment Manufacturers (APPLiA), 2016. 
4. Coolfresh: Development of internationally applicable test standards to assess the essential food preservation 
characteristics of household refrigerating appliances (WIPANO-Project, 03TNG001B), running 
5. AlpBioEco - Valorisation of innovative bio-economical potentials along bio-based food & botanical extract value 
chains in the Alpine Space. WP T1 (walnut value chain - food/cosmetic applications) & WP T2 (Business models 
in regard to the walnut value chain), running project. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
Access to laboratory equipped with latest state -of-the-art eBeam technology (Comet). At ASU the faculty of Life 
Sciences, scientific staff is very experienced in the conception and execution of consumer perception studies as well 
as in the development and characterisation of food packaging. This includes the biopolymer extraction and 
processing, surface modification of bio-based films as well as the incorporation of active packaging constituents and 
the full characterisation of packaging relevant properties. Additionally, the faculty has the analytical equipment for 
characterizing the mechanical as well as barrier and optical properties of packaging films. 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 7 of 68 
Participant no. 3 Name (shortname)/ 
Country 
CENTRE SCIENTIFIQUE & TECHNIQUE DE L'INDUSTRIE 
TEXTILE BELGE (CTB) / Belgium 
Description of the legal entity  
  
CTB is the Belgian scientific and technical centre for the textile industry, a membership organisation with strong 
links to the majority of the textile and plastic conversion companies. C TB offers a complete range of standardized 
testing, it is a notified bod y for protective clothing, is also involved in standardization committees and offers 
technological advice and training to companies in Belgium or abroad. Via take-over of the “Flemish Plastic Centre” 
its expertise and services have been diversified towards the plastic and composite industry. 
The research focus of C TB is on applied research, funded by private contract as well as national and international 
agencies (e.g. H2020, FP7, LIFE, Interreg, Eranet). 
Some well selected subjects for strategic research are: (i) extrusion processes and related polymer formulation (incl. 
biopolymers); (ii) intelligent textiles; (iii) textile reinforced composites: (iv) innovative finishing, coating and 
laminating formulations and technology; (v) implementation of nanotechnology and (vi) additive manufacturing. 
In the past decennium la rge expertise was built -up in the domain of processing via formulation and pilot line 
processing of a range of biopolymers including PLA, PBS, PHA and biopolymer blends. This resulted in a range of 
industrial implementations in different domains. 
CTB has also a large expertise in plastic recycling and has the necessary equipment available to test the recyclability 
of different polymer materials, including packaging foils. 
Main tasks 
CTB will have important tasks in WP3 (Upcycling of core materials and blends), WP4 (Biodegradation, compostability 
and materials recycling) and WP5 (Upscaling and Validation of upcycled packaging, textiles and composites from 
primary and secondary raw materials). PHA coatings will also be developed by Centexbel in WP2. 
The main tasks therefore include:  
a. Processing of biopolymers into foils, injection moulded pieced, monofilament & multifilament yarns at 
lab and pilot scale and evaluation of the properties 
b. Application of PHA coatings 
c. Evaluation of reprocessability recycled PLA materials. 
d. Develop recycled bioplastics with improved properties through self -reinforcement and the formation 
of microfibrillar structures 
e. Evaluation of chain extenders and compatibilizers to improve the reprocessing of polymer blends 
f. Upscaling the reprocessing of monomaterials and self-reinforcement from biomaterials 
g. Supporting the end user companies in material evaluation for specific products, perform first validation 
trials to produce first demonstrators 
Furthermore, CTB will give input in the req uirements for packaging products (WP1) and support exploitation and 
dissemination tasks (WP7). 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
CTB, as a technologic centre, is focused to help companies in the textile sector & plastics converting industry to 
develop new materials & products and increase their competitiveness through innovation. CTB is already for several 
years working on recycling of  polymers and on the processing of biopolymers to support the industry in the 
transformation towards innovative and sustainable textile products and preparing the shift towards a sustainable 
bioeconomy. 
CTB has state-of-the art test facilities for chemical, physical, microbiological and burning behaviour testing, as well 
as pilot lines for extrusion, injection molding, coating, knitting & braiding, weaving. This equipment is used for 
research projects and direct evaluation of new material & technology possibilities by a variety of companies. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 8 of 68 
Due to the growing importance of the bioeconomy and the industrial request for research and development support 
on implementation of the bioeconomy, CTB, supported by regional authorities, made a major investment in 
extending its laboratory and pilot -line facilities. In 2020 an additional 0,5 Meuro investment in a multilayer film 
extrusion line is foreseen. Thanks to this investment the possibilities of the semi-industrial processes required within 
the PRESERVE project are further extended. 
As specialized R&D lab for after  treatments of textiles, CTB also offer all required infrastructure on lab and pilot 
scale. CTB has different sizes and speeds to make formulations. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Dr Isabel De Schrijver  (Female): R&D Manager Plastic Characterisation, Processing and Recycling. Isabel holds a 
Masters and PhD in Analytical Chemistry. Since her start at CTB she was focussed on research in textile and plastic 
processing techniques, being involved in the set -up and the management of new research projects (private, 
regional, international). 
Dr Lien Van der Schueren (female), holds a PhD in Textile Engineering on the subject of chromic textile materials. 
At CTB she is mainly working on European and private research projects in the field of extrusion of thermoplastic 
polymers and fibre reinforced composites, especially on biobased materials.  
Dr Ruben Geerinck (male), has a PhD in textile engineering. He is a junior researcher working on formulation and 
bio-additives development for biopolymers, to improve processability and polymer properties. 
Dr Elke Van de Walle (female): researcher Plastic Characterisation, Processing and Recycling. Elke holds a Masters 
and PhD in Polymer Chemistry. At CTB she is performing different research projects focussing on plastic recycling 
and circular economy. 
Dr. Brecht Demets (male): Brecht holds an academic Master in Biochemistry and has over 10 years of experience as 
researcher in European R&D projects. Brecht joined CTB in 2014 and specialized in biobased treatments of textiles, 
with specific focus on biobased pigments and dyes, PLA , PHA and biobased polyurethanes. Brecht is the main 
contributor and first author of the recently filed patent on PLA and PHA based plastisol coating formulations. He is 
co-author of a peer reviewed book chapter on biobased coating techniques and as expert provides twice a year an 
industry oriented course on biopolymers to the industry. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
• L. Van der Schueren et al. - BIO4SELF: Biobased self -functionalised self -reinforced composite materials 
based on high-performance nanofibrillar PLA fibres – Bioplastics magazine [04/16] Vol. 11, p. 36-37, 2016 
• L. Van der Schueren, Guy Buyle, Luc Ruys – Biobased self-reinforced polymer composites from polylactic 
acid, Plastics are Future congress, Valencia, 2016 
• I De Schrijver - Impact of regulation on processing and recycling in the textile and plastic industry, EFRA, 
general assembly meeting, Belgium, 2016 
• D De Smet, M. Vanneste - Development and implementation of biomaterials in textile coating and finishing, 
ICTF 2015: 17th International Conference on Textiles and Fashion, Paris 2015 
 
• Book chapter: Biobased textile coatings and composites; book title: Biobased products and industries, ISBN 
978-0-12-818493-6 (2020, Elsevier), David De Smet, Frederik Goethals, Brecht Demedts, Willem 
Uyttendaele and Myriam Vanneste 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
• BIOONTOP, H2020 BBI, GA 837761, Novel packaging films and textiles with tailored end of life and 
performance based on bio-based copolymers and coatings 
• MULTICYCLE, H2020 SPIRE, GA 820695, Advanced and sustainable recycling processes and value chains for 
plastic-based multi-materials 
• BIO4SELF. Bio-based self-functionalised self-reinforced composite materials based on high performance 
nanofibrillar PLA fibres (H2020 2016-2019) – Coordinated by CTB. 
• BIO-EOL: End-of-life possibilities of bio-polymer based consumer products (ERANET-Cornet: 2014-2015). 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 9 of 68 
• REFOIL: Recycling of multi-layered foil materials (Tetra project – Vlaio – 2017-2019) 
• ECOXY:  Bio -based recyclable, reshapable  and repairable (3R) fibre -reinforced EpOXY composites for 
automotive and construction sectors. (H2020 – BBI 2017 -2021) – WP-leader: high tenacity PLA fibre 
reinforcements 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical e quipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
CTB has a fully equipped testing and processing lab available with all the relevant machines. Specific for processing: 
twin screw compounders, extrusion line, injection moulding machines, compression moulding, therm oforming,.. 
starting from lab scale up to pilot scale machines. New investments in purification machines (extraction, mixing, 
better processing,..) are done recently creating an open innovation platform on circular economy. More specific 
following equipment is available: 
• Micro-compounder & twin-screw compounder under water pelletizer for formulating biopolymers. 
• Lab lines for small scale testing of formulations (10 à 200g) in mono- & multifilaments 
• Pilot line for tape & monofilament production; mono - and bi component structures, pilot lines for 
multifilament yarn production: FDY, POY, BCF; mono and bicomponent (throughput 2 -14kg/hour, 
production speed up to 3500 m/min) 
• Semi-industrial injection moulding machines, profile and sheet extrusion line (width 50 cm), blown film 
extrusion line 
• An IR dyeing machine offers the versatility to test up to 16 different formulations in one run. For further 
upscaling CTB has a lab scale reel and a roll-to-roll semi-industrial coating and padding equipment. 
• Knitting, weaving, braiding equipment 
• All relevant analytical instruments to characterize polymer properties including, rheological behaviour, 
stability, thermal properties and morphology, mechanical properties of textiles and plastics 
 
 
Participant 
no. 
4 Name (shortname)/ 
Country 
ASOCIACION DE INVESTIGACION DE MATERIALES PLASTICOS Y 
CONEXAS (AIMPLAS)/ Spain 
Description of the legal entity  
 
AIMPLAS, Technological Institute of Plastics located in Valencia, is a private, non-profit Association with more than 
650 associated companies created in 1990. AIMPLAS is formed by +170 highly skilled professional, more than 65% 
with a Masters, Engineering  or equivalent degree in Chemistry, polymer engineering, materials engineering or 
equivalent, including 22 PhD.  
AIMPLAS’ fields of work are related to technological research and development on thermoplastic and 
thermosetting plastic materials & products, its transformation processes and their recyclability and sustainability. 
AIMPLAS generates new knowledge and technologies that can be transferred to companies in order to help them 
to increase their effectiveness and competitiveness. 
AIMPLAS has a broad expertise in the fields of recycling, compatibilization, reactive extrusion, biopolymers and 
renewable source materials, special assisted processing technologies and nanocomposites, gained during the last 
years in the frame of EU and na tional projects. Nowadays, AIMPLAS has participated in 100 EU projects in FP5, 
FP6, FP7, LIFE+, CIP -EcoInnovation, H2020, among others, coordinating more 40 of them. In H2020, AIMPLAS is 
participating in more than 20 projects, coordinating most of them. Ou tstanding LIFE projects were celebrated at 
the Green Awards ceremony in Brussels on 30 May 2017, BREAD4PLA – with AIMPLAS as a coordinator - was 
honoured as one of the two most exceptional LIFE projects of the programme's 25 -year history. At National and 
Regional levels AIMPLAS participates in around 100 projects yearly. 
Main tasks 
AIMPLAS will lead WP2 and will mainly be involved in the production of PHA coatings, its application by different 
printing methodologies according to the proposed demonstrators , as well as its characterisation (oxygen and 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 10 of 68 
water vapour barrier properties). It will also participate, within this work package, in the production and 
characterisation of the multilayer structures at pilot plant scale. These tasks will provide material and useful 
feedback for the development of the demonstrators in WP5. In WP5 will do the scale -up production of PHA 
coatings and the characterisation of the demonstrators obtained at pilot-plat.  
AIMPLAS will also have important tasks in WP3 in the developm ent and characterization of self -reinforced PLA 
materials, as well as, in the production of micro fibrillated reinforced materials. In WP4 , AIMPLAS will be mainly 
involved in the upcycled reprocessing of mono and multimaterial biopolymers and the scale-up of the enzymatic 
recycling process.   
Furthermore, AIMPLAS will give input in WP1 to define the requirements of packaging products and support on 
exploitation and dissemination tasks (WP7). 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
AIMPLAS, as RO is focused to help companies in the plastic sector to develop new products and increase their 
competitiveness through innovation, has more than 20 pilot plants representing the most relevant 
polymer/plastics/composites production technologies present in the industry nowadays and has state -of-the art 
test facilities for chemical, optical, morphological, mechanical and physical characterisation. These pilot lines and 
laboratories are used by many customer’s every year allowing them  to test new materials, optimize production 
processes and launch new products to the market, supported by AIMPLAS technical staff, resulting in more than 
5000 assays, 170 technical assessments and 120 training actions to more than 1500 clients per year. 
AIMPLAS has 9,000 m2 state-of-the-art facilities, including thermoplastics and thermoset pilot plants, analysis and 
testing laboratories (physical-mechanical, chemical, packaging, automotive and construction) and training areas. 
AIMPLAS is member of several international networks and organisations, such as ECP4, AESICOM or BIC and 
standardisation committees (ISO and CEN). 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Include female individuals in as much as possible! 
Mrs. Lorena Rodriguez (female), Degree in Chemistry by Valencia University and Master in Polymeric Materials 
and Composites Technology by Universidad Politécnica of Valencia; working as researcher in the Functional 
Printing and Coating Department at AIMPLA S. She has an experience over 10 years in printing technologies and 
packaging. She develops her career in the area of functional inks and coatings for different industrial sectors; 
focused in nanoparticles dispersion in polymeric matrices, formulation and characterisation of inks, sensors and 
indicators for active packaging and smart packaging. She is involved in several projects to provide new 
functionalities to the packaging developing functional inks and varnishes with advanced properties, she has 
coordinate European project S-Varnish FP7-SME-2013 606446, “varnish development with antimicrobial, oxygen 
and water vapor barrier properties and improved physic-mechanical properties, to be used in food industry”. 
Mrs María Dolores Gómez  (female), Degree in Che mistry, diploma of Advanced Studies by the University of 
Valencia and Master in Polymer Materials and Composites organized by the Universitat Politécnica de Valencia 
and AIMPLAS. More than 5 years of experience in Quantum-chemical research of conjugated molecules precursors 
of conductive polymers. Collaboration in national projects on the research of electroactive molecular systems and 
polyconjugated molecules for Electronics and Molecular Photonics. Researcher at the Functional Printing and 
Coating Departm ent since 2016. Involved in international R&D projects funded under H2020 Framework 
Programmes and national R&D projects funded by MINECO and Valencian Institute of Business Competitiveness 
developing technical management and coordination tasks. Experience  in nanoparticles dispersion in polymeric 
matrices, formulation of functional inks and coatings, its characterisation and application through different 
printing technologies, and in indicators for active packaging and smart packaging. 
Dr. Nuria Lopez  (Female), PhD in Materials Engineering by the Universitat Politècnica de València, working as a 
senior researcher in the Extrusion Department at AIMPLAS since 2003. Extensive experience in polymer processing 
field, analysis of properties and development of new products. Technical advice, evaluation and optimization of 
materials using extrusion processing technology, new developments for private companies and close collaboration 
with other Research Centres at Regional National and International level. Experience in sustainability 
developments, as the use of biodegradable and compostable materials and additives, materials from renewable 
sources, the use of natural fillers, studies of recyclability of materials and physical and chemical foaming products. 
Technical c oordination of several FP7 and H2020 Projects, such as PLA4FOOD, BIO4MAP, RIGA, FIBFAB, and 
WAYSTUP. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 11 of 68 
Mrs. Rosa González (female), degree in Chemistry by the University of Valencia, working as a senior researcher in 
the Extrsuion Department at AIMPLAS since 2000. Large experience in polymers processing and development of 
new materials and products. She has participated in national and European projects related to the development 
and use of new biodegradable and compostable plastic materials for packaging, ag ricultural and automotive 
applications (MULTIBIO, TRIGGER, ECOPLAST), the development of active packaging (NATAL, ENVAFUNG, 
NATENVAS) and the valorisation of different types of waste for packaging applications (LIFE BREAD4PLA, LIFE 
EXTRUCLEAN). Different contributions in international conferences and co-inventor in a national patent. 
Dr. Virginia Guiñón (Female) PhD in Chemical Engineering. 10 years of research experience in the field of corrosion 
and metallic materials for biomedical applications. 2 years of experience as an associate professor at the 
Polytechnic University of Valencia teaching in the area of Chemic al and Environmental Engineering within the 
Department of Chemical and Nuclear Engineering. She has worked in the field of physical -mechanical tests in 
plastics and composites, technical assistance in quality control of raw materials and finished products,  validation 
of new materials, evaluation of causes of failure, product behavior and research in national projects and 
international focused on biotechnologies, composites, construction applications, automotive applications, 
packaging and innovation. 2 years of experience teaching characterisation courses of plastic materials and recycled 
material and laboratory practices of physical-mechanical characterisation of plastic materials. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including  widely-used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
K. Haag, J. Padovani, S. Fita, J.-P. Trouvé, C. Pineau, S. Hawkins, H. De Jong, M. K. Deyholos, B. Chabbert, J. Müssig, 
J. Beaugrand, Influence of flax fibre variety and year-to-year variability on composite properties, Industrial Crops 
and Products, 98, April 2017, .1-9 
V.Kachrimanidou, N. Kopsahelisa, A. Vlysidisa, S. Papanikolaoua, I. K. Kookos, B. Monje -Martínez, M. C. Escrig -
Rondán, A. A. Koutinas, Downstream separa tion of poly(hydroxyalkanoates) using crude enzyme consortia 
produced via solid state fermentation integrated in a biorefinery concept, Food and Bioproducts Processing, 100, 
Part A, 2016, 323-334 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fbp.2016.08.002 
Signori, F., Boggi oni, A., Righetti, M. C., Rondán, C. E., Bronco, S. and Ciardelli, F. (2015), Evidences of 
Transesterification, Chain Branching and Cross -Linking in a Biopolyester Commercial Blend upon Reaction with 
Dicumyl Peroxide in the Melt. Macromol. Mater. Eng., 300: 153–160. 
Campanella, A., Wool, R. P., Bah, M., Fita, S. and Abuobaid, A. (2013), Composites from northern red oak (Quercus 
robur) leaves and plant oil-based resins. J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 127: 18–26. doi: 10.1002/app.36663. 
R.M. González, M.P. Villanueva1 9 – Starch-based polymers for food packaging, Multifunctional and 
Nanoreinforced Polymers for Food Packaging,(2011), 527–570 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1.-REFUCOAT BBI-2016 GA ID 745791 Full recyclable food package with enhanced gas barrier properties and new 
functionalities by the use of high-performance coatings. 
2.-WaysTUP! SC2-SFS GA ID: 818308Value chains for disruptive transformation of urban biowas te into biobased 
products in the city context, 
3.-BIONTOP BBI 2018 GA ID: 837761 Novel packaging films and textiles with tailored end of life and performance 
based on bio-based copolymers and coatings  
4.-Multicycle: H2020 SPIRE GA Nº: 820695Advanced and s ustainable recycling processes and value chains for 
plastic-based multi-materials 
5.-DAFIA H2020 BIOTEC GA 720770Biomacromolecules from municipal solid bio-waste fractions and fish waste for 
high added value applications.  
Description of any significant i nfrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
Equipment for dispersion and formulation of coatings.  
Laboratory and pilot plant printing and lamination equipment (flexography and gravure).  
Equipment for mechanical, rheological and physical tests: Universal Testing Machine, Rheometer, Optical and 
Electronic Microscopy, Oxygen and Water vapour Permeability test equipment, etc. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 12 of 68 
  
Figure 1 Coatings formulation equipment (left). Printing (flexo and gravure) and Lamination pilot plant equipment (right).  
AIMPLAS is participating in the follow committees of standardization: 
Nationals: AEN / CTN 53 / CTC032 Certification Committee for bituminous sheets AENOR; AEN / CTN 53 / GT 2 
"Agricultural Film"; AEN / CTN 53 / GT1 "PVC profiles for doors, windows, blinds and fittings"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC7 
"Tanks"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC 4 "Containers and Packaging"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC 4 / GT "Tote Bags"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC 
4 / GT "EPS Boxes"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC 8 "Recycled Materials"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC1 "Elastomers"; AEN / CTN 53 / 
SC2 "Plastic pipes and fittings"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC2 GT "GLP Tubes"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC3 "Cellular materials"; AEN 
/ CTN 53 / SC5 "Reinforced materials"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC6 "Raw material specifications and test methods": AEN / 
CTN 53 / SC6 / GT "Biodegradability and biobased products"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC9 "Tires out of use"; and 
International: CEN/TC 249/WG 7/TG 1 “Plastics - Biodegradable mulch films for use in agriculture and 
horticulture”¸ ISO TC61 (Plastics)/SC2: Mechanical Properties  and ISO/TC 138/SC 05/WG 05 "Polyolefin pipes". 
 
 
Participant no. 5 Name (shortname)/ 
Country 
FRAUNHOFER GESELLSCHAFT ZUR FOERDERUNG DER 
ANGEWANDTEN FORSCHUNG E.V. (IVV) / Germany 
Description of the legal entity  
  
 
 
The Fraunhofer Gesellschaft zur Förderung der angewandten Forschung e.V. is the 
leading organisation for applied research in Europe, undertaking contract research 
on behalf of industry, the service sector and the government. Within the framework 
of EU technology programs, they are actively involved in industrial consortia which 
seek technical solutions to improve the  competitiveness of European industry. An 
annual turnover of about 2.3 billion € is generated in contract research by about 
28,000 employees in 74 research facilities and institutes. 
In December 2017, the Fraunhofer -Gesellschaft was awarded the Logo »HR Ex cellence in Research« from the 
European Commission in recognition of its outstanding Integrated Human Resources Management. The Logo »HR 
Excellence in Research« is based on the 40 principles of the European Charter for Researchers and the Code of 
Conduct for the Recruitment of Researchers (»EU-Charta & Code«). As Europe’s leading organization for applied 
research and as project partner many EU-projects, Fraunhofer fulfils these principles. Fraunhofer is one of the first 
organizations for applied research in Germany to receive the Logo. 
The Fraunhofer Institut für Verfahrenstechnik und Verpackung (Fraunhofer-Institute for Process Engineering and 
Packaging, IVV) in Freising, Germany has approx. 300 employees and an annual turnover of €23.9 million. The 
activities comprise development of products and processes primarily in the area of food ingredients, food 
development, functional packaging materials, product safety, food quality, biogenic raw materials as well as 
plastics recycling. The scientific department ‘M aterials Development’, of Fraunhofer IVV will be involved in the 
tasks of the proposal. 
The department ‘Materials Development’ focuses on development of improved and alternative packaging 
materials and packaging solutions. Their research focuses on production of polymer films by extrusion or coating 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 13 of 68 
substrates with barrier layers. Developments are aiming on material reduction, material substitution by 
sustainable alternatives and implementation of functionalities for active packaging. The department compris es 
processing of packaging films and demonstrators in pilot plant scale as well as testing laboratories. On pilot plant 
scale extrusion casting and coating, compounding, lacquering and metallization facilities are available. The 
adjacent laboratory is accredited according DAkkS D-PL-11140-04-00 for oxygen permeability (DIN 53380-3) and 
water vapour permeability (DIN 53 122 -1). Further characterisation techniques are mechanical testing, surface 
energy measurements and surface characterisation techniques (FTIR, AFM, SEM, Raman). 
Main tasks 
IVV will bring its expertise in development of biobased packaging materials and multilayer films in WP2 and WP5. 
They will participate in the development of protein-based coating formulations and respective adhesives in close 
cooperation with ASU and BOSTIK (WP2). Application of the coatings in pilot scale will be conducted using the pilot 
facilities at IVV. As barrier improvement is a key competence of IVV, they will establish a PVD process for inorganic 
barrier layers with protein coatings. IVV will support partners with characterisation of coatings, particularly barrier 
testing. In WP5, IVV will support SÜDPACK (WP5 leader) with production of multilayer materials at pilo t scale 
before upscaling to industrial size for consortium end-users (MONDELEZ, DANONE). 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
IVV has competence in products and processes primarily in the area of food ingredients, food developmen t, 
functional packaging materials, product safety, food quality, biogenic raw materials as well as plastics recycling, 
and is therefore well -suited for a multidisciplinary project like PRESERVE. The tasks will be mainly performed by 
the team of the ‘Materials Development’ department, but coordination across departments, e.g. Dpt. of biogenic 
raw materials, would allow addressing upcoming challenges during the project. IVV has a team of experienced 
scientists, engineers and technicians in different fields as  material science, chemistry, physics, process 
engineering, packaging engineering, and food science. At IVV there is a long-year experience in related projects in 
biopolymers and multilayer materials for food packaging.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Dr. Siegfried Fuertauer (male) - received his Master degree in Chemistry from the University of Vienna in 2010 as 
well as his Ph.D. degree in Chemistry in 2016. His research initially focused on inorganic materials (intermetallic 
compounds), but then shifted during his Post-Doc stays (University of Vienna, 2017-18; LMU Munich 2018) from 
organic-inorganic hybrid nanomaterials to biologic materials. Since 2019 he is scientist at Fraunhofer IVV with 
focus on nanomaterials and biopolymers for food packaging. He has experience in acquisition  and execution of 
national and international research projects NanoCELL (BMBF PTJ NanoCare 4.0, 2019 -2021), EIT Food project 
“ProCELL” (2019-2020), SugarUP (BMBF Bioeconomy International, 2020-2023) and PLA4MAP (BMEL FNR, 2020-
2023). He is co-author of more than 20 peer-reviewed publications and regular reviewer in material and packaging 
related international journals.  
Dr. Esra Kucukpinar (female) – received her B.Sc. in Chemical Engineering from Boğaziçi University, Istanbul (1995) 
and her M.Eng. in Chemical Engineering from the Stevens Institute of Technology, New Jersey (1997), with a focus 
on polymer processing. She was employed at the Highly -filled Materials Institute, New Jersey, as a research 
engineer. She joined the RTD Centre of Arçelik in 1997 as a research specialist. In 2003 she received her Ph.D. in 
Chemical Eng. from Boğaziçi University. Since 2003, she has been employed at Fraunhofer-IVV as a senior scientist 
and project leader focusing on the development of multi -layered flexible barrier mate rials for packaging 
applications, from food packaging to the vacuum insulation panels, and organic electronics. She has experience in 
acquisition and conduction of international projects funded by the European Commission as well as national 
projects such a s Needs (BMBF 2018 -2021), Barriflex (Cornet (AIF), 2019 -2021), Innovip (H2020, 2016 -2020), 
Multicycle (H2020, 2018 -2021), Decoat (2019 -2021). She has co -authored more than 30 publications in peer 
reviewed scientific journals and presented her research work in various international conferences.  
Dr. Cornelia Stramm (female) studied chemistry at the Ludwig Maximilian University in Munich, from where she 
graduated in 1997. Afterwards (1997-2000), she did her PhD at same university and joined Fraunhofer IVV as head 
and scientist of the department Material Development. Under her guidance the department achieved 40-50 % of 
external funding to come from industrial sources, such as from bilateral projects. Her expertise is in: polymer 
packaging systems for food appl ications; development of polymer films with barrier properties and active 
functions; food packaging systems based on renewable materials and barrier properties of polymer films. She 
leads or was in key positions in 30 international projects such as NEXTGEN PACK (FP7, 2012 -2015), ECOBIOCAP 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 14 of 68 
(FP7, 2011-2015) and ProgRess (Cornet, 2014-2016) GLOPACK (H2020, GA: 773375, 2018-2021). She is co-author 
of eleven peer-review publications (Scopus) and two patent applications. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and /or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
1. Eibl, I., von der Haar, D., Jesdinszki, M., Stäbler, A., Schmid, M., & Langowski, H.-C. (2018). Adhesive based on 
micellar lupin protein isolate exhibiting oxygen barrier properties. J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 46383. DOI: 
10.1002/app.46383  
2. Cinelli, P., Schmid,  M., Bugnicourt, E., Wildner, J., Bazzichi, A., Anuillesi, I., Lazzeri, A. (2014).  Whey protein 
layer applied on biodegradable packaging film to improve barrier properties while maintaining 
biodegradability. Polymer Degradation and Stability 07/2014. DOI: 10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2014.07.007 
3. Bugnicourt, E., Brzoska, N., Kucukpinar, E., Philippe, S., Forlin, E., Bianchin, A., Schmid, M. (2019). Dispersion 
and Performance of a Nanoclay /Whey Protein Isolate Coating upon its Upscaling as a Novel Ready -to-Use 
Formulation for Packaging Converters, Polymers, 11(9), 1410. DOI: 10.3390/polym11091410 
4. Special Issue on "Adhesion Aspects in Packaging", Journal of Adhesion Science and Technology, Guest-edited 
by Esra Kucukpinar, Horst-Christian Langowski, 26 (2012) 20-21.  
5. Lindner, M., Schmid, M. (2017). Thickness measurement methods for physical vapor deposited aluminum 
coatings in packaging applications: A review. Coatings 7 (1) 9. DOI: 10.3390/coatings7010009 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. Ecoat, H2020 BBI, GA 837863, ECO sustainable multifunctional biobased COATings  with enhanced 
performance and end of life options (2019-2022). 
2. GLOPACK, H2020 SFS, GA 773375, Granting society with Low environmental impact innovative PACKaging 
(2018 – 2021) 
3. PLA4MAP, German BMEL FNR, GA 2219NR148, PLA trays with improved barrier properties for use in MAP 
packaging concepts for sensitive foods (2020-2023). 
4. Paper4Barrier, German BMBF KMU Innovative, GA 03X3591 D, Innovative paper -based packaging 
materials through barrier functionalization with nanoscale layers to replace petroleum -based ra w 
materials and film composites (2013-2015). 
5. FlexFunction2Sustain, H2020, GA 862156, Open Innovation Ecosystem for Sustainable Nano -
functionalized Flexible Surfaces (2020-2024) 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
1. Compounding: A co-rotating twin screw-extruder (Dr. Collin, 24 D, 25 mm diameter) with feeds for powder, 
flakes and liquids is available for compounding the hot-melt adhesives.  
2. Extrusion: A 7-layer extrusion plant is used (Dr. Collin, nozzle width 300mm, film width up to 500mm, feed 
1-15 kg/h, film diameter 20 µm – 3mm, 4 different polymers simultaneously) for the production of multi-
layer film structures, the extrusion of single-layer films and the extrusion coating and extrusion lamination 
of film sheets. The film thickness is monitored in-line with a capacitive sensor.  
 
Figure 1. 7-layer extrusion plant at Fraunhofer-IVV for extrusion lamination of thermoplastic protein-based adhesives 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 15 of 68 
3. Wet chemical coating: A wet chemical coating machine is available, which is unique in its possibilities of 
applying thin adhesive layers, in drying and curing, and in sensitively treating the barrier layers until 
lamination (50 cm roll width, 30m/min speed, up  to 140°C convection drying tunnel, corona -treatment, 
different application techniques gravure and slot-die, UV-curing) 
 
Figure 2. Wet-chemical coating pilot line at Fraunhofer-IVV for the coating of protein-based lacquers and wet chemical 
lamination of bio-based adhesives for packaging applications 
4. Inorganic barrier coatings : For physical vapour deposition (PVD) of inorganic barrier layers an electron -
beam vacuum coating unit is available. Film widths are 280mm, deposited species could be metals (Al) or 
metal oxides (Al2O3, SiOx). 
 
Figure 3. Pilot line for Physical Vapor Deposition of inorganic barrier layers  
5. Lab-scale formulation / coating equipment:  Thermo-controlled high shear mixing units for coating 
formulation and semiautomatic hand-coating unit (CUF 5 Sumet). Semi-automatic thermoforming unit for 
tray demonstrators. 
6. Analytics: Barrier testing (Aquatran and Oxtran / Mocon), mechanical testing (tensile strength), surface 
energy (wetting angle), film thickness, FT-IR, DSC, AFM, Raman, SEM-EDX, optical microscopy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 16 of 68 
Participant no. 6 Name (shortname)/ Country INSTITUTO TECNOLOGICO DEL EMBALAJE, 
TRANSPORTE Y LOGISTICA  (ITENE) / Spain 
Description of the legal entity  
 
ITENE is the specialist Technological Centre in R&D in packaging, logistics, transport and mobility. Its mission is to 
generate scientific and technological knowledge and adding value to companies through the implementation of 
R+D+I in these areas. ITENE provides business solutions with an integrated view of the supply chain, from raw 
materials, design and development of packaging and packaging systems, optimisation of the movement and 
distribution of goods, until the products reach the consumer and are ultimately managed as residues, all within a 
framework of sustainable performance. The centre has advanced facilities and a multidisciplinary team of 
researchers and technicians with proven and constantly evolving technologies for novel solutions. 
ITENE was founded in 1994 and currently employs 153 persons. Located in Valencia, Spain, the centre has 7,105m2 
of facilities covering laboratories and experimentation infrastructures equipped with the most modern 
technology. 
ITENE research area covers: 
• New Advanced Materials (Development strategies to obtain new packaging materials with better properties) 
• Functional surfaces and Intelligent Packaging.  
• Food safety and Active Packaging (Materials tha t release active substances from the packaging or absorb 
undesirable substances from the product to prolong the shelf life)   
• Packaging Technologies (vacuum, modified atmosphere) 
• Packaging Engineering (Transport simulation technologies) 
• Sustainability (Waste valorisation, LCA, LCC, Carbon Footprint) 
• Transport and Logistics (route optimization, distribution modelling, urban mobility) 
• Electronics, Robotics and Industry 4.0 
ITENE has participated in 39 projects from FP6 and FP7 and is involved in 25 H2020 projects (most of them under 
execution). 
Main tasks 
ITENE will act as task leader of those activities related to release of microplastics, circularity assessment and food 
safety and regulations. More specifically, ITENE will lead: 
Subtask 2.4.1. Optimization of the formulation of Functional Finishing treatment to reduce microplastics, where a 
coating and a finishing treatment will be developed and tested in order to reduce the release of microplastics.  
Subtask 2.5.2. Application of a functional finishing treatment to reduce microplastics., where Health and safety 
aspects and control of the release will be analysed.    
Task 6.4 Circularity assessments. ITENE will carry out an KPIs assessment to ensure circular approach of the project 
results  
Task 6.5 Identification and assessment of Legal, Regulatory, Ethical, Environmental, and H&S Requirements, 
leading both: evaluation of the legal framework regarding the risk assessment of the prototypes and compliance 
of the prototypes with EU Food Contact Materials regulations 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
The R&D areas that will be involved in this proposal are advanced materials, sustainability, nanosafety an d food 
safety. These areas, covered with 100 people from 5 different disciplines (chemical engineers, agronomy 
engineers, physicians, biologists, and environmental engineers).  
Our Nanosafety research group has wide experience in projects related with the risk assessment and management 
of engineered nanomaterials (ENMs) and release of ENMs in different compartments, including freshwater, soil, 
sediments and air. Moreover, the Nanosafety research group participates of the most important network of 
scientists related to the evaluation of the risk posed by the use of emerging chemicals, including the European 
NanoSafety Cluster and the Communities of Research in Nanosafety (CoRs) working groups. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 17 of 68 
The new advanced materials department provides expertise and new facilities to support the study and 
development of new materials in the nanometer range, including the design, synthesis and application of 
nanomaterials in relevant industrial sectors. This group has relevant experience in the development of 
biocoating, including Synthesis and characterisation of bio-based materials, formulation and production of new 
bio-plastics solutions with advanced properties and advanced compounding for high performance and cost-
efficient bio-based plastics. 
Our Food safety department has relevant experience on food Conta ct issues (participating in technical 
committees, both Spanish and European, related to Food Contact Materials Regulations). 
 ITENE offers accredited tests on the following areas:  
-Overall migration into aqueous food simulants by immersion, article filling and cell 
-Overall migration into fatty foodstuffs using iso-octane and 95% ethanol (substitute tests) 
-Determination of bisphenol A in food simulants 
-Determination of terephthalic acid and isophthalic acid in food simulants 
-Determination of residual butanone and ethyl acetate in packaging materials  
-Determination of formaldehyde in food simulants. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Carlos Fito-López (Male). MSc Degree in Biology and master’s degree in environmental health. Carlos Fito is 
ITENE’ head of nano-safety department, coordinator of the nano-safety unit and senior consultant in chemical 
risk assessment and in vitro toxicology. Since 2008, Carlos has been involved in the management of the Nano-
safety Unit of ITENE, working on a variety of Risk Assessment related projects, including the coordination of 
more than 7 regional, national and international projects. 
María Monedero (Female). PhD in Food Science Technology by the Polytechnic University of Valencia (UPV) and 
degree in Chemistry by the University of Valencia (UV). Master in Packaging Technology Techniques by ITENE, 
where she has been working for ten years. She is currently manager of projects in the area of new packaging 
materials development, including active and intelligent packaging, among other fields. She has also developed her 
career in the area of food contact materials legislation, by assessing companies and collaborating in the selection 
and set-up of analytical techniques aimed at the verification of compliance of the food contact materials. She has 
also participated in the writing of specific articles related to this issue. 
Teresa Calvo (Female). Project manager on  Functional Surfaces and Intelligent inks at ITENE. MSc Degree in 
Chemistry by the Polytechnic University of Valencia (Spain), with the intensification of Processes. She has a Master 
in Packaging Materials and Technologies and Packaging awarded by ITENE. S he has more than 10 years of 
experience in developing value -added properties for packaging materials through technologies such as smart 
packaging, active packaging, sustainable and biomaterials, through the development and printing of inks and 
coatings. Th us, she has earned strong  technical skills developing projects at national and European scale:  
innovative functional ink development, printing technologies and eco-indicators with specific properties (e.g. food 
contact and low migration) as well as in pa ste and liquid inks for conventional methods such as offset and 
flexography, ink -jet and gravure applications respectively. Characterisation parameters such as pigment 
dispersion, colour, brightness, wettability, tension and energy surface, tack, viscosity  and density. Value -added 
formulations related to food contact legislation and eco-friendly issues to assure safety and quality of products.  
MSc José Alonso (Male). Mr. Alonso has a MSc Degree in Chemistry and is the Project manager of Regional, 
National and European projects related to Packaging. More than eleven years’ experience in Packaging. He has a 
high expertise in food contact materials, food science, bio -based materials, development of new and active 
materials.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
1. Gallur et al, "Nanostructured biodegradable thermoplastic blends based on poly (L -D-lactic acid) and a 
poly (L-lactic acid-b-Ɛ-caprolactone) diblock copolymer Macromolecular Rapid Communication submitted 
December 2015) 
2. Polymers & Starch Blends Reinforced With Ce llulose Nano-whiskers And Nano -clays For Bio -packaging 
Conference Paper Jan 2008Proceedings of the Polymer Processing Society 24th Annual Meeting  
Proceedings of the Polymer Processing Society 24th Annual Meeting. Miriam Gallur. 
3. Zhang H., Hortal M., Dobón A., Bermudez J., Lara M. (2015). The Effect of Active Packaging on Minimising 
Food Losses: Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) of Essential Oil Component Enabled Packaging for Fresh Beef. 
Packaging Technology and Science. Accepted for publication. February 2015. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 18 of 68 
4. Carlos Fito-López, Maida Domat-Rodriguez, M. Van Tongeren, and Sally Spankie. Nanoparticle Release in 
Indoor Workplaces: Emission Sources, Release Determinants and Release Categories Based on Workplace 
Measurements. The Handbook of Environmental Chemistry 2015. DOI: 10.1007/698_2015_408 
5. Patent: EP13382126. Composition for the Preparation of a Nanostructured Biodegradable Polymeric. 
Material, the Material Obtained and its Applications. Inventors: Ana Guadalupe Galet Domingo, Maria 
Jorda Beneyto, Mercedes Hortal Ramos, Miriam Gallur Blanca, Natalia Ortuño, Susana Aucejo Romero. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. SCALIBUR: Scalable technologies for bio -urban waste recovery (H2020 -SFS-2018-2022). ITENE is coordinating 
this project regarding innovative solutions to transform urban food waste and sewage sludge into high value -
added products, helping cities to increase their recycling rate and creating  new circular economy business 
opportunities. ITENE leads activities such as PHA materials development, environmental impact. 
2. SEALIVE: Strategies of circular Economy and Advanced bio -based solutions to keep our Lands and seas alive 
from plastics contamination. ITENE is the  coordinator of this proj ect regarding Bio -based plastics 
solutions/formulations (PLA, PHA, starch and novel blends) with advanced properties (mechanical, thermal, 
controlled lifetime durability, improved biodegradability) and Sustainable strategies for bio-based plastics in land 
and sea applications. 
3. PLASTICIRCLE: Improvement of the plastic packaging waste chain from a circular economy approach. ITENE is 
coordinating this 20 pan-European partners working to reinvent the plastic packaging treatment process, making 
recycling more accessible, cost-effective and profitable for both citizens and professionals in the field.  
4. ENZYCLE: Microbial enzymes for treatment of non -recyCLEd plastic fractions - ITENE is the coordinator of this 
project and working in the identification and optimization of enzymes, enzyme depolymerization, environmental 
assessment and validation.  
5. NanoUptake: Computing infrastructure for the definition, performance testing and implementation of safe-by-
design approaches in nanotechnology supply chains. ITENE is the coordinator 
6. LIFE ECOTEXNANO: Innovative tool to improve risk assessment and promote the safe use of nanomaterials in 
the textile finishing industry (Life+), ITENE worked in the health and safety impact for users and environment, 
including the release of microplastics. 
Description o f any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
The main facilities used in the project are the waste pre -treatment laboratory, the processing laboratory, the 
physical and chemical laboratory a nd the packaging and environment laboratory. The Pilot processing plant has 
several small and large equipment for extrusion, injection and compounding, pilot scaled reactors and a chemical 
and material laboratory to fully characterize the new products. The chemical laboratory of ITENE, coordinated by 
the new materials division, has the necessary equipment to characterize the NMs in powder or liquid form, 
including a transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), z-sizers for DLS analysis, 
and TGA Q-5000 for Thermogravimetric analysis. 
• Processing laboratory: hydraulic press ASLAK, mini -extruder DSM Xplore and mini -injector DSM, twin 
screw extruder Brabender, twin screw compounder Coperion, cast line Dr. Collin (up to 5 layers), injection 
moulding machine Battenfeld, rotary coater machine (RK PrintCoat Instruments). 
• Physical and chemical laboratory: Liquid chromatographs coupled to different detectors (MS, PDA, UV-vis, 
LS, fluorescence), Thermogravimetric analyser (TGA) coupled to infrared (FTIR), Infrared Spectrometer 
(FTIR-Raman), Gas ch romatographs coupled to different detectors (MS, MS/MS, TOF, FID and TCD), 
Differential Scanning Calorimeter (DSC / MDSC) and Dynamic Mechanical Analyser (DMA), universal 
testing machine 
• Packaging and environment laboratory: Software of Life Cycle Analysis  SimaPro, Statgraphics and 
Multipack-Multimix. 
• Waste pre-treatment laboratory: magnetic separator for ferrous and nonferrous metals Goudsmit NF300, 
mill Retsch SM2000, shredder Blik B400, dryer Wittman Drymax D3050M.  
• Microbiological laboratory: Class II Laminar Flow Biological Safety Cabinet, incubators, autoclave.  Pilot 
Plant: Different capacity reactors and centrifuge 
The safety Research group has dedicated facilities and equipment to support the hazard, exposure assessment 
and characterisation of ENMS and ultrafine particles, including incubation chambers, high sensitive real time 
exposure monitoring devices for on-site exposure characterisation, and a new nano-aerosol exposure chamber 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 19 of 68 
dedicated to the evaluation of the airborne behaviour of NMs under controlled conditions, simulation of 
industrial process for risk assessment purposes, and the evaluation of the effectiveness of common risk 
management measures (i.e. Respiratory protection Equipment (RPE), dermal protection and filtration systems). 
The toxicity laboratory performs in vitro and ex vivo assays following current standards for the risk assessment of 
emerging contaminants, as well as substances of special concern such as virus, microorganisms and ultrafine 
particles. 
 
 
Participant no. 7 Name (shortname)/ 
Country 
NEXT TECHNOLOGY TECNOTESSILE SOCIETA 
NAZIONALE DI RICERCA R L (NTT)/Italy 
Description of the legal entity  
 
NTT is a private non-profit research company established in Prato since 1972. It has a staff of around 20 people, 
including employees and in-house consultants. NTT represents a reference point for research and technological 
innovation in the textile sector in Italy. The company is actively involved in research and demonstration projects 
on textile processing and textile machinery design realised at regional, national and European level. In particular, 
for the latter, NTT has participated in many projects fu nded by the LIFE programmes and the Framework 
Programmes concerning the textile sector and has also acted as coordinator of some of them. For instance, NTT 
has participated in seven projects of the 6th Framework Programme concerning the textile and clothing industry. 
Moreover, in the 7th Framework Programme NTT is involved in the following projects dealing with the application 
of textile in high added value application (i.e. energy production and personal protective equipment): NMP-2008-
SME-2-228439 (20010-2014) where photocatalytic materials were investigated; NMP-2007- 3.3-1-213903; FP7-
ENERGY-2010-FET-256736; where nanosized spacer has been produced. The key expertise of the company is 
distributed among different divisio ns. The proposed technical activities will mainly involve the Division of 
Chemical and Environmental Technologies, dealing with: chemical processing of textiles and nonwovens for 
apparel and technical applications; research and development of plasma, electron-beam, microwave, ultraviolet, 
laser and enzymatic processes; development of photocatalytic materials; textile analyses in its certified lab; 
assessment of environmental footprint of manufacturing sector by means of LCA. 
Main tasks 
- Involvement in WP3: Optimisation at pilot scale of prototypes radiation treatment by e-beam  
- Involvement in WP5: Implementation of ebeam treatment for upcycling   
- Leading WP6: Evaluation of the environmental, economic and social performances of the new products  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
NTT has a huge experience on the production of nanomaterials (including both titanium dioxide nanop articles 
and nano-fibres and polymeric materials at micro – i.e. filament – and nano – i.e. functional nano-fibers, scale) 
exhibiting self -cleaning, antibacterial and antipollution properties. Furthermore, NTT is investigating the 
effectiveness of E-Beam for the production of composite and laminates with high impact resistance for aerospace 
and automotive applications and is recently deeply involved in promoting sustainability in the manufacturing 
sectors (in particular the textile industry) by investigatin g environmental performances of different 
manufacturing processes by means of LCA. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Solitario Nesti (Male) is a senior researcher. He holds a degree in Mechanical Engineering got at Università degli 
Studi di Firenze (Italy). After his degree, he began research activity and technologies development in spinning, 
weaving and finishing fields at the Research Centr e of Textile Machines SAVIO S.p.A. of Pordenone (Italy). Then 
he had experience about informative systems organization, CAD CAM design and automation systems 
development in textile field at S. Bigagli & C. S.p.A. of Prato (Italy). Now he holds the office of Project Manager of 
Tecnotessile where he is running and coordinating research projects within textile technologies, processes 
development and product innovation in textile sector. He has been responsible for hundreds of R&D projects in 
textile sector. 
Daniele Spinelli (Male) is a researcher. He has a PhD degree in Chemical Sciences from the University of Siena 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 20 of 68 
(Italy). Since 2017 he is working in NTT as member of the chemical and technological research unit. Experiences 
in funded projects: Biscol and Smartpro (FP Programme), Photocitytex (Life Programme), Optisolv (Eurotransbio), 
Waste2Fuels, Bio4Self, Ecobulk, Sealive (H2020), Fish4Fish and Bluenet (EMFF). 
Marco Ruzzante (Male) is a technician. He holds a degree in Industrial Chemistry from the University of Pisa (Italy). 
Since 2009 he is working in NTT where he is carrying out the activities related with the production of nanosized 
textile structure (including the application of photocatalytic materials) and characterisation of textiles. Past 
experiences in funded projects: Easywash and Matecon (National programmes), Bio4Self (H2020), Biscol and 
Blueship (FP Programme) NoisefreeTex (Life+ Programme). 
Chiara Uvoni (Female) is a project Manager. She has a degree in Quality System Engineering. She is in charg e of 
the coordination of OTIR2020 cluster and as such is experienced in dissemination matters. Further, she has been 
in charge of the financial management of several EU and national projects for NTT. 
Maurizio Poggiali (Male) is a senior researcher. He has an upper school leaving certificate from the Buzzi Textile 
Institute and has huge experience in the design and production of composites. He is the responsible of the E -
Beam apparatus and plasma technologies at NTT. 
Enrico Venturini degli Esposti (Male) is a project Manager. He holds a degree in Economics and Business 
Administration and Textile Technician Diploma. After taking a Textile High School Diploma, Mr. Venturini 
graduated in Economics at the University of Florence. He then specialised in Industr ial Quality Control and 
developed significant experience in this field within textile companies. Since 1996 he has been holding the 
position of Project Manager at Next Technology Tecnotessile, for research projects. He has also a qualified trainer 
in the t extile sector. He has participated to several EU projects. He was in charge of these projects: PURIFAST 
Advanced Purification Of Industrial And Mixed Wastewater By Combined Membrane Filtration And Sonochemical 
Technologies (LIFE+); TEMP - Textile Excellenc e in EUMED Partners (FP7 -REGPOT-2009-2); MobileManager 
(Leonardo Da Vinci Programme); CREATE (European Creative Districts); Director of OTIR2020 - Innovation Pole 
for the Fashion. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including  widely-used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
• Corsi L, Nesti S, Lombardi L, Fatarella  E. Anti -bacterial covering panel and method for making the panel. 
Brevetto WO2012/056418, May 2012 
• Fatarella E, Parisi ML, Varheenmaa M, Talvenmaa P. Life Cycle Assessment of high protective clothing for 
complex emergency operations. Journal of Textile Institute 2014: 1-13 
• ML Parisi, E Fatarella, D Spinelli, R Pogni, R Basosi (2015).  Environmental impact assessment of an eco -
efficient production for coloured textiles. Journal of Cleaner Production 108, 514-524. 
• Castaldo et al. (2019). Critical Factors for the Recycling of Different End -of-Life Materials: Wood Wastes, 
Automotive Shredded Residues, and Dismantled Wind Turbine Blades 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. BIO4SELF - Development of fully -recyclable food packaging with enhanced gas barrier properties and new 
functionalities using high performance coatings (2016 -2019) - Financed by EC within H2020 -EU.2.1.3 - 
INDUSTRIAL LEADERSHIP - Leadership in enabling and industrial technologies - Advanced materials. 
2. ECOBULK – Circular Process for Eco-Designed Bulky Products and Internal Car Parts (2017-2021). Financed by 
EC within H2020-EU.3.5.4. - Enabling the transition towards a green economy and society through ecoinnovation. 
3. FISH4FISH - FISH chitinolytic biowastes FOR FISH active and sustainable packaging material (2019 -2022). 
Financed by the Executive Agency for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (EASME) under the European Maritime 
and Fisheries Fund (EMFF). 
4. SEALIVE - Strategies of circular Economy and Advanced bio -based solutions to keep our Lands and seas alIVE 
from plastics contamination (2019 – 2023) - Financed by EC within H2020-EU.3.2.5.3. Cross-cutting concepts and 
technologies enabling maritime growth. 
5. NTT coordinated the Clean Sky project E -SLEEVE dealing with the design and production of carbon-based 
sleeves via curing and layer -by-layer Electron beam polymeri zation - Financed by EC within FP7 -JTI - Specific 
Programme "Cooperation": Joint Technology Initiatives. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
• Low energy E-Beam apparatuses (80 - 300 keV; EB dose in the range 50 – 150 kGy with a maximum dose 
rate of 202 kGy/sec, current in the range 0 – 30 mA) 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 21 of 68 
• Equipment for chemical and physical characterisation of materials (among others, FT-NIR, FT-IR-ATR and 
UV spectrophotometer, biaxial tensile testing machine, DSC, SEM) 
• SimaPro software to carry out LCA studies 
 
 
Participant 
no. 
8 Name (shortname)/ 
Country 
ALMA MATER STUDIORUM - UNIVERSITA DI BOLOGNA (UNIBO)/ 
Italy 
Description of the legal entity  
 
Founded in 1088, the Alma Mater Studiorum – Università di Bologna (UNIBO) is one of the most important 
institutions of higher education across Europe. Research and Innovation are a priority of the University mission. 
UNIBO has an active patent portfolio of over 370 patents, related to more than 140 inventions , set up or 
accredited 27 spin -off companies and can also count Almacube , as business incubator. With regard to the 
capability of attracting funding, UNIBO is very active both at National and European level. Activities related to 
competitive funding programs are supported by the Research and Third Mission Division, with more t han 10 
years’ experience and about 50 people assisting the research groups. A Research Support Office deals with the 
UNIBO strategic positioning at local, national and international level, through integrated networking and lobby 
activities. The Programs&Pr ojects Office supports the UNIBO researchers with technical, legal, financial and 
administrative expertise. Moreover, the Office cooperates with the Knowledge Transfer Office, for the Innovation 
Management expertise and the IP protection and exploitation. Thanks to its scientific excellence and a central 
Project Management support, UNIBO has gained a considerable experience in International and European 
research projects, successfully participated in FP7 with 274 projects funded in 2007-2013 (58 as coordinator) and 
87,8ML Euros of funding, UNIBO is the second Italian university for the attractiveness of European funding for 
research, 37th in the European ranking of institutions of higher education. In Horizon 2020, UNIBO is so far 
involved in 262 funded projects (69 as coordinator) with more than 105ML Euros of funding.  
UNIBO will participate to the project with the Industrial and Environmental Biotechnology and the Polymer Science 
groups of the Department of Civil, Chemical, Environmental and Materials Engineering (DICAM).  
The Industrial and Environmental Biotechnology group  has expertise in the development and optimization of 
biotechnological processes, either based on microbial or enzymatic biocatalysts, for the production of bio-based 
products, the biodegradation of low MW xenobiotics as well as of bio -based and petroleum-derived polymers. 
The group has also expertise in the isolation and characterisation of microorganisms from extreme environments 
and of their enzymes, and possesses a large collection of bacteria from desert, extreme environments. 
The Polymer Science group  has a wide experience in the development of new synthetic routes to produce 
biobased polymers and strategies to prepare advanced materials, such as nanocomposites, for packaging, coating 
and biomedical applications. Moreover, the group is expert in the characterisation of polymer properties. 
Main tasks 
Using its biotechnology and polymer chemistry competences, UNIBO will have a strong role in material recycling 
in WP4. In particular, UNIBO will employ commercial hydrolytic enzymes for the controlled biodegradation of 
polyesters such as PLA  in order to recover oligomers or monomer from such polyesters.  Subsequently the 
depolymerized products will be upcycled to obtain new biopolymers with enhanced functionalities t hrough 
chemical reactions with multifunctional monomers. The new materials obtained will be fully characterized and 
will be employed in WP2 in the application of new upcycled bioplastics (e.g. adhesives, coatings).   
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
Two research units of UNIBO belonging to DICAM department are involved in Preserve. The Biotechnology group 
has expertise in the development and optimization of enzymatic processes for the degradation of traditional and 
biobased polymers. The Polymer Scien ce group is expert in synthesis and characterisation of bio -based 
monomers, polymers and advanced materials. The group has a specific expertise in preparation of aromatic and 
aliphatic biobased polymers, starting from biomass and in the synthesis and modification of polymeric structures 
to get specific functionalities (i.e. antioxidant, antibacterial, barrier properties). 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 22 of 68 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Prof. ANNAMARIA CELLI  (female). PhD in Materials Science Engineering, Associate Professor in Polymer 
Chemistry, Coordinator of the Polymer Science research group in DICAM; scientific responsible for research 
contracts with national and International companies; co -author of about 93 pub lications on peer -reviewed 
journals and 5 patents. She is the responsible of UNIBO for the H2020 projects NoAW (WP4 leader, 2016-2020), 
Agrimax (2016-2020), Usable Packaging (2019 -2022); she is involved in H2002 projects PROLiFiC  (WP3 leader) 
(2018-2022) and TERMINUS (2019-2023).  
Dr. LAURA SISTI (female), PhD in Industrial Chemistry, Assistant Professor in Polymer Chemistry since 2008. Her 
research interests are directed to the synthesis and characterisation of new polymer materials, preparation of 
composites and nanocomposites. She’s co -author of 46 publ ications on peer -reviewed journals and 5 patents. 
She’s involved in H2020 projects NoAw (2016-2020), Agrimax (2016-2020), Prolific (2018-2022), Usable Packaging 
(2019-20222) and is responsible of UNIBO for H2020 project TERMINUS (2019-2023). 
Prof. GIULIO Z ANAROLI (male). PhD in Applied Bio -catalysis and Industrial Microbiology, Associate Professor of 
Industrial and Environmental Biotechnology. His main expertise is on the microbial biodegradation of low MW 
xenobiotics, the enzymatic degradation of synthetic  polymers, the characterisation of microbial communities 
involved in pollutants degradation in environmental samples and on microplastics and the development of 
biotechnological processes for the production of biobased chemicals. He was involved in 7 FP7 p rojects and is 
currently participating in 5 H2020 (1 co -coordinated) projects. He is co -author of 52 peer -reviewed papers, 8 
book chapters and 1 patent. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or so ftware), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
1. C. Gioia, Banella M.G., G. Totaro, M. Vannini, P. Marchese, M. Colonna, L. Sisti, A. Celli. (2018) Biobased vanillic 
acid and ricinoleic acid: building blocks for fully renewable copolyesters.  J Ren Res. 6:126-135. 
2. C. Gioia, Banella M.G., P. Marchese, G. Vannini; M. Colonna, A. Celli. (2016) Advances in the synthesis of bio-
based aromatic polyesters: Novel cop olymers derived from vanillic acid and ϵ -caprolactone. Polym Chem. 
7:5396-5406. 
3. C. Gioia, G. Vannini, P. Marchese, Minesso A., Cavalieri R., M. Colonna, A. Celli. (2014) Sustainable polyesters 
for powder coating applications from recycled PET, isosorbide and succinic acid. Green Chem. 16:1807-1815. 
4. M. Ferri, A. Happel, G. Zanaroli, M. Bertolini, S. Chiesa, M. Commisso, F. Guzzo, A. Tassoni. (2020). Advances 
in combined enzymatic extraction of ferulic acid from wheat bran. New Biotechnology, 56, pp. 38-45.  
5. M. Gigli, A. Negroni, M. Soccio, G. Zanaroli, N. Lotti, F. Fava, A. Munari (2012). Influence of chemical and 
architectural modifications on the enzymatic hydrolysis of poly(butylene succinate). Green Chem. 14:2885 -
2893. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. USABLE PACKAGING (H2020, GA 836884, 2019-2022). The projects aim to unlock the potential of 
sustainable biodegradable packaging by developing bio-based packaging products that are biodegradable/ 
compostable and/or recyclable. 
2. TERMINUS (H2020, GA 84400, 2019 -2023). The project  addresses the challenge of unlocking recycling and 
reuse of flexible multi -layer and multi -compounds packaging materials for food and non -food applications, 
through the use of smart enzyme-containing polymers with triggered intrinsic self-biodegradation properties. 
3. AGRIMAX (H2020, GA 720719, 2016 -2020). The project aims at disclosing pilot scale processes for the 
valorisation of agrowastes into new food additives, packaging and agricultural materials.  
4. INMARE (H2020, GA 634486, 2015-2019). The project aims  at tapping marine environment to outsource 
enzymes with industrial and environmental applications. 
5. BIOCLEAN (FP7, GA 312100, 2012 -2015). The project aimed at the biodegradation and valorisation of 
petroleum-based plastics. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
Polymer polycondensation reactors (50g scale), Brabender mixer for polymer formulation (50g), injection 
moulding press; polymer characterisation equipment NMR, FTIR, GPC (-IR, -UV detectors), DSC, TGA, XRD, optical 
microscope, DMTA, Instron for tensile tests, contact angle measuring instrument, stress -controlled rheometer, 
OTR analyser. Microbiology, biochemistry and molecular biology equipment fo r the isolation, selection and 
characterisation of bacteria and enzymes (microbiological cabinets and incubators, optical microscope, SDS and 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 23 of 68 
native PAGE, PCR, qPCR), bioreactors (1 to 15 L), analytical equipment (UV -VIS spectrophotometers, HPLC -
DAD/UV, HPLC-MS, HPLC-RID, GC-FID, GC-ECD, GC-TCD). 
 
 
Participant no. 9 Name (shortname)/ Country BIOPOLIS SL (BIOPOL)/ Spain 
Description of the legal entity  
 
Biopolis, S.L. is a leading biotechnology company based in Valencia (Spain) active in new product development 
and applications. Created in October 2003, Biopolis is still owned directly by the Spanish National Research 
Council (CSIC). Biopolis shares are currently  distributed between the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC) 
and ADM Wild Valencia, S.A.U. The company is classified as large company.  Our core competences are the 
isolation, selection, design, characterisation, validation and production of microorgan isms and cellular 
metabolites with applications in agri-food, feed, pharmaceutical and chemical industries. This includes the design 
and development of microbial strains and metabolites, by strain and bioprocess development, followed by 
fermentation and downstream process optimization and the production at an industrial scale.  Biopolis, S.L. has 
also generated novel high -throughput screening platforms in vitro and in vivo, which enable us to evaluate and 
characterize the effect of selected ingredients in relation to nutritional and health protection functionalities. 
Therefore, the selected compounds can be produced and also evaluated in terms of their functional activity in 
the host.  Prototype projects in clude the selection, validation and production of starters and probiotics, the 
selection and production of enzymes, the identification, characterisation and process development of 
biochemicals and the design, validation and scale-up of novel bioprocesses. Patents and publications have been 
issued in relation to functional ingredients and probiotics and biopolymer production, including co-developments 
with our private and public partners.  Biopolis facilities spread over 1,500 m2 including laboratories and 
manufacturing plants, located in the Scientific Park of the University of Valencia. Our R&D centre hosts 9 
specialized research laboratories (biochemistry, molecular biology, cellular biology, microbiology, cell culture, 
chemistry, analytics, and bench-top and scale-up fermentation), a pilot fermentation and DSP unit (up to 300L) 
and an industrial plant with a total capacity of 9,000 L fermentation. The company cornerstone is a 
multidisciplinary staff, consisting of highly trained and specialized professional s in biology, biochemistry, 
biotechnology, organic chemistry, food technology, and industrial and chemical engineering. 
Main tasks 
The main role of Biopolis will be to upscale the fermentation of mcl-PHA in WP2 that will be as coating for several 
packaging formats.   
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
They have expertise on bio -process development, fermentation and downstream process optimization and the 
production of different biotech solutions at an industrial scale. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Dr Antonia Rojas (female), Degree in Chemistry, PhD in Biotechnology, head of Bioenergy Laboratory at Biopolis. 
She has large experience in microbial systems and strain selection, validation and bioprocess design for bulk 
chemicals over  production. From 2009 to the present she has been active in the preparation, management, 
coordination and / or development of several European R & D projects in the areas of bio -based industries, 
sustainability and revalorization of urban and agricultural wastes/residues (i.e. Integrated project FP6, KBBE-FP7, 
ERA-IB, EUROSTARS, NMP-FP7, CENIT, CIEN, etc.). 
Dr Marta Tortajada (female), Microbial Biotechnology Manager at Biopolis (Chemical Engineer, PhD in Automatics 
and System Engineering). She has 12 years’ experience in protein overexpression in microbial systems and strain 
and bioprocess design for biochemical and bulk chemicals overproduction. 
From 2005 to the present she has  been active in the preparation, management, coordination and / or 
development of several European R & D projects in the areas of bio -based industries, sustainability and 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 24 of 68 
revalorization of urban and agricultural wastes/residues (i.e. Integrated project FP6 , KBBE -FP7, ERA -IB, 
EUROSTARS, NMP-FP7, CENIT, CIEN, etc.). 
Dr Daniel Ramón Vidal  (male) CSO of Biopolis S.L, with more than 160 publications and patents in microbial 
biotechnology (selection of microbial starters including probiotics, fermentation develop ment and scale -up, 
strain improvement) and biotechnological production of microbial metabolites . His lanes of research are: i) 
microbial biotechnology (selection of microbial starters including probiotics, biochemical, physiological and 
molecular identification of their industrial relevant traits, scale -up fermentation, strain improvement by both 
classical mutagenesis techniques and metabolic engineering), and ii) biotechnological production of microbial 
metabolites (enzymes, functional ingredients, metabolic intermediates). He is author of more than one hundred 
articles in peer reviewed journals and co -author of thirty patents. He has obtained the European Prize of 
Divulgation on Science, the Prize of the Spanish Danone Institute, and the National Price in Technology Transfer 
of the Spanish Government. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
Among other tailored biotech solutions, BIOPOL has: 2,3-butanediol; isobutanol; D-lactic acid, biopolymers (PHA, 
PHB), enzymes, microorganisms. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. H2020, BIOTEC -05-2017 - Microbial platforms for CO2 -reuse processes in the low -carbon economy 
Project ENGICOIN “Engineered microbial factories for CO2 exploitation in an integrated waste treatment 
platform”. 2018-2021. 
2. H2020, BIOTEC -02-2016 - Bioconversion of non -agricultural waste into biomolecules for industrial 
applications. Project DAFIA “Biomacromolecules from municipal solid bio -waste fractions and fish waste 
for high added value applications”. 2017-2020. 
3. EU 7FP. KBBE2012.3.4 -02; Food, Agriculture and  Fisheries, and Biotechnology; Biotechnology for novel 
biopolymers. Grant agreement no.: 311815. Project “SYNPOL. Biopolymers from Syngas Fermentation”. 
2012-2016. 
4. EU 6FP ERA -NET Project. EUI2008-03600. Production and Upgrading of 2.3 -Butanediol from Bioma ss. 
2009-1012.  
5. VI FP. Integrated Project nº 026515-2 BIOPRODUCTION –Sustainable microbial and biocatalytic 
production of advanced functional materials. 2006-2010. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
BIOPOLIS houses state-of-the-art equipment in microbiology, molecular biology, biochemistry, fermentation and 
genomics: 
Standard auxiliary laboratory infrastructure, inc. laminar Flow Class II cabinets, large -capacity multi -tier 
refrigerated shakers, large medium preparation room, sterilizers, 4°C and -20ºC cold rooms, refrigerated, table-
top, vacuum and high-capacity floor centrifuges. 
• Molecular biology tools and standard laboratory equipment, gradient and RT thermocyclers, hybridization oven 
incubation and electroporation systems, vertical, horizontal, gradient gel electrophoresis systems, digital imaging 
gel documentation system. 
• Roche, IonTorrent, Illumina platforms for Next Generation, Massive Sequencing applications.  
• Biochemical analysis and quantitation:  UV/Vis scanning spectrophotometers, scanning spectrofluorometer,  
Analytical and semi-preparative HPLCs equipped with UV -visible, Evaporative Light Scattering, Refraction Index 
based detectors, Gas Chromatography system. 
• Microbial culture, monitorization and control: automated 96-well plate incubators and readers, microbioreactor 
for 24 simultaneous fermentations in microtiter plates under monitored and regulated pH, pO2 and temperature 
conditions, 7 lab bioreactors (1-5 L) for optimization purposes, 30L, 50L and 300L stainless steel stirred tank 
bioreactors, PC-based, with online measurement and control capabilities, equipped with advanced  sensorization 
systems: online methanol/ethanol determination, off -gas analyser, near -infrared in situ  monitoring, optical 
density continuous monitoring.  
• DSP for laboratory and pilot scale process development: Ultrasonic cell disruptor, high pressure, piston pump 
continuous homogenizers, micro and ultrafiltration membrane systems,  ÄKTA Explorer System (GE -Healthcare 
FPLC purifier system) with a capacity of 100 mL/min equipped for Ion Exchange, Affinity, Hydrophobic Interaction 
Chromatography and Size Exclusion Chromatography, laboratory and pilot freeze-dryers.  
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 25 of 68 
                                                   
 
 
Participant no. 10 Name (shortname)/ Country PLANET BIOPLASTICS SRL (PLANET) / Italy 
Description of the legal entity  
 
Planet Bioplastics (PLANET) is an innovative start -up, spin-off of the University of Pisa that includes among its 
owners two Professors of Pisa University. Other owners of the company have large experience in production and 
marketing of polymeric materials. The company has access to equipment for processing and characterisation in 
the University of Pisa and in the company Caldara, producer of recycled plastic compounds, whose owners are 
even partly owners of PLANET. PLANET is a full BIC member and partner of two European BBI-JU projects; PLANET 
plans to be involved in regional, national and European projects with high R&D participation but oriented to 
obtaining innovative products to propose on the market of bioplastics. PLANET is currently partner of two 
European BBI project ECOAT and BIONTOP.  
Thus, the company is strongly interested in the present project for production and marketing of biobased and 
recyclable products. As well the company as previous experience on material pre -treatment to improve 
recyclability and subsequent selection of compatibilizers and additives to improve properties of plastic produced 
using a percentage of recycled polymers.  
In the timeframe of the project the company plans to hire 1-2 persons that will be partly dedicated to the project. 
Main tasks 
PLANET will take care of pilot and industrial production of compounds to be used for production of items by 
injection moulding, cast extrusion and blow moulding extrusion.  
PLANET will contribute to set optimal conditions for detergent separation of multi-layers materials by protein or 
adhesive removal with water, solvent including enzymatic solvent on laboratory scale to be scaled to pilot-
industrial scale by the partner ROMEI.  
PLANET will contribute to optimize biobased polymers formulation with selection of chain extenders, nucleating 
agent and reinforcing fillers, and scale up compounds production.  
Processing conditions as thermal profile, screw configuration, feeding of additives etc. will be optimized by 
specific energy study. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
The managerial team, on the academic side, is composed of professors with strong scientific background on the 
properties and transformation of biopolymers (especially Polylactic acid and Polyhydroxyalkanoates) and with 
huge experience in National and Europ ean projects, carried out both as coordinators and RTO partners. The 
business side is composed of an expert marketing sales manager and three entrepreneurs, who own a company 
that carries out recycling and compounding of traditional plastic materials. They  have 55 years of specialization 
in the regeneration and trade of plastic materials, with the mission of reducing non-recoverable plastic waste to 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 26 of 68 
the minimum terms and promoting the culture of using regenerated material, significantly reducing the use of 
virgin raw materials.  
This solid academic know -how, combined with the great experience of the managerial team in industrial 
production and marketing of polymers, provide quick and able answers to the continuous evolution of the 
technical-legislative needs of circular and sustainable economy, with the aim to bridge the current gap in terms 
of performance and price between traditional plastic and sustainable solutions. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Prof. ANDREA LAZZERI (male), Full Professor of Materials Science and Engineering. He is specialized in preparation 
and use of micro -and nano-particles in polymeric composites, rubber toughening of plastics, deformation and 
fracture of materials and in ceramic matrix  composites. He is author of over 130 publications on international 
journals and 4 patents (3508 Citations, h -index 29, i -20 62). Didactical activity in Materials Science and 
Engineering and Materials Science and Technology for Cultural Heritage. He coordinated three European projects 
on Materials Science. He is director of the Interdepartmental Centre for Materials Science and Engineering of the 
University of Pisa and head of MSc degree course in Materials and Nanotechnology.  
 
Prof. Patrizia Cinelli (female), She is associate professor of Pisa University for Applied Chemistry and Materials 
Technology at Master Degree student of Construction Engineering and Architecture at Pisa University, Master 
Degree student of Chemical Engineering and Maste r Degree students of Materials and Nanotechnology. PhD in 
Chemistry at the University of Pisa partly performed at the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), 
Peoria, IL, USA. 20 years of experience in materials science, polymer processing and characterisation, 
biodegradation and life cycle assessment. She is co -author of over 80 papers in peer -reviewed journal, 9 book 
chapters, and 8 patents on innovative materials, with h-index 26.  She has worked in over 15 EC project from FP5, 
FP6, FP7 and Horizo n 2020, directly following writing, scientific activity, and reporting, and is currently 
coordinator of the EC project ECOAT. 
 
Ms Doriana Morganti (female), graduated in industrial chemistry at Milan University in 1986 and has relevant 
experiences: she was trained on plastic processing and characterisation at Brunel University (UK) for 8 months, 
worked in Versalis in applied research for 2 years, in Shell Research laboratories (CRCSL Belgium) for 3 years. She 
had several experiences in sales, among them 10 years in charge of new business and sales for a Japanese trading 
company, Sojitz Europe, which distributes in Europe engineering polymers and food packaging specialties. 
Recently she has been in charge of a compostable compound homologation and development  for an Italian 
distributor.  
 
Dr. Ing. Ilaria Canesi  (female) is a Chemical Engineer. She obtained a Master degree at University of Pisa on 3 
March 2017 and her thesis title was: “Fracture resistance and plastic behavior of poly (lactic acid) (PLA) toughened 
with poly (butylene adipate-coterephthalate) (PBAT)”. She works in the R&D team for Planet Bioplastics srl, start-
up Spin-off of Pisa University.  
 
Mr. Alessandro Caldara and Mr. Attilio Giorgio Caldara  (male) are co-owner of Planet Bioplastics, and own the 
company Caldara Plast (www.caldara.it), which carries out plastic compounds recycling. They have many years of 
experience in polymer processing and plastic marketing. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
1. P. Cinelli, M. Schmid, E. Bugnicourt, J. Wildner, A. Bazzichi, I. Anguillesi, A. Lazzeri. “Whey protein layer 
applied on biodegradable packaging film to improve barrier properties while maintaining 
biodegradability”, Polymer Degradation and Stability, 2014, 108, 151-157. 
2. P. Cinelli, M. Schmid, El. Bugnicourt, M.B. Coltelli, A. Lazzeri. “Recyclability of PET/WPI/PE Multilayer Films 
by Removal of Whey Protein Isolate based Coatings with Enzymatic Detergents”, Materials, 2016, Vo l. 
9(6), 473; doi:10.3390/ma9060473. 
3. M.K. Fehri, C. Mugoni, P. Cinelli, I. Anguillesi, M.B. Coltelli, S. Fiori, M. Montorsi, A. Lazzeri. Composition 
dependence of the synergistic effect of nucleating agent and plasticizer in poly(lactic acid): A Mixture 
Design study”.eXPREss Polymer Letter 2016; 10(4): 274-288 “ 
4. A. Lazzeri, T.V. Phuong, P. Cinelli. “Copolymers based on reactive polyesters and plasticisers for the 
manufacture of transparent, biodegradable packaging film”, PCT/IB2013/053302 (WO 2013164743 A1). 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 27 of 68 
5. E. Bugnicourt, P. Cinelli , V. Alvarez , A. Lazzeri . “Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA): Review of synthesis, 
characteristics, processing and potential applications in packaging ”, eXPRESS Polymer Letters 06/2014; 
8(11):791-808. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. WHEYLAYER: “Barrier biopolymers for sustainable packaging, Whey protein-coated plastic films to 
replace expensive polymers & increase recyclability” (FP7 - GA 315743 & GA 218340). (as UNIPI) 
2. BIO-BOARD: “Development of sustainable protein-based paper and paperboard coating systems to 
increase the recyclability of food and beverage packaging materials” (FP7 – GA 315313) (as UNIPI) 
3. ECOAT: “ECO sustainable multifunctional biobased COATings with enhanced performance and end of 
life options” (H2020 BBI - GA 837863).  
4. BIOnTop: “Novel packaging films and textiles with tailored end of life and performance based on bio-
based copolymers and coatings” (H2020 BBI - GA 837761).  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
• COMAC co-rotating twin screw extruder EBC 25 HT semi-industrial extruder  
• 4 gravimetric feeders Ketrion  
• 1 peristaltic pump for liquid additives  
• 1 melt flow tester CEAST automatic  
• 1 CEAST Charpy/IZOD equipment  
• 1 Oven  
• 1 PIOVAN Hot Air Dryer  
• 1 TECNICA DUEBI Injection moulding machines  
• HDT/Vicat testing  
• INSTRON 5500r Universal Testing Machine  
 
 
Participant no. 11 Name (shortname)/ Country Bostik SA (BOSTIK) / France 
Description of the legal entity  
Bostik was founded as the Boston Blacking Company in Chelsea, 
Massachusetts, in 1889. For most of the 20th century as the company 
embarked on international expansion and diversification, specializing 
in producing different families of adhesives for differe nt markets and 
applications. In 1990, Bostik was acquired by the TOTAL group, and by 
Arkema in 2015. Today, Bostik, as a division of Arkema, is a global leading player in adhesive for the industrial, 
consumer and construction markets with over €2.0bn of tu rnover, about 6,000 employees and 4 major R&D 
Centres in France, USA, Japan and China. Bostik benefits of its mother company’s policy of investment in 
innovation: Arkema invests 3% of its revenue in R&D, filed 244 patents in 2018 and employs 1600 researche rs. 
Developing and producing adhesives requires dealing with several different chemistries such as polyamides, 
polyesters, polyurethanes, acrylics, polyolefins and styrene -block-copolymers among others. Bostik’s adhesives 
are applied in the form of hot mel ts, pressure sensitive hot melts, films, solvent -based coating, solvent -free 
coatings, waterborne and extrusion resins.  
In the global Packaging industry Bostik designs, produces and commercializes lamination adhesives, cold seal 
coatings, heat seal extrud able co -polyesters and lacquers. Bostik is also the pioneer and global leader in 
extrudable pressure-sensitive hot-melts for reclosable lidding films.  Bostik also supplies adhesives for tapes and 
labels, for case and carton sealing as well as paper-based consumer goods.  
Main tasks 
Bostik will be leading task 2.3, with the development of laminating adhesives and the subsequent production of 
the selected candidate formulations at laboratory or small pilot scale (> 10 L), to be used by partners in tasks 2.5 
for pilot scale lamination trials, and for the production of packaging laminate prototypes. Two different adhesive 
technologies will be explored: 
(a) two-component reactive adhesives for wet lamination, based on isocyanate prepolymers with a vegetable oil 
polyester backbone having more than 50% biobased content, designed to provide high adhesion to protein -
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 28 of 68 
coated biodegradable plastic substrates and peel strength exceeding the food packaging industry requirements 
at very low coating weights ca. 2-5 g/m². 
(b) a biodegradable hot melt adhesive based on casein suitably formulated with plasticizers and other plant-based 
proteins to be melt -processable at temperatures allowing extrusion lamination without damage to the 
biodegradable substrates. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
Bostik is a major producer of adhesives for the manufacture of flexible packaging laminates for food and non -
food products, with an experience of more than 40 years in the synthesis, production and application of various 
laminating adhesive technologies in cluding one - and two -component polyurethanes, solvent -based or 
solventless, for the lamination of all the plastic film substrates commonly used in food packaging. Bostik also 
produces hot-melt heat-seals, cold-seals and extrudable pressure sensitive adhesi ves for reclosable packages. 
Significant expertise is available in Bostik R&D centre in Venette (F) both in terms of polymer synthesis, 
formulation, application and analytical characterisation of the adhesives and the laminates produced. Bostik is 
equipped with state-of-the-art pilot scale laminating & coating equipment. Strong focus is given to anticipating 
customers’ needs in terms of performance, regulatory evolution, low cost -in-use, sustainability and innovation. 
Bostik is strongly committed to support  their customers packaging makers, brand owners and retailers with 
regards to innovations towards minimizing the environmental footprint of packaging.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Dr Stéphane FOUQUAY  (male). Scientific Director, Sustainable Innovation Manager & Competitive Intelligence 
Manager at Bostik since 1999. S. FOUQUAY spent 40 years in R&D in the domains of pharmaceutical and 
(stereo)chemical organic synthesis, renewable and green chemistry, ph ysico-chemistry and formulation of 
surfactants, applied statistics and probabilities, analysis (NMR, IR, Mass Spectroscopy, Rheology, …), 
environmental analysis (toxicology and ecotoxicology), molecular engineering (QSAR), formulation of adhesives 
and seal ants, regulation (TSCA, REACH, GHS, CLP, …), Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), Product Environmental 
Footprint (PEF), Building Information Modeling (BIM) and Eco-design. He received his ès-Sciences Physiques PhD 
in 1985 from the University of Rouen (URA CNRS 46 4), France. Subsequently he joined Elf -Atochem Group as 
Spectroscopic Analysis Department Manager (staff of 10) in 1985 and as Synthesis and Molecular Engineering 
Department Manager (staff of 20) from 1989 to 1999. Later, he joined Bostik in 2000 as Industrial Adhesives R&D 
Director, Director of Research Centre of Ribécourt (staff of 80) and Global Competitive Intelligence Manager. He 
promotes Global Product Stewardship and Sustainable Innovation as Scientific Director within Bostik R&D 
Corporate Team since  2007. He was Vice -President of Biomolecules Commission (IAR Cluster), President of 
Technical Commission (2007 – 2012) of FIPEC (Fédération des Industries des Peintures, Encres, Couleurs, Colles, 
Adhésifs et Préservation du bois) and member of FEICA’s technical board (Association of the European Adhesive 
& Sealant Industry). He was also member of Industrial Chair of Life Cycle Assessment in Ecole Polytechnique de 
Montréal / CIRAIG - Interuniversity Research Centre for the Life Cycle of Products, Processes and Services (2000 
– 2015). He is involved in supervising PhD theses on adhesive chemistry and others research projects (ANR, …). 
He is author and co-author of 21 academic publications and 64 published patents. 
Dr Francis PARDAL (male). – R&D Manager, Polyurethane & Polyester adhesives, working at Bostik since 2013. F. 
Pardal spent 18 years in Academic and Industrial Research in the domain of polymer chemistry, physico -
chemistry, formulation of adhesives, nanocomposites. He received his PhD in 2005 from the ECOLE CENTRALE 
PARIS France and worked on the chemical recycling of PET by glycolysis process (valorization of polyester bottles 
waste into polyurethane foam for insulation panels). Subsequently he joined the CNRS (French national scientific 
research agency) as a research engineer and worked on several topics: Polymer synthesis (polyamide, acrylic 
copolymers by emulsion and mini-emulsion), nanocomposites (coatings & adhesives). He joined IVA Essex in 2011 
as R&D engineer. He developed new generation of varn ish for wire copper enameling: generation of inorganic 
network (sol-gel chemistry) in a polymeric phase (polyurethane, polyester, polyamide, and polyimide). 
Later, he joined Bostik in 2013 as R&D team leader for Flexible packaging and then R&D manager for polyester & 
polyurethane adhesives (staff of 8 -10) for several markets: Flexible packaging, Automotive, Marine, Transport, 
Building and Construction. He is author and co-author of 8 academic publications and 3 published patents. 
Marc Defoin  (male). Industrial Adhesives Technical Support Director R&D Manager Bostik. Over 27 years of 
experience in the food packaging and adhesives, occupying both technical and commercial management roles in 
an international environment. Marc Defoin has worked for Bosti k for over 13 years evolving from Market 
Manager to Technical Support Director. Before Bostik, Marc Defoin worked for Roland Emballages, Morton 
International and Rohm & Haas. He has a solid theoretical education and field training, being capable to fully 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 29 of 68 
correlate packaging performance requirements and structure with adhesives chemistry. His broad expertise 
includes the different families of adhesives such as solvent-based and solvent-free polyurethane-based adhesives 
for lamination, waterborne adhesives, waxes, hot-melts, coatings, printing inks, cold seal and heat seal coatings.  
Marc Defoin brings a tremendous field experience in the choice and use of appropriate adhesives for the very 
different packaging structures existing today, and for this reason, he is responsible for customer trainings all over 
the world for Bostik and involved in most innovation projects. Marc has a strong team spirit and leadership skills. 
Innovation, training and sharing his expertise with people are two important passions of him. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
Bostik was granted 3 patents related to projects «  NAPAPI » (from ADEME) and Franco -Belgian project 
« TECHFLAX » (Pôle IAR / FUI). They disclose biobased adhesives potentially biodegradable in presence of 
esterases. Also, 2 GRANTED patents disclosing wash-off pressure sensitive hot melt for washable labels and 
another patent for hot melt for yoghurt cups wrapping. 
Title Patent number Priority date 
Self-adhesive of renewable origin with temperature-stable adhesive power EP 2,865,728 24/10/2013 
PSA of renewable origin with temperature-stable adhesive power EP 2,865,694 24/10/2013 
Two-component lamination adhesive of renewable origin EP 2,917,256 12/11/2012 
Biodegradable hot-melt adhesive composition EP 2,245,102 14/02/2008 
HMPSA for removable self-adhesive label EP 2,164,916 29/06/2007 
Adhesive composition for removable pressure sensitive adhesive label EP 2,109,647 02/02/2017 
 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
Bostik participated in project «  NAPAPI » organized by ADEME (France) and the Franco -Belge project called 
«TECHFLAX» organized by Pôle IAR / FUI (France). 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
Being a global leading supplier of lamination adhesives to the flexible packaging industry. In its own R&D centre, 
located in Venette (Oise, France), Bostik is fully equipped to design, synthetize and formulate polymers and 
adhesives both at laboratory (liter) and pilot scale (10 – 50 L). The Venette centre is equipped with state-of-the-
art pilot scale laminating & coating equipment, which allows to test the adhesives and fine tune their application, 
to produce laminates and characterize them against all relevant application requirements (mechanical, physical, 
thermal and chemical tests).  
Also, Bostik is capable to perform LCA analysis with internal expertise since 2006. Bostik uses an expert system 
especially designed for its needs (Pwc Software TEAM V). Bostik is regularly audited (EPD) by an independent 
third party (critical review) against ISO standards.  
Bostik also benefits from the Corporate R&D resources and facilities of its mother company, Arkema, as a linked 
third party to Bostik in this project. 
 
 
Participant no. 12 Name (shortname)/ Country CARBIOLICE (CARB) / France 
Description of the legal entity  
 
Carbiolice (https://www.carbiolice.com/en/) is a start-up created in 2016 with the ambition to respond to one of 
the major environmental challenges of our decade: plastic pollution. Backed by the protection of some forty 
patents with an international coverage, Carbiolice has developed a unique, univ ersal and innovative solution in 
the form of an additive that makes biobased plastics compostable in domestic conditions and thus helps to fight 
plastic pollution through composting / organic recycling innovation is aimed at plastics and packaging applications 
which, by their nature, cannot be recycled. It is an innovative and eco -responsible alternative for achieving zero 
waste. The plastics thus designed can be assimilated to bio -waste, which will be a decisive element in the fight 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 30 of 68 
against plastic pollution but also an effective and complementary lever for the deployment of an efficient solution 
for sorting waste at source. 
CARB is the fruit of the shared, complementary ambitions of Limagrain Ingredients, a global seed company, 
CARBIOS, a green chemistry company developing enzymatic technologies, and the investment fund SPI, managed 
by Bpifrance. They have more than 15 years old experience in bio -polymers and industrial applications. They are 
focused developing a plastic economy based on circular economy. Thanks to the strategic alliance with 
Novozymes, the leading enzyme producer, CARB will have access the best-in class technologies and know-how to 
up-scale enzyme production. CARB has then developed proprietary technologies to introduce enzyme into 
polymer matrix giving birth to enzymated masterbatches. 
Main tasks 
In WP3, CARB will tailor its enzymated PLA masterbatches to reach biodegradation under mild conditions as will 
be tested in WP4 for the different targeted products where this EoL is applicable (e.g. bags, cosmetic packaging). 
They will also develop Food Contact Compliant solutions for packaging such as food tray s. Their masterbatches 
will be combined with self-reinforced PLA compounds for reaching improved properties. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
CARB dedicates to  introducing its tailored masterbatches into PLA based compounds and has an in -depth 
knowledge on enzyme encapsulation that they will bring to the project.  Internal lab and pilot equipment will be 
dedicated to the project to test the introduction of the masterbatch (extrusion, blowing extrusion, thermoforming 
or injection at pilot scale), the residual enzyme activity depending on the different processes, as well as preliminary 
composting internal tests before transferring samples to i.e. OWS. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Ms. Clementine Arnault . (female) R&D manager since November 2016. Degree in chemical engi neering (2013) 
from Ecole Nationale supérieure de Chimie de Rennes with a specialization in polymers’ formulation. After 3 years 
of experience in plastic polymers, their transforming process and applications working for a French compounder, 
she joined CARB at its inception. Her technical and industrial background are now dedicated to make CARB 
innovation a success and start working on next generation of masterbatches to enlarge application to other 
polymers. Currently R&D Manager, she manages a m ulti-disciplinary team of 10 people and make the link with 
academic and industrial partners. 
Ms. Sophie Macedo . (female). Business and alliances director since July 2018 . Master in agro -food industries 
management at ESSEC Business School (2002). Passionate by innovation and new markets development, she joins 
the Auvergne region after a first experience in the pharmaceutical industry, working for an international company, 
BAXTER Inc, specialized in critical care treatment and parenteral nutrition at sales and marketing positions. With 
a first international busines s development experience in a biotech company producing biobased alternatives by 
fermentation, Sophie is currently, Business and Alliances Director and manages the commercial deployment of the 
technology, including the validation with industrial players an d market pull by brand -owners as well as the 
partnership alliance to foster the international adoption of the technology. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
Products line: EVANESTO: an enzymated concentrate to make PLA products fully compostable 
https://www.carbiolice.com/en/. (formulation using an enzyme produced by NOVOZYMES). 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
4 patent families already published: 
Transparent multilayer films / FR3082143 – published on 13/12/19 
Plastic material with high PLA content and containing a citrate ester / WO2020/008029 
Plastic material with high PLA content and containing lactic acid oligomers / WO2020/008030 
Biodegradable polyester article comprising enzymes/ WO 2019/043134 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
Materials characterisation QC lab.  
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 31 of 68 
   
 
Pilot lines  
Coupounding line, blowing extrusion, thermoforming and injection 
 
 
Industrial line 
 
 
 
Participant no. 13 Name (shortname)/ Country SÜDPACK VERPACKUNGEN GMBH & CO.KG 
(SUDPACK) / Germany 
Description of the legal entity  
 
The Südpack Packaging Group is one of the leading manufacturers of co -extruded soft and rigid films, flexible 
plastic laminates and vacuum bags in Europe. One focus is on printing films using flexographic and rotogravure 
printing processes as well as digital printing. The main markets of the packaging manufacturer with headquarters 
in Ochsenhausen are meat and sausage products, fish, dairy products, bakery products, but also pet food and 
technical articles (non -food, medicine). Today, the Südpack Group manufactures in  five countries worldwide 
(Germany, Switzerland, France, Poland, USA) and sells its products in 73 countries. In 2017, the company had 
around 1350 employees and achieved sales of over 379 mio €.  
The company was founded in 1964 and is still family -owned, actual in the second generation. It was one of the 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 32 of 68 
first to develop plastic bags that enable controlled gas exchange and thus became a specialist for cheese maturing 
bags. The company grew steadily and opened its first foreign branches in the UK and Switzerland at the end of the 
1980s. In 1988 the subsidiary Ecoform was founded. In 2002 the company Piciotti in Bioggio, Switzerland, was 
taken over. Today, the gravure printing process competence centre is located there. Four years later, Südpack 
opened its customer centre for film development. Today, the Südpack Group focuses, among other things, on the 
area of coextrusion of high -barrier films. Special attention is paid to the development of high -performance, thin 
materials that help to save resources and thus  protect the environment. CDP Laboratories was founded in the 
north of France in 1989. After a long and close cooperation, the company was integrated into Südpack Medica in 
2005, which had been founded two years earlier. One focus of the company is the pro duction of medical sterile 
packaging in clean rooms.  
The film manufacturer's product portfolio ranges from multi -layer hard and soft films, tubular bag films and top 
films to convenience solutions for the microwave and prefabricated pouches. In addition, the company prints its 
films in-house in gravure printing with up to twelve colours and in high-quality flexo printing with up to ten colours. 
Südpack adheres to the highest hygiene and quality standards, which is reflected, for example, in certification 
according to ISO 9001 (1994), production according to HACCP guidelines (1996) and certification according to 
BRC/IOP (2003). With the help of the environmental management system according to ISO 14001 introduced in 
2009, work is being carried out on the con tinuous improvement of the resource, waste and energy balance. The 
in-house development centre offers the possibility of testing new packaging materials on various packaging 
machines. These include thermoforming machines, tray sealers, vertical and horizontal form fill and seal machines.  
Main tasks 
SUDPACK is the leader of WP5 and will upscale the material concepts to TRL6. They will produce packaging 
demonstrators at sufficient scale for product validation of MDLZ, DANONE and BDF, using their coating processes 
(protein coatings and PHA coatings), lamination (wet -chemical biobased adhesives) and printing lines. They will 
furthermore be responsible for cast-extrusion (r-bioPET) and blow-extrusion processes of biopolymers (r-PLA and 
r-bioPE).  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
SUDPACK is a leading provider of film packaging across Europe and therefore an important partner to bring the 
material concepts on the way to industrial maturity. They will build the bridge between packaging developments 
at TRL5 (conducted by RTOs IVV, AIMPLAS and CTB) and the end users (MDLZ, DANONE, BDF). As a specialized 
company for flexible multilayer packaging production, t heir R&D activities are related to all kinds of flexible 
packaging (food and medical), plastics processing (cast and blow film extrusion, thermoforming) and coating and 
printing techniques. They already have PLA based solutions, as well as packaging from recycled resources in their 
portfolio. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Matthias Schrägle (male) – is Head of Research And Development at SUDPACK since 2018. Before (2003-2018) he 
had several positions in another flexible film producing company (Huhtamaki) and was Head of Busine ss 
Development and Head of New Product Development. His research at Südpack is targeting economic and ecologic 
flexible packagings and aims on reduction and recycling of packaging materials and developments towards 
renewable sources.   
Matthias will be supported by the R&D and production staff as required. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
Products and research lines: 
1. Multipeel PET resealable film: 
https://www.suedpack.com/presse/artikel/sicher-siegelnder-allrounder/ 
2. Multiclose, an innovative packaging concept for thermoformable reclosable bags:  
https://www.suedpack.com/presse/artikel/wiederverschluss-mit-koepfchen/ 
3. Multifol G Plus – Thermoforming sheet replaces rigid packaging: https://www.kunststoffweb.de/branchen-
news/suedpack_tiefziehfolie_soll_hartverpackungen_ersetzen_t212313 
4. "xtear" tear perforation for composite films: https://www.kunststoffweb.de/branchen-
news/suedpack_aufreissperforation_xtear_fuer_verbundfolien_t237584 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 33 of 68 
5. Multipeel packaging with APET bottom film for 20% material saving: 
https://www.kunststoffweb.de/branchen-news/suedpack_multipeel-verpackung_mit_apet-
unterfolie_t228618 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. Chemcycling (prototypes of food packaging made from 100% recycled material).  
Südpack, BASF, Borealis and Zott (2020). 
2. PLA4MAP (PLA trays with improved barrier properties for use in MAP packaging for sensitive foods).  
FNR / German Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture – BMEL (2020-2023). 
3. BioBaFol: Development of novel bio-based films with special barrier properties for applications in the food 
and packaging sector. FNR / German Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture – BMEL (2019-2022). 
4. CEFLEX – a circular economy for flexible packaging. https://ceflex.eu/ 
5. Südpack “Sustainability report 2018”: 
https://www.suedpack.com/fileadmin/dummy/unternehmen/Nachhaltigkeitsbericht_Download/nachhaltigk
eitsbericht-2018-DE.pdf 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
1. Cast extrusion: The pilot plant “multiXtrusion” offers all kinds of necessary plastic extrusion techniques for 
flexibles. Mono- and multilayer cast films can be produced as cast films at high speed, with high control of 
the properties and independent from the production processes of the main plant, at film widths up to 
600mm. Cast extrusion is feasib le for film thicknesses > 20µm, so also for sheet production of 
thermoformable trays 
2. Blown film: For production of thin films with very even surface, even with the possibility of combination to 
multi-layer film structures during the production process, the blown-film pilot plant will be used. The film 
properties achieved by this process allow deposition of inorganic barrier layers. 
3. Coating / lamination / printing : All three processes will be demonstrated on an in -line pilot plant (flexo 
printing and coating). The processes can be run on soft films (e.g. for pouches), hard films (for trays) or 
cardboard < 300g/m2.  
4. Application technology centre:  
Extensive packaging and production tests can be realized in the application technology centre, such as 
thermoforming of trays, sealing tests of pouches or packing-specific mechanical testing (e.g. T-peel testing). 
 
 
Participant no. 14 Name (shortname)/ Country Graphic Packaging International (GPI) / 
Belgium 
Description of the legal entity  
  
Graphic Packaging International was founded 100+ years ago and is now one of the world’s largest manufacturers 
of folding cartons, unbleached paperboard, coated recycled board, flexible packaging, microwave packaging and 
of related machinery systems. GPI is a design -led provider of packaging solutions to the food, beverage and 
consumer markets including personal care, household and pet care sectors among others . The product portfolio 
includes cups, trays, foodservice packaging, folding cartons, cooking solutions, strength pac kaging and 
paperboard.  
GPI combine s market-specific expertise and innovative thinking to create inspired packaging  tailored to each 
customer’s needs . Embedded in a holistic vision of sustainability, GPI’s mission is to  provide nature-based 
packaging based renewable and/or recycled materials to improve the environment. Designing for the Environment 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 34 of 68 
(DfE) is in fact a central tenant of our innovation process and our raw materials come from sustainably managed 
forests. We also partner with our value chain to improve the  recycling of fibre -based products and the  use of 
recovered fibres. We are member of a number of industry alliances striving towards improving our industry such 
as 100% Recycled Paperboard Alliance, Recycled Paper Technical Association (RPTA), Pack2Go Europe, CEPI and 
4evergreen, a recently launched industry alliance to boost the contribution of fibre-based packaging in a circular 
economy. 
Globally, GPI has 19,000 employees spread across 77 converting facilities and 9 mills. In Europe, GPI has 14 
production sites and is headquartered in Brussels. 
Main tasks 
GPI will mainly be involved in WP5 where they will upscale the production  of carton and fibres-based packaging 
for Danone. They will compare the resulting materials with standard counterparts. They will also test the 
recyclability of the developed s olution in WP4. They will finally contribute with data in terms of state of the art 
and specifications in WP1, in terms of LCA in WP6, and in terms of market in WP7. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
PRESERVE aligns with a number of GPI’s Su stainability goals set in GPI’s Sustainability Vision 2025 (to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by 15%, to have 100% of GPI Products Recyclable and reduce LDPE use by 40% by 2025,  
more details in Sustainability and Social Responsibility Report Update 2018).  
GPI has in depth knowledge in terms of coatings, polymers, adhesives, and paper substrates, extensive in-house 
formulation experience in solvent -borne, water -based, and energy -curable coating chemistries.  They have 
equipment for c hemical, structural and mechanical analysis of substrates  and unique new packaging designs  
capabilities and market understanding. They also have a strong IP portfolio counting with 2200 patents. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Tom Garsed  (male): Business Unit Director at Graphic Packaging International  Europe since 2014. 20 years’ 
experience in the fibre packaging sector. BA in marketing from Birmingham City University. 
Luis Apodaca (male): EU New Product Development Technical Manager at Graphic Packaging International Europe. 
Food chemist graduated in 2009 from the national autonomous university of Mexico , with a Diploma on Quality 
Systems Management and in-depth experience in development of food packaging for different companies (Kraft 
food/ Mondelez, Campbell soup, Dairy Crest). 
They will be supported as needed by sustainability specialists, production and lab staff.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
Recently launched products: 
1. PaperSeal™ Innovation launched in February 2020 to Increase Food Tray Recyclability to replace 
Modified Atmosphere (MAP) and Vacuum Skin Packaging (VSP) plastic trays with a new barrier-lined 
paperboard alternative 
 
2. ecotainer™: hot and cold foodservice packaging that have plant-based, compostable or easily recyclable 
barrier coatings which eliminate plastic film barrier linings.  
 
3. KeelClip™: proprietary recyclable paperboard solution replacement for the ubiquitous plastic rings and 
shrink wrap film used in beverage packaging with a superior sustainability profile.  
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 35 of 68 
4. Packaging Award at the 2016 Foodservice Footprint Awards for plastic-free version of the iconic KFC 
food bucket.  
5. RISI PPI (Pulp & Paper International) Award in recognition of the innovative FruitPack™ solution for 
sustainable fresh produce packaging. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
Internal innovation lines and customers driven developments such as:  
• Fully compostable or recyclable grease and moisture resistant coatings. 
• PET lamination replacement using alternative biopolymers as renewable & compostable / recyclable 
solutions but providing similar temperature resistance & sealability. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
In Europe, most trials are performed at the design and innovation centres in Brandon and Leeds (UK) as well as in 
the development Kitchen in Igualada (Spain). 
The pilot plants available at GPI globally for new product development include: 
Printing 
• Waterbased flexography (4 stations) 
• Waterbased Gravure (2 stations) 
Laminating 
• Waterbased adhesive lamination (wet-bond) 
• Waterbased adhesive lamination (dry-bond) 
• Extrusion and extrusion coating 
Gluing 
• Cold-glue sealing 
• Hot-melt sealing 
• Heat-seal sealing 
• Flame-sealing 
• Skiving/hemming 
• Inserting 
Windowing 
• Clear film application 
• Barrier paper/foil application 
• Registered patch application 
Prototyping 
• Webbed corner container 
• Glued-end container 
• Form/Fill/Sealing applications 
Pressed-Bowl/Tray Forming Capacity 
Cutting 
• 1-up clam-shell cutting 
• Sheet-fed die-cutting 
• Rotary cutting 
• Slitting 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 36 of 68 
  
 
 
Participant No.  15 Name (short name)/ Country SIBO G d.o.o (SIBO) / Slovenia  
Description of the legal entity  
  
The company SIBO G d.o.o. (www.sibo-group.eu) is one of Europe’s biggest manufacturer of caps and closures in 
Europe, as well as pharmaceutical containers and thin wall packaging like coffee capsules, in all cases by injection 
moulding. Besides the main business of packaging, SIBO also produces medical devices in a clean room production 
and technical components. It also has its own tool shop where  it produces all the injection moulds for own 
production and also for export. 
In relation to some of the company’s history and milestones: 1967 Foundation of the company, producing plastics 
for the cosmetic industry; 1994 Expansion to foreign markets, moving to a larger factory, producing parts for 
automotive, household and food industries; 2004 Constant growth and professionalisation, again moving to a 
larger factory; 2007 Transfer of producing auto transfusion kit, Sorin; 2008 Establishment of the clean room facility 
with ISO14644, class 8, starting producing medical devices; 2008 Acquisition of injection moulding unit Betts UK; 
2009 Moving to a larger factory with 16,700 m 2 and 180 employees; 2011 President and CEO Boštjan Šifrar 
becomes Slovenian Entrepreneur of the year; 2011 Acquisition of injection blow moulding unit from Lajovic Tuba; 
2013 Company’s best year with 2.85 billion components made; 2014 Acquisition of Kittel company. 
High environmental standards: Zero use of fossil fuels for heating, by re-using waste heat from the production 
• Utilizing modern technology reduces energy consumption and emissions of heat, dust and noise 
The Quality Management System is certified according to the international standard  
ISO 9001/2008 and it respects the following guidelines: Good Manufacturing Practice GMP; Requirements for 
Medical Devices ISO 13485; Sampling Procedures for Inspection ISO 2859-1; Environmental Management System 
ISO 14001; Health and Safety Management System OHSAS 18001; Standard for Clean Room Production ISO 14644, 
Class 8 
Main tasks 
In WP5, SIBO will develop the upscale production of the injected demonstrators (jar and small bottle for BDF) from 
the upcycled bioplastics. They will as such tune the mould so that it is suitable to the properties of the developed 
materials, characterise the resulting packaging in comparison with existing benchmarks. If needed, they can also 
perform co-injection. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
Being one of the leading tube shoulder producers with capacity for injecting multi-materials, and receiving a lot of 
demands for more sustainable and recyclable options than currently used EVOH, SIBO is very suited to match the 
tasks assigned to it. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
BLAŽ OSTERMAN. B.Sc. of mechanical en gineering. CTO. In 2010 he graduated from the Faculty of mechanical 
engineering in Ljubljana. In 2011 he was employed in SIBO G, which also provided his student scholarship. During 
his studies he already worked in the company in the field of injection moulding technology. His work in production 
optimization greatly increased productivity and reduced the amount of scrap. In 2011 he was promoted to a newly 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 37 of 68 
established research and development team. His tasks were solving problems and optimisation on injection 
moulding lines. During that time he managed round 20 R&D projects and was actively engaged in 5. In 2012 along 
with the work in R&D he became the management of the department of injection technology. In April 2013 he 
also became the manager of the whole department of thermoplastics, which includes production, maintenance, 
IT and injection technology, making him the company CTO. 
UROŠ POGAČNIK. M.Sc. of mechanical engineering, Toll shop and R&D manager. During his studies he was actively 
involved in the work process o f the company tool shop, firstly in the final assembly, later in the automated 
processes of the tool shop. With his work he largely increased the efficiency of the electro -erosion machines. At 
the end of his studies he joined the design department as a res earcher. After a year he became an independent 
researcher. His work was to develop new products and moulds in the field of caps and closures or technical 
components, optimisation of technical processes, implementation of new technologies, etc. In October 2 011 he 
became the R&D manager. In April 2013 he took over the manager position of the tool shop. He manages the tool 
shop production, R&D, design and new mould sampling. In 2013 he finished his master’s degree. 
JANEZ PINTAR. Senior technologist. He is in the company since 1990. Currently he is the head of technology for 
injection of technical and medical components. His extensive experience in the field of injection moulding makes 
him an indispensable at solving problems and optimizi ng new and existing processes. He regularly attends 
seminars and trainings and then combined with his knowledge forwards it to his co-workers. 
NEJC LUŠINA, B.Eng., project manager. In 2007 he graduated as a bachelor of mechanical engineering. First , he 
worked in the company Iskra OTC in the measurement lab. Later he was also responsible for maintaining the ISO 
quality standards. He was introduced to the working of moulds for injection moulding, pressure casting, machining 
and deep forming of sheet metal. Currently he is employed in SIBO for 3 years, where he first worked in problem 
solving for mould technology. Now he works in managing large scale projects such as transfers of moulds and 
validation processes. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or pr oducts, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
1. 1. POGAČNIK, Uroš, KOPAČ, Janez. Tehnologija izdelave plastične embalaže za farmacijo/Production technology of 
plastic packaging for pharmace utical industry. Druga konferenca inženirjev strojništva Slovenije:  zbornik 
posvetovanja, Portorož, 11. In 12. November 2008, Zbornik konference, str. 93-100 
2. 2. POGAČNIK, Uroš, KOPAČ, Janez. Razvoj plastične embalaže za farmacijo/Development of plastic packaging for 
pharmaceutical industry. Industrijski forum IRT 2009: zbornik foruma , Portorož, 8. in 9. June 2009, Zbornik 
konference, str. 153-158. [COBISS:SI-ID 10981659] 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
As a major European convertor of tube shoulders and injected jars for pharma with strategic business interest to 
become more competitive through sustainable innovation, SIBO normally performs R&D internally for improving 
injection processes  or developing customised solutions for its customers , but was recently partner of the EU 
funded project: 
OPTINANOPRO (GA nº 686116) ‘Processing and control of novel nanomaterials in packaging, automotive and solar 
panel processing lines’ - H2020 PILOT. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
SIBO has the following infrastructure based over two production locations: Four production halls; Production 
according to GMP; Clean room ISO 14644 class 8; Machine Park; 83 injection moulding machines; 1 2K co-injection 
moulding machine, 5 injection blow moulding machines; 1 extrusion blow moulding machine; 18 robots; 13 
assembly machines; Clean room; ISO 14644, class 8 on 740m 2 ; 7 fully electric machines equipped with linear 
robots; 5 injection blow moulding machines; 1 extrusion blow moulding machine; Clamping Force from 50 to 380 
t; Tool shop; 35 high technology processing machine s; Tool testing centr e with 3 sampling injection moulding 
machines and measurement lab and 41 highly qualified technical staff 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 38 of 68 
 
 
 
Participant no. 16 Name (shortname)/ Country Groupe Danone SA (DANONE)/ France 
Description of the legal entity  
 
Danone, a company of more than 100 000 employees, present in the 5 continents, is dedicated to bringing health 
through food to as many people as possible (our mission), Danone is a leading global food & beverages company 
with a health-focused portfolio of iconic global and unique local brands across the world.  
At Danone, we aim to inspire healthier and more sustainable eating and drinking practices, in line with our vision 
-Danone, One Planet. One Health - reflecting our strong belief that the health of people and the health of the 
planet are interconnected. 
Danone strive to be a game -changer to foster positive solutions for the planet by committing to sustainable 
sourcing for all our ingredients and to enhance the circular economy of packaging. Danone is committed to deliver 
to all our consumers around the world safe product in an innovative, convenient & fully recyclable packaging. 
Danone’s total turnover is 25,3 M€ in 2019 
Danone Nutricia Research is committed to Danone’s mission, with more 1 500 people in over 60 countries. 
Main tasks 
In WP1, Danone will support the definition of the packaging requirements and in WP 5, Danone will characterize 
packaging developed in the framework of the project (WP3,4) and validate its suitability for storing different food 
products. They will finally contribute to the consumer perception study and exploitation and dissemination 
planned in WP7. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 39 of 68 
Danone has a matrix of multidisciplinary knowledge groups in the company with strong expertise in materials 
development and their processing into food packaging. With its team and resources, including pilot plant with 
transformation machinery, characterisation and quality laboratory, and its broad external network, Danone can 
carry out the transformation of materials into packaging and its food safety validation. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Dr. JESUS MAZA LIZA (male). Flexible Packaging End of Use Development Manager. After having obtained his 
chemical engineering degree, he obtained his master’s degree in Materials Science. He holds a PhD in Polymer 
Chemistry from University of Pau. During h is PhD he developed new bio -based polymers. Jesús confirmed his 
ability to perform high -quality research both in industrial and academic environments during his two post 
doctorate missions. 
Dr. PATRICK HUBER (male). Patrick Huber is Paper-based materials development manager at Danone. Previously, 
he has been with Centre Technique du Papier, Grenoble for the past 15 years, as a project leader in the Materials 
structuring group. He holds a PhD and Engineering degree in Materials and Chemical Engineering from INP-
Grenoble. He is co-inventor of several patents, in the field of nano-cellulose based packaging solutions. He has co-
authored 30 articles in peer -reviewed journals. He will be putting his expertise in the fields of cellulose -based 
packaging materials to the service of the project. 
CAROLINE WOLF (female). Bioplastics Development Manager. Engineering degree (2011) in Materials Science 
(ESIL). PhD (2014) in Process Engineering (Université de Montpellier II). Skills in the development of biomaterials 
for packaging applications. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
1. Expertise in the production of flexible film by several film process technologies – especially recyclable and 
biodegradable films 
2. Expertise in the mechanical, physical and chemical characterisation of raw materials and packaging film 
3. Know-how of technical r equirements regarding the packaging film performance and their process ability on 
packaging lines 
4. Expertise in certification and standardisation of plastic film 
5. Paper coating technology, paper recycling, design of multi-layer paper-based laminates  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
Internal research programmes and collaborations with the value chain on increasing the sustainability of used 
packaging and conventional plastics replacement. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
Our R&D laboratories are equipped with pilot lines and characterisation equipment for raw materials and 
packaging testing 
 
 
Participant no. 17 Name (shortname)/ Country MONDELEZ DEUTSCHLAND R&D GMBH 
Germany (MONDELEZ)/Germany 
Description of the legal entity  
 
 
 
MONDELEZ (https://www.mondelezinternational.com ) is one of the world’s largest snack companies with global 
net revenues of $25.9 billion and net earnings of $3.9 billion in 2019. We make and sell primarily snacks, including 
biscuits (cookies, crackers and salted snacks), chocolate, gum & candy, as well as various cheese & grocery and 
powdered beverage products. We have operations in approximately 80 countries and sell our products in over 
150 countries around the world.  
The aim of the company is to be the global leader in snacking by focusing on growth,  execution and culture and 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 40 of 68 
leveraging our strong foundation of iconic global and local brands, an attractive global footprint, and deep 
innovation, marketing and distribution capabilities. 
Our 2020 sustainability goals aim to place us at the forefront in t he fight against climate change with ambitious 
targets for an end-to-end approach to reduce our carbon footprint, including reducing our absolute CO2 emissions 
from manufacturing and addressing deforestation in key raw material supply chains. We are workin g to cut our 
absolute water footprint in manufacturing, focusing on priority sites where water is most scarce. We also 
continue to work on reducing waste in manufacturing and packaging. 
Our plan to drive long-term growth includes three strategic priorities:  
• Accelerate consumer-centric growth:  As demands on consumers’ time increase and consumer eating habits 
evolve, we aim to meet consumers' snacking needs by providing the right snack, for the right moment, made 
the right way. We have developed innovative approaches to identify and address how consumers snack 
across different emotional and functional needs and occasions that we believe will allow us to meet their 
needs and identify new innovation and renovation opportunities. We plan to test, learn and scal e new 
product offerings quickly to meet diverse and evolving local and global snacking demand. We believe our 
understanding of consumers’ behaviour will continue to lead to our meeting more of their needs and the 
growing demand for snacks and that PRESERVE could meet the aspirations of our customers to better protect 
our environment. 
• Drive operational excellence:   Our operational excellence and continuous improvement plans include a 
special focus on the consumer facing areas of our business and optimizing our sales, marketing and customer 
service efforts. At the same time, we are continuing our efforts to sustainably source key ingredients, reduce 
our end -to-end environmental impact and innovate our processes and packaging to reduce waste and 
promote recycling. 
• Build a winning growth culture:  To support the acceleration of our growth, we are becoming more agile, 
digital and local-consumer focused.  
We believe these shifts will help drive profitable top -line growth. We run our business with a long -term 
perspective, and we believe the successful implementation of our strategic plan will drive top - and bottom-line 
growth and enable us to create long-term value for our shareholders. 
Main tasks 
The main role of MONDELEZ in the project would be to take advantage of their experience and expertise from 
their leadership on the snack packaging market, specifically defining specifications and validation of bio packaging 
for snack and cheese products  in WP5. They will also support the definition of the specifications for selected 
Preserve packaging formats in WP1.  They will finally contribute to the consumer per ception study and 
exploitation and dissemination planned in WP7. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
We purchase and use significant quantities of packaging materials to package our products. We monitor 
worldwide supply, commodity cost and currency trends so we can cost -effectively secure ingredients and 
packaging. Moreover, we track regulatory developments in various jurisdictions relating to the use of plastic in 
packaging materials and taxes linked to the costs of waste  so that we can comply with evolving requirements. 
Based on information currently available, we believe that our compliance with environmental laws and 
regulations will not have a material effect on our financial results, but the involvement in PRESERVE pr oject will 
contribute to secure that compliance of future regulations linked to Circular Economy. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Ms. Emmanuelle Toubin (Female): Senior Group Leader in Research Development at Mondelēz International in 
Meals packaging since May 2018: She is leading the packaging research and development department for EU for 
cheese & grocery business, for growth, margin management, quality improve ment & sustainability programs, 
based out of centre of excellence in Munich. She is working for Mondelēz Int.  since January 1999.  
Mr. Michael Stumpf  (Male): Global SME leader Fibre based packaging at Mondelez International. He is leading 
the global Produ ctivity team for fibre based packaging (Corrugated & Folding Carton material).  
Developing and implementation of Global Paper Strategy in alignment with the Global Procurement Directors.  
Leveraging Paper Fibre (Corrugated & Paperboard) based Packaging desig n and technologies to implement 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 41 of 68 
Productivity, but also Quality improvement and Sustainability initiatives with relevant business impact across 
Mondelez globally. Working in collaboration with R&D Category Packaging, Global Procurement and Operations, 
as well with key vendors/suppliers and other external Partners (like Universities, Start-up companies).  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
1. GREEN PACKAGING Patent nº US 8.445,088 B2 
Our portfolio includes iconic snack brands such as Cadbury, Milka and Toblerone chocolate; Oreo, belVita and LU 
biscuits; Halls candy; Trident gum and Tang powdered beverages and the following 2 products were selected to 
validate the materials from the project: 
- Philadelphia cheese with plastics packaging 
- Chocolate bars with plastics packaging 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. Cadbury Purely paper Packaging : Mondelez trials its ‘world-first’ plastic-free packaging in Australia 
2. Paranaque recyclable packaging facility in Philippines 
All in all, PRESERVE is aligned with our main internal innovation lines to reach our 2025 sustainability and mindful 
snacking goals: 
• Minimizing food waste, end-to-end CO2 emissions and priority water usage by 2025 
• Making all packaging recyclable by 2025 to further reduce our environmental footprint 
• Including portion amounts and mindful snacking information on all packages globally by 2025 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
We pursue four objectives in research and development: food safety and quality, growth through new products, 
superior consumer satisfaction and reduced production costs. Our innovation efforts focus on anticipating 
consumer demands and adapting quickly to changing market trends. Wellbeing and sustainability are a significant 
focus of our current research and development initiatives. These initiatives aim to accelerate our growth and 
margins by addressing consumer needs and market trends and leveraging scala ble innovation platforms, 
sustainability programs and initiatives as well as breakthrough technologies. On December 31, 2019, we had 
approximately 126 manufacturing and processing facilities in 44 countries and 110 distribution centres and 
depots worldwide that we owned or leased. In addition to our owned or leased properties, we also utilize a highly 
distributed network of warehouses and distribution centres that are owned or leased by third party logistics 
partners, contract manufacturers, co-packers or other strategic partners.  
MDLZ is equipped with different testing sites. I n our German site  hosting the Meals centr e of excellence, all 
testing and packing equipment needed for the validation of the Philadelphia cheese packaging is available 
whereas the chocolate applications will be tested using the  resources and facilities available in MDLZ’s Poland 
and UK sites. 
 
 
Participant no. 18 Name (shortname)/ Country Beiersdorf AG (BDF)/ Germany 
Description of the legal entity  
 
Beiersdorf AG is a Germany-based manufacturer of chemical consumer goods, with a focus on personal products 
and cosmetics. The Company operates through two business segments: Consumer and tesa. The Consumer 
business segment provides skin and beauty care pr oducts, such as all-purpose skin creams, face, body and hand 
creams, lip care sticks, deodorants, soaps, shampoos, adhesive and other bandages, among others. The tesa 
business segment is involved in developing, manufacturing and marketing self-adhesive products and solutions for 
industry, craft businesses and consumers under the tesa brand. The Company also has its own research and 
development department. Beiersdorf AG is active through more than 150 subsidiaries worldwide. It is majority -
owned by Maxingvest AG. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 42 of 68 
Main tasks 
In WP1, BDF will support the definition of the packaging requirements for cosmetic products and in WP5, they will 
test and perform validation of bio -based packaging solutions with the packaging from SRM. They will finally 
contribute to the consumer perception study and exploitation and dissemination planned in WP7. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
BDF uses plastic, glass, metal, cardboard or paper in products packaging to reduce material use while maintaining 
stability and quality. This yields more than just economic benefits. Every stage of the packaging life -cycle offers 
potential savings that can make a substantial contribution to environmental protection. This includes low-energy 
production technologies, reduced transportation, and waste minimization. Since 2009, sustainability has been 
strategically anchored in cosmetic packaging development processes. The goal is to apply the sustainability criteria 
of "avoid, reduce, reuse and recycle" to all of packaging innovations. To identify the reduction of the environmental 
impact of packaging, Beiersdorf use s Life-Cycle Analyses. These help the company to understand how resource -
friendly processes can give rise to environmentally friendly innovations. As such they will bring high sustainability 
culture to PRESERVE and be able to guide the research towards new upcycled packaging fitting their strategy. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Dr. Mariana Pereda  (female). Material Expert at Beiersdorf since 2019. Previously Researcher at INRA (France), 
INTEMA (Argentina) where she developed films for food made from bio-based materials. She has a PhD in Material 
Science regarding Natural polymers as materials for food packaging and Food Engineering. 
She will be supported by the R&D and production staff as required. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
The brand portfolio includes NIVEA, Eucerin and La Prairie, which constitute the Company’s core brands, as well 
as regional and local brands, such as Hansaplast, Labello, Florena and Hidrofugal, among others. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
Internal research programmes on sustainable packaging alternatives. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
Infrastructure for: 
-Methods, technologies and test designs to demonstrate the effectiveness of cosmetic products. 
-Bulk compatibility test 
-Determining the compatibility and stability of existing or new packaging (e.g. new geometry, new packaging 
materials such as plastic resins, etc.) in correlation with existing, new formulations or new formula technologies. 
The test method comprises testing:  
1) The material compatibility and stability of a packaging system in correlation with an existing or new 
formula technology (new base formula). Hereby the formula is organoleptic checked as to its properties 
and the new packaging system is visually checked as to its properties.  
2) Weight loss in%. 
3) Light stability. 
4) Perfume testing. 
5) The packaging system regarding appearance and function. Comparison with sufficient reference samples 
as control for bulk compatibility and perfume stability is required. For details please refer to standard 
ancol stability test. 
 
 
Participant no. 19 Name (shortname)/ Country ORGANIC WASTE SYSTEMS NV (OWS) 
/ Belgium 
Description of the legal entity  
 
 
 
OWS is a stock company under Belgian law, constituted in 1988. The company is active in the following areas: 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 43 of 68 
• Engineering, construction and operation of composting and anaerobic digestion plants 
• Biological consulting, support, analysis and research with regard to anaerobic digestion (incl. pre - and 
post-treatment) 
• Biodegradation and composting laboratory testing 
• Waste management consulting 
• Life cycle analysis performance 
• Biological research in the development of a carboxylic acid platform for organic waste treatment 
• Biological research in gas fermentation and chain elongation for carbon capture and utilization 
application 
 
OWS developed the anaerobic DRANCO process to treat several types of organic waste streams. In the last decade 
OWS also offers processes for energy crops (DRANCO -FARM and BES reactor types). OWS has experience with 
the anaerobic digestion of several types of urban biowaste, energy crops, manure and industrial side streams. 
Moreover, the OWS contract research laboratory division has a longstanding experience in the field of 
biodegradation and compostability testing. OWS has tested more than 3000 products in this field for more than 
800 different clients.  
Main tasks 
OWS will lead WP4 and perform biodegradation, organic recycling and home composting on selected packaging 
materials from WP2, 3 and 5. They will also support the standardization and policy outreach tasks in WP7. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
OWS is recognized as testing lab for biodegradation and organic recycling by all certification institutes world -
wide. The lab is recognized as testing lab on compostability and biodegradation by all certification institutes 
worldwide (TÜV AUSTRIA Belgium, Din Certco, BPI, ABA, etc). OWS was, and still is, actively involved in the 
development of test procedures (and international standards) to evaluate the biodegradation of materials under 
different environments (compost, soil, anaerobic, water, marine). 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Mr. BRUNO DE WILDE  (Male), lab manager, Master in bioscience engineering with a specialization in 
environmental technology at the State University of Gent and started working in OWS at 1989. He is the author  
or co -author of many scientific articles on biodegradation and compostability. For many years he has been 
actively involved in several standardization committees such as ISO, CEN and DIN in the field of biodegradable 
and compostable materials. He is also a member of the Certification Committee Biodegradable Materials of DIN 
CERTCO (Germany). 
Mr. STEVEN VERSTICHEL  (Male), lab project manager, Master of Science in bioscience engineering with a 
specialization in environmental technology at the State University of Gent. He is the author or co-author of several 
scientific articles on biodegradation and compostability. He star ted working at OWS at 1999 and is head of BCE 
(Biodegradation, Compostability and Ecotoxicity) department. Within OWS he is responsible for organization of 
EU projects. 
Ms. NIKE MORTIER  (Female), lab project manager, Master of Science in bioscience enginee ring with a 
specialization in environmental technology at the State University of Gent. She started working in 2008 and is 
project manager for compostability and ecotoxicity testing and was responsible for EU-projects as FP7 KBBPS and 
FP7 OPEN -BIO. She was  and is active in several standardization committees on biodegradation. She is also 
representative of ECOS (European Environmental Citizens Organization for Standardization) in standardization 
groups on biodegradation and participated as expert in the Comm ittee for Risk Assessment of ECHA (European 
Chemicals Agency) on the restriction on intentionally added microplastics. 
Ms. Eveline Beeckman (female) is Master of Science in bioscience engineering with a specialization in 
environmental technology at the Sta te University of Gent. She started working in 2019 and is project manager 
for biodegradation testing within OWS. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
1. De Wilde, B., Mortier, N., Verstichel, S., Briassoulis, D., Babou, M., Mistriotis, A. & Hiskakis, M. (2013). 
Report on current relevant biodegradation and ecotoxicity standards. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 44 of 68 
2. Six L., Velghe F. Verstichel S. and De Meester S. (2016). Sustainability Considerations on the Valorization 
of Organic Waste. Book Elsevier: Biotransformation of Agricultural Waste and By -Products. The Food, 
Feed, Fiber, Fuel (4F) Economy, Chapter 11, Pages 287-305. 
3. Seggiani M., Cinelli P., Verstichel S., Puccini M., Vitolo S., Anguillesi I., Lazzeria A. (2015). Development of 
Fibres-Reinforced Biodegradable Composites. Chemical Engineering Transactions Vol. 43, 1813 – 1818. 
4. Mortier N., Velghe F. and Verstichel S. (2016). Organic Recycling of Agricultural Waste Today: Composting 
and Anaerobic Digestion. Book Elsevier: Biotransformation of Agricultural Waste and By -Products. The 
Food, Feed, Fiber, Fuel (4F) Economy, Chapter 4, Pages 69-122. 
5. Biodegradable Plastic Blends Create New Possibilities for End -of-Life Management of Plastics but They 
Are Not a Panacea for Plastic Pollution. Tanja Narancic, Steven Verstichel, Srinivasa Reddy Chaganti, Laura 
Morales-Gamez, Shane T. Kenny, Bruno De Wilde, Ramesh Babu Padam ati, and Kevin E. O’Connor. 
Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52 (18), pp 10441–10452. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. SYNPOL ‘Biopolymers from syngas fermentation’ - FP7 -OWS was responsible for biodegradability and 
compostability (organic recycling) testing, ecotoxicity, LCA. 
2. OPEN-BIO ‘Opening bio-based markets via standards, labelling and procurement’ - FP7 -Biodegradability 
procedures in all kind of environments with specific attention to marine conditions, organic recycling 
(composting, anaerobic digestion), ecotoxicity.  
3. OPTINANOPRO ‘Processing and control of novel nanomaterials in packaging, automotive and solar panel 
processing lines’ - H2020 - Work OWS involved biodegradation and organic recycling and LCA. 
4. AGRIMAX ‘Agri and food waste valorisation co -ops based on flexible multi -feedstocks biorefinery 
processing technologies for new high added value applications’ - H2020 -. OWS was responsible for 
biodegradation and compostability testing and LCA. 
5. BIOnTop ‘Novel packaging films and textiles with tailored end of life and performance based on bio-based 
copolymers and coatings’ – H2020 – Biodegradation and organic recycling and LCA 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
1. OWS has incubation rooms for composting vessels and reactors, allowing incubation at different 
temperatures. OWS has also equipment for biodegradation tests in all kind of environments: compost, 
anaerobic, soil, water, marine, etc. 
 
2. OWS has a Growth chamber for plant growth tests, acclimated room for animal ecotoxicity tests (e.g. 
earthworms, daphnia, algae), and analytical equipments for compost analyses (drying oven, muffle 
furnace, titrators, pH -meters, centrifuge, manual and automatic sieves, gas chromatographs, 
spectrophotometer, AAS, ICP, flow injection analyser, grinding equipment, TOC analyser, etc.). 
 
 
Participant no. 20 Name (shortname)/ Country Pla.to GmbH (PLATO)/ Germany 
Description of the legal entity  
  
Pla.to ( https://www.plato-technology.de/en/home.html) is a globally active machine manufacturer and plant 
engineering company located in Goerlitz - Germany. PLA.TO is a market leader in systems for long lasting recycling 
equipment. Their equipment is built basically in wear resistant steel materials.  They divide their service into two 
basic scopes: 
1) Engineering: they provide close council to the costumer regarding suitable processes and sequence of 
processes, equipment and adaptations to fulfil their needs. Also, they provide assess on a correct 
parameter selection, targeting the optimal throughput performance while achieve the best results. In 
addition, they construct a 3D layout of the new processing system.  
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 45 of 68 
2) Technical centre: they create as many samples as possible from client’s plastic, and test them in t heir 
machines. Basically, they do field testing under production conditions.  
Main tasks 
PLATO will design a pilot line for delamination, separation and purification of multilayer materials for allowing 
their further recycling in WP4.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
Pla.to is a specialized engineering and machine making company for cleaning, washing, separation and drying of 
all types of waste plastics. Besides the solutions for materials like HDPE and PET bottles, LDPE and stretch film, we 
are focusing on multilayer films. Pla.to offers pro ven technologies and individual concepts. We supply both, 
components and turn -key plants. We develop for our partners ecological and innovative processes. Beside s 
cleaning, we are a competent partner for chemical processing and waste water treatment systems. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
DI Heinz R. Schnettler  (male) is Managing Director of Pla.to GmbH in Germany. He has an engineer degree in 
Plastics Technology from the RWTH Aachen and started his professional career 1992 at “Der Grüne Punkt – Duales 
System” as project engineer (“The green dot – dual system”: network of industry-funded systems for recycling the 
packaging materials of consumer goods). 1995-1997 he was Product Manager at DKR German Society for Plastics 
Recycling GmbH and from 1997 -2003 Technical Manager at “Der Grüne Punkt”. Since 2003 he is head of 
technology at Pla.to, since 2006 he holds the main shares of the company (MBO).  He will coordinate the tasks of 
Pla.to in this project. 
DI Swanhild Thürmer  (female) has an engineer degree in Mechanical and Power Engineering from University of 
Applied Sciences Ulm and further academic qualifications in the field of Energy and Environmental Technology 
(University of Applied Sciences Zittau/Görlitz, Institut Universita ire de technology Belfort -Monbéliard). After 
research stays and internships abroad (France, Poland, China, Southeast Asia and Australia) in the field of Energy 
and Process Engineering, she started in 2014 at Pla.to. Here she is Project Manager for Processing Technology and 
Plant Design. She will provide operational support to the project in terms of construction and design of recycling 
machine prototypes. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
Relevant solutions: 
1. DRY CLEANING: cleaning without water. At the heart of our innovative mechanical dry-cleaning technology is 
a high-speed centrifuge. Acceleration and impact forces inside the centrifuge cause paper to break down and 
contaminations to be spun off from plastics. Not a drop of water is used in this process, allowing to save money 
on water supply and wastewater management. In addition, the waste volume is reduced by at least 50%, which 
is especially important given the ever-rising cost of waste disposal. 
2. HYDRO POWER WASHING: The first cleaning phase for the plastic waste begins with the Friction Washer, which 
uses a large volume of circulating water in a constant cycle. This gives the contaminations a good soaking and 
makes it easier to remove during the second cleaning phase. The high -intensity washer then gives the pre -
washed plastics a thorough, final cleaning. The contaminations are removed by means of powerful frict ion 
between the screen basket and the rotors in the centrifuge. The force applied by the cleaning system is strong 
enough to remove even difficult dirt. No additional water is required during this phase and the plastic is 
dewatered alongside the cleaning process 
3. MECHANICAL DRYING: High peripheral speeds are needed to spin water from these surfaces. The extra -long 
Pla.to rotor optimises drying efficiency by allowing the film particles to remain inside the dryer for an especially 
long time. The machine also h as an integrated fan in a wear -resistant design that generates a powerful air 
flow. The fan sucks the film through the machine while also taking up the evaporating water. At the same time, 
residual debris is removed from the surfaces through friction. The cleaning system automatically removes dirt 
particles together with the spun off water from the dryer. 
4. THERMAL DRYING: Pla.to Thermal Dryers achieve outstanding drying results by applying hot air to the wet 
plastic in a highly intensive process. The machine surfaces are thermally insulated to minimise heat losses. 
5. DENSITY SEPARATION WITH THE HYDROCYCLONE: the process guarantees a precise separation for a greater 
product quality.  
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 46 of 68 
6. ZIG-ZAG ASPIRATOR: The most common example is the removal of labels from PET bottles. The thick PET flakes 
need to be collected, while the  labels need to go. The Zig -Zag Aspirator uses an air flow to suck up the 
lightweight labels. The heavier plastic pieces fall to the bottom. Another advantage is that the shredded 
material is dust free, which is a huge gain in further processing 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1) Recyclist / Green Moon / Green Moon DE:   Bottle-2-bottle HDPE recycling for Nivea cosmetic bottles 
(2018-2020): Joint project between Pla.to, Beiersdorf and Fraunhofer (IVV, IWKS). 
https://www.ivv.fraunhofer.de/en/news/nivea-recyclist.html 
2) SAM-SORT: Aerodynamic conditioning of film composites for the selective separation of plastics.  (2019-
2022). Funded by European Regional Development Fund (EFRE) and the Sächsische Aufbaubank: 
https://www.plato-technology.de/fileadmin/user_upload/News-Presse/Pressemitteilung-20191122.pdf 
3) Development of a triboelectric process for the treatment of films from the floating fraction  from the 
recycling of plastics according to the German Packaging Ordinance (2003-2005). German Federal Ministry 
of Ecucation and Research - BMBF/PTJ. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
Example of available equipment: 
   
  
 
 
Participant no. 22 Name (shortname)/ Country ROMEI SRL (ROMEI) / ITALY 
Description of the legal entity  
 
Romei company is specialized in post -industrial plastic scraps recycling. The company was established in 1983 
upon the unique initiative of Renzo Romei who managed to foresee the possibility to develop a new business in 
the plastic recycling that, at that time, was an unexplored market.   
With over 30-years’ experience, ROMEI built a deep and efficient know -how of the plastic recycling processes: 
the company collects scraps and by -products from the plastic industry and transform them in raw materials 
(flakes and  granules). It can efficiently supply many markets from the goods manufacturing sector to the 
packaging industry. The investments on quality standards allows us to offer recycled products with similar 
characteristics as virgin products but with a lower price and the minimal carbon footprint.   
Thanks to an ongoing financial and technological growth the company is now operating on three warehouses. 
The company property consists of a total area of 32.000 sqm (12.500 covered area) equipped of the best 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 47 of 68 
technologies to successfully complete the recycling process of most common polymers and all form of plastic 
scraps: grinders, shearing machineries, vibro -screens, metal detectors, plastic presses, mixing silos, choppers, 
extruders for pellets and quality test laboratory.   
The company is owned by Marco, Enrico and Daria Romei who have the full management over marketing, 
administration and production process.  
ROMEI company strongly believes that the post-industrial scraps recycling represents a great contribution to the 
reduction of lost wastes and an important promotion for reusable resources.   
Main tasks 
In WP1, ROMEI will provide insights in the current EoL  situation of plastic packaging especially in terms of 
recyclability. The main role of ROMEI is the validation of a customized recycling process for the innovative 
materials from the project including bioplastics, multilayer films with bio -based barrier coating in WP4 working 
with PLANET in terms of suitable process for the coating removal. They will validate the pilot from PLATO. They 
will also collaborate with IRIS in terms of applicability of the sorting of the new materials. Applicative testing about 
the recovered materials will be also performed in the ROMEI quality control internal laboratory. SRM materials 
will be provided as needed to WP5. Moreover, ROMEI will provide inputs for LCA in WP6. Finally, ROMEI will 
contribute to the exploitation planning and dissemination especially in terms of reaching policy makers who could 
improve the legislative framework in terms of recycling in EU (WP7). 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
Romei has been developing an over 30 years experi ence in the plastic recycling processes. ROMEI is mainly 
specialized in PET recycling coming from the food packaging industry. The food packaging products, seeking 
better performances, are subjected to continuous developments. This constant packaging development requires 
a great effort by the recycling companies to reprocess always more complex scraps. ROMEI company is well 
trained to react to complexity and is able to find new applications for these materials. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
MARCO ROMEI (male), R&D manager, Graduated in electronic engineering at University of Florence. In Romei 
since 2002.   
ENRICO ROMEI (male), Production manager, in Romei since 1987.  
GIANLUCA FASANO (male), R&D Coordinator, in Romei since 2013. Graduated in Chemistry with specialization in 
plastic polymers.   
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
• ROMEI’s main products are PET compounds for injection moulding and extrusion applications coming from 
food packaging recycled materials.  
• PET/PE and PET/EVOH/PE recycling know-how.  
• Wide experience and know how on recycling technology and application for industrial and post-consumer 
materials.  
• Wide experience and know how on food packaging technology and products.  
• A full equipped facility for production tests and analysis on a wide range of polymers. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. RIGEPLAST project (Rigenerazione mediante processi sostenibili di plastomeri post-uso per applicazioni 
predeterminate con valore aggiunto), regional POR-CREO project, 2009-2011.  
2. SUPERTEX project (Sustainable Flame Retardant Technical Textile from Recycled Polyester), 
ECO/10/277225/SI2.596871 under CIP ECOINNOVATION program, 2012-2014. 
3. BIONTOP, H2020 BBI, GA 837761, Novel packaging films and textiles with tailored end of life and 
performance based on bio-based copolymers and coatings 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
Logistic facilities for collecting and storage samples of raw materials and recycled polymers.  
Free space and offices to host the pilot recycling plant and use existing energy and water supply plants.  
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 48 of 68 
• Two twin screw extruders for production tests on PLA coming from separation plant.  
• One single screw extruder for production tests on PE layer coming from separation plant  
• Various size reduction machines for test any kind of raw materials (shredders, choppers, mills etc.)  
• One single screw extruder and two injection moulding machines, lab scale, for three kind of specimen 
production.  
• One mill, lab scale, for sample flakes reduction.  
• Various mixing equipment, production scale, for samples homogenization.  
Full equipped laboratory for sample testing:   
• FT-IR spectrophotometer and DSC thermal analysis for polymers identification  
• Brabender “Aquatrack” for moisture content determination  
• Dynamometer for tensile test  
• Melt flow rate for polymer MFR measure  
• Analytical balance for polymer density measure.  
Various ovens and a colorimeter 
 
 
Participant no. 23 Name (shortname)/ Country DENIMX B.V. (DenimX)/ The 
Netherlands 
Description of the legal entity  
 
DenimX B.V.  (www.denimx.nl) is a development and production company of products, made out of recycled 
textiles. After more than 5 years of research and development under the flag of industrial design studio MMD, 
DenimX was officially founded as a company in February 2017 and is located in Maastricht, The Netherlands. Its 
main aim is to add value to discarded waste streams and create good -looking, functional and commercially 
feasible products in large volumes by combining textile fibers with bio-based binders into a re-usable, recyclable 
composite material. DenimX’s businessmodel consists of 3 pillars:  
1. Consultancy of large SME’s and multinationals regarding their sustainability policy within the field of 
development, production and material usage 
2. Design, engineering and production of upcycled products that are sold by affiliated distribution partners 
per market segment (i.e. furniture, lighting, acoustics and carpets market) 
3. Design, engineering and product ion of an upcycled product collection that is sold directly to B2B 
customers or to end consumers, using an online shop and direct sales 
DenimX has several larger companies and organizations as a client e.g. Nike Europe, DSM Dyneema, Dutch 
Ministry of Defense, Elis, PI (Penitentiary Institution) and City of Maastricht, yet functions as a hub and director 
of development and production processes. The company is founded and run by Marc Meijers, industrial designer 
with over 25 years of practical experience in product development. He is momentarily DenimX’s sole owner and 
‘employee’. For every single project a team is composed that fits the request.  
Main tasks 
DenimX will have a strong role in the creation and development of technological and commercially viab le 
solutions for upcycling of discarded materials, with a focus on, but not limited to textile composites with bio -
based polymers SRM (WP5). DenimX will add know-how of various materials and production technologies and a 
vast network of production and finishing partners and will add creative input to the process.  They will also test 
the DSS from WP6. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
With its flexible team and resources, including industrial design engineers, prototypers, production partners and 
finishing companies, DenimX can contribute to concept development, design and engineering, prototyping, 
assembly, mechanical desi gn as well as assembly, validation and industrialisation of prototypes in production 
plants.  
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 49 of 68 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Marc Meijers (male). MSc Industrial Design– After finishing his study Industrial Design at the Delft University of 
Technology, Marc Meijers founded the industrial design studio MMD in Maastricht in January 1993 and has been 
active in the field of product development and innovation ever since. His office worked for many different Dutch 
and international brands among which are Mosa Tiles, Brabantia Household Appliances, Tiger Products Bathroom 
accessories, DSM Chemicals and Engineering Plastics, HBI Lighting, Dutch Railways, Per kinElmer (US) Medical 
Devices, Ranpak (US) packaging machinery and many more. He also founded the Limburg Society of Design LDA 
of which he was chairman for 5 years and is now their honorary member.  In 2011 Marc Meijers invented a 
patented solar heat coll ector system that resulted in a new company Q -Roof. In 2017 he sold his shares to his 
partners in order to focus on the development and his brand -new company DenimX that originated from a 
request of one of MMD’s clients ‘. How to make use of the valueless textile waste streams’. Besides his vast 
experience in product development, Meijers used to be a teacher and assistant professor at the Departments of 
Industrial Design and Architecture at the Eindhoven University of Technology and the University of Applie d 
Science in Venlo. He also works regularly as a guest teacher at Academy of Arts in Maastricht and Delft University 
of Technology.  
Marc will involve other staff and in house consultants as required for producing the final selected demonstrators. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
• Paper CIB2007 – 315 – Design process of a temporary light weight emergency shelter with integrated 
climate control – M.H.M. Meijers MSc, M.G.D.M. Cox MSc, R. Gijsbers MSc, 11 pages, 2007 
• Inventor of European patent EP 09166931.7; Title ‘Rooftile heat exchange system’ 
• Inventor of Dutch patent, Ref. 30377.0002.NLN0; ‘Verbindingssysteem voor meerlaags ruiten en een 
lichtstraat omvattende meerlaagsruiten en een verbindingssysteem’   
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. Smart upcycling of discarded denim textile waste and transformation into a collection of chairs for the 
Event Office of the City of Maastricht, The Netherlands (2018-2019) 
2. Smart upcycling of discarded sports apparel of Nike Europe and transformation into acoustic panels for 
Nike’s offices of their European Logistics Centre in Laakdal, Belgium (2018-2019) 
3. Smart upcycling of army uniforms of the Dutch Ministry of Defense and transformation into Motorcycle 
bodyparts of an Electric Vehicle, The Netherlands (2018) 
4. Smart upcycling of discarded bullet proof vests, m ade from Dyneema® fibers into a presentation table 
for DSM Dyneema, The Netherlands (2018) 
5. Smart upcycling of discarded denim textile waste and transformation into a collection of bags and lifestyle 
accessories for DenimX Product Collection (2020) 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
DenimX does not own any machinery itself, yet works with a vast network of material suppliers, production 
partners and finishing specialists that possess specific equipment in order to manage the production and 
assembly of products made out of recycled textile waste streams. DenimX is able to process a variety of materials 
(e.g. PLA -PP-PE-PET-PES-PA, cotton, cotton -PES mixes, natural fibers), create a number of composite recipes 
(based on (r)biopolymers/r -fibers) and manage and direct several production technolog ies (e.g. apparel 
destruction, non-woven production, spinning, extrusion, thermobinding, thermoforming, assembly). Depending 
on the required application, various kind of technologies and composition recipes will be combined (reversed 
engineering).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 50 of 68 
Participant no. 
 23 Name (shortname)/ Country Silon s. r. o. (SILON)/ Czech Republic 
Description of the legal entity  
 
Silon s. r. o. is a recycled PET staple fiber producer and compounder located in the Czech republic celebrating 70 
years of existence in 2020. The portfolio ( www.silon.eu) includes compounded PE, PP and PA material of various 
types and recycled PET fibers, produced as a staple or tow. The main areas of the target market include automotive 
sector, civil engineering, cable industry, hygiene and food packaging. The company is IATF 16949, ISO 9000, ISO 
14000 certified. 
The compounds division features wide range of expertise related to compounding of powders (talc, CaCO3), glass 
fiber, glass beads, carbon fiber and cross -linking modification of polyolefines. As well the laboratory is equipped 
with wide range of analysers including a unique chlorine-testing device for water pipe assessment. The production 
premises operate under the strict HACCP or GMP principles. The compounding is done on single-screw and twin-
screw extrusion lines with either cut filament chip forming or sphe rical chips. The material can be packed in 
protective or standard packaging, based on the sensitivity. 
In the Fibres division, Silon has one of the longest expertise in PETbottle flakes recycling for over 20 years of such 
production. Silon is supplying wid e range of automotive and hygiene products made of rPET, with standards 
quality, guaranteed by Öko-tex certificate Class I, for some of the assortments fulfilling the FDA regulation. Most 
of the production is performed on a single step fiber line of different type, both with single-screw and twin-screw 
extruder. The raw material is dosed either via crystallizer to improve the properties of the PET flakes or via the IR 
dryer. 
The fiber division can produce 3.0dtex to 17 dtex staple fibre cut length 38 to 85 mm. 
Main tasks 
Silon, as an industrial member of the consortium, is mainly aimed at the practical validation of the project results. 
It means the main task is a successful reprocessing of recycled materials for textile purposes and for further pre-
processing for packaging and films on an industrial level and the specifics, that may be related to such 
reprocessing, as well as technology related specifics, adjustments needed to deal with the recycled raw material 
of different origin. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
Due to the fact that recycled fiber production is a niche type of plastics processing, Silon has used its lasting know-
how and expertise and developed many unique solutions in past that has positive impact on the processability and 
stability of the material produced. As well in the compounding division there is a wide know-how due to the variety 
of materials in the portfolio, with very different applications and needs. 
Both divisions feature very skilled specialists in textile analyses, polymer science of both types, recycled material 
and the specifics and virgin material, and related equipment for raw material chemical analyses (chromatography, 
NIR, FTIR analyses; viscosimeters etc) and mechanical lab for both fine materials as fine dtex fibre and polymer 
testing bars. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Ing.et Ing. Jana Kadlecová, Ph.D.  (female) – Business Development Manager. PhD degree in Transportation 
Systems and Technology, CTU in Prague (2008), Master in Management and Financial Control (2004 and 2005). 5 
years of Technical Key account Manager and Business Development Manager in Silon (CZ) responsible for new 
products development, Technology development, lead -in at the customers, Project management; 7 years of 
Project management and Scientific research at CTU, Faculty of Transportation Sciences (CZ) responsible for the 
EU and CZ applied research and Experimental research activities, FP6 and FP7, local projects funded by ministries 
and Grant Agency, Technology Agency of the CZ. 
Ing. Jana Kredatusová, Ph.D. (female) - Research specialist. PhD degree in Polymer Science, VŠCHT Prague (2011), 
Master in Polymer Science VŠCHT in Prague (2004). 2 years experience as Research Specialist in Silon, division 
Fbres. 6 year as Researcher at Academy of Sciences, Prague, thermic properties of material (DSC, 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 51 of 68 
thermogravimetry, nanocomposites, biodegradable poly mers). 1 year experience as Researcher at Technical 
university in Liberec. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
1. Ujcic, Aleksandra;  Nevoralova, Martina;  Dybal, Jiri;  Zhigunov, Alexander;  Kredatusova, Jana;  Krejcikova, 
Sabina;  Fortelny, Ivan;   Slouf, Miroslav. Thermoplastic Starch Composites Filled With Isometric and 
Elongated TiO2-Based Nanoparticles. 2019. Frontiers in Materials in 2019  
2. Milena Špírková;  Magdalena Serkis;  Rafał Poręba;  Lud’ka Machová;  Jiří Hodan;  Jana Kredatusová;  Dana 
Kubies;  Alexander Zhigunov: Experimental study of the simulated process of degradation of 
polycarbonate- and d,l -lactide-based polyurethane elastomers under conditions mimicking the 
physiological environment. 2016. Polymer Degradation and Stability 
3. Ivan Kelnar;   Ümitcan Bal;   Alexander Zhigunov;   Ludmila Kaprálková;   Ivan Fortelný;   Sabina 
Krejčíková;  Jana Kredatusová;   Jiří Dybal;   Miroslav Janata;   Mohammadreza Nofar. Nano -modified 
HDPE/PA6 microfibrillar composites: Effect of aminated graphite platelets coupling. 2019. Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science 
4. Milena Špírková;   Jiří Hodan;   Libor Kobera;   Jana Kredatusová;   Dana Kubies;   Luďka Machová;   Rafał 
Poręba;  Magdalena Serkis;  Alexander Zhigunov;  Jiří Kotek. The influence of the length of the degradable 
segment on the functional properties and hydrolytic stability of multi -component polyurethane 
elastomeric films. 2017. Polymer Degradation and Stability  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. BIONTOP, H2020 BBI, GA 837761, Novel packaging films and textiles with tailored end of life and performance 
based on bio-based copolymers and coatings 
2. MULTICYCLE, H2020 SPIRE, GA 820695, Advanced and sustainable recycling processes and value chains for 
plastic-based multi-materials 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
Single screw and twin-screw compounding line of various setup for compounding of different types of fillers and 
reactive extrusion. 
Single screw and twin-screw fiber line with one or two drawing zones 
Chemical laboratory to analyse the Raw material includi ng NIR, FTIR, chromatography, microscopy, MFI testing, 
mechanical laboratory for product measurement including tensile strength, elongation testing, surface testing, 
toughness, E-modulus. 
 
 
Participant no. 24 Name (shortname)/ Country KNEIA SL (KNEIA)/Spain 
Description of the legal entity  
 
KNEIA is a Spanish SME that works with public companies, research institutions, government agencies and 
investors to provide assessment services on innovation management, dissemination and communication 
strategies, knowledge transfer, and implementation of  scientific technological structures worldwide, for the 
improvement of the competitiveness and the technological progress of companies. Key activities include 
valorization studies, the evaluation of knowledge to determine market feasibility in other sectors, the protection 
and valuation of R&D results, the coordination of marketing and communication activities directed at 
commercializing new technologies, the definition of dissemination strategies to reach potential end -users and 
acquirers of technologies, market analysis, trainings, eco -innovation guidelines and open innovation as well as 
general legal guidance on the preparation of transfer contracts.  
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 52 of 68 
KNEIA offers expertise in a variety of roles in project collaboration including project coordination, dissemination 
and communication activities, research valorization and exploitation, design management, market development 
and commercialization activities. 
Main tasks 
In the project, KNEIA is the leader of WP7  and act as IPR & Exploitation manager . KNEIA will have overall 
responsibility for the dissemination related activities, including the generation of the project’s business strategy 
as defined in the Plan for the Exploitation and Dissemination of Results (P EDR), ensuring the dissemination 
activities are undertaken to maximize the exploitation opportunities for the project partners and for widespread 
dissemination of the technical achievements demonstrated in this project. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
KNEIA has a consolidated expertise in the activities related to Dissemination, Communication and Exploitation 
areas and its team is dedicated to pursue the best strategies to communicate and valorize science and scientific 
results.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Cristina Barragán (female) has a Degree on Audiovisual Communication and is Master on International Business 
Administration by the Polytechnic University of Catalonia. She holds more than 15 years of experience in the area 
of R&D management. In relation with Research and Innovation related activities, Ms. Barragan has worked at the 
Open University of Catalonia, the Polytechnic University of Catalonia, the Terrassa Health Consortium and the 
Leitat Technological Centr e, where has been the Project Management Director and member of the Executive 
Board for several years. She has been jury member for the Technology Review TR35 Spain 2012 award, and is co-
founder of KNEIA S.L. 
 
Ciro Avolio (male) has a Degree on Diplomatic Sciences and is Master of Environment, Development and Politics 
by the Sussex University. He has PhD on Sustainability at the Polytechnic University of Catalonia, with a 
specialization in Water Management. Has more than 10 years  of experience on R&D projects management, in 
relation with different financing programs, including FP7, CIP, LIFE+ and ENPI amongst other. Mr. Avolio is co -
founder of KNEIA S.L. and collaborates on a constant basis with international institutions, both public and private, 
on the definition of research and innovation projects, focused on the assessment of the valorization of their 
project portfolio.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
KNEIA is a young company, created by a senior team with long experience in Collaborative Programmes, including 
the development and implementation of innovation business plans for SMEs, supporting access to R&D funding 
opportunities at European level (H2020, FP7, LIFE+ and CIP programmes among others), developing ad -hoc 
dissemination and communication strategies, conducting market research analyses and technology monitoring 
assignments, delivering specialist training sessions on the adoption of innovative practices, and defining route -
to-market and proof-of-concept operations on new product development and launch. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
KNEIA personnel has wide experience on leading the Work Package on Dissemination and Exploitation of R+D 
results in H2020 and FP7 projects, offering a vast experience covering following contributions: 
- Dissemination and Communicatio n of R&D results: designing suitable communication strategies and 
campaigns and supporting the whole dissemination process 
- Project & Risk Management: valuating project risk, defining project governance and management best 
practice, and providing technical assistance and project management support to collaborative projects. 
- IP Strategy Design: Protection and valuation of intangible assets generated from R&D projects, and 
general assistance on regulatory and legal issues related to technology. 
- Commercialization of R&D results (Knowledge Marketing): Supporting the technology transfer process, 
through the evaluation, marketing and deal-making of technology. 
 
Our main projects are:  
• H2020 ECOBULK - Circular Process for Eco-Designed Bulky Products and Internal Car Parts  
• H2020 ZEOCAT-3D - Development of a bifunctional hierarchically structured zeolite-based nano-catalyst 
using 3D -technology for direct conversion of methane into aromatic hydrocarbons via methane 
dehydroaromatization 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 53 of 68 
• H2020 ECOAT - ECO sustainable multifunctional biobased COATings with enhanced performance and end 
of life options 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
No infrastructures will be made available by KNEIA. The SME contribution in the project will be multidisciplinary 
expertise on economy, market analysis, communication management, community management, dissemination, 
IPR protection and legal advice. 
 
 
Participant no. 25 Name (shortname)/ Country CROWDHELIX LIMITED (CHX) /UK 
Description of the legal entity  
 
The Crowdhelix Network (CHX) is a pan -European Open Innovation Network that enables Research Technology 
Organisations (RTOs) and businesses to collaborate, innovate and grow. The Crowdhelix Network has more than 
450 member organisations from 44 countries and is present in all EU Member State countries. The network 
membership is reported to have won more than €4.5 billion of funding under Horizon 2020, highlighting the 
quality of its membership base. The network is structured around virtual technology clusters known as He lixes. 
There are currently 21 live Helixes in areas such as Digital, Health and Energy etc. The network hosts focused 
collaborative events for each Helix each year where the aim is to connect organisations across Europe and 
promote collaboration and open i nnovation. In addition to hosting and running events, CHX also has its own 
technology tool called: Crowdhelix. The tool is designed so people and organisations can profile their expertise 
and capabilities within a Helix area. It is then used to help organi sations post opportunities, which are matched 
to people’s profiles within the platform. Once a match is made, the CHX team helps to facilitate an opportunity, 
so that it then turns into a tangible collaboration. 
Main tasks 
In WP7, Crowdhelix will help PRESERVE address parts of the impact section by managing the stakeholder 
engagement and clustering activities. It will leverage and expand the Circular Plastics Helix - a virtual community 
of experts in recycling, circularity and renewable-sourced plastics. Launched in the frame of the ongoing project 
MultiCycle, the Helix acts as the communication and knowledge exchange platform for the project. It will include 
all partners, relevant stakeholders from the Crowdhelix Network, aligned projects, an d any other actors with 
interest in plastics and the circular economy. The purpose of the Helix is to 1) increase the visibility of the project 
and promote its activities findings among the users of the Crowdhelix platform, 2) provide central online space 
for knowledge building and advancement of innovation, 3) create a sense of community and inclusion among 
experts working in the fields of plastics and sustainability. Crowdhelix will also lead clustering activities and ensure 
PRESERVE is networked with other projects in the area of plastics circularity. Building on the legacy of the Plastics 
Circularity Multiplier initiative and other relevant networks, Crowdhelix will promote cross cooperation between 
EU projects and initiatives and work to boost the impact of the project in a resourceful way 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
With 450 member organisations in 44 countries, Crowdhelix is uniquely placed to disseminate the key message 
of the project across the research and innovation landscape. Its pan-European community currently has a reach 
to over 500,00 individuals representing research centres, universities, and industries. The network connects 
excellent researchers and innovative businesses and enables them to collaborate, innovate and grow. The Circular 
Plastics Helix service will be to lead on activities related to stakeholder engagement and clustering. More 
fundamentally, the Helix will profile and inject relevant commercial actors from across Europe, such as SMEs and 
Industry leaders commercialising in this space, with a view to forging alliances and partnerships that are in the 
spirit of growth, expansion and ongoing sustainability and advancement of the IP created beyond the end of the 
project. The Helix will also identif y relevant and appropriate open source communities with a view to ensuring 
that open outputs from the project are made available and accessible to all EU SMEs, RTOs, universities and 
industry actors, in the spirit of open dissemination and sharing. CHX wil l continue to manage the community 
beyond the end of the project – promoting the project’s outputs and impacts and enabling new forms of 
collaboration and open innovation across the European Research Area. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 54 of 68 
Abdul Rahim (Male) is a founder and director of CHX. He has a proven track record of establishing strategic, 
mutually beneficial partnerships and relationships. He is an expert in public funding and has secured severa l € 
millions for organisations and institutions. Abdul has significant links with UK and European Universities and 
focuses on connecting business to research institutions. He was on the board of London Metropolitan University 
from its formation to March 20 10. He is currently an Advisory Board Member, Faculty of Business and 
Management at Regent’s University. Abdul holds a Master in Business Administration (MBA) and is a Fellow of 
The Royal Society of Arts & Manufacturing. 
Michael Browne (Male) is co-founder of the Crowdhelix Network, as well as its policy and innovation partnership 
lead. Previously he was Head of European Research and Innovation at University College London (UCL). Michael 
has overseen the award and delivery of more than 1 billio n euros of EU funded grants and has more than 15 
years’ experience in managing and exploiting large -scale international collaborative projects. Michael has 
extensive experience in shaping and influencing policy at regional, national and EU levels.  
Riam Kanso (Female) is responsible for overseeing the progress of the platform and its position in the academia-
industry ecosystem. Riam has a research background (Neuroscience PhD) and has worked on building academic-
industry collaborations throughout her career, both in the public sector and private consultancy space. Riam has 
been involved in the creation and management of acceleration programmes for start-ups and their training and 
has great experience in working with mid-cap companies. Due to previous positions in academia and government, 
Riam has acquired significant experience and knowledge in science policy. 
Natalia Grzomba (Female) is a Community & Project Manager for the Crowdhelix  Network, responsible for 
community engagement, project management, & managing relationships with network members. In the frame 
of the MultiCycle project, she has been leading the Circular Plastics Helix - a virtual community of experts in 
renewably-sourced plastics and recycling processes. Previously Natalia had worked in Brussels on an EU -funded 
communications campaign for the European Research Council (ERC). Natalia has experience in EU research and 
innovation policies and holds an interdisciplinary master’s degree in Culture and Thought after 1945. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
The Crowdhelix Virtual Platform  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
- MultiCycle [EU H2020]: the project develops advanced and sustainable recycling processes and value 
chains for plastic -based multi-materials. CHX helps MultiCycle address parts of the impact section by 
managing the Circular Plastics Helix, which acts as a knowledge e xchange vehicle for delivering 
communication and dissemination activities. 
- PRIME-VR2 [EU H2020]: PRIME -VR2 will develop an accessible, collaborative VR rehabilitation 
environment for users with compromised physical capability on the path to rehabilitation.  CHX is 
developing a Virtual Reality Helix, which will focus on developing a marketplace for the PRIME -VR2 
exploitation. 
- OPENiSME [EU]: The overall objective of the project is to help unlock innovation capabilities for SMEs 
that aspire to grow through the facilitation of new open innovation partnerships.  
- ERC=ScienceSquared [EU H2020]: CHX’s role in this EU -funded campaign was to communicate and 
disseminate selected science projects funded by the European Research Council across its community 
and the broader European Research Area.  
- CRUCIAL [EU H2020]: CRUCIAL will develop new state -of-the-art imaging for the brain and heart and in 
understanding the mechanisms that link neural and cardiac deterioration in patients with these 
comorbidities. CHX is developing a CoMorbidity Helix and wil l lead on the dissemination and capacity 
building activities and contribute to the exploitation and commercialisation activities.  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
The Crowdhelix Virtual Platform  
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 55 of 68 
Participant no. 26 Name (shortname)/ Country EUROPEAN BIOPLASTICS EV 
(EUBP)/Germany 
Description of the legal entity  
 
 
European Bioplastics (EUBP) is the industry association representing the bioplastics industry in Europe across the 
entire bioplastics value chain. Established over 20 years ago, EUBP now has 70 member companies from across 
the globe. EUBP’s members primarily produce, refine, and distribute bioplastics, i.e. plastics that are bio -based, 
biodegradable, or both. In addition, biomass feedstock producers, bioplastics converters and compounders, and 
several renowned academic and private research institutions are also members of EUBP. The association’s key 
objectives are to serve as a contact and network platform, as a primary resource for information about the 
bioplastics industry, and as a catalyst for advancing the objectives of the growing bioplastics industry as a whole. 
EUBP coordinates various working groups (WG) and product groups (PG) focused on these themes, such as the 
PG Bio-based, PG Biodegradables, the WG Regulatory Affairs, and the WG Communications, and actively supports 
the introduction (e.g. CEN TC  249 and 411) and monitoring (e.g. EN 13432) of industry standards and best 
practices. As part of that commitment, EUBP has introduced the Seedling® logo, an EN 13432 -based conformity 
mark of industrial compostability for biodegradable plastic packaging. I ncreasingly, EUBP comments on political 
processes linked to the advancement of the Circular Economy and the Bioeconomy in Europe and legislation 
impacting on the bioplastics industry’s ability to fully bring to bear its innovative potential. 
Main tasks 
EUBP will primarily contribute to the definition of specifications for the upcycled bio -based packaging (WP1) 
according to c consumer and market requirements that are well known through its member organizations. 
Furthermore, EUBP will help to shape the speci fications for materials and processes and support PRESERVE by 
input covering legislative aspects for bio-based materials. 
Along its core mission, covering the provision of required biopolymers -based solutions along the value chain, 
EUBP will lead communication and dissemination (WP7), by reaching out to consumers, scientific and industrial 
community members by several educational and dissemination events, that will help raising public and societal 
environmental awareness and policy outreach to encourage the adoption of PRESERVE’s new bio-based solutions 
and flanking existing and upcoming EU policy strategies, such as Plastics Strategy, CEAP and Green Deal. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
EUBP is registered as an association in Germany, classifies as an SME, and is membership-based. EUBP currently 
has <10 employees who represent a very broad range of expertise and backgrounds, ranging from polymer 
chemistry, to economics, to political and social science, to seasoned communication and PR specialists. This mix 
of different and relevant expertise, the international network groomed over decades, a nd the range of subjects 
covered by EUBP staff in their daily operations render EUBP a suitable partner for this project. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
OLIVER BUCHHOLZ  (male) heads European Bioplastics’ Communications Department. He holds a diploma in 
political sciences and looks back on almost 5 years of work for different NGOs and another 5 years as a 
Public/Government Affairs consultant for a renowned agency in Germany with a focus on health, chemistry, and 
energy related issues. 
KATHARINA HINSE (female) joined European Bioplastics in 2014 and holds the position of Environmental Affairs 
Manager. In a second position, she is working for the German Association for Compostable Products. Katharina 
holds degrees in European Studies and Political Science with a focus on environmental policy. Previously, she was 
managing a regional section of an environmental NGO. At European Bioplastics she supports the two Product 
Groups “Biobased” and “Biodegradables” and deals with certification issues. During the past years she has 
acquired extended knowledge regarding waste management of bioplastics. 
CONSTANCE ISSBRÜCKER  (female) heads European Bioplastics’ Environmental Affairs Department. She is 
responsible for issues regarding the compostability, sustainability, and standardisation of bioplastics. Constance 
holds a degree in Chemistry from the University of Jena in Germany with specialization in Bioorganic and 
Macromolecular Chemistry. Before joining the association, she worked at universities in Berlin and Jena, with her 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 56 of 68 
research focusing on polysaccharide chemistry, and on cellulose dissolution, modification and analytics in 
particular. 
CHRISTIAN SCHULZ (male) studied "Technology of Renewable Resources" at the University of Applied Sciences 
and Arts Hanover and worked from 2011 - 2019 as a research associate at the IfBB - Institute for Bioplastics and 
Bio-composites in various third -party funded projects, among others for the development of a database for 
products made of bioplastics for public procurement as well as in th e sustainability team for market analysis, 
calculation of land use and on life cycle assessment of biobased plastics. He also supported the institute's public 
relations work, e.g. in the context of the webinar series "Biomaterials in Focus" and as part of a group of young 
researchers who dealt with the special challenges of biomaterials on a technical-industrial level as well as in the 
field of marketing and communication. Since January 2020 he is in charge of the EU project activities of European 
Bioplastics. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
EUBP regularly publishes background papers, position papers, and similar documents on bi oplastics research, 
innovations, and markets, available through their website. In cooperation with academic and private scientific 
research institutes, EUBP annually publishes a comprehensive bioplastics market data study. The current version 
is “Bioplastic market data 2019 – Global production capacities of bioplastics 2019 – 2024”. EUBP annually hosts 
Europe’s largest bioplastics-focused conference and exhibition in Berlin, the European Bioplastics Conference. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. PolyBioSkin – High-performance functional bio-based polymers for skin-contact products in the biomedical, 
cosmetic, and sanitary industries (ongoing: 2017 -2020); Funded by BBI -JTI; Grant Agr eement ID: 745839  
The PolyBioSkin project showcases the usability of biopolymers in other sanitary applications like diapers as 
well as biomedical and cosmetic sector. 
2. BIOnTop – Novel packaging films and textiles with tailored end of life and performance b ased on bio-based 
copolymers and coatings (ongoing: 2019 -2023); Funded by BBI -JU; Grant Agreement ID: 837761  
The BIOnTop project aims for aims for developing new bio -copolymers, compounds, biocomposites & 
coatings formulation and process them into home or industrially compostable mono - or recyclable 
multilayer-materials in food packaging as well as recyclable/reusable coated woven fabrics and secondary 
packaging from secondary raw material for bags applications. 
Description of any significant infrastructur e and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
N/A 
 
4.2. Third parties1 involved in the project (including use of third party resources) 
 
Participant no.10.   BIOPLASTICS SRL (PLANET) / Italy 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted)? 
Yes 
Access to lab scale processing equipments such Mini extruder and minijet, film blow extruder, FT-IR, Charpy 
Impact tester 
Budget: 20000€ 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties? No 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 
11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
No 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners? (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
No 
If yes, please describe the International Partner(s) and their contributions 
 
1 A third party that is an affiliated entity or has a legal link to a participant implying a collaboration not limited to the action. (see relevant articles Model Grant Agreement). 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 57 of 68 
 
 
Participant no.11.   BOSTIK SA (BOSTIK) / France 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted)? 
No 
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted and amount 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties? Yes 
The third party of BOSTIK will be Arkema France. Arkema France is the largest Affiliate of the Arkema Group in 
France, and owns 100% of the partner, Bostik S.A., as described in the shareholding organisational chart below: 
 
Profile of third party: 
Arkema is a global manufacturer in specialty chemicals and advanced materials. Arkema devotes 2.7% of its sales 
to R&D. Arkema operates 5 R&D centres in France with extensive analytical facilities and expertise.  Arkema has 
participated in many EU funded research projects and was involved in twenty H2020 projects in 2019. 
Main tasks attributed in the project: The Scientific Director for adhesives & coatings at Arkema France’s Corporate 
R&D (Bruno Charrière) is supervising the research on Adhesives. In addition, on a case by case, some expert ise 
linked to the project is available in the Arkema France research centr es (other than the Venette research centr e 
which is linked to Bostik), and that expertise (e.g. in analytics, modelling…) could be involved. 
Relevant Projects: 
Arkema France is involved in the EU projects Muticycle (together with several of the partners of the current 
Preserve project); MMAtwo (on PMMA recycling through depolymerization); PolynSpire (on PA and PU 
recycling through depolymerization).  
Budget: 40,000€ 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 
11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
No 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 58 of 68 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners? 2 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
No 
If yes, please describe the International Partner(s) and their contributions 
 
 
Participant no.12.   CARBIOLICE (CARB) / France 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted)? 
Yes 
Subcontracting of support for Regulatory Affairs in terms of e.g. toxicity analysis necessary to prepare the EFSA 
dossier for food contact approval (complementary to WP6). 
Budget: 60,000€ 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties? No 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 
11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
No 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners? (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
No 
If yes, please describe the International Partner(s) and their contributions 
 
 
Participant no.14.   Groupe Danone SA (DANONE)/ France 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted)? 
Yes 
Trials with a business partner already working with DANONE in terms of pulp moulded bottle (very unique 
format in the market) whereby the PHA coating from the project will be applied. The involved equipment/staff 
time for the provision of bottles will be charged. 
Budget: 20000€ 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties? No 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 
11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
No 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners? (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
No 
If yes, please describe the International Partner(s) and their contributions 
 
 
No other partner plans to make use of third parties’ resources. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 ‘International Partner’ is any legal entity established in a non-associated third country which is not eligible for funding under Article 10 of the Rules for Participation Regulation 
No 1290/2013. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 59 of 68 
5. Ethics and security
5.1 Ethics 
 
During the preparation of this proposal, in keeping with the required Ethics Appraisal Procedure, an Ethics Self-
assessment was performed with the completion of the Ethical Issues Table, and this project does not involve 
Ethics issues. 
Nevertheless, ethic aspects will be overseen in the  subtask regarding RRI in WP8 and other aspects like the 
respect of GDPR, e.g. in the dissemination activities or for the consumer perceptions assessments , will be well 
accounted for in WP8. Furthermore, ethical aspects related to the developed products will be considered in the 
s-LCA in WP7. 
All in all, the ethical footprint of th e project will be very positive vs. the current situation by: i) reducing the 
depletion of finite resources, ii) limiting leakage in the environment or impact thereof, iii) limiting food waste.
5.2 Security3 
 
In terms of security, project will involve NO: 
• activities or results raising security issues 
• 'EU-classified information' as background or results 
 
  
 
3 See a rticle 37 of the Model Grant Agreement. . For more information on the classification of Information, please refer to the Horizon 2020 guidance: 
https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/other/hi/secur/h2020-hi-guide-classif_en.pdf. 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 60 of 68 
ANNEX: Support letters from External Stakeholders Group 
 
Summary of current External Stakeholders Group members and respective roles (more members will be added during 
project implementation based on needs and cross-fertilisation potentials): 
 
Name (Short name) Type Country Role 
CocaCola Large Germany Definition of the requirements for biopackaging for other 
beverage products and formats, provide feedback on 
developed packaging and early adopter when available 
Manor Farm Large Ireland Manor is interested to use bio -based materials for meat 
packaging, and therefore could be interested also in the 
project outcomes. 
PackCluster Association Spain PackCluster is interested in interacting with us in order to 
define the current issue with packaging circularity and 
collaborate in cross dissemination activities 
Industry Association for Food 
Technology and Packaging 
(IVLV) 
Association Germany Access food packers aspirations and concerns in terms of 
recyclability of packaging materials and use of biobased 
materials  
FlandersFood cluster 
organisation 
Belgium Flanders' FOOD is a unique, strategy -driven platform that 
contributes through innovation to a more competitive, 
innovative and sustainable agri-food industry. 
Zentrum für Lebensmittel und 
Verpackungstechnologie e.V. 
(ZLV) 
Association Germany Diffuse best practices to food packers in terms of use of 
biobased and recycled materials  
Pack4Food Cluster 
organisation 
Belgium Pack4Food is a consortium of 45 companies, the most 
important Flemish research centr es active in the food -
packaging interaction field and network organizations. 
Pack4Food aims to stimulate innovation in food-packaging, 
both at the food producer and at their suppliers (packaging 
producers, filling machine producers, ...), and also to 
support companies in their everyday packaging challenges.  
CEFLEX- A circular economy for 
flexible packaging 
Industry-wide 
initiative 
EU CEFLEX is interested to follow new initiatives that can 
improve circularity of flexible packaging, therefore to guide 
us and benefit from the new knowledge generated 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 61 of 68 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 62 of 68 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 63 of 68 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 64 of 68 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 65 of 68 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 66 of 68 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 67 of 68 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
              CE-BIOTEC-09-2020 
Page 68 of 68 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Elodie BUGNICOURT on 14/05/2020 16:20:41 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public -private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Funding & Tenders Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integr ity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can b e verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Funding & Tenders 
Portal.  
(https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/support/faq)