4. Developing an intelligent Decision Support System for raw material valorisation (RMI -DSS) that analyses 
physical and chemical properties of mined samples, along with sorting data and valorisation chain requirements,  
to determine optimal sorting thresholds and enable dynamic decision-making for sorting criteria (T4.3–CIBOS). 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
5. Exploring non-destructive, real-time analysis methodologies using optical sensors, microscopy imaging sensors, 
and hyperspectral cameras to characterize ore and identify optimal crushing sizes with respect to the valorisation 
process. Conducting trials wit h lab -scale sorting systems to validate mineral separation and crushing size 
identification. (T4.4–ICCS).  
KPIs: sorting accuracy of metal oxides and metal sulphides >95%; Improvement in the overall utilization of mined 
ores by 40%; Increase classification models computational efficiency by 10%; 10% reduced waste in mined minerals 
by identifying optimal crushing size; Reduction of electrical energy consumption by 5%; CO2 emissions reduction by 
5%; Reduction of area/volume needed for pre -sorting by >35%; Laser -based detection 80 -90% over the project 
duration for size.  
  
SO2. Achieve game -changing resource efficiency improvements through new process technologies (KER2) 
Addressing the issue of dust generation and losses through process gasses, PRIM -ROCK will develop a new, 
 
6  Artemova, A.V .; Maklakov, S.S.; Shiryaev, A.O.; Osipov, A.V .; Petrov, D.A.; Rozanov, K.N.; Lagarkov, A.N. Influence of Hydrog en 
Reduction Stage Conditions on the Microwave Properties of Fine Iron Powders Obtained via a Spray -Pyrolysis Technique. Magnetism 2023, 
3, 90-101. https://doi.org/10.3390/magnetism3020008  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 6  
indirectfired rotary kiln (IFRK) as well as a microwave rotary kiln (MRK), and optimise their design to vastly expand 
the spectrum of raw material size that can be processed via both the calcination and roasting processes, through: 1. 
Producing a lab-scale IFRK prototype at TRL4 for operational data generation and model training (T6.1–NTUA).  
2. Performing advanced physicochemical (T2.3–NTUA, T2.4–ITA) and thermophysical (T2.3–CIRCE, T2.4–BUL) 
simulations for modelling the microscopic and macroscopic behaviour of the calcination and roasting processes 
in the IFRKs. Advanced modelling and design of  the MRK (T2.5 –CEIN). Developing physics -based Reduced 
Order Models based on the outputs of the thermophysical simulations, so that more efficient surrogated models 
can be obtained from off-line full order simulations to be embeded in higher -level models (larger scales) (T6.2– 
ITA, CIRCE). Simulating the whole process behaviour to obtain the optimal design architecture (T6.3–NTUA).  
3. Delivering 2 IFRK prototypes, tailored for calcination and roasting (T6.4 –NTUA) and 1 MRK tailored for 
sulphide roasting (T6.5–CEIN).  
KPIs: Design, development and delivery of 1 lab-scale IFRK, 2 pilot-scale IFRKs and 1 pilot-scale MRK; IFRKs: 2m, 
4-10kg/h, 6 heating zones up to 1200 o; MRK: tube reactors of 5 -12cm diameter, 915MHz, 5 -30kg/h; Technology 
capable of coupling of process steps (roasting+H 2 reduction); Eliminating reductive smelting and increasing the 
efficiency of reduction to over 80% for ferronickel; ROMs that can be executed in real time in simple devices and that 
can reproduce the process KPIs under steady-state conditions with > 90% accuracy; >90% conversion through raw 
material calcination.  
  
SO3. Leverage innovative intensified processes to further improve material efficiency through post -thermal 
processing treatment (KER3)  
Adopting a circular and holistic approach the material efficiency is further leveraged utilising breakthrough, 
technically and economically feasible, and environmentally sound post-processes, through:  
1. Modelling of a Microwave Induced Plasma (MIP) reactor tailored to transform the of hydrogen sulphide, 
generated (H2S) during metal sulphide reduction, to Hydrogen (H 2) and Sulphur (S), towards the reutilisation of 
H2 in the kilns (T2.6–EUT).  
2. Modelling of a heat exchanger for controlled cooling of the gases coming from the MIP reactor (T2.6–BUL).  
3. Developing a virtual toolkit for the exploitation of byproduct (enriched CO 2) valorisation in e -Methanol 
production, supported by technoeconomic analysis to demonstrate investment viability (T9.5–CORE).  
4. Manufacturing and delivering of the MIP reactor at pilot-scale tailored to sulphide roasting (T6.6–EUT).  
5. Manufacturing and delivering of the heat exchanger prototype (T6.7–BUL).  
KPIs: Hydrogen reduction of pure oxide and sulphide minerals at lab -scale at pilot scale (TRL6) with H 2 and S 
decomposition and recovery of both elements at >95% efficiency; Minimum mineral reduction degree 80%; The effect 
of the process parameters, including particle size, temperature, hydrogen partial pressure, reaction time, on the 
process recovery and kinetics, as well as the optimum operation conditions to achieve maximum metal reduction will 
be studied; Technical target: to achieve >97% reduction effi ciency at optimum conditions), 35% reduced process 
energy footprint, process time.  
  
SO4. Development of digitalisation framework to optimize the resource efficiency of the new processes (KER4) 
Development and deployment of a flexible, interoperable and scalable digitalisation framework comprised of:  
1. A complete network of sensing techniques, such as SWIR (Shortwave Infrared), NIR (Near Infrared), VIS 
(Visible), Raman, Fluorescence and LIBS (Laser Induced Breakdown spectroscopy), coupled with 
HybridEnsemble Modelling for data fusion that can be readily tailored to pre-process, process, and post-process 
realtime monitoring requirements. (T3.2–IRIS)  
2. A Process Control System (PCS) overviewing and managing the different tools in all stages of processing. The 
process control system embeds horizontal functionalities (e.g., logs, alerts, security and safety measures, and 
integration with legacy systems) for the smooth management of all stages of the processes. (T3.3, T5.1–MAGG).  
3. Secure and interoperable multilayer data management platform, providing the resources needed for the planning 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 and real-time monitoring of the process lifecycle, through a common 
framework of different spectroscopic process analytical technologies and implementing data fusion (T3.1, T5.3–
IRIS).  
4. AI-based data-driven models to identify the optimal parameter space for enhancing the resource efficiency of the 
IFRKs and MRK (T5.2–SCCH, CORE)  
5. Decision Support System (DSS) and user-friendly interface for monitoring of the processes in (near) real-time and 
suggest optimal settings to the user (T5.4–SCCH, CORE)  
6. 3D visualization of the processes leveraging advanced data interface technologies (T5.5–STAM)  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 7  
KPIs: Increase the control and therefore the quality of the thermal processes; Improvement in the accuracy of 
predictive modelling (through the adoption of modern AI-driven models and transfer learning techniques) at 20% or 
higher, as compared to either existing predictive modelling results or expert-based predictions; Enhanced resource 
efficiency through process digital optimisation by ~5%.  
  
SO5. Deploy and consolidate a technology adoption framework  
Establish the appropriate baselines and methodologies in the design phase of the project (T1.5–ADMR). Conduct the 
following types of assessments in the development and integration phase of the project (T6.8–ADMR). Consolidate 
the assessments in the deployment and finalisation phase of the project:  
1. Assessment of energy efficiency and intensity, measuring and validating the energy consumption per unit of output 
across all processes and benchmarking energy use against industry standards and best practices, including a Life 
Cycle Sustainability Assessme nt (LCSA) and Evaluate Societal and Environmental Impacts: To quantify the 
broader societal and ecological benefits or risks associated with the project, ensuring alignment with 
environmental regulations and societal expectations (T9.2–PRINS)  
2. Technoeconomic assessments for comparative evaluation against existing processes, including cost drivers and 
financial benefits of the proposed solutions and energy footprint calculation (T9.1–ADMR).  
3. Assess and improve workplace effects and OHS performance: Develop strategies for workplace improvement and 
workforce development through capacity building (up/re skilling), addressing skills, organisational change, 
eliminating hazards and identifying risks (T9.3, T9.4–EUROC).  
4. Business potential assessment and business plan development: To create a robust business plan that outlines 
project implementation, market entry, and scaling strategies, ensuring financial sustainability and market 
competitiveness of the project outcomes (T10.2,11.2,12.2–STAM).  
5. Develop and implement a comprehensive strategy to identify relevant existing and emerging standards, and utilize 
insights from this analysis to inform the development process on the hand (e.g. ensuring interoperability for data 
sharing), as well as for eng aging effectively with standardization bodies to actively contribute to ongoing 
standardization efforts, focusing on significant contributions to the development or modification of standards that 
align with the project’s objectives and advancements (T10.3,11.3,12.3–UNE)  
6. Foster Clustering and Networking, creating synergies with other projects, initiatives, funding programmes and 
stakeholders in the field, enhancing knowledge exchange, achieving multiplier effects, and fostering innovation 
ecosystems (T10.1,11.1,12.1–CORE).  
KPIs: LCA decrease global warm potential GWP100 by >80% (excluding H 2 production), assessments and OHSE 
carried out for each IUC, DEC KPIs (see Section 2.2).  
  
SO6. Establishment and demonstration of two pilot-scale units  
1. Deployed in Greece (NTUA premises) comprising the RMI system and the IFRK, tailored to calcination.   
2. Deployed in Spain (EUT premises) comprising an RMI system, IFRK, MRK, MIP and heat -exchanger, tailored 
to roasting.  
3. Technological assessment of demonstrations (T8.5–NTUA)  
IUC1,2 will be demonstrated in the Greek pilot unit, while IUC3,4-5 will be piloted in the Spanish one, with potential 
additional sample processing for comparative assessment according to initial results.   
Table 1. Target process efficiency improvements in PRIM-ROCK  
  Industrial Use case  Pre-processing   Process  Process  Post-process  
  
IUC#1 Limestone 
(CaCO3)  
>50% reduction of 
mass lost during 
handling (4-6% of 
total mass as 
fine/ultrafine) through 
detection (OPSR, 
XRT) and optimisation 
of particle size 
(crushing)  
>90% reduction in 
kiln dust losses due to 
drag (inc. ring  
formation) that 
comprise between 5%  
(for concentrates) and 
25% of raw material 
lost or collected in 
filters (removal of  
Virtual toolkit for feasibility assessment of Carbon 
Capture of enriched CO2 produced by calcination 
and utilisation in e-fuels.   IUC#2 Magnesite  
(MgCO3)  
IUC#3 Laterite (Fe, 
Ni  oxides)  
Direct reduction with H2 
to increase efficiency 
from 45% up to 90% 
and eliminate pre- or 
post- reduction steps  
Recovery of H2 reducing 
agent through treatment 
in MIP and utilisation of 
Gas  
Cooling Heat Exchanger  
IUC#4 Sphalerite  
concentrate (ZnS)  
 IUC#5 Chalcopyrite  
concentrate (CuS)  based on process  pelletisation stage). Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 
20/09/2024eliminating 95% of  to maximise recovery requirements  losses  >90%.  
Table 2. Pertinence of project objectives in relation to the call  
HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-41  SO  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 8  
To reach ambitious targets regarding resource efficiency, disruptive process technologies must be developed in addition to 
process efficiency options for existing technologies.  
1, 2, 3  
Develop disruptive process technologies to improve resource efficiency, such as those based on process intensification (e.g., 3D 
printed processes equipment, coupling of process steps, new processes that integrate multiple reaction steps, activation of 
molecules using renewable energy via alternative processes e.g. microwave, plasma);   
2, 3  
or to prevent and minimise waste generation by, e.g. processes that adjust in real time to feedstock changes or that have tig hter 
processing control solutions to ensure higher yields from complex and fluctuating raw material feeds;  
1  
Where relevant advanced process technologies and their combinations need to be developed and supported by advanced 
materials innovation and the implementation of enabling digital technologies including advanced concepts on process control 
and data driven Artificial Intelligence.   
1, 2, 3, 4  
The proposals should include energy efficiency, techno -economic and life -cycle assessments considering the overall process. 
This should also include the assessment of possible societal and environmental impact and the effects on the workplaces (skills, 
organisational change, and others).  
5  
Proposals submitted under this topic should include a business case and exploitation strategy, as outlined in the introduction to 
this Destination.  
5  
Research must build on existing standards or contribute to standardisation. Where relevant interoperability for data sharing 
should be addressed.  
4, 5  
All proposals should build on or seek collaboration with existing projects and develop synergies with other relevant European , 
national or regional initiatives, funding programmes  
5  
  
1.1.2  Ambition  
Innovations #1,2 Separation and sorting technology toolset as part of RMI (KER1)  
Separation Technology for Optimal Mineral Crushing Size  
State of the Art : In the ore sorting process, determining the optimal crushing size for mined minerals is a critical 
step. This factor greatly influences the efficiency of sensor-based sorting technologies. At the same time, numerous 
sensing technologies capable of provid ing insightful information and details regarding the materials’ physical and 
chemical properties (i.e. optical, spectral reflectance/absorption, magnetic properties, etc.) 7 have emerged. In detail, 
colour-based characterization techniques have been designed and implemented, ample of identifying minerals of 
distinct colours (e.g. dark-coloured vs light-coloured) with high accuracy8,9. The systems’ accuracy, however, drops 
drastically, circa 60%, when the samples under examination show colour resemblance (i.e. various tones of same 
colour). In addition, hyperspectral sensors are used to extract the ores’ unique spectral signatures (up to 2500nm), 
which are closely related to their molecular vibrational properties, achieving an identification accuracy of up to 90%10. 
Nonetheless, despite the fast-paced development of the sensing hardware, no extensive analysis has been conducted 
on the correlation between the size of the input feedstock and the overall performance of the sorting system.  
Breakthrough: Within PRIM-ROCK an exploratory analysis will be conducted to estimate the optimal, valorisation 
chain-specific crushing size of minerals, leveraging information acquired by spectroscopic (up to 5000nm) and 
microscopy sensors and taking into consideration the overall requirements (i.e. feedstock purity, grain size, particle 
size distribution, etc.) of the valorisation flow with the goal to process these materials further optimally. Certain 
process parameters, such as the size of crushing of mined minerals, will be correlated with the sorting effectivity.  
Adaptive Sorting System for Ore Streams  
State of the Art: Currently developed sorting systems delving into multi-sensory inference, utilizing an ensemble of 
sensors (e.g. optical RGB sensors, hyperspectral imaging, X-Ray technology, etc.) to enrich the acquired information 
for analysis11. Common ground to every sorting system is the need for a mechanism to segregate ores based on the 
output of the characterization process. To this end, various approaches have been proposed to automate the physical 
sorting of such materials that re -direct them to the respective bins by a) robotic arm 12 , b) pneumatic means 8. 
Depending on the sensing technology and the materials to be sorted, the separation accuracy of online methodologies 
 
7   X. Luo, K. He, Y . Zhang, P. He, and Y . Zhang, ‘A review of intelligent ore sorting technology and 
equipment development’, international  Journal of Minerals, Metallurgy and Materials, vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 1647–1655, Sep. 2022.  
8 C. Bergmann, Developments in Ore Sorting Technologies, Council for Mineral Technology, Randburg, 2009, p. 75.  
9 C.Y . Xu, The application of photoelectric color separator and the optimization in mineral separation process of some mine, Wo rld Nonferrous 
Met., 2016, No. 17, p. 31.  
10 N. Okada, Y . Maekawa, N. Owada, K. Haga, A. Shibayama, and Y . Kawamura, ‘Automated Identification of Mineral Types and Grain Size 
Using Hyperspectral Imaging and Deep Learning for Mineral Processing’, Minerals, vol. 10, no. 9, 2020.  
11 D. Peukert, C. Xu, and P. Dowd, ‘A Review of Sensor-Based Sorting in Mineral Processing: The Potential Benefits of Sensor Fusion’, Minerals, 
vol. 12, no. 11, 2022.  
12 H.J. Wang, X.P. Liu, G. Wang, and S. Han, Optimization of mobile manipulator sorting path based on improved genetic algorithm, J. Beijing  
Univ. Posts Telecommun., 43(2020), No. 5, p. 34  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 9  
ranges from 60% up to 90%8. The design and implementation of ore sorting systems, up to this day, however, focuses 
on the maximization of commonly used performance metrics, such as accuracy, precision, picks per minute, etc., 
hence constituting the sorting systems rigid and incapable of adapting dynamically to new sorting criteria. Although 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
these metrics are crucial to quantify the system’s overall capacity to execute fast and accurately the separation task, 
their maximization does not necessarily contribute towards the optimal valorisation path of ores. Therefore, at present, 
sorting systems  combine powerful, high -resolution and information -dense sensors to marginally optimize their 
performance, without taking into consideration the valorisation requirements, the output stream’s characteristics, and 
the available raw-materials.  
Breakthrough: PRIM-ROCK ‘s goal is to upgrade the sorting process for mineral ore raw -materials by means of 
both hardware and software in order to constitute the system versatile and dynamically adaptive to a wider range of 
criteria, as they are defined by the overall valorisation process’ needs. To this end, a lab scale RMI mechanism and a 
pilot scale RMI sorting mechanism will be designed and implemented capable of identifying and ultimately sort the 
raw materials from the mined ore stream, based on dynam ic classification criteria (e.g. size, purity of sorted 
magnesite, etc.). An innovative intelligent Decision Support System (DSS) will be leveraged to estimate the optimal 
classification thresholds. Input to the DSS will be the combination of the optimal, valorisation flow-specific crushing 
size, the raw-materials’ physical and chemical properties, as well as requirements of the upcoming valorisation flow, 
such as particle distribution, purity of input stream, etc. The classification of the ore streams will  be supported by 
hyperspectral and microscopy imaging sensors, a pneumatic system will be responsible for the segregation of 
fine/ultrafine ores into their respective categories, while a delta robot equipped with an end -effector (e.g. gripper, 
vacuum) will handle coarser, bigger materials of the input stream, with accuracy more than 95%.  
Innovation #3 New indirect-fired rotary kiln (IFRK) technology for the replacement of direct-fired 
rotary kilns (DFRK) (KER2)  
State of the Art : Rotary kilns have become the backbone of many industrial processes, such as in roasting and 
calcination, particularly in recent years as the pressure to create a circular economy has continued to rise. Nowadays, 
in thermal processing Direct-fired rotary kilns (DFRKs) are mainly used, which rely on direct contact between the 
process gas and the material in order to heat the material to the specified temperature 14,15. Direct-fired kilns can be 
either of the co-current design, or counter current design, referring to the direction that the process gas flows through 
the drum in relation to the material. While DFRKs are relatively simple in design, operation and maintenance and 
they are efficient in terms of heat transfer due to the direct conta ct between the material and the combustion gases, 
they also have some major drawbacks which turn out to be crucial in many applications. By adapting DFRK 
technology, off-gases flows with an inherent velocity are produced and particles that are too fine can become entrained 
in the process gas flow and carried out through the exhaust gas system. This results in a high rate of reprocessing and 
can significantly reduce the overall process efficiency. Dealing with this problem requires the design of the kiln to be 
centered around permissible gas velocities as opposed to heat transfer requirements. Additionally, DFRKs provide a 
limited atmosphere control as the atmosphere inside the kiln is essentially the same as the combustion atmosphere, 
where oxygen is also pr esent. As a result, DFRKs cannot maintain an inert or non -reactive atmosphere and the 
inevitable oxidizing environment can affect the quality of materials that are sensitive to oxidation. Finally, the direct 
exposure of the material to the heat leads to a gradient in temperature, with parts of the material closer to the flame 
being hotter than those further away. This uneven temperature distribution can affect the consistency and quality of 
the process’s material, leading to a non-uniform final product.  
Breakthrough: In PRIM -ROCK a technology for electrified indirect -fired rotary kiln (IFRK) will be developed, 
where the kiln is heated from the outside, using a heat shroud, and the material is heated via contact with the hot kiln 
shell. Hence, IFRKs are able to treat all granulometry ranges, including finely divided solids as well, as they are not 
in intimate contact with hot combustion gases. As a result, the raw material losses are minimized. Furthermore, IFRKs 
can provide the necessary controlled environ ment for effective material processing, like the absence of oxygen at 
high temperatures and the utilisation of an oxygen free reductive environment. As the heat source is external, the 
indirect heating method allows for precise control of the temperature a nd provide more uniform heat distribution, 
minimizing the risk of localized overheating or thermal gradients within the material. Innovation #4 Novel 
microwave rotary kiln for sulphide roasting (KER2)  
 
State of the Art : Conventional rotary kiln installed in the industry typically rely on direct flames from fossil fuels 
and boast high capacity of production (around 200t/h) and require a residence time of over 2 hours for a proper heat 
transfer. Additionally, gases of combustion and reaction are intermixed, leading to uncontrolled atmospheres and non-
extractable reaction gases. Microwave rotary kilns emerge as a promising solution for downsizing, energy efficiency 
 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 10  
and fast processing time. They aim to bridge the industry gap, as exemplified by patent WO/2016/128596 from CEIN, 
and through various projects involving CEIN and NTUA, like DAPhNE, DESTINY and RemovAL, some of which 
have found industrial application. Carbothermal reduction with microwave heating has been  
14 S. Sarbishei, K.L. Tafaghodi, The effect of sulfur content of rotary kiln fuel on the composition of nickel laterite calcine, Fuel, 280 (2020),   
Article 118648, 10.1016/j.fuel.2020.118648  
15 Fu, X.; Chen, Z.; Xu, X.; He, L.; Song, Y . Deposits in Gas-fired Rotary Kiln for Limonite Magnetization-Reduction Roasting: Characteristics 
and Formation Mechanism. Metals 2019, 9, 764. https://doi.org/10.3390/met9070764  
thoroughly studied 16 and successfully demonstrated 17 with the process carried out under controlled atmosphere in a 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 solid-phase flow microwave reactor, reaching TRL4/5 in 
microwave pilot plants developed during projects such as RemovAL, DESTINY and Sulfometae.  
Breakthrough: PRIM-ROCK is set to revolutionize the roasting process through electrification, utilizing an ultrafast 
microwave process intensified by hydrogenation of sulphides. The innovative microwave rotary kiln will operate 
under a controlled atmosphere, capable of applying hydrogen as a reactant. It features a microwave applicator with 
electromagnetic modulation along the kiln, facilitating ultra-fast roasting processes and real-time tuning thanks to a 
unique monitoring and control system. High -power d ensity modulation enables swift material transformation, 
typically in less than 2 minutes. Precise atmospheric conditions will be maintained using pressure differentials, 
ensuring adequate residence time for the hydrogen reaction. As the dry, granular mate rial passes through the 
microwave rotary kiln, it is thermally transformed in the presence of reactive gases at high temperatures into 
separable, enriched intermediate metal products. Reaction gases will be continuously extracted and collected during 
the process.  
Innovation #5 Hydrogen utilisation as a reducing agent for metal reduction from their oxide and 
sulphide ores  
State of the Art: Historically, the metallurgical sector has predominantly utilized coal as a source for carbon, due to 
its abundance and cost-effectiveness. Carbon is used as a reducing agent to extract most metals by eliminating oxygen 
from oxide ores, releasing substan tial carbon dioxide emissions during the process. As the process industries push 
towards decarbonisation, a decisive shift from carbon is enabled by the adoption of hydrogen as: (a) hydrogen serves 
as both a sustainable energy source and an eco -friendly reducing agent in metal production and (b) hydrogen can 
enhance performance due to many factors. These include the lack of contaminants found in coal and coke, that 
simplifies metal purification. Moreover, the reduction temperature is lower in H 2 based processes, while simpler, 
more efficient, and controllable continuous reactors can be utilised. Finally, consistent hydrogen supply through RES 
is possible, while simultaneously reducing reliance on coal mining and imports. Nonetheless, there are ch allenges. 
Hydrogen is only commercially utilized in a limited number of refractory metals (i.e., W, Mo) and partly utilized in 
Ni and Co metals production. Hydrogen reduction of metal oxides has been extensively studied at laboratory scale, 
particularly in regard to kinetics and reaction mechanism18. The challenge with sulphide ores, a significant source of 
critical metals, lies in managing the produced hydrogen sulphide gas, unlike in the case of oxide ores that produce 
water. Thermodynamic analyses indicate the potential for hydrogen to reduce oxides and sulphides of these critical 
metals. However, industrial-scale application faces hurdles such as: (a) underdeveloped thermodynamic models for 
solid-gas reactions and gas phase equilibria; (b) limited understanding of gas-solid reaction kinetics and mechanisms; 
(c) insufficient knowledge on the impact of ore pre -treatment on hydrogen reduction efficiency; (d) lack of 
comprehensive experimental data for scaling up to pilot and industrial levels; (e) uncertainties around the economic 
feasibility considering hydrogen costs; and (f) challenges in safely managing toxic gases like H 2S19. The utilization 
of hydrogen for reducing critical metals from their ores is still in early stages, necessitating further development of 
fundamental knowledge and resolution of key technical challenges.  
Breakthrough: The main innovation proposed in this case is the hydrogen reduction of metals oxides and  sulhpides 
in order to enhance metals recovery and eliminate the use of fossil fuels as all the processes are fully electrified. A 
breakthrough process for the treat ment of Laterite (Fe, Ni oxides), Sphalerite concentrate (ZnS) and Chalcopyrite 
concentrate (CuS) with main advantages including: (i) simplification of the highly complex treatment process of ores 
concentrates and further utilization of low grade sources; (ii) recovery of the used hydrogen positively affecting the 
cost and sustainability of the overall  sulhpide mineral reduction process; (iii) effectively addressing the conventional  
sulhpide ore processes environmental problem of SO2(g) generation, through the efficient processing of H2S and the 
consecutive production of H2 and Sulphur. An efficient method to overcome the thermodynamic barrier and increase 
the copper yield is to shift the reaction equilibrium continuously to the right by introd ucing sufficiently large 
quantities of H2 in the system and continuously removing the generated H2S as soon as it is formed. The coupling of  
sulhpide reduction process with the continuous decomposition of the formed H2S(g) to H2(g) and S(s) will allow the 

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 11  
continuous recycling and feed of the produced H2(g) in sufficient quantities into the system and secure the economic 
performance of the process without adding excess cost.  
16 García-Baños, B.; Catalá -Civera, J.M.; Sánchez, J.R.; Navarrete, L.; López -Buendía, A.M.; Schmidt, L. High Temperature Dielectric  
Properties of Iron - and Zinc -Bearing Products during Carbothermic Reduction by Microwave Heating. Metals 2020, 10, 693. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/met10050693  
17 López-Buendía, AM, Brau, E, Sparis, D., Panias, D Davris, P., Balomenos, E. Iron source from bauxite residues by using microwave 
technology. Proceedings of the 41st international ICSOBA Conference, Dubai, 5 - 9 November 2023. 
https://icsoba.org/proceedings/41stconference-and-exhibition-icsoba-2023/?doc=88  
18 Rukini, A., Rhamdhani, M.A., Brooks, G.A. et al. Metals Production and Metal Oxides Reduction Using Hydrogen: A Review. J. Sustain.  
Metall. 8, 1–24 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s40831-021-00486-5  
19 Physical Chemistry of Metallurgical Processes, First Edition. M. Shamsuddin. The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society. Published by  
John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 2016  
Innovation #6 Hydrogen recovery from roasting by-product gasses through microwave-induced 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/1324 plasma (MIP) treatment   
State of the Art : The state-of-the-art production of critical metals from sulphide ores is highly complex involving 
many high temperature process stages and is directly associated with the production of sulfuric acid.  The production 
of sulfuric acid adds significant cost  to the CAPEX and OPEX of the overall metal extraction process and has low 
market value. In this respect the direct production of critical metals from sulphide minerals with the use of hydrogen 
is a very attractive process alternative as it significantly reduces the processing steps and considerably simplifies the 
overall metal production process. A major drawback of the direct reduction of metal sulphides with hydrogen is the 
formation of unwanted hydrogen sulphide gas (H2S) that is the mai n product of the reaction of the metal sulphides 
with hydrogen. Hydrogen sulphide is a toxic gas and cannot be emitted to the atmosphere as is. Therefore, a 
sustainable process for the direct hydrogen reduction of sulphide minerals should involve, as an in tegral part an 
efficient and economic process of the transformation of hydrogen sulphide to inert, easily manageable, harmless 
compounds. Some of the plasma systems used in the dissociation of H 2S using plasma include the use of a pulsed 
corona discharge reactor20, a gliding arc discharge14, and an ozoniser discharge15, in single or coupled magnetrons16. 
Nonetheless, the challenge remains as H 2 and S recompose when cooling without rapid thermal quenching 17  18 . 
Breakthrough: To address this challenge, a breakthrough, technically and economically feasible, and 
environmentally sound technology enabling the transformation of the generated hydrogen sulphide to Hydrogen (H2) 
and Sulphur (S), is proposed by the PRIM -ROCK project. In the case of sulphide ores, the project proposes a 
breakthrough technology based on the use of hydrogen on an IFR Κ process to reduce the metal sulphides to metal 
and hydrogen sulphide which in turn is decomposed either with by a two-step thermochemical decomposition or with 
decomposition to H2 and Sulphur in a Microwave Plasma reactor. The innovation will be supported by an innovative 
heat exchanger prototype that controls the cooling effect and inhibits the recombination, via thermal quenching. This 
enables the produced H 2 to be recycled in the sulphide reaction process and sell the unused H 2 and the produced 
Sulphur. The proposed process directly addresses all the inherent disadvantages of the conventional production of Ni, 
Co and Cu from sul phide ores like complexity and many high temperature production stages, unusually high CO 2 
emissions, successfully addressing the environmental problems and rendering the production process from H 2 
consumer to H2 producer.  
Innovations #7,8,9 Digitalisation   
Multirange Spectroscopic Platform as part of Hybrid-Ensemble Modelling for data fusion   
To date, there is no popular system that combines spectroscopy with other sensors to improve accuracy by data fusion. 
For this purpose, we will leverage an innovative Multirange Spectroscopic Platform developed by partner IRIS, 
 
13 G. Zhao, S. John & J.Zhang, "Production of hydrogen and sulfur from the hydrogen  sulhpide in a nonthermal-plasma pulsed corona discharge  
reactor," Chemical Eng. Science, vol. 62, pp. 2216–2227, 2007.  
14 K.R. Gutsol, A. Rabinovich & A.Fridman, "Dissociation of H2S in non -equilibrium gliding arc tornado discharge," Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 
vol. 34, pp. 7618–7625, 2009  
15 V . Dalaine, J.M. Cormier, S.Pellerin & P.Lefaucheux, "H2S destruction in 50 hz and 25 khz gliding arc reactors," J. Applied Physics, vol. 84, 
no. 3, pp. 1215–1221, 1998.  
16 K. Hadidi and P. Woskov, "Efficient, modular microwave plasma torch for thermal treatment," Plasma Science and Fusion Center Report, 
MIT.  
17 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.04.006  
18 Microwave-Induced Plasma Torch for Thermal Decomposition of H2S into Hydrogen and Sulfur  
 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 12  
whereby different spectroscopic Process Analytical Technologies (PA Ts) have been engineered into a common 
framework to open the possibility of tackling highly demanding monitoring applications by spectral data fusion in an 
effective and affordable way. This platform, called VISUM Fusion, is a disruptive framework that leverages all the 
common elements-power supply, embedded computer, dedicated software, user interface, communication means and 
regulatory compliance- plus a ‘shared suite’ of the specific sensors/spec trometers, the respective light sources, and 
the suitable probes, capable of delivering the following sensing techniques: SWIR, NIR, VIS spectroscopy; Raman 
spectroscopy; LIBS spectroscopy; Fluorescence spectroscopy. The disruption lies in the fact that we  are activating 
these such techniques through shared spectrometers, as well as common illumination systems (VIS, NIR and SWIR 
can all use a common halogen lamp), power supplies, software drivers (if the spectrometers are purchased from the 
same manufacturer) and -in some cases- optical probes. LIBS, as a powerful analytical technique for the simultaneous 
acquisition of almost all the elements of the periodic table19,27 is of relevance for monitoring applications in minerals 
processing, and as such will be added to the Fusion set-up by incorporating a pulsed laser (for generating plasma), an 
excitation probe and an inspection probe. The LIBS implementation also requires VIS high resolution spectrometers, 
each covering a narrow band to resolve fine peaks. The Fusion -Hybrid-Ensemble effectively addresses the 
requirement for multiple spectrometers, and just one or two will suffice. In this setup, LIBS will not operate in 
isolation; other technologies will accompany it, providing ample redundancy to compensate the lack of resolution. 
This approach  results in a more economical LIBS configuration. This makes the platform ideally suited for 
experimental work related to the measurement or detection of compounds at low concentration, often in Associated with 
document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 complex matrices and with intrinsic barriers that do not match the ideal scenario 
of any of the traditional technologies.  In the Machine Learning (ML) realm, ensemble modelling is a process where 
multiple diverse models are created to predict an outcome, either by using many different modelling algorithms or 
using different training data sets20. The ensemble model then aggregates the prediction of each base model and results 
in once final prediction for the unseen data. The motivation for using ensemble models is to reduce the generalization 
error of the prediction. In this project, we will elevate this concept to the next level by incorporating a new paradigm: 
Hybrid Ensemble, which extends the rather novel concept of ensemble from its original use in ML towards the sources 
of instrumental data when such sources involve a plurality of different physics. The concept is particularly suitable 
for implementing data fusion from a combination of spectroscopic analysers such as LBIS, NIR, Raman; it is intended 
for extracting more sensitive and accurate predictions on chemical composition and physical pr operties than could 
be retrieved by merely using these analysers alone or even by merging the multivariate data from different sensors to 
be further modelled under a  
single common predictive model. Reduced Order Models for the design 
of the indirect-fired rotary kiln:   
State of the Art : The physical -chemical processes involved in the process are complex and affected by many 
variables. Physics -based models can be used for simulation and analysis, but they will inevitably lead to 
computationally intensive simulations (CFD, FEM, DEM) that cannot be used in real -time, which hinders their 
usability in the Digital Twin used for process optimisation. Reduced Order Models (ROMs) can be used to achieve 
real-time ability. Reduced Order Modelling is a mathematical technique to transform complex and computationally 
costly models into real-time applications that can be integrated in production environments, transforming the complex 
mathematics running underneath the models into simple operations that can be solved on -the-fly with very low 
hardware requirements21. An example of state-of-the-art (SoA) implementation of a ROM approach is Twinkle 22, a 
library for building families of solvers to perform Canonical Polyadic Decomposition (CPD) of tensors, developed 
by ITA. This library is able to generate parametric ROMs as products of one-dimensional functions, applying tensor 
factorization techniques on data sets generated by running batches of virtual tests with the original model. It is 
especially focused on post-processing data from CAE simulation tools.   
A complex system is usually described by the interaction of different parameters. An output variable of interest will 
depend on many other input variables, some of which may be intertwined. The 
approximation builds a modal representation of the multi -parametric model 
 
19 Cécile Fabre, Nour Eddine Ourti, Christophe Ballouard, Julien Mercadier, Jean Cauzid, Handheld LIBS analysis for in situ quantification of 
Li and detection of the trace elements (Be, Rb and Cs), Journal of Geochemical Exploration, V olume 236, 2022, 106979, ISSN 0375-6742,  27 
https://libs-info.com/understanding/11/   
20 Vijay Kotu, Bala Deshpande, Chapter 2 - Data Mining Process, Editor(s): Vijay Kotu, Bala Deshpande. Predictive Analytics and Data  Mining, 
Morgan Kaufmann, 2015, Pages 17-36, ISBN 9780128014608, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801460-8.00002-1.   
21  V . Zambrano, R. Rodríguez-Barrachina, S. Calvo, S. Izquierdo , TWINKLE: A digital -twin-building kernel for real -time computer-aided 
engineering, SoftwareX 11 (2020) 100419  
22 V . Zambrano, R. Rodríguez-Barrachina, S. Calvo, S. Izquierdo. TWINKLE: A Digital -Twin-Building Kernel for Real -Time ComputerAided 
Engineering, under revision in Software X, (2019)  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 13  
solution with separated variables and explicit dependency on model parameters. In other words, the output of the 
system is described by means of independent functions, one for each variable separately and related to the output 
variable. The approach is based on the  
assumption that a problem of N, not necessarily independent, variables can be rewritten as the product of N 
onedimensional functions, one for each of the variables of the system, as shown in the equation.  
Breakthrough: Real time, physics -based ROMs will be developed based on the results of high -accurate, but also 
computationally demanding simulations, of the detailed physics taking place inside the electrified indirect-fired rotary 
kiln for roasting (i.e. reacting, multiphase flow with heat transfer). These ROMs will be then embedded and executed 
as a subroutine of higher -level models to enhance its accuracy without increasing the computational effort. ROMs 
will be implemented under modelling standards as Modelica or as standalone FMUs, so they can easily link to other 
codes/libraries of higher-level models. The resulting hybrid models will be exploited for analysis of what-if  
scenarios, and for the optimization of the process parameters. 
Data-based predictive modelling and model generalization:   
State of the Art : Industrial processes involve physical phenomena that evolve over time and can be monitored 
through time-series sensor data. For example, in the lime calcination process 23, the processing time of the material 
may last over several hours, which increases the complexity of capturing the temporal relations of process 
parameters/control inputs with the product quality and efficiency. For this reason, calcination processes are o ften 
studied through fundamental principles of heat and mass transfer equations and CFD simulations24. However, given 
that the kilns under consideration have major technological differences from others, it is required that specific models 
are derived, specifically tailored to each kiln and each process. Due to such specialized modelling, a continuous  
 
validation and calibration of these models is necessary which cannot always be automated. In order to automatize the 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)667 25 67 - 20/09/2024 modelling and optimization of such complex processes, data -based 
modelling techniques and intelligent methods have been used instead, such as neural networks 33, artificial bee colony 
and multivariate regression splines for prediction 26 , or machine learning methods such as linear regression, Lasso, 
support vector regression27. Although machine learning and data-based techniques provide a basis for automatizing the 
generation of predictive models, several challenges remain, namely a) the proper selection of relevant (or similar) and 
high-quality historical datasets and b) the proper selection of relevant parameters (features) that can better capture the 
temporal dynamic phenomena in the time horizon of interest (e.g., when generating predictions). This is because such 
processes involve nonlinear physical phenomena, thus machine learning models should be trained using data of similar 
operating conditions (e.g., similar temperature distribution in lime kiln processes 31). However, even under conditions 
of properly selected datasets and feature parameters, training such AI -based machine learning models may still 
encounter several challenges, such as insufficient data, and changes in the characteristics (e.g., distributions) of the 
features used. Note that in many cases the digitization of such industrial plants has often been completed within the last 
few years, and there may not be sufficiently rich datasets for successfully modelling such processes through AI -based 
techniques, e.g., neural networks. This often leads to poorly performing models or models that cannot be generalized to 
new operating conditions (e.g., to small differences in the material composition, fuel properties, and configuration 
settings). In such cases, transfer learni ng techniques, such as domain generalization 28 and adaptation29 , or model fine 
 
23 Kychkin, A. V ., G. C. Chasparis, and S. Ellero. 2023. “Automated Cross Channel Temperature Predictions for the PFR Lime Kiln Operating 
Support.” In 2023 31st Mediterranean Conference on Control and Automation (MED), 960–66. Limassol, Cyprus: IEEE. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/MED59994.2023.10185790.  
24 Moghaddam, Saied, Pouria Orouji, Ali Mohammad Mirshams, Ehsan Roomizadeh, Yahya Haj Ebne Ali, and Nasim Hamzehloo. 2023. 
“Investigating the Potentials to Improve the Energy Consumption of a Lime Rotary Kiln Using Measurement and CFD Simulation.” Heat and 
Mass Transfer 59 (5): 949–70. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00231-022-03309-9.  
25  Järvensivu, M, K Saari, and S. -L Jämsä-Jounela. 2001. “Intelligent Control System of an Industrial 
Lime Kiln Process.”   Control Engineering Practice 9 (6): 589–606. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0967-0661(01)00017-X.  
26 González Suárez, Víctor Manuel, Esperanza García -Gonzalo, Ricardo Mayo Bayón, Paulino José García Nieto, and Juan Carlos Álvarez 
Antón. 2019. “Predictive Model of Gas Consumption and Air Emissions of a Lime Kiln in a Kraft Process Using the ABC/MARS -Based 
Technique.” The international Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 100 (5): 1549–62. https://doi.org/s00170-018-2773-4.   
27 Benchekroun, M. T., S. Zaki and M. Aboussaleh, “Kiln Predictive Modelisation for Performance Optimization,” In Review, preprint, Jan.  
2023. Doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-2462189/v1.  
28 Zellinger, Werner, Thomas Grubinger, Michael Zwick, Edwin Lughofer, Holger Schöner, Thomas Natschläger, and Susanne SamingerPlatz. 
2020. “Multi-Source Transfer Learning of Time Series in Cyclical Manufacturing.” Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing  31 (3): 777 – 87. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10845-019-01499-4.  
29 Xu, Ruijia, Ziliang Chen, Wangmeng Zuo, Junjie Yan, and Liang Lin. 2018. “Deep Cocktail Network: Multi-Source Unsupervised Domain 
Adaptation with Category Shift.” In 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 3964–73. Salt Lake City, UT: 
IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2018.00417.  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 14  
tuning30, can be used to exploit additional datasets from similar operating conditions or simulation data. However, there 
has been a limited effort to address these challenges in time-series data in industrial processes36, and to the best of our 
knowledge such techniques have not been applied in calcination and roasting processes.  
Breakthrough: Given the absence of sufficiently rich and relevant datasets for modelling calcination and roasting 
processes through AI -based or data -based techniques, we target the development and implementation of a data 
processing pipeline that extends current pract ices in these processes by integrating the following main elements a) 
data pre-processing (involving data quality improvements, filtering, and data aggregations), b) feature engineering 
(involving the utilization of correlation and temporal cau sal techniques), c) standard and sophisticated AI -based 
predictive modelling techniques  (e.g., regression models, recurrent neural networks and LSTM, variational 
autoencoders, and attention networks), d) domain generalization/adaptation techniques for exploiting datasets of 
different sources, i.e., DT simulations and historical data of similar conditions, and e) model fine tuning or ensemble 
modelling by utilizing the most recent data or synthesizing hybrid combinations with physics -based models. More 
specifically, domain generalization, in (d), corrects priorly available datasets (e.g., through optimal parameterization 
of correction factors or projections) that can retain the validity of the models when the operating conditions change, 
which provides robust ness in model performance through time. Model fine tuning, in (e), allows for continuous 
adaptation of the models (e.g., regression models or LSTM) to new operating conditions by incorporating new data 
in the training process as it becomes available, or by  establishing hybrid model combinations (e.g., with the 
physicsbased simulation models).  The proposal team has experience in predictive modelling of industrial and 
calcination processes31, feature engineering32, transfer learning in manufacturing and time series datasets38,36.  
1.1.3 Positioning    
Technology  Start  End  
Lab-scale RMI characterization mechanism : A high accuracy system that identifies and characterizes ore streams to 
determine the most efficient crushing size  
4  6  
RMI sorting mechanism : A high accuracy, high performance sorting system for the segregation of mineral ore streams, 
while capable of dynamically, on-line adjusting the sorting hyperparameters  
4  6  
Estimation technology for optimal, valorisation flow -specific crushing sizeAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024: 
An ore pre-treatment module based on correlation analysis of crushing size and valorisation flow  4 6  
Intelligent Decision Support System for raw material valorisation: An intelligent tool to estimate the optimal sorting  
thresholds, based on the calculated crushing size, the physical and chemical properties of minerals and the requirements of 4 6 the overall 
valorisation flow  
Indirect-fired rotary kiln (IFRK): An electrified rotary kiln for the efficient calcination and roasting of mineral ores  4  6  
Microwave rotary kiln (MRK): A microwave kiln for the reduction of metal sulphides  4  6  
Microwave-induced plasma reactor: Plasma treatment for the recovery of H2 from hydrogen sulphide gasses  4  6 Process 
Control System (PCS): For the efficient and user-friendly control of the IFRKs  4  6  
Multirange Spectroscopic Platform: An innovative data infrastructure tailored to  the pilots’ monitoring challenges  4 6 Reduced Order 
Models: Advanced models for reducing the order of the physicochemical and thermophysical simulation  
results for the IFRKs, while maintaining accuracy  4  6  
Data-driven models: AI-based algorithms for the optimization of the IFRKs and MRK resource efficiency  4  6 #§PRJ-OBJ-PO§#
1.2 Methodology    
 
30 Grubinger, Thomas, Georgios C. Chasparis, and Thomas Natschläger. 2017. “Generalized Online Transfer Learning for Climate Control in 
Residential Buildings.” Energy and Buildings 139 (March): 63–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2016.12.074.  
31 Kychkin, A. V ., G. C. Chasparis, and S. Ellero. 2023. “Automated Cross Channel Temperature Predictions for the PFR Lime Kiln Operating 
Support.” In 2023 31st Mediterranean Conference on Control and Automation (MED), 960–66. Limassol, Cyprus: IEEE. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/MED59994.2023.10185790.  
32 Luftensteiner, Sabrina, Michael Mayr, and Georgios Chasparis. 2021. “Filter -Based Feature Selection Methods for Industrial Sensor Data: A 
Review.” In Big Data Analytics and Knowledge Discovery, edited by Matteo Golfarelli, Robert Wrembel, Gabriele Kotsis, A Min Tjoa, and  
Ismail Khalil, 12925:242–49. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Cham: Springer international Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3030-
86534-4_23.  
 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 15  
#@CON-MET-CM@# #@COM-PLE-CP@# PRIM-ROCK 
Concept  
The PRIM-ROCK project aims to meet the pressing demand for resource efficient mineral processes by introducing 
innovative solutions with potential applications across various resource -intensive industrial sectors. The project is 
committed to the transition from fuel-based to electrified thermal processes, advancing both the decarbonisation of 
the industrial sectors and reduction of the material waste, increasing at the same time the competitiveness of the 
industries through higher productivity. At its core, PRIM-ROCK focuses on the calcination and roasting processes of 
mineral ore streams and aims to deliver three state -of-the-art rotary kiln prototypes to replace the highly inefficient 
conventional methods. These comprise two novel indirect -fired rotary kil ns, one for the calcination of lime and 
magnesite and the other for the reduction of metal oxides and sulphides, in addition to a microwave rotary kiln 
specifically tailored for sulphide ores. To further drive decarbonization, hydrogen will be employed as the reducing 
agent for metal oxides and sulphides. To exploit the full potential of the kilns and maximise resource efficiency, the 
raw material will be suitably pre-processed through an advanced and automated system, encompassing classification 
modules, crushing and sorting capabilities. Following a holistic and circular approach, PRIM-ROCK addresses also 
the post-processing stage by developing a cutting -edge microwave-induced plasma reactor to dissociate hydrogen 
sulphide produced during the sulphides roasting into hydrogen and sulphur, reclaiming hydrogen for reuse. To prevent 
recombination of hydrogen sulphide a heat exchanger system will be utilized for controlled cooling before H2 is 
reintroduced in the kilns. Additionally, a virtual toolkit will be developed for assessing the viability of capturing the 
enriched CO 2 generated by the calcination process, while utilizing the recovered H2 to produce e -Methanol. The 
project's innovative approach includes a multifaceted digital framework addressing industrial processes in a highly 
integrated way. A network of sophisticated sensors will be designed and developed to enable the in-depth and accurate 
monitoring and understanding of the systems physical behaviour, while a process control system will provide the 
required access to the critical operational parameters. The project  will consolidate an interoperable and multilayer 
data management platform, providing the resources needed for the planning and real-time monitoring of the process 
lifecycle, through a common framework of different spectroscopic process analytical technologies and implementing 
data fusion. From the design stage, a complete set of simulations will be conducted, including physicochemical, 
thermophysical, reduced order modelling of their results and process simulations, to obtain the optimal design of the 
prototypes. Hybrid digital replicas of the prototypes will be consolidated with the utilisation of AI-based data-driven 
models, along with decision support systems, user-interfaces and 3D visualisation features, to maximise the resource 
efficiency of processes. Finally, to ensure the industrial adoption and uptake of the PRIMROCK solutions, a complete 
analysis of the techno-economic feasibility, sustainability and its overall societal and environmental impact will be 
conducted. The breakthrough technologies wil l be demonstrated in 3 different ASPIRE sections, namely Minerals 
(Magnesite - TERNAMAG, Laterite – NTUA for exploiting Greek FeNi deposits), Cement (Limestone - FORN) and 
None-ferrous metals (Sphalerite, Chalcopyrite – KGHM and mixed sulhpide oresHEGOLD).  
  
Figure 3. Overall concept of the PRIM-ROCK project  
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 16  
KER1 – Raw material intelligence system (ICCS, CIBOS)  
ICCS is set to create an advanced automated system incorporating multiple sensing modules and deep-learning (DL) 
algorithms. The goal is to efficiently and in real-time identify and separate materials, of various grain sizes, detected 
in ore streams. Build ing on the knowledge gained from the Horizon Europe MASTERMINE and W2W projects, 
enhanced DL approaches will be developed to specifically identify and analyze complex non-linear spectral patterns 
in ore streams. In detail, hyperspectral cameras, ample of densely sampling the EM spectrum up to 5000nm, will be 
utilized along with an industrial high -speed RGB camera to optically recognize the particle size distribution and 
chemical composition of each sample, in relation to processing parameters, and hence perform the localization of the 
sample along the conveyor belt.  
Moreover, information regarding the colour of the samples, i.e. levels of white, will be extracted in to order to assist 
the identification process, as well as to characterize it based on that feature. In tandem with the cameras, microscopy 
imaging sensors will be employed to gain further intel on the microscopic structure. In this manner, the samples’ 
unique fingerprint will be defined through the combination of spectral, colour (RGB) and micro-spatial features.  For 
classifying minerals within ore streams, a deep convolutional architecture, such as ViT or GAN, will be employed to 
extract joint features from both the hyperspectral and the microscopy imaging sources. Specifically, the raw input 
streams will firstly be treated by mechanical means, such as vibrational separation, cleaning, crushing, etc., ensuring 
even and uniform distribution along the belt that conveys the samples through the multi -sensory module. Once 
samples have passed through the multi-sensing module the joint spectro spatial information will be processed by the 
deep convolutional model to binary classify the samples. Based on the sample’s size, the most prominent actuation 
sub-system (i.e. delta -type robotic manipulator fitted with either electromechanical or suction -based grasping 
mechanisms to handle larger samples, or pneumatic separation through pressurized air discharge for finer materials 
with median particle size below 3mm) will be selected, and guided by the previously extracted geometrical features, 
to perform the physical separat ion of the samples by placing them in the corresponding container according to the 
classification results. At the end of the conveyor’s belt, an additional bucket is placed to gather unidentified/unsorted 
objects, that will be re-introduced to the system in a second iteration of sorting. In case they fail to be sorted again, 
an offline analysis of those samples will be conducted to identify their specific spectro-spatial properties and provide 
feedback to the sorting system. In this manner, the DL models will be updated to better fit the ore streams distribution, 
and hence increase the systems sorting efficiency.  
A pilot case will be designed, focused on testing 
and validating two advanced and adaptive 
automated sorting prototypes, tailored for the 
calcination and roasting processes, respectively. 
These will facilitate the pre -processing of the 
mineral ore streams to a) identify and characterize 
and b) sort the apparent raw material . Initially an 
RMI characterization mechanism, will be designed 
and implemented to take mineral ore streams as 
input and characterize their content. The pre- 
treatment unit, responsible for processes such as    
mechanical pre -sorting, cleaning and crushing, Figure 4. Concept of the Raw Material Intelligence system will be 
installed prior the characterization system. The treated samples will, afterwards, be analysed using a combination of 
RGB, hyperspectral and microscopy imaging sensors, while DL models based on SoA architectures, e.g. CNN, Visual 
Transformers, GANs, etc., will perform the classification task and ultimately the characterization of raw material, 
based on its optical, i.e. sample’s white levels, and  spectral properties. In this manner, an extensive analysis of the 
system’s capacity to analyse and characterize both coarse and fine grains will be conducted. The pilotscale RMI 
sorting prototypes will be developed, in parallel, employing the RMI characte rization mechanism as the basis of its 
design. Specifically, the proposed sorting systems will utilize and build upon the same multi -sensor module, while 
incorporating a combination of robotic mechanisms, i.e. delta robot with a gripper or a vacuum endeffe ctor for 
handling bigger and coarser samples, and a pneumatic system for the separation of fine/ultrafine grains. The sorted 
output stream will be then forwarded to the IFRKs. The integration of the lab-scale RMI characterization mechanism, 
post the IFRKs will, also, be investigated. In this manner, an automated characterization method for the products of 
the processes is proposed, thus a) allowing for better evaluation of the pipeline’s overall efficiency and b) providing 
further feedback to optimize the crushing and sorting of the ore streams.  
To increase the system’s versatility an intelligent agent will be trained on data extracted during the sorter’s operation 
time, to develop a Decision Support System (DSS) that dynamically estimates the optimal separation criteria and 
adapts on-line the sorted output stream. In detail, the intelligent DSS will leverage information acquired through the 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 17  
operational phase of the sorter to select the optimal separation settings based on the properties of the input stream. 
Different combinations of pre-treatment approaches (e.g. crushing, washing, etc.) and classification schemes will be 
tested to identify the number of sorting scenarios the DSS may suggest and hence increase the overall performance 
of the system. Moreover, by utilizing the data collected from both RMI mechanisms,  a continuous analysis of the 
composition of the input and output stream will be conducted, thus identifying changes in the streams’ composition 
in terms of minerals and other substances concentration. In this manner, the deep learning classifier model will be 
regularly updated so that its output will dynamically adapt to circularity and sustainability criteria, such as aspects 
related to offer vs demand, logistics optimizations, supply chain management, etc. The systems’ performance will be 
evaluated, based on absolute metrics (e.g. accuracy, picks per minute, etc.), as well as according to multidisciplinary, 
sustainability criteria, aiming to align the system’s output characteristics with the rest of valorisation chain.   
  
KER2 – Intensification technologies for thermal processing (NTUA, CEIN)  
Indirect-fired rotary kilns for calcination and roasting of mineral ores  
The process intensification component of the project will design, develop, and validate innovative and efficient 
technologies. Specifically, NTUA will construct two novel Indirect -fired rotary kilns (IFRKs) to replace the 
conventional Direct-fired rotary kilns (DFRKs) used in the calcination and roasting processes of mineral ore streams. 
In order to efficiently control transfer of gases and solids, hoods at feed and discharge ends of the kiln shell will be  
designed. Special seals between hoods and rotating  shell will minimize ingress air and maintain required process 
atmosphere. As kiln shell will be heated externally, the selected material must withstand temperature, corrosion, 
and/or abrasion. Special attention will be given to enshrouding furnace for optimum heating up of the kiln shell with 
the electric emitters while isolating process gases from environment. Heating zones with electric emitters, insulation, 
wiring, and junction boxed for fixed kiln length increments will be designed to be easily serviceable, replaceable, and 
exchangeable. Sensing devices like thermocouples, H 2 mass flow, power meters, etc. will provide dynamic data for 
system monitoring and control.   
The ores will be charged from the material bins to the kiln. The hydrogen needed for reduction will be pre-heated in 
a heat exchanger, before entering the reactor. To ensure a uniform gas distribution inside the reactor, a propriety gas 
distributor design will be applied. After reduction and final material sampling, the whole material is collected again 
in the material bins and discharged afterwards into a quenching vessel (cooler). Gas recycling stream will be passed 
to a heat exchanger and a gas cooler, f or removing the formed water vapor during reduction. Unreacted hydrogen 
will be recycled and re-used in the process again after passing a recycle gas compressor, the heat exchanger, and the 
reducing gas furnace. The theoretical hydrogen consumption by the reduction will be added to the process before the  
 
Figure 5. Top: Electrified vertical kiln for microspheres production, Bottom: validated CFD modelling (Contours of air 
temperature (left) and particles’ concentration) for the electrified furnace33  
  
NTUA team has an extensive knowledge, on research and technology development in the field of extractive industries, 
covering actions for designing, simulation and prototyping sustainable metallurgical routes by utilising H2 and energy 
 
33  Panagiotis M. Angelopoulos, Antonis Peppas & Maria Taxiarchou (2023) Modelling the Thermal 
Treatment and Expansion of Mineral  Microspheres (Perlite) in Electric Furnace Through Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD): Effect of 
Process Conditions and Feed Characteristics, Mineral Processing and Extractive Metallurgy Review, DOI: 10.1080/08827508.2022.2161536  
heat exchanger.  
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 18  
efficient processes. The team is also equipped with equipment for physicochemical characterisation like ICP -MS, 
AAS, XRF, XRD, laser particle analysers, BET, TG, SEM, TEM and others.  
  
Microwave rotary kiln for the reduction of metal sulphides  
The development of the PRIM-ROCK project includes the construction of a microwave kiln for the reduction process 
of metal sulphides, designed with adjustable electromagnetic fields within the tube and featuring a novel system 
capable of modulating the signal to accommodate the dynamic changes occurring during the roasting reaction. This 
innovation is crucial for managing the transition of materials from moderate low dielectric properties to conductive 
states, necessitating precise control of the electrical field in a reactor designed for metallic materials. An advanced 
control system will collect thermal and microwave property data, which will be instrumental in developing the 
algorithms and software necessary for real-time tuning of the process. This level of control is essential for optimizing 
the roasting reaction and ensuring efficient treatment of materials.  
  
Figure 6. Tests with metallic component (left) sulphides (centre). Control system with microwave parameters, with polar 
Smith chart as base to be used in PRIM-ROCK (right).  
  
Direct reduction of metal ores using hydrogen as a reducing agent  
A breakthrough process for the treatment of metal sulphide concentrates is proposed involving hydrogen reduction 
of the concentrate in the IFRKs to produce metals and hydrogen sulphide as a result of the reaction between hydrogen 
with sulphur. The process is intended to be used in tandem with KER3 to achieve the sustainable use of hydrogen. 
The main advantages of the proposed process include: (i) simplification of the high complexity of metal sulphide 
concentrates, (ii) recovery of the used hydrogen affect ing the cost and sustainability of the overall process, (iii) 
solving the environmental problem of SO2(g) generation in the processing of sulphide ores through the production of 
sulphur. The process is simpler and less energy intensive. Nonetheless, as a new process, there are gaps in fundamental 
knowledge needed: where available, the results of lab experiments carried out by the project partners or available in 
the literature will be considered in the experimental design, but a significant number of lab tests will still be needed 
carried out to fill the gaps in the existing knowledge in terms of refining process kinetics and optimising the 
parameters of the reduction process. It is important to mention that although there is initial knowledge in the study of 
pure materials, this knowledge is not considered in many cases complete and needs significant work effort for 
additional testing. Concerning metal ores/concentrates and tailings very few references are known for the exploitation 
cases proposed in this project. The main outcomes from lab scale testing include development of proper mathematical 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
models to predict the technical behaviour of pure oxide and sulphide materials as well as ores, concentrates and 
tailings under variable process conditions; identification of the optimum operation conditions in each of the studied 
systems; and determination of the quality of each product in terms of metal extraction and product purity. Based on 
the acquired knowledge from the lab scale testing, continuous operation bench scale tests will be carried out at the 
optimised conditions to produce adequate quantities (3 – 6 kg) to evaluate the process efficiency, hydrogen and energy 
consumption and the quality of the targeted metals. Tests will be performed in the modified IFRK. In terms of 
processing in the IFRK, the process is straightforward: the kiln will be lo aded with sulphide ore, where the 
preprocessing (particle size, grinding, pelletisation) will be investigated. The optimal heat distribution will be defined 
across the three heating zones, in addition to other parameters (e.g., staying time, rotation, tilt, H2 pressure). The main 
outcome of the bench scale tests includes the determination of the optimum conditions in each case studied in terms 
of process conditions, H 2 consumption and product quality to enable the engineering design of the pilot and 
demonstration tests. Depending on each case, the produced material can be a marketable ferroalloy, as in the case of 
nickel laterite treatment, or an intermediate product th at needs to be further processed to extract and purify the 
contained critical metal. Consi derable research effort will be allocated to the decomposition of the H 2S produced 
during the hydrogen reduction of sulphides, to H2 gas and solid sulphur, as this process provides significant prospect 
to considerably enhance the technical and economic viability of the under-development solutions.  
  
  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 19  
KER3 – Post-processing solutions (EUT, BUL, NTUA)  
Microwave-induced plasma reactor for H2 recovery  
PRIM-ROCK will demonstrate at TRL6 an integrated and sustainable MIP reactor for the decomposition of H 2S 
gasses and recovery of H 2(g) and S(s), with subsequent reutilisation of H 2 for direct reduction in the process stage. 
As described, PRIM-ROCK will employ hydrogen as reducing agent to produce critical (Fe, Ni, Co) and important 
metals (Zn, Cu) in an environmentally friendly and economically sustainable way. The capacity of processing several 
materials with the same technology showcases the flexibility and 
adaptability of the solution. To realise the potential of the 
technology, it is imperative to generate fundamental knowledge, 
enriching existing models of kinetics 34  and especially on the 
plasma thermal quenching effect of the reverse reactions35.   The 
process to be employed is comprised of the following elements: 
(1) Reactor supply: To supply the reactor, a mixture of H 2S and 
an inert gas (e.g., argon) is used. The feed gas composition and 
supply rate will be extensively studied (projected 70 -100% H2S 
concentration, at flow rates of 0.53l/sec, preheating temperature). 
(2) Plasma generation: The feed gas is then introduced into a 
plasma reactor, where it is subjected to a microwave field. The 
microwave field ionizes the gas, creating a plasma that 
dissociates the H2S molecules into H 2 and S. The parameters in 
this s tage are the power input that also influence the reactor 
temperature. (3) Product separation: The H 2 and S produced in 
the plasma reactor are separated from each other using a 
condenser. The separation process is a critical step in the process, 
as it determines the purity of the final products.  (4) Product 
recovery: The H2 and S are then collected in separate  
containers. This stage is crucial due to the cooling effect, as outside the optimal cooling temperature the original 
reactant H2S  Figure 7. Microwave Induced Plasma reactor (MIP)   
gas is reformed. For this stage, a plasma thermal quenching at EUT premises analysis is very important to 
help design the optimal heat  
exchanger that will retain the hydrogen and sulphur products, inhibiting recombination. Following the simulations, 
experimental work first at bench and then arelevant scale is foreseen. Where available, the results of lab experiments 
carried out by the project partners or available in the literature will be considered in the experimental design.  
  
Design of a heat exchanger system to fit the existing reactor  
 
34  Alexander Friedman, Plasma chemistry. Cambridge University Press, 2009, pp. 744–745   
35 Microwave-Induced Plasma Torch for Thermal Decomposition of H2S into Hydrogen and Sulfur, Mohamed Sassi and Naji Amira, Masdar  
Institute of Science and Technology  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 20  
Cooling of a high temperature surfaces (over 2000°C) presents an extremely challenging heat flux values that makes 
the use of conventional heat exchangers designs unviable. This is mainly due to the nature of suitable coolants for 
this temperature range that takes the heat exchanger solution to the use of liquid metals as coolants, which brings an   
extremely demanding safety process that is usually cost - 
prohibitive in most applications. However, with the 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 advances in 
materials science and the adaptation of the heat pipe 
technology in many high temperature applications, an 
innovative heat pipe heat exchanger for such high heat 
flux applications can be a viable, cost effective and safe 
heat management systems  for the cooling application of 
such walls. It is also due to the ability to control the heat 
transfer process withing the heat pipe system (boiling – 
condensation of the working fluid) through an innovative 
design for the heat pipe condenser sy stem that twill keep 
the heat pipe system operating at a lower temperature than 
the allowed value within its structure to keep the heat 
transfer process  
sustained. An example system was developed by BUL  that was tested in a representative environment to cool 
Figure 8. Heat exchanger used in the silicon industry hot surfaces (1400°C - 2500°C) using a water-cooled (>1500oC) 
for controlled cooling (BUL) heat pipe system with water as its working fluid. During  
the operation of the system, the internal working temperature of the heat pipe was 250°C thanks to the innovative 
condenser design for this heat pipe that facilitated the required active heat removal form eth heat pipe system that 
was absorbed form eth high temperature wall through radiation. An example of the system can be seen in the photos.  
  
CO2 capture and eMethanol production virtual toolkit  
The Virtual Toolkit will simulate in a dynamic way a promising configuration for the exploitation of enriched CO2, 
produced via the calcination process of IUC1 (Lime) and 2 (Magnesite). Within the energy system’s boundary 
conditions, based on the user’s in puts that will set the objective function for each scenario, the recovery of CO2 
through a virtual CCUS unit will feed a virtual e -Methanol production unit, and the system will be modelled for 
technoeconomic and environmental analysis. A Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) will be employed for the 
operational multi-objective optimization algorithm, while Reinforcement Learning (RL) will also be considered. 
Black-box models will be employed for the CCUS and e -fuel production unit, meaning that a data-driven approach 
will be preferred over physical modelling. This will require the collaboration of domain experts. The toolkit will 
provide reliable energy balance information, including emissions and costs and deliver long -term scenarios for 
investments according to end-user priorities and constraints.   
  
  
KER4 – Digital process-line optimisation (IRIS, MAGG, ITA, NTUA, CIRCE, BUL, CORE, SCCH, STAM)  
Scadalytics Industrial IoT data platform  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 21  
The data from VISUM Fusion platform, and from 
any other relevant data source is collected in the 
Scadalytics Data Management Platform that 
consists of a series of layers. The Communication 
Interfaces and APIs layer is designed for data 
integration and interoperability not only with the 
VISUM Fusion, but can also receive data from 
SCADA/ERP, PLC, from other analysers,  
Industrial IoT or field devices and enriched by 
external data (economic, societal). A data 
processing layer performs data conditioning prior 
to its use by the data fusion layer. As discussed, a 
 ground-breaking  advancement  is 
 the combination  the  Multirange 
 Spectroscopic Platform with hybrid-ensemble 
modelling for implementing  data  fusion. 
 The  most straightforward approach for 
implementing data fusion through hybrid 
ensembling involves  
identifying optimal pairs of instruments and  Figure 9. High level schematic of based on Multirange  
machine learning methods within a specific Spectroscopic- Hybrid Ensemble Fusion Platform and Scadalytics ensemble 
architecture, to achieve both the most data management software  
robust and accurate predictive algorithm. An instant evident advantage is a reduction in the number of observations 
(samples) required for developing models that are not prone to undergo overfitting. In fact, the lack of sufficient 
numbers of different sam ples (as many as required for building useful models) is the most frequent barrier to the 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
wide use of machine-learning-based spectroscopic analysers. The hybrid ensembling concept addresses the limitation 
of two extreme approaches: on the one hand, modelling the merged data by means of just one weakly optimal 
algorithm and, on the other hand, applying the machine learning ensemble approach to a dataset that involves limited 
information provided by just one type of spectroscopic analyser. The outputs from this layer can be either sent directly 
to the Scada, can be interfaced through a self -contained User Interface, or can be sent up to an upper layer of 
intelligence for use by predictive models. Indeed, the Scadalytics platform, in combination with the VISUM Fusion, 
has the potential to move minerals processing towards process automation through m ultivariate process control 
(MVPC) and software sensors trained on historic process data. Scadalytics can also connect with a higher -level 
Digital Twin that may be in place or can act itself as the Digital Twin of the productive process that is being monitored.  
Modelling any novel intensified process or, in general, complex systems such as a plasma reactor entails not only 
managing a plurality of data sources but also describing processes that cannot be precisely emulated by deterministic 
approaches. That is the main reason for taking advantage of the combination of both Visum Fusion and Scadalytics 
for seamlessly acquiring highly informative data and building and hosting data -driven or hybrid digital twins of the 
involved processes in a common framework.  
  
Advanced sensor network for the process and post -process Figure 9 provides a schematic of the 
complete sensing  
network. It is based on the VISUM Fusion Multirange Spectroscopic 
Platform that incorporates several detection techniques (SWIR, NIR, VIS, 
Raman, Fluorescence and LIBS) in a common hardware platform, which not 
only allows us to use the optimum technique fo r each measurement 
requirement, but it also enables seamless data fusion, to obtain dramatic 
improvements in precision, accuracy, and limit of detection. This self -
contained portable multirange spectroscopic platform is comprehensive 
enough  
to be configured for successfully tackling a high plurality of   
demanding applications, such as the  in-line monitoring of the Figure 10. VISUM PalmTM: Portable (handheld) NIR 
processing and refining of minerals and critical raw analyser for at -line control at different points of the materials, 
while at the same time being highly modular to process, from raw material to final quality control. enable easy 
simplification as required for targeted applications and for the sake of affordability. To further extend the framework 

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 22  
capabilities, VISUM Fusion can also fuse data provided by off-the-shelf compatible temperature and electrochemical 
sensors installed in each of the case study pilot plants.  
  
Multiscale physics-based simulations towards the optimal prototypes design   
To obtain the optimal design of the prototypes towards enhancing their resource efficiency PRIM-ROCK introduces 
a complete set of simulations to vastly analyse their physical behavior on different scales of interest. Special emphasis 
will be placed at the simulations of the IFRKs to generate knowledge that is currently scarce or underdeveloped in 
the literature, regarding the reaction kinetics, mechanisms and thermodynamics of the calcination and roasting 
processes involving ores of different physicochemical nature. First, the kinetics of the reactions will be assessed from 
molecular dynamics simulations (i.e. atomistic modelling). The simulations will rely on the reactive force field 
(ReaxFF) interatomic potentials, which allow to model large-scale systems where chemical reactions are occurring. 
This novelty approach links the quantum mechanics accuracy, which itself is computationally intense and limited to 
small systems, with the classical Molecular Dynamics (MD) algorithms and scheme to allow for explori ng larger 
simulation scales and times than DFT methods. The ores will be modelled in the atomic level, considering the 
crystallographic structure of the selected mineral variety. In the case of roasting, hydrogen will be added to the model 
considering different concentrations and temperature conditions and allow it to react with the ore to monitor the 
evolution of the reduction reaction under the ReaxFF force field. Such simulations will allow for monitoring the 
different chemical species that are formed, o r disappeared, during the chemical reactions, which will help in 
establishing a detailed reaction mechanism pathway. Besides, the precise monitorization of the concentration of the 
chemical species involved in each reaction step will allow for determining the kinetic parameters associated (i.e., 
activation energy, kinetic constant, order of reaction). This will not only help getting a better understanding of the 
reduction and carburization processes, but also give indications of the limiting physical and ch emical processes. As 
a second step, the simulations will scale up, implementing a novel methodology to obtain the volumetric reaction rate 
at the particle level. To this end, the reaction kinetics obtained with ReaxFF will be considered at the gas -particle 
interface (surface reaction) to predict the overall volumetric reduction rate, as well as the materials properties (particle 
size, specific surface, porosity) and process parameters (such as residence time). This methodology will be developed 
using open-source tools such as LIGGGHTS (Discrete Element Method, DEM), OpenFOAM (Finite V olume Method 
FVM – Computational Fluid Dynamics CFD) and Python. Once the workflow is fully implemented, then it will be 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 applied to study the calcination and roasting process at the particle 
scale under a wide range of scenarios (Design of Experiments, DoE), considering the range of the above-mentioned 
parameters of the process. The simulations are expected to be highly  computationally demanding because of the 
complexity of the physics involved (multiphase, reacting, heat transfer flow) and thus the further direct application 
to the reactor scale will be unfeasible. Hence, the results of this physicochemical simulations at the particle level will 
be postprocessed using reduced order techniques. The resulting ROMs will be able to predict in real -time the 
volumetric reaction rate of the ore particle depending on the ore properties and operating conditions, and so, could 
be later used as a source term of the full thermodynamics IFRK simulations. Regarding the latter, a comprehensive 
CFD-DEM model will be developed, in which steady-state value of different relevant variables will be evaluated all 
along the dimension of the equ ipment. These include temperature, pressure, heat losses, emissions, calcination 
reaction rate and conversion, among others. The model will help to evaluate any change in operating conditions, 
geometry, raw material specifications or boundary conditions, providing a strong support to design phase by allowing 
virtual testing. The results will, finally, feed the full-scale process simulations, performed through simulators such as 
ASPEN, to model the whole process behavior and obtain the optimal design of the kilns.  
  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 23  
Digital Twinning of the process towards optimization of the resource efficiency (data -driven models, DSS, UI)  
In PRIM-ROCK an AI-/data-driven 
modelling  framework  will 
 be developed  for  supporting 
 the monitoring and optimization of 
the calcination and roasting 
processes. Given that such 
techniques may require sufficiently 
large and rich datasets and may fail 
to generalize to operating conditions 
or scenarios that are not 
representative in the historical data, 
we will develop data-driven models 
that can be generalized to possibly 
unseen scenarios/operating 
 conditions.   
This would be achieved by utilizing  Figure 11. Concept of data-driven digital twinning towards DSS.  
a larger range of data sources, particularly data generated through the physics-based simulation framework developed 
in the project, or data generated by similar industrial use -cases. Such integration of alternative data sources, often 
referred to as transfer learning and domain generalization/adaptation, is graphically depicted in Figure 11. The upper 
(process/data pre-processing layer) layer captures a standard data -based modelling framework, also applied here, 
comprising data quality/pre-processing and feature engineering/selection techniques. These steps would be sufficient 
for most AI-/data-driven modelling approaches, such as different types of linear/nonlinear regression models or neural 
networks. However, as discussed earlier, such models may be sens itive to variations in the configuration of the 
processes. To this end, we augment this framework with the knowledge-transfer layer  that aims at transferring 
additional knowledge to the model design through a) alternative data sources (e.g., simulations, s imilar processes), 
and/or b) model fine -tuning. In the first case, a feature/parameter alignment (or normalization) technique is 
implemented where features of different sources are transformed to become invariant to the details of the industrial 
process (e.g., dimensions of the kiln, material properties, etc.). This allows for building up significantly larger datasets 
for training a model that is robust to such variations in the process details. In the second case of model fine tuning, 
the trained model can  further be adjusted through either i) additional training in the scenario of interest, or ii) 
hybrid/ensemble modelling, e.g., via combinations with the physics-based models.  
  
Process Control System  
The process control system builds on MIRA, a Digital Twin Enabler platform developed by MAGG, which embeds 
the functionalities: 1) to model the digital representation of the industrial process, specifying all relevant involved 
assets, resources, and data, 2) to execute and monitor the operational aspects, 3) to receive data to measure user 
defined metrics. The features specific to the process control will be implemented on top of MIRA’s native capabilities 
to implement the process Digital Twin, following emerging trends for the monitoring of industrial systems over their 
life cycle in the context of estimation and control 36. Besides modelling the real -life system, the underlying digital 
twin has the ability to operate in parallel with the real-life system and in an offline setting. The latter enables what-if 
analyses or investigations relating to different scenarios despite their occurrences. The figures below exemplify some  
of the possible data customizations.   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
  
1.2.1 PRIM-ROCK methodology  
The project’s implementation will be carried out in three phases from a technological perspective, while DEC 
activities are distributed in WPs11-13 and Coordination in WP14.   
P1 Preparatory & design phase (WP1 -3, M1-18): The starting point of PRIM -ROCK is the consolidation of the 
project’s technological specifications (T1.1), as well as the exact identification of the end -users’ requirements and 
needs (T1.2) to establish a rigid framework for the development of the soluti ons until M6. This will be achieved 
through a detailed analysis of the use -cases involved and the characteristics of each novel process to properly align 
 
36  W. Birk, R. Hostettler, M. Razi, K.Atta, R. Tammia; Automatic generation and updating of process 
industrial digital twins for estimation  and control - A review; Front. Control Eng., 25 August 2022, Sec. Control and Automation Systems, 
V olume 3 - 2022 | https://doi.org/10.3389/fcteg.2022.954858  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 24  
the technological focus and investigate the potential for improvements. The critical parameters will also be identified 
for the smooth implementation of the monitoring and control systems (T1.3). Safety and security issues will be 
considered in this phase (T1.4) and the baseline for later efficiency calculations and comparisons will be established 
by M12 (T1.5). Based on these outputs, detailed multi -physics simulations (both on microscopic and macroscopic 
levels) will be conducted for processes and compone nts to obtain the optimal design configurations towards 
increasing the overall resource efficiency (WP2). The project’s digitalisation framework will also be designed during 
this phase, starting with the overall IoT reference architecture (T3.1) and the design of the sensor network (T3.2), as 
well as the process control and interfaces (T3.3) until M18.   
  
  
Figure 12. Project phases and associated objectives  
  
P2 Intelligence development and prototyping phase (WP4-7, M18-36): The second phase marks the progression 
from conceptual designs to tangible solutions. Key activities include the development and integration of intelligent 
systems (WP4) that harness the power of advanced sensor networks, AI algorithms, and data processing capabilities. 
These systems will undergo rigorous prototyping, aiming to refine the accuracy of real -time material sorting and 
processing. At the same time the Industry 4.0 framework will be deployed in WP5, featuring integration of automation 
and control systems (T5.1), data integration and orchestration through the project’s IoT platform (T5.3), data-driven 
model development aligning with the project’s overarching goal of enhancing resource efficiency (T5.2) and, finally, 
the integration of process digital twins with the associated decision support systems, interfaces (T5.4) and 3D 
visualisation attributes (T5.5). The IFRKs will be prototyped in WP6, first at lab scale to produce data (T6. 1), and 
then following the simulation-driven optimisation of the heating mechanisms (T6.2, T6.3) the pilot-scale prototypes 
will be delivered (T6.4), as well as the microwave rotary kiln for sulphide roasting (T6.5), the microwaveinduced 
plasma reactor for  H2 reduction (T6.6) and the heat exchanger for controlled gas cooling (T6.7). A preliminary 
assessment of the process feasibility from the technoeconomic perspective (T6.7). Once all the components are ready 
by M28, integration and validation will be carried out by M36 (WP7) in two pilot units: one in Greece (NTUA) and 
one in Spain (EUT).  
P3 Demonstration phase (WP8-9, M37-48): During the Demonstration Phase, the focus shifts to demonstrating the 
developed solutions in relevant environment (T8.1, T8.2), accompanied by the various assessments aimed at 
validating the potential of the technology (T8.3). Simultaneously, a complete a nd comprehensive assessment of the 
impact of the PRIM-ROCK solutions will be carried out, including technoeconomic analyses, energy and intensity 
evaluations and societal and environmental studies (WP9).  
Greek Pilot unit: H2 Living Lab  
Pilot activities at TRL 6 will be implemented in a H2 Living Lab, where an ATEX IIC classified area is supervised by 
a Safety and Protection System (SPS). SPS manages signals are collected from different types of detectors like H 2 
concentration, infrared flame detectors, pneumatic valves, compression status etc., which automatically activating 
pre-configured safety procedures in case of alarm. H2 equipment is powered by a smart grid (2 PV plants and 6 wind 
generators, battery banks) operated through an intelligent energy flow monitoring and control system (54 smart 
meters and 1.800 monitoring nodes). A massive amount of data fromRES and H2 facilities performance data, will be 
fed on models to be trained through AI.  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 25  
The Living Lab will create from the beginning of the 
project an environment, for a methodical approach 
focused on PRIM -ROCK technologies.  An electrified 
20kW rotary kiln will be fed with ore samples and H 2 
produced from PEM electrolyser, where sulphates and 
oxides reduction rate will be evaluated towards 
processing parameters. Pilot trial will provide a data flow 
for evaluating physicochemical and simulation trained 
models accuracy. From the operational perspective, real-
time (online) capacity which ensures  
maximum  uptime  of  green-H2 
 production  via   electrolysis or other means, which is a function of RES  Figure 13. H2 living lab 
infrastructure availability, energy pricing and storage SoC will be also validated. Representative reduced ores 
samples will be smelted for producing alloys to be characterised as intermediate products. Spanish Pilot unit: 
EUT premises  
The Spanish pilot will be implemented in the EUT laboratory located in 
Barcelona. In the dedicated pilot area the MIP torch system is currently 
installed, which consists of a microwave head, protection and waveguides 
to deliver energy at the treatment poin t. The treatment point comprises 
modified waveguides to accommodate a tubular plasma capsule made of 
ceramic material, through which the material to be treated circulates. The 
magnetron and shields are water -cooled, while the plasma capsule is 
cooled by compressed air. There is the possibility of modifying both the 
waveguides and the plasma capsule to adapt them to different processes. 
That requires a brand-new design or modifying the current assembly. The 
ignition and material feeding are currently manual , but there is ongoing 
research into the possibility of automation. There are currently two 2 kW, 
2.45 GHz water -cooled generators and a third on with the same 
characteristics and power, but air-cooled. A fourth generator, with 1.3 kW 
power, is currently dedicated to emergency  
support. Additional equipment is available, such as instrumentation,  
sensors, and data loggers, as well as equipment for material treatment Figure 14. Two microwaves working for before 
or after the use in the gas flow (sieve, mill, dust handlers, etc.). hydrogen decomposition from water. The entire 
system has laboratory-level processing capacity, making  
industrial-level production not possible without scaling for such purposes. The processing of solid materials (powder) 
is limited to less than g/min, and the gas processing level is at 1 -3 l/min. However, multiple generators can be 
combined in series or parallel for specific tests. The system is versatile and can be adapted as required. It allows the 
generation of plasma from various types of gases (air, CO2, oxygen, helium, argon, nitrogen, hydrogen, etc.) and can 
work with dusty plasmas.  
1.2.2  Industrial use-cases  
IUC#1 – Lime production (FORNACI)  
 
 Organisation description: Fornaci Calce Grigolin has been operating for over 55  years in the production of high-
quality  lime with the aim of guaranteeing 
its customers a wide and complete range 
of products for the use of lime in various 
sectors with different purposes. The 
company boasts modern plants with high 
productivity  and  the 
 continuous production cycle which, 
thanks to the use of wood sawdust as fuel, 
is considered zero impact as regards the 
Kyoto protocol. Another strategic factor 
guaranteeing continuity of supply is the 
high availability  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 26  
of quarries belonging to the Grigolin group  Figure 15. FORN lime production plant.  
and own deposits of limestone raw material of high 
quality and homogeneity.   
Process description: The raw material to obtain lime is limestone: a sedimentary rock mostly composed of calcium 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 carbonate that is extracted from special quarries. The limestone, coarsely 
crushed with a size of a few centimetres, is introduced into special furnaces where it is fired at high temperatures 
between 800 and 900°C. During this phase, a reaction called "calcination" takes place, which leads to the formation of 
calcium oxide with the release of carbon dioxide. The product thus obtained, also know as quicklime, takes the form of 
lumps of various grain sizes, which are then subjected to grinding and sifting. For cement industry an indicative material 
efficiency values for a raw mill, pyro -processing tower, rotary kiln, is 36%, 37% and 34 45. Hydrated lime (or slaked 
lime) is obtained through the process of hydration of quicklime. The extinguishing of calcium oxide can take place by 
stoichiometrically dosing the water, with the formation of po wdered hydrated lime, which in turn can be refined with 
specific wind separators to obtain micro -lime (or lime flower). When quenching takes place with excess water, Lime 
Putty is obtained, which undergoes suitable seasoning in special tanks.  
Objectives: (a) improve the calcination process, (b) RMI to optimize kiln performance by removing unwanted 
materials in the raw material stream, (c) digitalisation framework through dynamic simulation of calcination process 
based on feedstock changes, data -driven models for the optimization of operational parameters, Reduced Order 
Models development and Hybrid Digital Twin of the process.  
Implementation: Activities at FORN will start by deploying a gateway and all relevant infrastructure for data 
communication. All data relevant to raw materials will be shared, emphasizing in limestone particles size, as well as 
those relevant to the calcination process. FORN will also provide specifications on the UI and the expectations for 
results visualisation. Samples of raw materials will be shipped to partners for characterisation and to develop the 
digital models. The digital twin of the process will  allow FORN to simulate the calcination performance, including 
kiln health state (e.g. temperature and pressure distribution), anticipating dangerous situations and removing 
noncompliant feedstock. Non-compliance can mainly consist of very fine limestone, that creates clogs in the kiln and 
reduces the air flow, and contamination by other materials, which can generate unwanted situations during 
calcination. Switching from batch to real -time analysis of fuel may also improve the calcination performance, 
preventing the plant from feeding contaminants in the kiln.   
IUC #2 – Magnesite production (TERNAMAG)  
 Organisation description: TMAG is a magnesite and magnesia producer, member of GEK TERNAMAG GROUP, 
one of the leading business groups in Greece, with €1.2 billion turnover, over 5,000 employees, presence in 16 
countries and half a century of market activity. It exploits the world-class magnesite deposits in the northern part of 
Euboea Island (Greece). Its large volume reserves consist of high -purity, boron-free, low -iron, cryptocrystalline 
magnesite. TERNAMAG currently boasts a high purity and consistency Caustic Calcined Magnesia (CCM) and Dead 
Burned Magnesia (DMB) products. Through a state-of-the-art beneficiation, calcination and sintering equipment, it 
can produce and supply a wide range of products, with MgO content up to 97% and customized grades. Its new 
stateof-the-art rotary kiln has an annual capacity of 60,000 MT 
sintered/calcined products. Process description: Beneficiation 
takes place in situ, including crushing, washing, 
screening/classification and use of magnetic and optical sorters. 
Hand picking is also used for the  selection of high purity, special 
material. For the processing, calcination uses LPG fuel. Tailings are 
being processed with optical and magnetic separators and equal to 
1.3 mMT. The low-grade magnesite (most of them fines and ultra-
fines), is about 45% of the total exploiting  
magnesite and is treated as mine -wastes, generating considerable  
resource wastes and causing severe environmental consequences46.  
Objectives: (a) improve the calcination process, (b) production of 
very clean CO2, (c) Colour detection for optical sorting, (d) 
digitalisation framework through dynamic simulation of 
calcination process based on feedstock changes, data-driven 
models for the optimization of operational parameters and Digital  
Twin of the process.   

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 27  
Implementation: IUC#2 will adopt the same implementation Figure 16. Top: TERNAMAG plant for methodology as 
in IUC#1. Key activity in this case is the pre - magnesite production, Bottom: Rotary kiln for processing of the raw 
material through the RMI system, utilizing magnesite calcination.  
deep convolutional models to characterize the content and an actuation system for sorting the apparent magnesite.  
45 Tianming Gao, Litao Liu, Lei Shen, Fengnan Chen, “Analysis of material flow and consumption in cement production process”, 
Journal of  Cleaner Production 112 (2016) 553-565, Elsevier, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.08.054  
46 Hao-Yu Zhu, Shu-Wen Shao, Ming -Zhi Guo, Shi -Yi Zhang, Yan Zhang, "Engineering properties and sustainability evaluation of 
crushed low grade magnesite mortars", Journal of Cleaner Production, V olume 425, 2023, 138979, ISSN 0959 -6526, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.138979.  
  
IUC#3: Ferronickel production (NTUA) Organisation 
description: Today, one of the biggest EU nickel producers 
is operating in Greece, producing approximately 20,000 
tones of Ni contained in Fe -Ni per year. The process 
involves roasting reduction up to metallic iron in a Rotary 
Kiln (R/K) and smelting in an Electric Fur nace. Drying, 
preheating and prereduction of the metallurgical mixture in 
rotary kilns, from which one is partially used for calcine or 
dolomitic lime production (needed for the process).  
Process description:  The development of the LM process 
emerged as an alternative to the Krupp-Renn method for  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
Figure 17. DFRK used for Ferronickel roasting  
processing Greek nickeliferous laterites, which proved ineffective. This novel approach included reducing ore to 
metallic iron through roasting in a Rotary Kiln (R/K), followed by smelting in an Electric Furnace (E/F). The initial 
ferronickel output from t he E/F, containing about 15% nickel was further refined to 90 -95% nickel in an oxygen 
converter, before undergoing electrolysis to produce pure nickel. However, the LM process encountered various 
challenges and was eventually replaced by a new method invol ved a preliminary reduction in R/Ks, with the 
subsequent smelting of calcine in E/Fs to produce ferronickel (15% Ni), which was then enriched to 20% Ni using 
an oxygen converter. Over time, numerous technological advancements have been integrated or tailored to enhance 
the process, establishing its reliability and competitiveness 47. However, it’s worth to mention that in a new FeNi 
industry (2017) at Republic of Kosovo, during the stages of crushing and calcination only 28% of Nickel contained 
is lost48. For FeNi production in Greece, 6,5% of raw material fed in rotary kiln is lost in flue gases49.  
Objectives: (1) Improve sorting of ores based on elements, concentration and particle size, (2) carry out reduction 
through roasting in H2 atmosphere, replacing C.  
Implementation: IUC#3 will adopt the overall methodology with the following changes: The main innovation 
proposed in this case is the hydrogen reduction of nickeliferous laterite in the IFRK to reduce iron, nickel and cobalt 
oxides, followed by the concentration of the m etallic iron, nickel and cobalt by magnetic separation of the formed 
metal phase. Then, on industrial process level (beyond the project) production of refined ferroalloy with high nickel 
content in SAF. This process will eliminate the use of coal in the re duction process and will produce high nickel 
content ferroalloy, while simultaneously reducing the energy intensity of intermediate and final products. 
PRIMROCK exploitation strategy for FeNi production will be supervised by NTUA.  
IUC#4&5 – ZnS and CuS (KGHM, HEGOLD)  
Organisation description: KGHM is the main producer of Copper in Poland and a significant player among those 
controlling the world’s copper reserves. The company's share is estimated at 40 million tonnes of copper in situ.  
 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 28  
HEGOLD produces three concentrates, namely, lead/silver concentrate, zinc concentrate, and 
gold/pyrite/arsenopyrite concentrate which are sold through 
Greek ports  
Process description: The deposit KGHM operates includes 
three main rock types: sandstone, shale and dolomite. 
Concentrates at Lubin (23,000t/d), Polkowice (22,000t/d) 
and Rudna (43,500t/d) use a conventional flotation process 
to produce 25 –26% copper concentrates. The next st ep 
includes mixing, averaging and drying of copper 
concentrates mixture in order to be smelted in flash furnace 
to produce blister copper (99% Cu). The production of 
copper in the flash smelting process is accompanied with a  
large amount of copper-rich slag, which has to be treated with the aim of copper recovery. Copper flash smelting Figure 
18. Copper facilities of KGHM    
consists of blowing fine, dried copper sulphide concentrate  
and silica flux with air, oxygen-enriched air or oxygen blast into a hot (≈1200oC) hearth-type furnace. The furnace is 
equipped with hydrocarbon fuel burners located concentrically in a reaction shaft. Burners are used to adjust 
temperature, so that the reaction in the shaft is performed properly, that is, a concentrate smelts at a sp ecified rate. 
The products of the process are: (a) a molten copper-rich Cu-Fe-S matte, 45-65% Cu, which contains almost all of  
47 Zevgolis, “The evolution of the Greek Ferronickel production process”   
48 Zarife Bajraktari-Gashi, Behram Halilaj, “Material balance of the technological process in the new foundry of new ferronikel in Drenas 2017”, 
Journal of Technology and Exploitation in Mechanical Engineering, V ol. 4, no. 1, pp. 29-35, 2018, ISSN 2451-148X  
49 Skartados, Konstantinos, “Detailed analysis of laterite pre-reduction in rotary kilns, correlated with overall efficiency at smelting. The LARCO 
case”, PhD dissertation, National Technical University of Athens, 2000.  
the copper from the concentrate plus unoxidized Fe and S; (b) a molten slag which contains iron oxide from iron Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
oxidation plus gangue and flux oxides; (c) an off -gas which contains SO 2 from sulphur oxidation and N 2 from the 
input blast plus CO 2 and H 2O if supplementary fossil fuel is burnt in the furnace.  In general flash smelting a 
significant amount of low -grade matte is produced which is an intermediate product of metal sulphides where 
valuable metals like Ni, Cu, and Co have been enriched. In the traditional smelt route, the low metal mattes are further 
converter blowing to reduce the iron content and other impurities forming the high-grade mattes like nickel‒copper 
where almost 70 wt % Co and most part Ni, Cu a re transferred to the converter slag, leading to the massive loss of 
valuable metals. Furthermore, the environmental issues of the emissions of oxy sulhpide gases in the 
pyrometallurgical process are inevitably. Consequently, developing an efficient and environmentally friendly method  
to synchronous extraction of nickel, copper, and cobalt from low‒nickel matte is a highlighted issue 37. During the 
process a massive amount of residue containing critical metals giving a promising alternative as a secondary raw 
material. HEGOLD built and commissioned in May 2017 a new selective flotation plant to process fresh ore from 
underground mineS at a throughput of around 400 ktpa. The company is seeking innovative technologies for direct 
reduction of sulphide concentrates.  
Objectives: (a) ZnS and CuS roasting through IFRK and MRK, (b) metal reduction in H 2 atmosphere, (c) H2 
recovery through the MIP reactor, (d) controlled gas cooling via the heat exchanger, (e) reintroduction of recovered 
H2 to the roasting process. Implementation: IUC#4&5 will adopt the full methodology of PRIM -ROCK, testing 
the roasting process through both the IFRK and MRK. Samples will be first pre -processed with the RMI system 
and subsequently sent to the Spanish pilot unit for roasting. The complete pi lot-line will consist of: IFRK/MRK, 
MIP reactor and the heat exchanger. The utilization of the recovered H 2 in the roasting process, as well as for e -
Methanol generation will be investigated.  
1.2.3 Do No Significant Harm  
The EU Taxonomy Compass was used to perform a preliminary analysis of the activities with the following assessed 
to their relevance to the 6 areas of the Taxonomy, education, data processing, hosting and related activities, 
 
37 Sun, Q., Cheng, H., Mei, X. et al. Efficient Synchronous Extraction of Nickel, Copper, and Cobalt from Low–Nickel Matte by Sulfation  
Roasting‒Water Leaching Process. Sci Rep 10, 9916 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-66894-x  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 29  
programming & consultancy. Substantial contribution and DNSH criteria are adhered to. PRIM -ROCK will 
contribute to 5 of the 6 areas, through the deployment of green processing technologies. In short, climate change 
adaptation and mitigation will be improved through the PRIM-ROCK. Likewise, water, pollution and circular  
economy transition will be addressed through the project.  1.2.4 
Technical robustness of AI systems  
In recent years AI projects and applications have increased exponentially, becoming one of the foremost strategic 
priorities. PRIM-ROCK will ensure the reliability, trustworthiness, technical and social robustness, transparency, as 
well as resilience of th e AI systems (including classical machine learning, deep learning and distributed learning 
systems) that will be used based on the following measures: (a) Training, validation, and evaluation of alternative 
and unbiased AI models to identify and select technically robust models and exhibit the required performance of the 
tasks at hand. To achieve this, the CRISP-DM (Cross Industry Standard Process for Data Mining) methodology will 
be implemented, which involves the development and evaluation of multiple models, using an agile, iterative 
approach. Moreover, Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) and model analysis will be applied in PRIM -ROCK to 
identify and mitigate potential biases. (b) Development and use of transparent “white glass” mod els wherever 
applicable/acceptable and explanation of “black -box” models:  In cases where “white glass” models achieve 
satisfactory performance, they will be preferred over “black-box” models like deep learning. Nevertheless, when the 
use of “black-box” models is necessary the project will employ XAI (Explainable Artificial Intelligence) techniques 
in order to interpret the models and enhance their reliability. (c) Use of Data Efficient AI methods applications where 
there is a lack of adequate quality data: PRIM-ROCK will leverage data assets from its partners for the development 
of AI/ML systems. In case whereby the available dataset volumes are insufficient to create high performing AI 
systems, PRIM-ROCK will employ data efficient techniques such as few sho t learning, model pruning, ensuring 
acceptable performance with smaller training datasets. (d) Compliance with mandatory regulations (e.g., GDPR), as 
well as the requirements of the AI act, and the proposal of the European Parliament and Council Proposal f or and 
AI Regulation: PRIM-ROCK’s AI systems adhere to mandatory frameworks and regulations, such as GDPR, and with 
emerging AI regulations at the European level. Hence, the AI systems will be thoroughly tested in terms of technical 
and social performance, particularly in high-risk scenarios.  
1.2.5 Related R&D&I activities  
In this section we present some of the research and innovation actions that are relevant to PRIM -ROCK and whose 
results will feed into the project. The partners involved will build upon the expertise gained in these actions and 
transfer the knowledge obtai ned. KER1 Raw Material Intelligence system (ICCS, CIBOS)  ICCS draws experience 
from Wood2wood (GA: 101138789), PLASTICE (GA: 101058540), DiginTraCE (GA: 101091801) and REDOL 
(GA: 101091668) where  
 
they develop intelligent systems for valorisation of various waste streams. Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
KER2 Intensification technologies for thermal processing (NTUA, CEIN)  The KER2 team will use knowledge 
generated in previous projects on thermal processes research and prototyping, such as DESTINY (GA:820783), 
RemovAL (GA:776469) and ENEXAL (GA: 249710).  
KER3 Post-processing solutions (EUT, BUL, NTUA)  The KER3 team has expertise in the proposed post -process 
solutions and will leverage results from VIV ALDI (CSIC), ETEKINA (GA: 768772), DREAM (GA: 723641) and 
H2SUSBUILD(GA: 214395). KER4 Digital process line optimisation (IRIS, MAGG, ITA, NTUA, CIRCE, BUL, 
CORE, SCCH, STAM)  The KER4 team has expertise in digitalisation of process industries, with involved partners 
sharing common past and ongoing activities in AMBIANCE (GA:101058406), METAWA VE (GA:101138476), 
TRINEFLEX (GA:101058174), COGNIPLANT (GA:869931), CAPRI (GA:870062) and TEAMING.AI (GA: 
957402).  
KER5 Technology adoption framework (ADMR, PRINS, EUROC, STAM, UNE, VDU) The KER5 team will leverage 
experience from DiG_IT (GA:869529), INPERSO (GA:101069820), INN-PRESSME (GA:952972), STREAM-0D 
(GA:723082), FLEXIndustries (GA:101058453), ECOFACT (GA: 958373), SALEMA (GA: 101003785), 
BEATLES (GA: 101060645), VOLATILE (GA:720777) and AccelWater (GA: 958266).  
KER6 PRIM-ROCK demonstrator portfolio (FORN, HEGOLD, TERNAMAG, KGHM, NTUA) FORN has participated 
in COGNIPLANT, HEGOLD in MultiMiner (GA: 101091374) and NETHELIX (GA: 101092365), TERNAMAG in 
MASTERMINE (GA:101091895) and TERRA VISION (GA: 101138643), KGHM in illuMINEation (GA:869379) 
and NetHelix (GA: 101092365). As part of the ex trovert R&I strategy (WP10,11&12), PRIM -ROCK will also 
interface with SPIRE-SAIS51 to exchange expertise and lessons learned with regards to up/reskilling the European 

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 30  
workforce and engaged target groups. Likewise, through interfacing with H4C -ECOP52 and H4C EUROPE the 
Consortium will gain valuable experience in establishing H4Cs and their precursors.  
1.2.6 Interdisciplinarity  
PRIM-ROCK is an ambitious project aiming for the rapid acceleration of the adoption of breakthrough and smart 
solutions in the process industry ecosystem. This is an effort that by itself requires the harmonious collaboration of 
disciplines: applied sciences such as Process Engineering (PE), Computer Sciences (CS) with an emphasis on Data 
Science, Social Sciences & Humanities ( SSH), Economics ( Eco), Environmental Sciences ( ES) and Physics, 
Chemistry & Mathematics (PCM).  
WP  PE  CS  SSH  Eco  ES  PCM  Multi- and inter- disciplinary advances in PRIM-ROCK  
1  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  Technological specs, process requirements, safety and baseline for 
assessments  
2,3,4  ✓  ✓        ✓  
Simulations and designs of the prototypes, data reference architecture, 
monitoring & control design, RMI sensors & control systems, sorting 
prototype, classification, DSS  
5,7  ✓  ✓  ✓        Data infrastructure, control network, data-driven modelling, DSS, UI, 3D 
visualisation, Integrated and validated pilots  
6  ✓  ✓    ✓  ✓  ✓  ROMs, process simulations, prototyping, feasibility assessment  
8  ✓  ✓          Demonstrations and technological assessments  
9      ✓  ✓  ✓    TEA, LCA, LCC, LCSA, health, scaleup, regulations  
1.2.7 SSH dimension  
In the modern mission-oriented innovation paradigm, a stronger recognition of non-technological aspects and of the 
added value of an open innovation processes are key 53. This is due to the multiplicative effect of technological 
innovation when societal, economic and environmental contexts are considered and ultimately aligned. The project 
will address these issues on multiple levels: (a) on human resource, skills and lab our market level, the project will 
carry out targeted training activities to up/reskill European workforce in order to improve the acceptance and safety 
of new technologies (WP8). (b) Moreover, through cooperation with local and regional education and training 
providers on the regional/local level (within companies and H4C), bridging with sch ools and universities, and 
developing new teaching materials, part of the project’s extrovert R&I strategy (T8.1). (c) Finally, the project will 
deliver tools and resources (LCA models, novel business models, governance approaches, mapping reports and other 
open access results) to contribute to the development of a common tool database of good examples creating social 
value, ultimately stimulating both inter- and cross-sectoral transfer of innovations.  
1.2.8 Gender equality strategy, abiding by the principles of diversity and inclusion  
To fulfil project objectives, as well as to maximise its impact, it is necessary to specifically consider expectations and 
needs (incl. skills) of women with regards to the PRIM -ROCK results, since women in industries report a male 
dominated landscape. In this line, PRIM -ROCK will take care of offering a gender -neutral environment, for both 
contents and framework. User studies will be carried out on gender-balanced user panels. PRIM-ROCK will develop  
51 https://www.aspire2050.eu/sais     
52 https://www.h4c-community.eu/the-h4c-ecop-project/   
53 https://www.cbe.europa.eu/strategic-research-and-innovation-agenda-sria    
a Gender Equality Plan supported by the results of a co -designed digital survey, engaging the industrial communities 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
involved with its DC and addressing intersectional and context specific challenges. Rethinking the work environment, 
endorsing successful past approaches and inventing new practices when necessary and combining dedicated training 
sessions PRIM-ROCK aspires to set out the overall objectives for integrating an equality and inclusivity culture. 
Complementarily to that, actions to involve women in results exploitation will be sought, namely promoting women 
entrepreneurship reaching them through relevant Women i n STEM initiatives. Moreover, women Web 
entrepreneurship is supported and encouraged with close access to the WeHubs, which connects business ecosystems 
and provides them with mentoring tools to support women entrepreneurs in the digital sector. Integrating an equality 
culture on training, rethinking the decision-making process and interventions on the built environment and inventing 
new practices, will be placed in the core of our activities with established methodologies that adhere to the European 
Institute for Gender Equality (EIGE) guidelines for gender mainstreaming. Furthermore, PRIM -ROCK will stay 
informed and get inspired by the newly established EC equality platform for the energy sector. The long-term impact 

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 31  
evoked by the project’s equality strategy and actions can contribute to addressing inequalities in the clean energy 
transition, a need put forward by the Gender Equality Strategy 2020-202538.  
1.2.9 Open science management  
Open science practices (OSPs) are intrinsic to the project methodology. Also, the methodology of PRIM -ROCK 
aligns with the open access policy of the EU to the greatest extent possible, as well as ensures the protection of the 
financial interests of all participating parties in the consortium, in compliance with the principle “as open as possible, 
as closed as necessary”. Moreover, the OSPs will contribute to the quality of research within the project by improving 
its transparency and traceability taking into consideration the project aspects like gender dimension or workers needs 
and concerns as part of a responsible and inclusive R&I effort. Within PRIM-ROCK the following set of OSPs will 
be implemented: Early and open sharing of research: To attain PRIM-ROCK objectives, it is crucial to validate research 
outputs with stakeholders engaged in the mineral processing industry, key early adopters of the breakthrough 
innovations. PRIM-ROCK will be careful to engage stakeholders from multiple TGs (see Section 2.1) to co-design 
and co -create the process innovations for roasting and calcination kiln technologies, and the related pre - and 
postprocessing. PRIM-ROCK will mobilise an inclusive and participatory approach to effectively involve them in 
the decision-making processes and other activities over the duration of the project. Moreover, in addition to the OSPs 
contributing to advance research by enhancing its transparency and traceability, the participatory approach can be 
critical for fostering op portunities for the necessary long -term commitment of key actors. Providing open access to 
research outputs: PRIM-ROCK partners are fully committed to ensure open access to peer-reviewed publications that 
adhere to the terms of the Horizon Europe Grant Agr eement, utilizing specific platforms in compliance with 
OpenAIRE and community’s preferences and requirements. Publications in Open Research Europe (ORE) will be 
conducted as well as in several relevant open journals and peer -reviewed publications with a C C-BY license or 
equivalent licenses.  
1.2.10 Research data management  
PRIM-ROCK will handle heterogeneous data along the project lifecycle, aiming to provide open access to the data 
excluding data for commercial purposes or other legitimate interests of beneficiaries. During the PRIM -ROCK 
project, several data are utilized a nd are exploited which are related to the specifications of the end -users of the 
project, the critical process parameters relating to the roasting and calcination kiln technologies and processes, and 
the related pre- and post-processing, as well as the breakthrough process innovations that are developed and promoted 
by the project. Different openness levels are established in the PRIM-ROCK project: Open (O), Restricted (RE), and 
Confidential (CO). Crucial technical data remains confidential within the project duration and accessible exclusively 
for project partners to protect commercial interests. Additionally, the Data Management Plan (DMP)  will be 
established to define the specifications of data procedures and will be accessible by stakeholders and the community 
in the form of database records or spreadsheets. The responsibility for data management lies with all project partners, 
overseen by the Project Coordinator, and reasonable expenses for data management are provisioned in the budget. 
PRIM-ROCK is deeply committed to complying with the FAIR principles, according to below: Findability: Research 
data and outputs will be provided with metadata that can be harvested and identified with Digital Object Identifiers 
(DOIs). Moreover, generic documentation (publ ications, deliverables) will be easily findable through accessible 
URLs. Open data sets will be shared and linked on the official website of the project or other websites such as 
ResearchGate, as well as published in repositories like Zenodo, ensuring compliance with OpenAIRE standards and 
requirements. Accessibility: Open access of data is ensured using Zenodo open-data repository or similar platform. In 
PRIM-ROCK, accessible formats are widely utilized and have open specifications. Metadata is aimed to persist even 
when the data are no longer sustainable, as well as promote long -term digital preservation. Regarding confidential 
data and IPR, these will be stored in a centralized server repository under the latest available version of the Creative 
Commons Attribution International Public License (CC BY) or Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication (CC 
0), where partners will share technical documents and data obtained from the research and testing throughout the 
project. Interoperability: Interoperability is an important consideration and highly relevant for PRIM-ROCK and will  
 
be adhered to through standards and ontologies. Furthermore, open files formats and MIME media types will be Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 prioritized, and instructions will be included to define the ways for opening and 
 
38 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52020DC0152   

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 32  
managing the datasets. Reusability: PRIM-ROCK uses datasets that will be linked to relevant publications to streamline 
their understanding and reusability. Data and metadata follow standard terms. Moreover, the documentation includes a 
readme file and will be provided to avoid misuse or misinterpretation and keep integrity of data.  
  
  
  
  
#@CON-MET-CM@# #@COM-PLE-CP@#   
2  Impact    
#@IMP-ACT-IA@#  
The key outcome of PRIM -ROCK are two pilot -lines for the resource efficient processing of ores for the cement, 
mineral and non-ferrous industries. The pathway to impact in the project is divided in two periods. The first concerns 
the time during and shortly after the project, where the uptake of results from TGs creates short and mid-term effects, 
i.e., outcomes (described in §2.1.2) – and is projected until 2030, enabled by the DEC strategy (§2.2.1). The second 
period concerns the timeframe beyond 2030, wh ere meaningful impact is expected thanks to an increased adoption 
of the PRIM-ROCK ecosystem and individual results in a significant number of replication and transferability cases 
(§2.1.2). The Key Exploitable Results (KERs) and individual results (R) are shown in Table 5, while market related 
information (e.g., market size, commercialisation cost) is described in §2.2.2.  
  
Stakeholder Target Groups (TGs)  
Five Stakeholder Target Groups (TGs) have been identified as the main beneficiaries of the results:  
Table 3 Stakeholder Target Groups involved in the project  
Stakeholder TGs  Main message and strategy  
TG1 – Industries: Industrial 
end-users from the P4P 
sectors. 
 Industrial associations  
 Process flexibility is not only about energy and emissions, but also productivity, efficiency,  
and resilience. D: Advertising, presentation and highlighting the projects innovations in  
forums and information channels. E: Agreements for tailored system commissioning, 
patenting, licensing, sales, SaaS, PaaS. Focus on ROI, payback, GHG savings and 
supportive tools (finance, planning) C: Industrial association and cluster involvement.  
TG2 - Technology 
developers: EU OEMs, 
process sectors that are  
SME-centric.  
 Resource efficiency can be a smart investment, both for providers and end-users.  
 D: Publication of pilot information, methodologies, results and best practices focused on  
the available results, commercialisation & manufacturing agreements. E: Licensing, PaaS, 
service and product models. C: Industrial & SME associations and clusters, promotion of 
the role of SMEs in process industries and decarbonisation.  
 TG3  –  Research: 
Research performers 
such as universities,  
research organisations 
and associations.  
 Research actors are integral in developing the knowledge to accelerate the adoption of  
new technologies. D: Publication and presentation of the results, methodologies, datasets  
and other research outputs to relevant instruments and fora. Availability of open -access  
results. E: Opportunities for collaborative consultation and expert services for replication 
purposes. C: Clustering, shared activities with other national and EU supported initiatives. 
TG4 - Financing & 
Governance: Local, 
regional, national and  
international 
authorities, public 
procurement.  
 Ambitious policies are needed to address challenges posed by politico -economic  
conditions. PRIM-ROCK will provide evidence-driven conclusions to support decisions,  
investment, analyse risks and opportunities.  
 D: Publication of pilot information, methodologies, results, best practices and 
opportunities. C: Networking, policy briefs, interest representation.  
TG5 - European society : 
General public, 
consumers, workforce,  
associations.  
 Greening the industry and the economy leads to more and better employment  
opportunities and quality of life. D: Advantages resulting from the project’s  
implementation will be disseminated. Positive effects on quality of life, environmental 
and economic activity will be highlighted via online material, video, TV segments and 
interviews. E: Opportunities generated as part of the new business models will be 
highlighted. C: Engagement activities (e.g., workshops) to improve acceptance.  
  
  
  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 33  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Barrier analysis  
Each of the results will be exploited according to the exploitation plan (§2.2.1.4). To assess the adoption potential 
(via DEC) of the results, the collective experience and sector knowledge of the PRIM-ROCK Consortium is distilled 
into a barrier analysis, as shown below.   
  
Table 5. Barrier analysis of the PRIM-ROCK project  
 Barriers most relevant to PRIM-ROCK  Means of overcoming barriers  
High upfront costs required for investment in 
resource efficient, smart and electrified 
technologies  
The Industrial Emissions Directive (IED) covers the largest installations 
producing raw materials in the EU. This directive requires facilities to adopt 
the so-called Best Available Techniques (BAT) to obtain the operation permit, 
which is managed by the c ompetent authorities at a national or sub -national 
level. Only through an integrated value chain approach can real advances in 
low carbon technologies be understood, achieved and evaluated on a long 
term. Using a value chain approach would make it easier t o boost the 
contribution of existing economic activities, but also to create and develop new 
more efficient low-carbon activities, through the introduction of new materials 
and investments. The project promotes a comprehensive capacity to emulate 
process l ines and run pilots (KER6) producing credible and actionable 
technoeconomic information (R5.1)  
Table 4. Results of the PRIM-ROCK project  
( 
OA: Open-Access, (R)research Output and other information 
) 
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 34  
Process industries are intrinsically conservative 
and hesitant regarding both data sharing and 
investment in new and unproven technologies.  
The raw materials sector is sustainable in a low carbon economy. The potential 
for growth exists and is compatible with the targets of a low carbon economy. 
The concept of circularity should be part of process design and operation from 
the very beginning – big data analytics and cross -sector data integration can 
achieve this ambitious goal. In the future, innovation, increasing energy -cost 
and CO2 prices, and investment support schemes might make these measures 
more financially attractive. Digitalisation ap proach will provide reliable data 
on configuration performance (KER4), by virtue of digital twins, validated 
through TEA (R5.1), but also through LCA (R5.3), safety (R5.7) and other 
aspects (KER5).  
The accelerated technology development is not 
accompanied by sufficient capacity building for 
the EU workforce.  
The consortium will utilise both research and industrial know how for 
delivering a comprehensive roadmap and tools for accelerating new 
technologies adaption. The project will support the adoption of new 
technologies through capacity building (R5.4), and v isualisations (R4.6) used 
as training tools.   
Lack of incentives and standards to drive the 
market towards resource efficiency  Policy and regulatory report (R5.8)
2.1 Project’s pathway towards impact  Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
 Contribution to the expected outcomes and impacts  
EO1 Achieve a step change in the process industry’s green transformation by improving by at least 30 % the 
industrial processes resource efficiency compared to the state of the art;  
The PRIM-ROCK project is focused on achieving breakthrough resource efficiency primarily through improvements 
in the handling and processing of fine and ultrafine materials. The results contributing to this breakthrough are:  
  
Conventional processing: Total losses are estimated according to the calculations of S1 and summarized here: In the 
pre-processing stage losses in the area of 4-6% are reported. In some cases (e.g., laterite) pelletisation is employed, 
increasing the resource and energy footprint of the process significantly. In the thermal treatment stage, 5-25% mass 
loss due to drag is observed as a worst -case scenario. For instance, in the cement industry indicative material 
efficiency values for rotary kilns and similar units’ range between 34%-37%. Within this share, 6-12% as slag or dam 
ring formation is accounted for. This brings total losses in the range of 21-30% of initial raw material mass. Moreover, 
in the case of low‒nickel matte blowing (treatment of intermedia te product of nickel sulphide ore), almost 70wt % 
Co and most part Ni, Cu are transferred to the converter slag, leading to the massive loss of valuable metals, whereas 
in the magnesite industry, the low grade magnesite (mostly fines and ultra-fines), is about 45% of the total exploiting 
magnesite and is treated as mine-wastes, generating considerable resource wastes and causing severe environmental 
consequences .  
PRIM-ROCK improvements: Conservative estimations for the pre -processing stage indicate that losses can be 
reduced to 2-3% at pilot scale (TRL6, project end) and at below 2% at TRL9 (3 years post project). This is due to the 
integration of classification and sorting to the RMI ( KER1) that are tailored to specific process lines, utilising high 
fidelity process models (KER4), and well trained DSS. Likewise, for the thermal processing (KER2), the capacity to 
effectively eliminate losses (below 3% at pilot scale  and below 1.5% in commercial scale), is the main enabler for 
the breakthrough in process efficiency, but also comes with substantial improvements in productivity, intensity and 
emissions reduction. Moreover, in IUC3 -5, where (a) C is used as a reducing agent and/or (b) multiple reduction 
stages are conventionally used, the removal of both elements will enable achieving breakthrough status.   
Process inefficiencies  Limestone  
(FORN)  
Magnesite   
(TERNAMAG)  
Laterite   
(NTUA)  
 Chalcopyrite  
(KGHM)  
Zinc   
(KGHM, HEGOLD)  
Production (t/a)  120,000  100,000  20,000  341,000  25,000  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 35  
Total losses (%)  28%  30%  21%  25%  26%  
Improvement  32%  36%  20%  30%  31%  
Considering the production metrics for the end -users of the project, it is observed that in each case, the benchmark 
of 30% is exceeded with the exception of FeNi. In the FeNi (IUC3) however, the focus is on the direct reduction 
through H2, that will increase the reduction efficiency from 45% up to 90%, achieving a maximum of 100% in process 
efficiency, with a more conservative projection around the 60% mark until TRL8 where sufficient training and 
optimisation data will reach close to the theoretical maximum.   
EO2 Reduce the CO2 intensity of the process industry and contribute to the climate neutrality goal; and EO3 
Overall positive environmental and if relevant health and safety impact demonstrated;  
In terms of emissions, these industries generate over 2.2MtCO 2/a, with up to 0.58MtCO2/a associated with material 
losses. The following factors will contribute to the reduced emissions: (a) the main contributors are the electrified 
kilns (IFRK and MRK of KER2), where we project the CO 2 footprint to be reduced by 25-43%, depending on each 
country’s energy mix, and without considering additional renewables. In the case of Zinc production and mainly for 
the ISF process, the direct emissions constitute the maj or part. In Europe, the ISF technology has suffered due to 
higher cost constraints since the early 2000’s, which has led to the closure of almost all these plants. Taking into 
account the production level of the European zinc plants, the amount of electric energy consumed by those plants and 
the need for a secured continuous supply of this energy, in-house production from renewable resources such as wind 
or photovoltaic is not a realistic option58. ISF is a carbothermic reduction process which utilises carbon both as a heat 
source but also as reducing agent. 40% of roasting and calcination processes CO 2 emissions are related to thermal 
energy from fossil fuels burning55, which will be minimised by IFRK technology utilising green electricity.  (b) the 
replacement of C as a reducing agent with sustainable H Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/20242 will 
achieve significant reductions in laterite,  
chalcopyrite and zinc processing, the case of sulphide ores processing, the amount of hydrogen produced from the 
generated hydrogen sulphide (H 2S) decomposition is about 60 kg per tonne of contained metal, For Zinc case  the 
metal produced corresponds to 25,000 t/a and to 73,236 t/a of processed  sulhpides, able to reproduce 4.4 t/a of H 2 
through the microwave-induced plasma reactor. The annual global production of zinc exceeds 13.5 million tons, with 
the majority (85%) produced from  sulhpide concentrates, which on theoretical level can correspond to over 22,000 
tons of H2 if sufficient infrastructure were to be installed.  
Nonetheless, the sustainable H 2 loop will provide an excellent degree of flexibility to the end -user industries. The 
mass and energy balance of electrified calcination can reduce CO 2 emissions can reduce more than 20% in relation 
to a coal -fired calciner 57. Moreover, a hybrid system integrating an electrified calciner with an amine -based CO2 
capture unit using only internal heat integration can completely decarbonize the cement industry. Thus, PRIM-ROCK 
will generate substantial savings as shown below, in t otal over 770ktCO 2 per year, assuming commercial scale 
operation in the 3 pilot lines. It should be noted that carbon credits (assumed at a conservative price of 55€/t) 
contribute to very substantial savings, totalling almost 80M€. State -of-the-art magnesia production proce sses [61] 
calculates the unavoidable geogenic CO 2 emissions amount equal to 1.09 tn CO 2 /tn MgO, proposing as the only 
sustainable perspective for this type of emissions the CCU.  
Process parameters  
Limestone  
(FORN)  
Magnesite   
(TERNAMAG)  
Laterite   
(NTUA)  
 Chalcopyrite  
(KGHM)  
Zinc   
(KGHM, HEGOLD) 
Total  
  
CO2eq (tCO2/t)  1.50  4.20  13.40  4.10  3.00    
Process emissions   178,800 tCO2  421,000 tCO2  116,400 tCO2  1,394,690 tCO2  113,412 tCO2  2,224,302 tCO2  
Energy consumption  150 GWh/y  311 GWh/y  3200 GWh/y  1125 GWh/y  147 GWh/y  4934 GWh/y  
Material losses (t/a)  33,600 t/a  30,000 t/a  4,200 t/a  86,955 t/a  9,451 t/a  164,206  
CO2eq (tCO2)  50064 t/a  126300 t/a  24444 t/a  355646 t/a  29487 t/a  585,941tCO2  
CO2 intensity (final)  0.943 tCO2  2.406 tCO2  4.382 tCO2  2.756 tCO2  1.976 tCO2    
CO2 savings (t/y)  65,684  180,429  28,761  454,912  41,595  771,380  
Carbon savings (€/a)   € 6,221,371    € 13,231,429    € 4,820,139    € 51,687,773    € 3,949,956    € 79,910,667   
Emissions footprint  37%  43%  25%  33%  37%    

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 36  
Data was collected from Eurostat, ASPIRE roadmap, Statista and sector specific reports for lime 39 , ferronickel40 ,41 , zinc42 , 
copper43 and magnesite 44,61, as well as data provided by end -users and domain experts in the Consortium. With regards to 
environmental, health and safety the main effects tiggered are shown below:  
Relevant result  Human health / safety   Environmental   Uptake by 2030  
Pre-processing line (R1.2)  Automation reducing accidents  >30% reduction of material 
discharge due to handling  
TG1: Adopted by >3  
EIIs in pilot scale  
IRFK prototype (R2.5)  Reduction of dust discharge >90%, 
reducing risk to worker health  
Process waste reduction by over 
50% per unit of product  
TG1: Uptake by >5 
EIIs in TRL7 scale  Microwave rotary kiln (R2.6)  
Virtual toolkit (R3.4) and 
visualization (R4.6)  
Utilisation for upskilling / reskilling 
purposes, reducing accidents  
Projections of process footprint 
and environmental effects  
TG1 & TG3: Uptake 
by >5 stakeholders  
Societal & environmental impact 
assessment (R5.2) and 
Workplace IA (R5.3)  
Definition of effects and improvement 
measures to facilitate the safe uptake of  
new technologies  
Definition of process and 
product footprint and mitigation  
TG1&TG4: Used in 
decision-making by >8 
stakeholders  
OHSE Reports and protocols 
(R5.6)  
Definition of process risks and new 
mitigation measures  
Mitigation to environmental 
damage due to mishandling  
TG1&TG4: Decision 
making in>4 cases  
Finally, it should be noted that the improvement in process efficiency will reduce by a corresponding amount the 
need for primary extraction of raw materials. Moreover, as dust loss during the pre-process and process stages is the 
main contributor to this effect, there are established protocols dealing with health and safety aspects of these 
materials, that will be directly impacted by the near elimination of this waste stream, as this dusting not only leads to 
environmental and health issues but also represents a loss of material, with significant economic implications.   
  
EO4 Enable the techno-economic feasibility of novel technologies and processes, demonstrated and validated 
at suitable scale against current industrial processes to produce the same products and EO5 Enable the 
increase of the competitiveness and resilience of the European process industry;  
From a technoeconomic perspective, it is important to consider: (a) the upfront costs (CAPEX), (b) the running costs 
(OPEX) and (c) the improvements on productivity level.   
  
  
  
The productivity (t of product/h) is listed for each of the end-users, along with investment projections for the adoption 
of IFRK in IUC1-5 and MFRK in IUC5 to achieve the same level of productivity. Initial designs show that a capacity 
of 800kg kiln is co mfortably within design specifications for calcination, whereas for processes requiring H 2, the 
capacity will be half, at 400kg. Due to the efficient, controllable and optimised heating, staying time in the kiln will 
be reduced by 80% for the IFRK and by 90% for the MFRK, meaning that the IFRK will process 800kg in 7.5 mins 
compared to the 3t/h of conventional kilns and the MFRK will process 400kg in 6.5mins compared to the 1.5t/h for 
reduction processes, a productivity increase ranging between 9 -16%. Nonet heless, this increase comes with 
substantial investment as the CAPEX for switching to IFRK/MFRK at the current production capacity of plants 
would range between 2.5M€ for a calcination IFRK and 5.5M€ for a roasting MFRK, plus an additional 1M€ for the 
plasma treatment. If the investment were to be made, however, the payback period would range between 0.3 to 1.84 
years, rendering PRIM-ROCK an excellent investment opportunity.   
 
39 https://www.eula.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/A-Competitive-and-Efficient-Lime-Industry-Summary_0.pd  f   
40 Energy Consumption and Greenhouse Gas Emissions of Nickel Products  
41 Decarbonising the lime industry: State-of-the-art https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2022.112765  
42 SECTORAL ROADMAP ZINC 2050 - Eurometaux  
43 Energy efficiency • Energy intensity in copper and gold mining  
44 Evaluation of GHG emissions from the production of magnesia https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.06.118 61 
The European Magnesite/Magnesia Industry – Euromines 2020  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 37  
  
Regarding resilience, PRIM -ROCK will address this major challenge related to the processing of low -grade ores. 
Currently, there is no economic value (or the value is negative) in low grade ore bodies and industrial residues until 
new economic methods are provided to extract them. PRIM -ROCK will enable the utilisation of low-grade fines and 
ultrafine secondary resources for critical metals production. As already mentioned, Magnesite industry utilises mainly 
high-grade ores while in parallel low -grade ores a re used for backfilling or treated as wastes. PRIM -ROCK will 
deliver innovative flexible and efficient production routes able to further enhance magnesium’s strong reducibility 
for replacing rare metals including titanium, zirconium, beryllium, uranium, and hafnium. With the economy growth 
and ever-increasing demand for higher living quality, the thirst for magnesium products accelerates the widespread  
exploitation of magnesite ore. Furthermore, in the case of low‒nickel matte blowing (treatment of intermediate 
product of nickel sulphide ore), almost 70 wt % Co and most part Ni, Cu are transferred to the converter slag, leading 
to the massive loss of val uable metals. Consequently, developing an efficient and environmentally friendly method 
like PRIM-ROCK to synchronous extraction of nickel, copper, and cobalt from low‒nickel matte is a issue.  
Contribution to expected impacts, scale and significance  
To assess the scale and significance of the impacts, a brief replication study is carried out.  The projection considers 
the direct replication (directly available cases such as owned plants, units contracted for management such as 
services) and indirect replication (client networks and collaborations). The replication potential is significant, due to 
the high added value of the project for stakeholders, and interest in the technologies developed. For the indirect 
replication, contacts will be engaged through the Advisory Board. As part of business planning and upscaled studies, 
the replication potential will be refined, and a more detailed analysis will be presented.   
  
The PRIM -ROCK Consortium is well placed to address challenges related to the supply of sustainable and 
costefficient critical raw materials, with end users from Greece, Italy and Poland. The potential critical metal proven 
and probable reserves in EU represent significant metal ore quantities, including: (i) 220 million tonnes of low-grade 
nickeliferous/cobaltiferous laterite resources containing 1.7 Mt Ni and 0.1 Mt Co found in Greece; 70 Mt and the 
reserves at 26.5 Mt of variable grade copper sulphide ores, also containing nickel, cobalt and PGMs, and representing 
about 3.5% and 3% of the global resources and reserves, respectively. These are mainly found in Poland, Finland, 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
Bulgaria, Sweden, Spain and Greece and contain 41 Mt Cu.  
  
To realise the scale and significance of the impacts, the successful conclusion of the project in 2028 is needed, where 
a TRL6 pilot line will be deployed. Following 1 year (2029), an upscaled (1/20) prototype will be tested, with a 
fullscale system commissioned in 2030. Market entry will follow on 2031, where at least 3 full-scale systems will be 
deployed. From there on, it is a matter of upscaling manufacturing capacity (2032) and achieving the status of an 
established system in the EU market by 2033, whe re cumulatively 15 process lines will host the full PRIM -ROCK 
system, with production capacity exceeding 1.8Mt/y, generating savings in excess of 275M€/y and associated 
emissions averted over 2.3MCO2/y. Notably, these innovations will leverage investments over 50M€/y.   
Contribution to destination impacts  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 38  
(a) Global leadership in clean, climate-neutral and resilient industrial value chains, (b) circular economy and climate-
neutral and human-centric digital systems and infrastructures, through (c) innovative production and manufacturing 
processes and their digitisation, (d) new business models, sustainable-by-design advanced materials and technologies 
enabling the switch to decarbonisation in all major emitting industrial sectors, including green digital technologies.  
PRIM-ROCK will contribute to all four aspects of the destination impact, as well as to the P4P KPIs as shown in 
Table 6  through: (a) the improvement of resource efficiency through electrification and decarbonisation of EU 
process industries as detailed in the previous sectors, accompanied by significant cost savings and improvements in 
productivity, addressed through KERs 1 and 2; (b) a comprehensive strategy and framework for digitalisation coupled 
with capacity building in KERs 4 and 5; (c) a holistic digitalisation pathway, adaptive to the needs of industrial 
ecosystems and focused on enabling actors to participate in the twin transition (KER4); (d) All of the above, 
demonstrating the promise of an integrated strategy to resource efficiency and the adoption of the technologies 
through KER5 and 6. Through these actions, PRIM-ROCK will contribute to the destination impact, as well as KSOs 
C,A and D.   
  
Contribution to P4P KPIs  
Table 6. PRIM-ROCK contribution to P4P KPIs  
   P4P KPIs45 63  PRIM-ROCK Contribution  
  
001.- Develop new electrified processes and Energy 
efficiency, ensuring process flexibility and 
capturing the full potential of renewable energies  
Contribution to realizing the 100% total CO 2eq emission reduction potential 
demonstrated at TRL6 sustainable H2 production (KER3), replacement of fossil 
fuels through electrification of thermal processes (R2.5 and R2.6), and the virtual 
toolkit for process scalability (R3.4) that will increase investment in this area, 
supported by the TEA (R5.1) and business plans (R5.4)  002.- Replace fossil fuels and feedstock by  
Renewable H2 and biomass in processes  
003.- Develop new efficient CO/CO 2 Capture and 
purification technologies  
Virtual simulation toolkit for enriched CO2 capture and utilisation in e-fuels 
(R3.4)  
  
005.- Design processes for maximum resource 
efficiency, including the development of materials 
for circularity  
Contribution to 80% of Wastes reduction potential at TRL6, demonstrated 
through multiple sectors and processes (R6.1 -4), especially through vastly 
improved processing technologies (KER2), replacement of C by H2 for reduction 
(KER2), elimination of process steps through more efficient reduction (KER2), 
recovery of H2 for sustainable loops (KER3).   
006.- Develop new processes for circularity of 
secondary materials from wastes/residues for all 
industrial processes  
0010.- Foster new framework conditions to 
generate  
 a market for climate neutral solutions  
Through the Technology Adoption Framework (KER5), covering 
technoeconomic aspects (R5.1), LCA, LCSA (R5.2) to OHSE protocols (R5.6) 
and standards (R5.7)   0011- Foster new skills and types of jobs and business 
development, including SMEs, through P4Planet 
programs and H4Cs  
Over 1000 jobs created in industrial engineering and digital, new skills for 
equipment operation for operators and high-skilled profiles, with at least 1 
integrated in specific academic curricula and 1 integrated company training 
programs.  
  
Scientific, Technoeconomic and Societal Impacts  
Scientific: By 2033, through open access results and the systemic approach to engagement of stakeholders across the value chain, 
important scientific knowledge will be generated, particularly regarding the affordable and sustainable improvement of building 
operation. The project will generate at least 32 (FWCI~2) publications and 2 in ORE, a wealth of research data, and extensive 
capacity building in a pool of over 1000 individuals. These results will propagate into impactful research conducted and 
knowledge generated, projecting uptake by over 100 research organisations using the open tools and data. The new directions 
in digital services and systems engineering, but also social sciences and humanities will contribute to >100 jobs created in  
  
R&D, mainly towards industrial engineering IoT, AI, ML, energy systems specialists, business/economist experts and social 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
sciences.  PRIM-ROCK will ensure Open Access and be efficient, transparent, and responsive to societal challenges aligned with  
EC´s goals on Open Science.  
Societal: By 2033, PRIM-ROCK will have contributed to EU policy priorities & global challenges by contributing to the areas  
highlighted in Error! Reference source not found. . This will be achieved through the extensive work on non -energy costs, 
market design and integration, digitalisation, policy, governance, and through continued interactions with local, municipal, 
national, and international stakeholders. Many of the topics will be related to implementations of the REPowerEU pack age. 
 
45 https://efce.info/3rd+European+Forum+on+New+Technologies/_/2%20-%20Ludo%20Diels%20-%20Process4Planet.pdf 63 
APPENDIX F Processes4Planet Intervention Logic  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 39  
Moreover, PRIM-ROCK will contribute to the SDGs by reducing process industry energy demand by over 25% and reducing 
CO2 emissions by over 30%, averting over 2200kt of CO2. The penetration of renewables will be increased by >30% Over  
25,000 citizens will have been engaged, with 10% participating in 8 H4C and U-IS with over 30 innovations deployed by 
SMEs.   
Economical/Technological: By 2033, the cumulative improvements in resources efficiency, electrification and data-driven  
technologies will contribute to innovation-based growth by reducing energy costs for SMEs and industries, leading to significant 
savings but also confidence in the security of supply. Process industry productivity will increase by 10% at least. Based on the 
PRIM-ROCK business plan (§2.2), we project that over 270 M€ will be generated as revenue for end users and over 1100 jobs 
will be the effects of PRIM -ROCK actions. Over 50 M€ will be leveraged for electrification and decarbonisation. Progress 
towards zero accidents will be significant.   
     
 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 40  
  Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024
2.2  Measures to maximize impact – Dissemination, exploitation, and communication  
 (DEC)   
#@COM-DIS-VIS-CDV@#  
 
PRIM-ROCK features a comprehensive strategy focused on maximising the uptake, diffusion, deployment and/or 
use of project’s results by EU stakeholders, achieving the projected outcomes, and triggering the desired impacts. 
The strategy revolves around the DEC actions of WP9 and will be supported by comprehensive engagement activities 
(WP8). The strategy evolves to match the project’s maturity, as the perception and needs of the Target Groups (TGs) 
become more apparent, as shown below. The Plan for Dissemination and Exploitation of Project Results (PEDR) is 
the main resource describing these activities, prepared by CORE as the Dissemination and Exploitation Manager 
(DEM). Activities will focus on 6 major stakeholder TGs to ensure the active uptake of results: TG1 Process plant 
owners, TG2 EU industrial ecosystem, TG3 Research community, TG4 Policy makers and financiers, TG5 Workforce 
and general public, encompassing 3 phases based on the progress of the project:  
(a) Early Phase (M01 -18, WP10): This phase is committed on building awareness for PRIM -ROCK, making the 
project visible and recognisable, sharing its objectives, values, and technological innovations. Visual identity and 
logotype, templates website and social media accounts are set to establish the PRIM-ROCK brand. Initial awareness 
is also focused on the mapping of key stakeholders and associated financial instruments that will facilitate uptake. 
(b) Intermediate Phase (M19 -36, WP11):  This phase will conce ntrate on focused activities such as conference 
participation, workshop and webinar organisation, publications and other instruments added to the DEC toolset. By 
now, the design phase of the project has been concluded and its results are available, enhanci ng DEC efforts with 
tangible substance. Leveraging the momentum from the early phase, this phase is intended to further consolidate 
awareness and to establish meaningful dialogue on the project’s projected value and continuation, especially with 
regards to the goals of the P4P. These efforts are bolstered by the targeted engagement of the TGs that will provide 
rapid feedback for the project’s direction. An advantage of PRIM-ROCK is the high replicability potential (see §2.1) 
of the DC#s, that also involve a high number of influential stakeholders.   
(c) Final Phase (M37 -48): This phase will focus on maximizing target market and industry awareness about 
PRIMROCK’s exploitable results. In this phase, with most results gradually available, stronger interfaces with the 
policy, governance, standardisation bodies and financiers are  forged, in the form of meetings, sessions and policy 
briefs. This phase is committed to the project’s continuation and longevity, but also to the realisation of projected 
impacts. During the final 6 months (WP13), with the participation of the TGs engaged, system upscale planning will 
be achieved with actual market-based feedback.   
Dissemination and communication activities and instruments  
The instruments employed for PRIM-ROCK’s dissemination and communication activities are highlighted below.  
Instruments and KPIs  Time  TGs  
Publications: Peer-reviewed, open-access, journals (>20)  12-48  3  
Dissemination and Communication Plan  
DEC strategy timeline  
  
Figure 19 DEC Phases of PRIM-ROCK  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 41  
Communication materials : Effective communication with the P4P and wide intensive process 
industry sector and ecosystem: 2 brochures, 2 posters and 1 rollup (>1000 viewers)  
6-48  1,2  
Policy briefs: Policy briefs, reports, white papers, communiques (x2-3)  24-48  1,4  
Newsletters: 1 every year informing regarding the progress of the project, results, opportunities 
for participation (>200 recipients each)  
 15-48  All  
Conference participation: Participation in relevant conferences, info days, and other events as Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
specified in paragraph below this table where PRIM-ROCK will be presented, especially events 
organized by P4P members and Innovation Clusters (est. >15 events)  
12-48  All  
Networking and joint events H2020/HEU projects/ initiatives : Networking activities, technical 
exchange and dissemination activities will be done with relevant R&I projects.  10-20 interactions, 
joint work on regulatory frameworks, joint D&C, cluster with P4P projects and link with H4Cs.   
1-48  All  
Focus groups / local regional stakeholder workshops: A series of focus groups in each pilot 
location will be done engaging with general public, addressing stakeholder and citizens 
perspectives and social acceptance. 1 focus groups/workshops per pilot location  
12-48  5  
Information, awareness, open-air activities 3 Information and awareness exhibitions : one per 
pilot and replication case, 100 recipients per information/awareness exhibition.  
12-48  5  
Digital/social media presence/networks Posts on social media (2-4 per month, >500 followers on 
LinkedIn, and Twitter)  
30-48  3,5  
Website A dedicated section of PRIM-ROCK website will be targeted to the research and 
innovation community, industry and public organisations, also including content targeting schools 
and universities > 75 visits per month and > 2 monthly updates  
1-48  3,5  
Videos: 3 videos to disseminate PRIM-ROCK, mainly through the pilot locations. >3000 viewers   3-48  5  
Capacity building and skills development: These will be centred around the pilots to ensure that 
operators are trained on the correct and safe functioning of the PRIM-ROCK technologies.  
12-48  1,5  
Open Science KPIs:  Early shared pre-prints/presentations/posters >4; open project repository: 1; 
Articles in ORE 2; Open research outputs: 3; Publications with Open Data: >2; Open data in the 
repository: >2; Articles in open peer review: 4; Researchers in open peer-review: 4.  
18-48  All  
2.2.1 Exploitation of project’s results and business plan  
Exploitation, market and IPR management activities will be executed and monitored by dedicated WPs (WP11 -13) 
aiming to ensure future industrial implementation. PRIM -ROCK is directly in line with (a) the EC “Innovation 
Radar” which aims to identify and support high potential exploitable results, to represent a pathway to enacting, 
measuring and accelerating commercial and economic outputs and (b) with retaining competitive IP advantages 
within EU. All exploitation strategies will be described in the PEDR to be submitted as deliverables in M6, M18, 
M36 and M48 ensuring coherent business planning and sustainability of financing after the end of the project. 
Opportunities for further funding possibilities including EU, national and regional funding programmes (w ithin 
Europe) will be mapped, and synergies will be investigated.  
Business plan: Commercial exploitation of the PRIM -ROCK offering is projected to begin in 2031. Every result is 
primarily oriented to the wider industry engineering market, but also features significant potential in secondary 
markets, that are referred. PRIM -ROCK features 30 results, where all will feature different levels of commercial 
exploitation. For a more robust projection, the analysis is focused on the project’s KERs.  
KER1 - Raw Material Intelligence system : KER1 provides a complete system for the classification, analysis, 
preprocessing and segregation of raw materials according to process parameters. It has three main components: RM 
monitoring and control systems (R1.1), the Pre -processing line (R1.2) and th e RMI DSS (R1.3). It will be 
commercialised by ICCS and CIBOS as the main beneficiaries. The relevant markets are sensor -based sorting 
machines for the mining market sector, standing at 110 M€ in 2022 and projected t o reach 250M€ in 2031 46 . 
Exploitation will be product (hardware) and service-based through sales or leasing, at 1M€/unit at TRL9.   
KER2 - Intensification technologies for thermal processing : ΚΕΡ2 is comprised of R2.1 Molecular & 
Physicochemical models, R2.2 Thermophysical models, R2.3 Reduced order models, R2.4 Process models, R2.5 
 
46 Transparency markets, Yahoo Finance, GMI  
65 
Credence research  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 42  
IRFK prototypes, R2.6 Microwave rotary kiln and the R2.7 Control system. NTUA and CEIN will exploit the 
prototypes and the other partners likewise their results. The global market stands at over 800M€, with 60% in Asia 
and 17% in the EU 65. The exploitation model will again be product and service based, with licensing and 
manufacturing agreements with OEMs, at a price of 2,5M€ for a 800kg capacity unit (or 400kg with H2 at 3.5M€).   
KER3 - Post-processing solutions: KER3 is comprised of different solutions, with R3.1 Multi-physics model of the 
plasma reactor (EUT) and R3.2 MI -Plasma reactor for H2 recovery (EUT) supported by R3.3 Gas cooling heat 
exchanger (BUL) and a R3.4 Virtual toolkit (CORE) dealing with the virt ual post -process of CCUS and e -fuel 
generation. The main market all of these solutions are oriented towards EEIs, a €19.8b market according to the SRIA. 
Commercialisation will be both product and service based, with tailored systems commissioned at 1M€/unit.  KER4 
- Digital process-line optimisation: KER4 delivers a scalable and adaptable process for the digitalisation of process 
industries, and their optimisation. It is comprised of R4.1 Monitoring configuration design (IRIS), R4.2 Data 
orchestration (CORE), R4.3 AI-based data driven optimisation (SCCH), R4.4 Optimisation DSS & UI (SCCH) and 
R4.5 Digital Twin development methodology (CORE). The corresponding digital services market is surging at 
1.5Tn€. Exploitation will be service or product as a service based with a 100,000€ sales price with subscription. KER5 
- Technology adoption framework : KER5 will deliver a holistic service to support decision -making, investment 
and operation of project technologies. It is comprised of R5.1 Technoeconomic & energy footprint  
 
assessment (ADMR), R5.2 Societal & environmental impacts (PRINS), R5.3 Workplace Impact Assessment Associated with 
document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
(EUROC), R5.4 Business plan (STAM), R5.5 Standardisation reports (UNE), R5.6 OHSE Reports and protocols 
(EUROC), R5.7 Policy and regulatory report (VDU). KER5 is relevant to the consultation market, that exceeds 
100b€, with technical consulting at ~20%. Exploitation will be service based.  
KER6 - PRIM-ROCK demonstrator portfolio: KER6 will be used as the whole system product offering, addressed to 
the process industries, a €19.8b market according to the SRIA.  
Financial projections: The prospects for the commercialisation of PRIM -ROCK were projected until 2033. By 2031, 
we expect the project to achieve market readiness, as the project will conclude in Q4 2028. In brief, the opportunity 
is financially attractive and likely to deliver substantial returns on the investment over the forecasted period. By the 
end of the 4th year, the cumulative profit stands at €162M, which is a substantial sum, especially considering the 
initial investment of €10M and commercializati on costs of additional €35M, implying that not only the initial 
investment is recovered within the four -year period, but also sizeable profit is generated. The table indicates 
aggressive sales growth year -over-year, with substantial increases in both sales  and profit. The final market share 
percentages are very low, which suggests that even with the growth, PRIME -ROCK is operating in a large market 
with considerable expansion potential. Finally, with a new job created for every €120k in sales, over 1360 jobs will 
be created. The project is well -positioned to offer lucrative returns, while the cumulative profit indicates healthy 
growth potential. However, it is essential to note that these projections are contingent upon successful execution of 
StreamSTEP and the realization of the forecasted sales.   
  
  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 43  
2.2.2 Project results and management of intellectual property  
Project methodology and results will be published, but products and models developed will be evaluated by an IPR 
committee within the Project Consortium to evaluate any harm to property rights. Regarding Intellectual Property 
(IP) rules, at proposal stage the fundamental aspects in relation to Background IP, Foreground, Results Ownership, 
Exploitation strategies and Access Rights have been discussed to ensure the necessary IP framework is understood 
and robust. During the preparation and signing of Consort ium Agreement the partners will update/confirm their 
background IP and create an IP baseline. PRIM-ROCK will follow the IPR Management Guidelines from the proposal 
stage right through to the end of the project and IPR issues will be further elaborated and agreed during the negotiation 
of the Grant Agreement (GA). Moreover, during project implementation, the Consortium will take address IPR issues 
and market uptake, as part of the GA sessions. Consortium Agreement (CA):  IP issues will be covered in the CA 
that will be drawn up based on the DESCA model. All consortium partners will agree and sign acceptance of the CA 
prior to the signature of the GA. The maintenance of the status of result ownership and rules accessing bac kground 
knowledge vital to the successful completion and exploitation of the project results by each beneficiary are addressed 
in WP10-12. Background IP: The Background knowledge of the partners is identified at proposal stage and updated 
prior to the writing of the CA. Background IPR will remain the property of the Originator Company or organisation. 
However, where needed, during the period of the project, all background knowledge necessary for carrying out the 
project will be available for use by any other partner of the consortium, with access rights being granted royalty-free 
by the owning partner. For post-project exploitation, needed access will be once again granted by the owning partner, 
either royalty-free or by charging a license fee under reasonab le terms, thereby promoting collaboration and the 
advancements of the research and innovation employing NDAs as needed. Patents and Knowledge Sharing:  The 
novel results of the project that are eligible for patenting will be actioned as soon as possible. In cases of joint 
inventions, the ownership will be shared in accordance with a notified agreement. A framework for access rights for 
jointly conducted research will also be reported in the DECP. Other IPR tools, such Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
as trademarks, copyrights, utility models etc. will also be actively assessed for the different aspects of novel 
innovation, e.g. trademarks will be considered for individual components for branding and commercialization 
purposes in other industries by the DEM in consultation with the consortium partners. #§COM-DIS-VIS-CDV§#
2.3 Summary   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/20 24 
Target groups and needs  Results  DEC Measures  Outcomes (by 2031)  Impacts (by 2033)  

 
 
TG1 – Industries: Industrial end -users 
from the P4P sectors. Industrial 
associations. They are the main 
beneficiaries of the project’s results. They 
need to improve the resource efficiency, 
productivity and resilience of the EIIs. They 
also need access to new tools and resources 
to support technological innovation.  
TG2 - Technology developers: EU OEMs, 
process sectors that are SME -centric. They 
need to scale up their operations, expand 
networks, clients and business, improve 
resilience and innovate.   
TG3 – Research: Research performers such 
as universities, research organisations and 
associations. The research community needs 
access to new tools and knowledge, 
operational data and insights provided 
directly by the industry and society.   
TG4 - Financing & Governance : Local, 
regional, national and international. They 
need access to clear and actionable 
information on a high level, particularly 
with regards to technoeconomic areas, risk 
of investment, environmental and societal 
impacts, feedback on policies and 
regulations.  
TG5 - European society : General public, 
consumers, workforce, associations. They 
need to improve their quality of life through 
more and better paying jobs, reduced 
pollution and more resilient societies.   
 KER1 - Raw Material Intelligence system:   
 R1.1 RM monitoring and control systems, R1.2 Pre 
processing line, R1.3 RMI DSS   
 KER2 - Intensification technologies for thermal  
processing: R2.1 Molecular & Physicochemical  
models (ITA), R2.2 Thermophysical models  
(NTUA), R2.3 Reduced order models (ITA)  
R2.4 Process models (NTUA), R2.5 IRFK prototype  
(NTUA), R2.6 Microwave rotary kiln (CEIN), R2.7  
Control system (MAGG)  
 KER3 - Post-processing solutions: R3.1 Multi 
physics model of the plasma reactor (EUT), R3.2 
MIPlasma reactor for H2 recovery (EUT), R3.3 Gas  
cooling heat exchanger (BUL)  
 R3.4 Virtual toolkit (CORE)  
 KER4 - Digital process line optimisation:  
 R4.1 Monitoring configuration design (IRIS), R4.2 
 Data orchestration (CORE), R4.3 AI-based data 
driven optimisation (SCCH), R4.4 Optimisation DSS  
& UI (SCCH), R4.5 Digital Twin development  
methodology (CORE),   
 3D Visualisation of process line  
 KER5 - Technology adoption framework:   
 R5.1 Technoeconomic & energy footprint  
assessment (ADMR), R5.2 Societal & environmental  
impacts (PRINS), R5.3 Workplace Impact 
Assessment (EUROC), R5.4 Business plan (STAM),  
R5.5 Standardisation reports (UNE), R5.6 OHSE  
Reports and protocols (EUROC), R5.7 Policy and  
regulatory report (VDU)  
 KER6 - PRIM-ROCK demonstrator portfolio:  
R6.1 IUC1 Limestone processing (FORN)  
R6.2 IUC2 Laterite processing (NTUA for Greek 
FeNi production)  
R6.3 IUC3 Magnesite processing (TERNAMAG) 
R6.4 IUC4Zinc processing (KGHM)  
R6.5 IUC5 Chalcopyrite processing (KGHM)  
Dissemination: Product 
/service showcasing and 
exhibitions, wider energy  
sector related events,  
conferences, fairs, scientific  
publications, technical 
workshops, meetings with  
policy makers, technical  
factsheets, videos. Oriented 
towards all TGs.  
Communication:  
Workshops, interviews,  
surveys, physical -online 
communities, collaboration 
with EU R&I initiatives and 
energy communities,  
organisations and  
partnerships, information  
awareness, website, forums,  
networking.  
Exploitation: Know -how and 
IP protection, openaccess, 
licensing, product as a  
service, replication strategy,  
introduction into existing  
service portfolios, packaging,  
establishment of sales  
networks, franchising. Smart  
contracts, shared savings, 
CO2 tax valorisa tion. 
Measures apply to all results 
according to the tables in 2.1.  
  
• Adoption of 
project’s main  result by at 
least 3 process  industries in 
operational  scale.   
• Digitalisation 
framework  and optimisation 
applied in  at least 10 plants 
(mineral,  non -ferrous, 
cement, ferrous  sectors)  
• Reduction of losses 
in raw material handling by 
over  50%, RMI system 
adopted  by >3  
• Reduction of losses 
in  process stage by over 80%,  
Electrified Rotating Kiln 
 (IFRK/MRK) uptake by >5 
 EIIs in pilot scale  
• Virtual toolkit used 
by >5 stakeholders to reduce 
the  risk of CCUS, TEA 
applied in >5 industries for 
process 
 upgrade  
• Investment of at 
least 20M  in upscaling, 
KER5 used by  at least 12 
plant owners /  operators  
  
  
   
• 32 (FWCI~2) publications and 
2 in  ORE,   
• Extensive capacity building in a 
pool of over 1000 individuals.   
• Uptake by over 100 research  
organisations using the open tools and  
data.   
• The new directions in digital 
services and systems engineering, but 
also  social sciences and humanities will  
contribute to >100 jobs created in R&D 
• Moreover, PRIM -ROCK will 
contribute to the SDGs by reducing  
process industry energy demand by  over 
25%   
• and reducing CO2 emissions by 
over  30%, averting over 2200kt of CO2.   
• The penetration of renewables 
will be  increased by >30%   
• Over 25,000 citizens will have 
been  engaged.  
• Process industry productivity 
will increase by 10% at least.   
• Over 270M€ will be generated 
as  revenue for end users and over   
• 1100 jobs will be the effects of 
PRIMROCK actions.   
• Over 50M€ will be leveraged 
for electrification and decarbonisation.   
• Progress towards zero accidents 
will be significant.  
#§IMP-ACT-IA§#  
 
 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 39  
 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 47  
  
  
3  Quality and efficiency of the implementations  Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 
20/09/2024 
#@QUA-LIT-QL@# #@WRK-PLA-WP@#
3.1  Work plan and resources  
  
Figure 20. WP structure (pert-like)  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 48  
  
  
Figure 21. PRIM-ROCK’s Gantt  
#§QUA-LIT-QL§# #§WRK-PLA-WP§#   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024
3.2  Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole   
#@CON-SOR-CS@# #@PRJ-MGT-PM@# Matching 
of project objectives  
PRIM-ROCK gathers an inter - and trans-disciplinary 
Consortium composed of 22 partners from 8 countries, 
7 Member States (Spain, Greece, Belgium, Italy, 
Austria, Poland, Lithuania), as well as United 
Kingdom. The Consortium features 7 SMEs (CORE, 
IRIS, STAM , ADMR, PRINS, EUROC, CIBOS), 
along with 6 RTDs (EUT, ICCS, CIRCE, ITA, SCCH, 
CEIN) and 3 universities (NTUA, BUL, VDU). 
Moreover, 1 Standardisation Body (UNE), and 5 Large  
Enterprises  (MAGG,  FORN,  HEGOLD,  
TERNAMAG, KGHM) round out the partnership. The 
cohesive  team  of  partners  has 
been  created  
considering: a) balanced complementary expertise and capacity, with clear roles and results; b) geographical 
differentiation adhering to the requirements of the call with regards to pilots but also replicability of results; c) 

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 49  
  
previous experience, proven expertise and motivation, for an effective and efficient management and execution of 
the project; d) good representation and involvement of stakeholder Target Groups; e) P4P partnership involvement  
and f) Newcomers to EU funded research.  3.2.1 
Access to critical infrastructure  
Have been described in 1.2.2. All the partners have the infrastructure to carry out development and piloting work.   
3.2.2 Description of partners and corresponding roles  
All partners will participate in 
WP1 and its activities, in WP8 
and WP9 for demonstrations and 
technology adoption framework 
consolidation,  respectively, 
 as well as WP10-12 for DEC 
actions and  WP13  with 
 regards  to reporting as  part 
 of project management.  
#1  NTUA  is  the 
 project’s Coordinator.  They 
 consolidate technical specs in 
T1.1, conduct physicochemical 
modelling of the IFRK for 
calcination in T2.3, lead WP6 by 
optimising IFRKs design  
in T6.3 and construct the prototypes in T6.1 and T6.4, validate them in T7.2, and leads the demonstration WP8 by 
assessing the technologies in T8.5.  
#2 CORE is an EL SME. They undertake data -driven optimization of the roasting process via IFRK and MRK in 
T5.2, lead T5.4 where the process DSS and UI will be developed and conduct the scale-up & expansion study in T9.5. 
They also lead the CDE WPs (WP10,11,12), overseeing the communication and dissemination activities.  
#3 EUT is an ES RTD, responsible for conducting the simulations and design of the MIP reactor in T2.5, as well as 
its prototyping in T6.6 for the recovery of H2. They also lead WP7, undertaking the integration of the prototypes in 
the pilot units in T7.1 and the validation of the ES pilot in T7.3.  
#4 ICCS is an EL RTD. They consolidate end-users’ requirements in T1.2 and are responsible for the RMI system. 
Particularly, they design the system in T2.2 and lead WP4, where they develop the monitoring and control systems 
for the RMI (T4.1), develop the sorting  prototype in T4.2, the classification DSS in T4.3 and the crushing size 
identification system in T4.4.  
#5 CIRCE is an ES RTD. CIRCE leads the simulation and design WP2, where they lead the analysis of the material 
flow in T2.1, as well as T2.3 conducting the thermophysical simulations of the IFRK and develop the ROMs in T6.2. 
#6 ITA is an ES technology center. ITA leads T2.5 by conducting the physicochemical modelling of the IFRK for 
roasting, as well as T6.2 where they develop the associated ROMs.  
#7 SCCH is an A T RTD. They lead the efforts for the data-driven calcination process optimisation in T5.2 and develop 
the associated DSS and UI in T5.4.  
#8 BUL is a UK university, leading the development of a heat exchanger prototype for the controlled cooling of H2 
and S gasses in T6.7, based on the designs of WP2. Moreover, BUL carries out the thermophysical modelling of the 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 
IFRK for the roasting process in T2.4.  
#9 CEIN is an ES technology provider SME. CEIN leads the design of the MRK for the sulphides roasting process 
in T2.5 and manufactures the prototype in T6.5.  
#10 IRIS  is an ES RTD, which leverages their expertise in monitoring and sensor networks, as well as on the 
associated data integration. IRIS leads T1.3, T3.1 and T3.2, developing the foundation of the digital framework. Then, 
in T5.3 IRIS integrates the middleware, that is refined in WP7 and demonstrated in WP8.   
#11 STAM is an IT consulting SME. STAM leads the 3D visualisation of the digital twins in T5.5 and support the 
integration of industrial IoT sensors in the FORN case for operational data collection. They are also the project’s 
Exploitation Manager (WP10,11,12).  
#12 ADMR is an EL SME and the main responsible for the coordination of the technology adoption framework, 
supporting the individual assessments and other activities. ADMR leads T1.5 and T6.8, coordinating these activities, 
as well as WP9 and the associated TEA task (T9.1).   

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 50  
  
#13 PRINS is an EL SME, experts in LCA, LCC and LCSA. They leverage their knowledge leading T9.2.  
#14 EUROC is a BE SME and the project’s expert on health and safety. They lead T1.4, T9.3 and T9.4, as well as 
provide support in WPs6, 7 and 8.  
#15 MAGG is an IT LE and experts in control systems and automation. MAGG leads WP3 and T3.3 designing the 
control system and interface, develops the system in T5.1, implement in WP7 and demonstrate in WP8.  
#16 CIBOS is an EL SME. They lead the development and implementation of the RMI-DSS in T4.3.  
#20 VDU is a LT university, responsible for the legislative monitoring (T9.6) and ethics management (T13.3).  
#21 UNE is an ES Standardisation Body and will address the standardisation aspects of the project in WPs 10 -12.  
End users: FORN, TERNAMAG, HEGOLD, FeNi Greek producers (through NTUA) and KGHM will have a 
similar participation profile. Their role will be to (a) providing requirements, parameters and support for the design 
of process technologies that will emulate conditions relevant to industrial production. In the case of FORN, STAM 
will support data collection, in the case of TERNAMAG, sample analysis will also be carried out onsite; (b) Sending 
raw material samples to the pilot unit for comparative assessment of the process performance.  #§CON-SOR-CS§# #§PRJ-
MGT-PM§#   
4  Ethics self-assessment  
  
Ethical dimension of the objectives, methodology and likely impact  
PRIM-ROCK is focused on improving the calcination and roasting processes, thanks to a holistic approach centred 
around groundbreaking process intensification (PI) and digital technologies. The Consortium commits to upholding 
the highest ethical standards for research, as delineated in the European Code of Conduct for Research Integrity of 
ALLEA and ESF, to observe and promote the principles of integrity in scientific and scholarly research. These 
principles include honesty in communication, reliability in p erforming research, objectivity, impartiality and 
independence, openness and accessibility, the duty of care, and fairness in providing references. For the 
Consortium, it is of the utmost importance that ethical issues are appropriately addressed from the outset of the 
project. To facilitate the practical application of ethical and legal principles the EC has identified key issues that 
could arise during project's development.   
PRIM-ROCK entails the collection of meaningful data, with a view to producing insights that will successfully 
inform the project's activities, enabling evidence-based results. The Consortium is aware and committed to the EU 
and national legislation regardi ng data protection and data ethics. A Data Management Plan (DMP) will be 
formulated from the early stages of the project and updated when deemed necessary. It will describe the complete 
data management life cycle of the data to be collected, processed and/ or generated by the project and will lay out 
the approach for their sound and FAIR management. All data referring to user groups participating in the demo 
cases and other project activities (e.g., interviews, surveys, workshops, etc.) will be managed according to specific 
terms that will be detailed in the DMP, protecting the data subjects' rights and freedoms. All information related to 
project results and data exchanged in the project will be treated as confidential, thereby providing a first line of 
protection and security.  
Artificial Intelligence: The consortium places significant importance on ethics and AI and will take all the necessary 
steps to ensure that the development, training, and integration of AI is inclusive, explainable, has a positive purpose 
and use data responsibly. Task 13.4 will cover data lifecycle aspects as well as data governance through the delivery 
of the DMP and its updates during the project lifetime.  
Compliance with ethical principles and relevant legislations  
NTUA, as the project's Coordinator and in close collaboration with the project's Steering Committee will establish 
the required governance systems to constantly monitor the progress of the project from its legal, ethical, and  
 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 51  
  
societal dimensions and will record risks identified, mitigation suggestions, and actions taken, regularly reporting 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 to the PO and the EC via its multi -version deliverables as described in 
the implementation plan (Section 3). PRIM -ROCK will comply with data protection acts, directives, and opinions, 
both at European and at National level. These include:  
 -  The Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, especially its arts. 7 and  
8.  
- The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU, specifically the article concerning the protection of personal 
data.  
- Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of 
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement within the EU/ EEA of 
such data to be replaced in May 2018 by Regulati on 679/2016 (the General Data Protection Regulation). - 
Directive 2002/58/EC of 12 July 2002 concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy 
in the electronic communications sector (Directive on privacy and electronic communicati ons) [2002] OJ 
L201/37, as modified by the Citizens Rights Directive.  
- The opinions of the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies in their report Citizens 
Rights and New Technologies: A European Challenge on the Charter on Fundamental Rights related to 
technological innovation.  
- In particular recommendations related to ICT concerning data protection and individuals freedom and 
autonomy applicable national data protection legislation.  
- As regards processing personal electronic data, protecting privacy in the electronic communications sector 
and retaining data generated or processed in connection with the provision of publicly available electronic 
communications services or of public communications networks (e.g. cloud, big data, open data, cookies 
etc.),  
 -  PRIM-ROCK will comply with the relevant legislation:  
- EU Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002 concerning the 
processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector 
(Directive on privacy and electronic communications).  
- EU Directive 2006/24/EC of 15 March 2006 on the retention of data generated or processed in connection 
with the provision of publicly available electronic communications services or of public communications 
networks.  
Artificial Intelligence: PRIM -ROCK will pay attention to ethical issues related to the way the developed AI 
operates, in terms of Bias elements caused by model, system, or process inconsistencies. The system will be 
designed and assessed in a way that ensu res compliance with the recent EU's draft AI Act, the OECD's 
recommendations on AI, and the Council of Europe's report on the human rights dimensions of Algorithms.