3.2 Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole .......................................................................... ....... 
41Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/2024 Matching of project objectives 
........................................................................................................................... 41 3.2.1  Access to critical 
infrastructure ............................................................................................................ 41  
3.2.2 Description of partners and corresponding roles .................................................................................. 
41  
4 Ethics self-assessment ............................................................................................................................. 42   
  
  
#@APP-FORM-HERIAIA@#  
  
NOMENCLATURE  
DFRK: Direct -fired rotary kilns, IRFK: indirect -fired rotary kiln, MRK: microwave rotary kiln, MIP: 
microwaveinduced plasma, CKD: cement kiln dust, LKD: Lime Kiln Dust, IUC: industrial use-case, OPSR: Optical 
Sorting Recognition, XRT: Chemical recognition.  
  
1  Excellence   
#@REL-EVA-RE@#  
Introduction  
Mineral resources are an important material basis for the entire economy. The International Mineralogical 
Association’s (IMA) members annually produce 180 million tonnes of industrial minerals for the EU-28, Turkey, and 
Norway. These include calcium carbonate (precipitated and ground), dolomite, lime, bentonite, magnesite, and other 
valuable minerals1. Industrial minerals, either in a processed or natural state, are used to make building materials, 
ceramics, electronics, glass, medications and medical 
devices, paints, paper and plastics, and a myriad of other 
industrial and domestic products, contributing €14 billion 
to the EU economy 2.  The non -ferrous metals sector 
provides 500,000 direct jobs and 3 million indirect jobs in 
the EU, thousands more across wider Europe. These jobs 
are often highquality well -paid jobs, and trade unions 
have come together to fight to keep these jobs in Europe. 
European trade unions call for urgent action to level the 
global playing field to ensure Europe’s competitiveness in 
producing high-quality green products, while preserving 
 
1  
Processes4Planet SRIA 2022   
2 IMA-
Europe   

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 3  
and creating jobs. Amongst the many processes employed in mineral processing, calcination, a crucial process in the 
minerals processing and cement industries,  
involves heating materials to high temperatures. This  process is integral to transforming raw materials into Figure 
1. European non -ferrous metals industry stats useful products and plays a vital role in the efficiency (Source: 
Eurometaux)  
and sustainability of these industries. Roasting is a similar process for heating  sulhpide ore to a high temperature in 
the presence of air. It is a step in the processing of certain ores. More specifically, roasting is often a metallurgical 
process involving gas –solid reactions at elevated temperature s with the goal of purifying the metal component(s). 
The gaseous product of  sulhpide roasting, sulfur dioxide (SO2) is often used to produce sulfuric acid. Many  sulhpide 
minerals contain other components such as arsenic that are released into the environment. Rotary kilns have become 
essential in these processes, due to their diverse capabilities and high degree of control over process parameters.  
While rotary kilns have become the backbone of many new industrial processes that make the world a more efficient 
and sustainable place, the technology cannot (or often should not) process material in just any shape or form. In 
addition to being inefficient, feeding unprepared material to a kiln can have several unintended consequences, ranging 
from an incomplete reaction or a failure to achieve the intended reaction, to unnecessarily long retention times and 
excessive energy costs. Direct -fired rotary kiln s (DFRK) rely on direct contact between the process gas and the 
material in order to heat the material to the specified temperature, leading to fine and ultrafine particles becoming 
entrained in the process gas flow and carried out through the exhaust gas system. This results in a high rate of 
reprocessing and can significantly reduce the overall process efficiency, in addition to other issues.  
In the cement industry, the amount of cement kiln dust (CKD) generated typically ranges 15–20%2 of the produced 
cement, leading to an annual CKD production of approximately 12.9 metric tonsAssociated with document Ref. 
Ares(2024)6673367 - 20/09/20244. Similarly, the lime industry generates Lime Kiln Dust (LKD), with an annual 
production of approximately 1.8 to 3.6 million metric tons in the United States only3. CKD and LKD are usually 
stockpiled, and it is estimated that the total amount of kiln dust currently stockpiled throughout the country exceeds 
close to 90 million metric tons (100 million tons)4, creating substantial issues in their management. In the critical 
metal industries, the wide use of carbon as a cheap reduction material as well as the lack of the relevant 
fundamental knowledge and expertise has limited the hydrogen use to a few cases of refractory metals. However, 
hydrogen could be used as an alternative to carbon reductant, provided that there is enough fundamental knowledge 
concerning the thermochemical feasibility and equilibrium, the kinetics, and the factors, i.e. metallic mineral 
mineralogical phase, affecting the hydrogen/metal oxide/sulphide reaction system. Moreover, it is necessary to 
deeply understand the technical problems arising in the case of treating complex metal ores and concentrates due to 
the various compounds and mineralogical phases present in the reaction system. In this context, the PRIM-ROCK 
project represents a new frontier in the metallurgical industry in view of developing and demonstrating the 
necessary fundamental knowledge that will pave the way to sustainable, more energy efficient mineral processes 
with low carbon footprint, in a significant number of critical metals. Moreover, it will develop entirely new, 
breakthrough technologies enabling the direct extraction of metals from the EU metal sulphide resources. The 
project will also demonstrate an integrated approach to treat critical metal minerals coupled with onsite renewable 
hydrogen production, powered by artificial intelligence.  The knowledge developed in the PRIMROCK innovative 
processes directly targets the real scale application in the relevant industrial areas and will also provide the 
foundations for going beyond the specific cases studied in this project towards the development of a climate neutral 
critical metal hydrogen metallurgy on the long term. Both calcination and roasting processes present important 
optimisation potential dependent on the effective pre-treatment of raw material ores. In the ore sorting process, 
accurate, machine-assisted classification and sorting, as well as determining the optimal crushing size are key steps, 
greatly influence the efficiency and productivity of the production process, while also enabling also the utilisation 
of lower grade ores. For both sectors, process innovations are needed to improve resource efficiency, reduce waste 
and low-value by-product generation, and mitigate emissions and risk to worker health and safety.
1.1  Objectives and ambition   
#@PRJ-OBJ-PO@#  
 
2 Al-Bakri AY , Ahmed HM, Hefni MA. Cement Kiln Dust (CKD): Potential Beneficial Applications and Eco-Sustainable  
Solutions. Sustainability. 2022; 14(12):7022. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14127022  
3 https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/research/infrastructure/structures/97148/kd1.cf  m and references therein  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 4  
PRIM-ROCK aims to bring a step -change in the calcination and roasting processes , thanks to a holistic approach 
centred around ground-breaking process intensification (PI) and digital technologies, considering the following:  
  
Figure 2. Overview of the process line addressing multiple types of raw materials.  
(1) pre-processing stage, referred to in the project as the Raw Material Intelligence (RMI) system (KER1), comprised 
of a process line featuring advanced sensorisation, AI -driven sorting, and decision-support, complete with real-
time analysis capabilities and optimized crushing size determination for the raw materials. KER1 will contribute 
to process efficiency in a versatile manner, establishing an interface between pre-processing of raw materials and 
their thermal  
 
treatment and (a) optimising pre-processing in accordance to process parameters, Associated with document Ref. Ares(2024)6673367 
- 20/09/2024(b) enabling the adaptation of  
process parameters depending on raw material changes, even in real -time. Pre -processing will thus enable the 
resource efficiency of the corresponding processes to be increased by over 10%4.   
(2) replacement of Direct-fired rotary kilns (DFRKs) with Indirect-fired rotary kilns (IFRΚs) and microwave rotary  
kilns (MRKs) as the process components (KER2 – Intensification technologies for thermal processing). Replacing 
DFRKs with the electrified IFRKs and MRK removes the need for process gasses, solving the issue of fine and 
ultrafine material loss through drag, reducing emissions and improving the controllability and flexibility of the 
calcination and roasting processes. The capacity to process without losses of fine and ultrafine material is the major 
contributor to process efficiency, as losses can exceed 25% in many industries as previously described. Moreover, 
adoption of the technology removes the need for pelletisation and filters. Moreover, as slag or dam ring formation in 
the rotary kiln can be avoided, resource efficiency will increase by 6 -12%,5. This refers to a build -up around the 
circumference of the kiln’s interior in such a way that material is either prevented from passing through or is 
significantly inhibited. Ring formation is extremely common, occurring in roughly 85% of commercial rotary kilns. 
It is typically the result of a change in slagging temperature. Thus, depending on the process, KER2 will contribute 
to resource efficiency in the 20-32%5,6 range.  
(3) improvements on post -process component level, enabling using the kiln for direct reduction through H 2 as a 
reducing agent, which will be subsequently recovered by decomposition through Microwave -Assisted Plasma 
(MIP) reactor (KER3 – Post-processing solutions), which requires a sustainable and low -cost H2 supply that is 
 
4  Jan Spisak, Dusan Nascak, Eva Oravcova, “Increasing dust -chamber efficiency of rotary furnace for 
magnesite treatment”, European  Scientific Journal March 2015 edition vol.11, No.9 ISSN: 1857 – 7881 (Print) e - ISSN 1857- 7431  
5 Lime Kiln Principles and Operations. Terry N. Adams. Technical Consultant. Seattle WA  

 
101178403 — PRIM-ROCK    Part B, page 5  
the goal of this activity. Replacement of C by H2 and high levels of recovery will improve the resource efficiency 
of reduction processes of the selected lines by over 60% (FeNi case, from 45% to 90% 6 to pre-reduction stage). 
Additionally, an innovative heat exchanger prototype will be developed to at the post-process level to manage the 
thermal quenching effect of the plasma and cool the process gases in a controlled way, maximising recovery. 
Finally, due to the substantial en riched CO 2 produced by calcination, a virtual toolkit for decision support in 
capture and utilisation in e-fuels will be developed, enabling credible feasibility assessments.  
(4) Enabling the integration of KER1 -3 and maximizing the improvements in resource efficiency will be achieved 
through the digital infrastructure component  (KER4 - Digital process -line optimisation ). KER4 will deploy 
tailored, and exhaustive simulations of the pre -process, electrified process and post-process stages to obtain the 
optimal design of the prototypes, while process digital twins will be developed with data -driven functions for 
efficient monitoring (with 3D visualization capabilities) and further opt imization. An innovative data platform 
will facilitate data fusion, bridging the models, the Process Control System (PCS) and the advanced sensor 
network of all stages. It is estimated that digital technologies will contribute to the maximization of the process-
line resource efficiency by 3-5%.   
(5) support the technological development process by addressing issues related to adoption of the technology through 
a comprehensive suite of transversal activities: Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), Life Cycle Costing (LCC), Life 
Cycle Sustainability Assessment (LCSA), Technoeconomic Analysis (TEA), GHG emissions avoidance, energy 
footprint analysis, technology scale -up roadmap, standardization, data management and security, business case 
and exploitation strategy development, and workplace assessment (including sk ills development). ( KER5 - 
Technology adoption framework)  
  
1.1.1  Project objectives  
SO1. Contribute to resource efficiency gains through the Raw Material Intelligence (RMI) system (KER1) The 
characteristics of raw materials exert significant influence on processing efficiency and product quality. 
PRIMROCK will leverage this interface by introducing a holistic system for raw material pre-processing through:   
1. Design of the RMI component, creating a detailed blueprint for integrating advanced sensors, AI algorithms, and 
control systems into ore processing workflows, ensuring effective classification, sorting, crushing and 
optimization of processing parameters (T2.2–ICCS).  
2. Introducing advanced sensorisation and control systems for the RMI system to accurately detect and analyse the 
composition of mineral ore streams, enabling dynamic adjustment of processing parameters for maximum 
efficiency and accuracy. Delivering an integrated sensor and control system prototype tailored for high-precision 
ore processing applications (T4.1–ICCS).  
3. Deploying two AI -assisted sorting systems for tuneable segregation of mineral ore streams, utilizing 
nondestructive vision sensory devices and deep learning models. (T4.2–ICCS).