4. Members of the consortium ......................................................................................................................................... 69 
4.1. Participants (applicants) ...................................................................................................................................... 69 
4.2. Third parties involved in the project (including use of third party resources) .................................................. 120 
5. Ethics and Security ..................................................................................................................................................... 125 
5.1. Ethics ................................................................................................................................................................. 125 
5.2. Security .............................................................................................................................................................. 125 
  
 
5 
1. Excellence 
PROMETHEUS will develop a world -leading Rapid Ultra -Short Pulse Laser Surface Texturing technology for the 
functionalisation of a wide range of materials and products. The PROMETHEUS consortium consists of EU -leading 
organisations that cover the full value chain for laser surface engineering, with access to all of the necessary resources to 
develop the technology and provide access to European and global markets. The 4 end-user partners: MAIER, CRF, ARCELIK 
and JJVC are all recognised in their industrial sectors: Automotive, white goods and fast- moving consumer goods. In order 
to minimise the ultimate time to market and to maximise exploitation, the demonstration unit will be built by PRIMA who 
are already suppliers of these integrated systems to the European and global markets. 
By building on our consortium’s existing technologies and developments, PROMETHEUS will overcome the existing barriers 
that are currently limiting developments and holding back ultra -short pulse laser texturing from achieving mainstream 
application, through developing: 
• USP laser architectures with pulse duration <10ns, powers >1kW and pulse repetition rates above 500Hz. 
• Direct Laser Interference Patterning (DLIP) technology to achieve multiple length-scale periodic patterns (3- 10µm) 
with processing speed of 2-5 m²/min. 
• USP laser architectures of M2 beam quality ≤15 or spatial coherence >15% and coherence length equal to 3mm. 
• Industrial grade fibre cables that are able to transmit peak power densities above 5GW/cm 2 over a minimum 3m 
length. 
• Optical inspection methods for assessing the quality of the produced functional surface textures at the high 
production speed (up to several m2/min) and respond via process control. 
In so doing, the PROMETHEUS project will transform our current technologies from the current TRL 4 to create a market 
leading solution that will have clear advantages over existing solutions and demonstrate those in an industrial relevant 
environment (TRL 6). 
PROMETHEUS will directly address and contribute to the wider Europe 2020 targets through increased employment of 20-
64 years old, increased R&D spending, reduced energy usage and greenhouse emissions, and increased education,  
especially at third level education as well as the 10 EC priorities for 2015-19 Jobs, growth and investment and the UN 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
Surface engineering is a critical technology that adds functionality to materials surfaces through texturing, surface 
modification or coating. Currently, coating solutions dominate due to their higher level of maturity , relatively low cost 
and higher speed. However, surface coatings have a number of limitations, including: 
• Limited durability and effectiveness over long-time periods. 
• Need for potentially harmful chemicals, many of which are regulated through the REACH legislation. 
• Poor sustainability and resource efficiency due to the chemicals and processes employed. 
 Enhanced surface functionality through surface texturing  has existed for a number of years. The earliest commercial 
application demonstrated on cylinder liner honings i,ii, with more recent applications shown for texturing of magnetic 
storage devices iii,iv and for MEMS devices for overcoming adhesion and stiction problems v. Early work in the 1960s  
relating to tribologyvi,vii,viii was based on the concept of surface texturing providing micro-reservoirs to enhance lubricant 
retention or as micro-traps to capture wear debrisix. 
Current Surface Texturing (LST) methods: 
• Electron and Ion -Beam lithography for the 
fabrication of high-resolution surface patterns with 
small feature sizes down to ~100 nm. However, 
these techniques are inherently limited to 0.008-
0.03 cm²/minx which makes them 
infeasible for many applications.  
• Conventional micro machining such as micro -
milling can achieve high processing speeds (e.g. 
~0.01 m²/min) but at low resolution (e.g. 15 - 100 
μm) which significantly limits the type of achievable 
surface features. 
• Chemical etching is also an option but is restricted 
due to the use of potentially harmful chemicals and 
other challenges related to scalability and control make it widely unattractive to end users. 
 
Figure 1 Fabrication speed vs. Feature size 

 
6 
Each of these techniques, typically suffers from low productivity, due to the size and complexity of features required for 
surface functionality. There is an inevitable a trade-off between resolution / definition and speed. 
Laser surface texturing (LST) is a highly promising surface engineering technique that offers: Excellent repeatability; 
Non-contact processing; The ability of achieving small feature size and the possibility of achieving high quality finishing. 
Over the last decade there has been a large number of academic publications on using LST for the manufacture of 
hydrophobic, high friction, oleophilic (for oil trapping) surfaces etc. However, despite the promising results, the industrial 
uptake has been very limited and in most cases the technology has stalled at TRL 4. The reasons identified for this failure 
to progress beyond TRL is attributed to: 
i) High cost, 
ii) Poor productivity and 
iii) Lack of knowledge. 
USP lasers are ideally suited for surface texturing and ablation applications on temperature sensitive materials and 
substrates. Whilst USP laser processes have been widely applied in industrial applications already, their widespread take 
up has been limited due to four main technical limitations of current laser surface texturing, including: 
• Heat accumulation and oxidation 
• Synchronisation of laser pulses 
• Plasma Shielding effects 
• Precision at high processing speeds 
The PROMETHEUS project directly addresses these shortfalls by developing a novel high power 1.5 kW USP laser system, 
which utilises the average power and repetition rate of the ultrashort pulsed laser source more effecti vely than current 
methods via spreading the pulses temporally across the component at industrially relevant speeds, whilst ensuring 
minimal thermal degradation of the component’s surface. 
The approach uses a direct laser interference patterning (DLIP) tech nique that is uniquely suited to high power 
applications as the increased power is spread across the interference pattern, enabling high power utilisation whilst 
maintaining high precision from the interference patterns. Current systems are intrinsically l imited – as the power is 
increased, the scan rate must also be increased to prevent will melting that results in lower resolution. Increasing 
scanning rates leads to an inherent loss of resolution and control. 
This is an innovative solution for high speed surface patterning of periodic structures in a one step process whereby periodic 
structures can be produced in different materials including metals, ceramics, polymers and coatings in a single step 
process. This approach will enable our consortium to utili se novel laser texturing methods for superior temperature 
control and ultra -high processing speeds. The technology has the potential to create functional surfaces with optimal 
friction, hydrophobic or hydrophilic, anti-corrosion or other properties. 
The PROMETHEUS solution will build on previous research and development work by the consortium to create: 
Ultra-Short Pulse (USP) lasers from APL with pulse durations in the nanosecond regime down to the femtosecond regime. 
The average laser power will be increased to power within nanosecond lasers towards 2-3 kW. We will initially start with 
pulse durations in the range of 5 -15 ns and then seek to develop to a few hundred picoseconds. The  power may be as 
much as 25 mJ. This will be combined with an innovative Direct Laser Interference Patterning (DLIP) from FRAUNHOFER. 
As such a laser system would have to be highly multi -mode (M2~30), a novel M2 transformation beam shaping method 
based on diffractive optics will be developed and utilised by HOLO-OR to achieve effective interference patterning with 
a partially coherent source. This approach will build on current similar  novel M2 transformation HOLO-OR systems that 
have been shown to produced good interference patterns. 
To allow for process control to be achieved, process monitoring and control from VISUM and AIMEN will also be 
developed. 
These will be integrated into a demonstrator system consisting of the laser, M 2 transformation, beam splitting and fibre 
delivery that can achieve processing speeds of 2-5 m²/min for a range of materials and geometries. 
This will enable the technology to be demonstrated for the next generation of manufacturing of functional textured 
surfaces in a broad range of industrial sectors, including: 
1. Automotive – Exterior chrome-plated bumper trim with self-cleaning properties. Almost planar with some 
curvature. 330 mm x 30 mm x 20 mm. 
2. Automotive – laser surface texturing of cylinder piston liners to replace mechanical helical side -honing to 
 
7 
deliver controlled surface roughness and reduced piston friction. 
3. Automotive – Improved mould tools with low friction surface to eliminate lubricants for aluminium hot 
forming process. 
4. White goods - Hydrophobic texturing for dishwashers and tumble dryer heat exchangers to reduce energy 
consumption required for drying and condensers. 
5. Fast moving consumer goods (FMCG) – oleophobic surface texturing of plastic packaging for FMCG 
application to reduce current practice of overfilling and to enable the customer to extract maximum product. 
6. Health - antibacterial functionality for PROLENE suture (JJVC) and improved cement adhesion on PEEK 
orthopaedic implants (JJVC) 
1.1. Objectives 
The overall aim of PROMETHEUS is to develop high power ultra-short pulse lasers and the associated optics to enable 
the precise periodic texturing of surfaces to impart a range of surface functionalities at unprecedented processing 
speeds. 
Key Overarching Objectives: 
The PROMETHEUS project a number of broad qualitative objectives, including; 
• To manufacture textured functional surfaces utilising fewer raw materials, less energy and less waste. 
• To improve accuracy, power and control over existing technologies. 
• To achieve fast materials processing with processing speeds 2-5 m2/min, representing a significant increase 
on current laser techniques. 
• To increase achievable precision. 
• To minimize heat impact on sensitive materials. 
• To increase productivity. 
• To increase achievable flexibility and product customization. 
• Significantly reduce processing costs. 
In order to achieve those objectives, the specific smart objectives for the research programme have been carefully 
devised to address the challenges identified in the previous section and are as below: 
 
Table 1.1 PROMETHEUS technical developments and demonstration and commercial exploitation objectives 
 
 No Objective WP 
Technical 
Development 
1 To develop and validate designs for 3 laser architectures with capability to achieve 
pulse duration <10 ns at powers of 1.5 kW, 2.4 kW and 3.2 kW and pulse 
repetition rates above 500 Hz by month 17 
2 
2 To develop and validate designs for 4 laser architectures to achieve M2 beam quality 
≤15 or 
spatial coherence >15% and coherence length > 3 mm, at average powers above 1 
kW by month 17 
2 
3 To develop preliminary seed laser source fibre or YAG based with optimum beam 
quality 
characteristics for interference patterning with power up to 400 W by month 20 
2 
4 To develop a laser source capable of emitting pulses with duration between 0.8 to 10 
ns and average power above 1.2 kW with pulse repetition rates between 0.5 to 100 
kHz by month 24 
2 
5 To develop optical fibres that are able to transmit peak power densities above 5 
GW/cm2, 
with average power of 2 to 3 kW over a minimum length of 3 m by month 20. 
2 
6 To develop optical fibres that are be capable of transferring multimode beams 
with M2 ranging between 12 and 40 by month 20 
2 
7 To develop DOE module to achieve M2 beam quality ≤5 with high efficiency 
transformation 
>85% by month 22 
3 
8 To achieve multiple length-scale periodic patterns (3-10) with processing speed 
of 2-5 m²/min using DLIP High-speed Multiplexing and/or Scanner-based High-
speed DLIP by month 24 
3 
9 To realise surface textures on end user materials with 2.5D laser processing 
methods in order to provide required functionality (increased hydrophilicity and 
reduced surface friction) with surface features of <15  
4 
 
8 
 10 To deliver textured surface structures using DLIP technology or otherwise to 
optimise surface functionality to deliver surfaces that exhibit; 
• Hydrophobic functionality on aluminium 8006 sheet evidenced by water contact 
angle 
> 130° and a roll of angle of 20° by month 18 
• Hydrophobic functionality on PP chrome effect finishes evidenced by water 
contact angle > 130° and a roll of angle of 20° by month 18 
• Oleophobic functionality on PP flat plaque evidenced by oil contact angle > 
130° and a roll of angle of 20° by month 18 
• Periodic laser grooves exhibiting a honing pattern, with surface finish Rvk 
between 1.0 
-3.5 µm and Rpk < 0.1 µm as proved by laser surface profilometry by month18 
• Low coefficient of friction mould tool surface wrt aluminium work piece as 
evidenced by a reduction in the coefficient of friction by > 40% as measured by 
unlubricated strip drawing test at 300°C by month 24 
periodic textured 3D surfaces using DLIP process  
4 
 11 To deliver an in-line sampling and monitoring control system that measures the 
DLIP system characteristics with embedded process intelligence and simplified 
process model. This will consist of diffractographic monitoring of the pattern 
structure and precise period and image based and scatterometric defect 
detection and evaluation of pattern homogeneity. 
5 
 12 Closed loop control of key interference controlling optics, working distance and 
pattern overlap (workpiece feed synchro) 
5 
and 
6  
 13 To develop in-line inspection heads capable of achieving 2 µm feature resolution 
by month 24 
5 
 14 To integrate a 1.5 kW ns laser, M2 transformation, beam splitting, DLIP optics 
and fibre delivery into a single modified PRIMA unit that can achieve processing 
speeds of 2-5 m²/min for a range of materials and geometries by month 27 
6 
Demonstration and commercial exploitation 
objectives 
15 To demonstrate the hydrophobic surface texturing on a PP chrome effect curved 
surface by month 36 (MAIER case study) 
7 
16 To demonstrate the use of PROMETHEUS to laser texture a cylinder piston liner 
with honing pattern and surface finish Rvk between 1.0 -3.5 µm and Rpk < 0.1 
µm by month 36 (CRF case study) 
7 
17 To demonstrate a hydrophobic aluminium 8006 profiled surface 50cm x 50 cm 
with water contact angle > 130° and a roll of angle of 20° by month 36 (ARCELIK 
case study). 
7 
18 To demonstrate a controlled hydrophilic and hydrophobic surface onto a heat 
exchanger fin by month 36 (ARCELIK case study) 
7 
19 To demonstrate the manufacture of a oleophobic surface on PP packaging using 
the DLIP technology with oil contact angle > 130° and a roll of angle of 20° by 
month 36 (the JJVC case study) 
7 
20 To demonstrate that we can manufacture the integrated PROMETHEUS 1.5 kW 
system 
commercially for €900k by month 36 
9 
 
  
 
9 
1.2. Relation to the work programme 
The PROMETHEUS project will address the topic ICT-04-2018 “Photonics based manufacturing, access to photonics, 
datacom photonics and connected lighting”, with focus on the Research and Innovation Actions, Highly Productive Ultra-
Short Laser Systems for Fast Materials Processing theme. 
 
Table 1.2 How PROMETHEUS will address the specific challenges and scope of the topic 
ICT-04-2018 Challenge and Scope PROMETHEUS Project Contribution 
Specific Challenge: 
Photonics research in Europe is widely 
recognized for its excellence; 
researchers however experience 
difficulties in demonstrating their 
conceptual breakthroughs. The 
challenge is to reinforce the innovation 
ecosystem by providing access to 
advanced photonics technology to 
researchers and thereby accelerating 
the deployment of the next generation 
of disruptive photonics technologies. 
PROMETHEUS will enable our research base to directly trial, demonstrate and 
prove our innovative technology directly to industry, making a significant 
contribution to overcoming the “Valley of Death” and reinforcing our 
innovation eco -system. PROMETHEUS will achieve a strong, mutually 
beneficial and effective collaboration between public sector research 
performers and private sector commercial companies, directly address the 
weakness identified as a part o f the EC’s 2012 Policy Communication on the 
European Research Area. PROMETHEUS will enable our consortium to 
accelerate the commercial deployment of our next-generation laser texturing 
approach. 
Photonic integration combined with 
cost-effective assembly a nd packaging 
processes enables a drastic level of 
miniaturization, reducing  the costs of 
implementation and energy 
consumption. To  develop and apply 
innovative photonics - based 
manufacturing solutions. 
PROMETHEUS directly addresses the challenges facing th e materials 
processing sector that are currently preventing the widespread uptake of laser 
technologies for functional texturing, namely: high cost and reliable 
performance. Through the development of innovative photonics technologies 
centring on the direct laser interference patterning using 
>1 KW high pico-second lasers and diffractive beam M2 transformation, we will 
be able to achieve hitherto unachievable speeds of 2-5 m2/minute. The power 
and simplicity of our approach will reduce the cost of implementation to < 0.75 
euro/m2, making mass surface texturing with lasers commercially attractive. 
To create new ways of producing more 
goods with fewer raw materials, less 
energy and less waste. 
Application of PROMETHEUS to a dishwasher application (ARCELIK) has the 
potential to create hydrophobic/philic surfaces that can potentially increase 
drying performance and energy usage by 4% per machine – If applied across 
the whole ARCELIK range, this would equate to global savings of 26.7 GWh/ 
year. 
Application of PROMETHEUS to the JJVC, consumer bottle, will prevent the 
need to overfill bottles (currently 15 -20%), leading to significant savings of 
(very expensive) materials such as shampoo, skin creams and lotions. 
Application of PROMETHEUS to the CRF engi ne cylinder / piston can 
potentially save in excess of 1.1% fuel saving per vehicle, equating to savings 
on average of 7.7 litres per year of petrol. 
Application of PROMETHEUS to the MAIER non -stick body trim has the 
potential to make significant water and energy savings due to reduce cleaning 
and enhanced aerodynamics. 
Across all of these products, the use of textured surfaces will be replacement 
for functional coatings – there is therefore an inherent energy, materials and 
waste saving as a result of not having to produce and apply coatings. 
To develop systems which deliver 
improved accuracy, power and control. 
PROMETHEUS will allow for patterning with an accuracy of ±1 μm, compared 
to ±50 μm currently achievable using laser focussed texturing. The use of a 
very high powered USP laser (2 -3 kW) with beam splitting, allows for the 
efficient use of a single laser source rather than multiple sources, significantly 
reducing system cost and making process control inherently more 
straightforward. 
 
  
 
10 
 
ICT-04-2018 Challenge and Scope PROMETHEUS Project Contribution 
To enable the next generation of  
manufacturing in a range of industrial  
sectors. 
PROMETHEUS includes end-user partners: ARCELIK, JJVC, CRF & MAIER for use 
in their next generation of manufacturing. Once proven within these 
organisations and their sectors (white goods, automotive & FMCG), 
PROMETHEUS will also be exploited across other industrial sectors. 
Scope: b) Research and Innovation Actions - Highly Productive Ultra-Short Laser Systems for Fast Materials 
Processing. To development of ultra-short pulse laser systems with*… 
Pulse durations in the nanosecond  
regime down to the femtosecond  
regime; 
As a part of PROMETHEUS, APL will create and develop USP laser architectures 
with pulse duration <10 ns, powers >1 kW and pulse repetition rates above 
500 Hz. 
Average beam power levels of at least 1 
kW; 
To develop fast materials processing  
with minimal heat impact  on the work 
piece. 
The texturing process will achieve a speed of 2 -5 m2/minute, compared with 
0.4 m2/minute currently achievable. The very short pulse duration will reduce 
heat impact, leading to materials ablation rather than melting. 
To potentially develop related 
monitoring and closed loop control 
aspects. 
The optical monitoring technologies to be developed by AIMEN and IRIS, will 
initially be a part of a QA process for testing parts that can be used to further 
optimise the process parameters, together with detail process models. 
Following o n from PROMETHEUS project, future developments  will aim to 
integrate these technologies with in-line control. 
To demonstrate the developed system 
with a relevant industrial application. 
PROMETHEUS will be demonstrated for 4 industrially relevant applications: A 
vehicle body part (MAIER); A engine cylinder/piston  (CRF); A white goods, 
dishwasher application (ARCELIK) and a implant and antibacterial surface 
(JJVC). 
Expected Impact: b) Research and Innovation Actions 
To strengthen industrial 
manufacturing based on ultra -short 
pulse lasers. 
The USP laser to be developed by APL, coupled with the optical management 
technologies will make commercial laser texturing competitive in terms of 
performance and cost against existing technologies. This will lead to 
strengthened use of USP technologies for materials processing across a range 
of sectors. 
To extend field of applications by 
simultaneous improvement of precision 
and productivity. 
productivity for laser texturing will poten tially increase significantly, mainly  
due to the increase in processing speeds from 0.4 m2/min currently to 2 -5 
m2/min. 
Cross-Cutting Activities: 
PROMETEUS will also address the cross-cutting activities, specifically: 
• PROMETHEUS brings together and integrates different cross -cutting KETs, including: Nanotechnologies (through  
surface texturing), advanced materials, advanced manufacturing and processing as well as photonics itself. 
• These members will interact closely with PHOTONICS21 as an inherent part of the project. 
• Many of the PROMETHEUS partners are members of PHOTONICS21 (HOLO-OR, FRAUNHOFER, AIMEN, PRIMA, CRF), 
the Horizon2020 Photonics Public -Private Partnership (PPP) designed to build on the strengths of the European 
photonics sector and reinforce its competitiveness. These members will interact closely with PHOTONICS21 as an 
inherent part of the project. 
• PROMETHEUS aims to foster inclusive and sustainable research and innovation in-line with the Responsible Research 
and Innovation, RRI. 
• PROMETHEUS will also address skills needs and shortages related to the developed technology ensuring that the 
project results are also integrated and used in training of the necessary workforce. 
  
 
11 
1.3. Concept and methodology 
 
(a) Concept 
The PROMETHEUS concept consists of four key 
elements: 
• Ultra-Short Pulse (USP) lasers from APL  with 
pulse durations in the nanosecond regime down 
to the femtosecond regime. The average laser 
power will be increased to power within 
nanosecond lasers towards 2 - 3 kW. We will 
initially start with pulse durations in the range of 
5-15 ns and then seek to develop to a few hundred 
picoseconds. The power may be as much as 25 mJ. 
• Direct Laser Interference Patterning (DLIP) from 
FRAUNHOFER. 
• A novel M 2 transformation beam  shaping 
method based on diffractive optics by HOLO -OR 
to achieve effective interference patterning with a partially coherent source. 
• Process monitoring and control from VISUM. 
These individual technologies will be integrated into a single demonstration unit that will be used for the regular textural 
patterning for materials surfaces to achieved required functionality: 
1. Non-stick / easy to clean chrome plated polypropylene automotive bumper trim with self-cleaning properties. 
2. Reduced friction for a 316-steel engine cylinder/piston. 
3. Hydrophobic performance for dishwashers to reduce energy required for drying and further applications to 
condensers. 
4. Non-stick / low stick performance for polypropylene bottles for FMCG applications. 
Positioning of the Project – Table 1.3 describes the key technologies in the PROMETHEUS project and the current 
technology readiness level of the technologies at project start and where we will take the technology to during the project 
and Table 1.4 details linked national and international projects. 
 
Table 1.3 PROMETHEUS key technologies, current TRLs and target TRLs 
 
Description / TRL – Project Start Description /TRL – Project End 
Technology 1 – USP lasers 
Feasibility of DLIP patterning on aluminium and steel surfaces, 
with an 800 W, 60 ns APL laser that has shown improvements 
in hydrophobicity and scalability – TRL 4. 
0.8 to 10 ns, average power >1.2 kW laser delivered by 
fibre and combined with DLIP to demonstrated in an 
industrially relevant environment – TRL 6. 
Technology 2 – Textural processing 
Current High-Speed-DLIP approaches with USP laser source 
from FRAUNHOFER with limited 3D capability – TRL 3 
Final DLIP approaches from FRAUNHOFER with 2.5D 
capability – TRL 6. 
Technology 3 – Process monitoring 
Laser diffractometry used in NIL, off-line characterization and 
lab scale setups – TRL 4 
Micro-photogrametry and more with offline image 
processing – TRL 4 
On-line Laser diffractometry for DLIP – TRL 6 Hardware 
based pattern quality evaluation with real time image 
processing – TRL 6 
Technology 4 –M2 transformation 
TRL 4 – A lab prototype for M2 transformation of highly multi-
mode beams exists and the concepts has been proven for both 
355 nm and 532 nm wavelengths. 
TRL 6 – A complete sub-system for 1064 nm, integrated 
with the high power pico second laser and DLIP optics 
 
  
 
Figure 2 The overall concept of 
PROMETHEUS 

 
12 
Linked national and international research and innovation activities 
All of the consortium members have been involved in National and EU-wide projects which are inherently linked to 
PROMETHEUS, and PROMETHEUS will build on the knowledge that has been gained from these projects (details for each 
partner are shown in the partner descriptions in Section 4). Output from these projects will be feed into the PROMETHEUS 
project allowing our consortium to maximise their impact and minimising the risk of the project. 
This project is cross sectoral (spanning the Automotive, white good and FMCG sectors) and trans-disciplinary (USP lasers, 
DLIP Interference Patterning technology, M 2 transformation and Diffractive Optical Elements, fibre delivery and Process 
monitoring and control). While the project is being demonstrated in our key sectors of spanning the Automotive, white 
good and fast-moving consumer goods, the system’s capability developed through the PROMETHEUS project will be as 
relevant to other sectors as the  challenges are universal. A list of the national and international projects for each of the 
partners are shown in Section 4. The most pertinent EU funded projects are summarised below: 
 
Table 1.4 Relevant funded projects including consortium partners 
 
Project acronym (partners involved) Description Link with PROMETHEUS 
CIM-Laser (APL, MTC). UK- EPSRC 5-year R&D programme with 5 UK 
universities, developing laser 
processing for industry. (TRL 2-3) 
Fundamental work on laser surface 
texturing processes and laser beam 
shaping, forming basis of 
PROMETHEUS work. 
“LASER4FUN” European ESRs Network 
On Short Pulsed Laser Micro/ 
Nanostructuring Of Surfaces 
(FRAUNHOFER). MSCA-ITN-ETN. 
New surface micro/nano- 
structuring/patterning methods by 
using SP/USP laser technologies 
Proof of concept (TRL 3) for DLIP - 
Generated knowledge will be used to 
mature / commercialise the 
technology in PROMETHEUS 
CLEANSE (MTC, APL). InnovateUK. Development of and adaptive laser 
micro-machining system for inserts 
and drills (TRL 3) 
Laser micromachining for improved 
coating adhesion, in -process 
inspection and feedback. 
DLIP (APL). InnovateUK. Feasibility study in achieving Direct 
Laser Interference Patterning at very 
high speed, using a laser source 
emitting 60 ns long pulses at  average 
powers between 500 W and 1 kW. 
Forms phase 1 of PROMETHEUS, 
demonstrating the capability of the 
high average power products by APL to 
achieve interference patterning and 
the scalability with average 
power. 
LASER4SURF - Laser for mass 
production of functionalised metallic 
surfaces (VISUM). H2020. 
Development of laser -based solutions 
for functionalization of metallic     
surfaces     with   textures 
~1 µm in mass production using USP 
via LIPSS. 
Surface texture parameters and 
properties developed will form 
platform for learning and the use of 
USP lasers to achieve these. 
ModuLase – Development and Pilot 
Line Validation of a Modular re - 
configurable Laser Process  Head 
(EWF). H2020 
Development, validation and 
demonstration of a rapidly re - 
configurable laser process head based 
on intelligent sensor technologies for 
in-process monitoring. 
In-process monitoring and control 
knowledge developed will underpin 
PROMETHEUS. 
UltraSurface - Ultra Dynamic Optical 
Systems for High Throughput Laser 
Surface Processing (HOLO -OR, EWF).  
H2020 
Use of high efficiency Diffractive 
Optical Element to split and shape laser 
beams for surface structuring. 
Increased for laser surf ace processing 
throughput technologies developed 
based on optical  concepts will for the 
based for PROMETHEUS 
developments. 
LASHARE: Laser equipment 
Assessment for high impact 
innovation in the manufacturing 
European industry. GA: 609046. 
(AIMEN, MAIER, HOLO-OR, EWF, 
CRF, PRIMA, TWI). FP7 project. 
Develop of robust assessment 
framework for innovative laser 
equipment paving the way for new 
manufacturing applications. 
Laser technology was applied over its 
products with an aesthetical purpose. 
This learning will be extended to 
functional surfaces. 
MASHES: Snapshot spectral imager for 
cost effective IR surveillance - 
GA645114. AIMEN. H2020 
Development of robust and cost 
effective hyperspectral systems and 
analysis tools for a variety of 
applications. 
Combination of image and spectral 
information in process control and 
monitoring 
  
 
13 
APPOLO: Hub of Application 
Laboratories for Equipment 
Assessment in Laser Based 
Manufacturing (MAIER, CRF, IRIS). 
FP7 project. 
Establishes connections between 
end-users, which have demand for 
laser technologies for (micro) 
fabrication and research institutes, 
universities and manufacturers. 
Specific USO (1 ps) laser source 
knowledge and access to APPOLO 
HUB, a network of laser laboratories 
that provide laser micro-machining 
services. 
ATTRACT - FRAUNHOFER. National 
Fraunhofer funded project. 
This project lead by FRAUNHOFER 
comprised the establishment of the 
DLIP technology from proof -of- 
principle up to a relevant 
technological level. 
Concepts developed will provide 
PROMETHEUS with initial 
information about optical devices for 
interference patterning. 
SHARK - Laser surface engineering 
for new and enhanced functional 
performance with digitally enabled 
knowledge base (MTC, JJVC). H2020. 
Laser texturing to create a broad 
range of functional surfaces at 
industrial scale throughputs, and 
place Europe in an unassailable lead 
in this key area of manufacturing. 
Platform knowledge of laser 
texturing and surface 
functionalisation that will underpin 
PROMETHEUIS. 
BOREALIS – Demonstration of a 
novel Laser Deposition Machine 
with high throughput, efficiency and 
near net shape production 
capabilities. (PRIMA). H2020 (2014 
– 2017) 
The project led by PRIMA among the 
rest of the developments, focused on 
the integration ablation technology 
within LMD machine for surface 
finishing, micro texturing and micro- 
holes. 
Outcomes on the ablation 
technology will be used during 
integration and testing activities in 
order to enhance the operation 
performance of PROMETHEUS USP 
laser surface texturing. 
 
(b) Methodology 
The project flow through the work 
packages is shown in Figure 3 with the 
flow moving from requirements and 
specification in WP1 through to the use 
case demonstration in WP7. The 
project is managed by the EWF, with 
WP8 being dedicated to the Project 
Management. The project has 4 distinct 
phases span over a total duration of 36 
months. There are 4 core development 
work packages in the PROMETHEUS 
project (WP2, 3, 4 
and 5).  
The commercial exploitation will be led 
by the EWF through WP9 who will 
manage the dissemination of 
information to the wider 
manufacturing community and also 
maintain the business plan on behalf of 
all the members to ensure the project 
results will be exploited and rapidly 
commercialised. This approach 
represents a robust means to deliver  
 
 
 
Figure 3 Work Plan 
Methodology 
the technical developments and also gives a simple but effective management process to control the project 
continuously and in line with the expected Milestones. This gives the project the maximum chance of delivering an 
effective demonstrator with a high chance of rapid and successful commercialisation. 
Table 1.5 PROMETHEUS Phases 
 
Phase Period 
Phase 1: Determination of the End-user requirements and the specifications M1-M3 
Phase 2: Consists of two elements in parallel: Development of system component parts and surface 
texturing studies that aims to determine the optimal surface texturing required to achieve each of 
the end-user’s requirements. 
M4-M24 
Phase 3: PROMETHEUS system integration. M18-M38 
Phase 4: End user case study developments at ultra-high speed M39-48 

 
18 
Sex and Gender Analysis - There are no gender issues specific to the PROMETHEUS project or technology. The programme 
of work will not discriminate against persons of any gender and will aim to eliminate any barriers to this objective and to 
encourage participation of women in the research programme and its outcomes. All efforts will be made to encourage 
participation by women in the project and to achieve this, appropriate work practices will be instigated to all for work 
scheduling that allows for reconciliation between work and family life. Active measures will be taken to ensure that 
women scientists are well represented in the partner’s organisations and that women scientists lead elements of the 
programme. Opportunities for mobility within the programme will take account of the different needs of women and men 
in order to enhance participation by women scientists. When the proposed technology is developed it will be equally 
applicable to males and females. 
 
1.4. Ambition  
 
Current State of the Art 
Laser Surface Texturing (LST) is a very promising surface engineering technique with that exhibits: Excellent repeatability; 
Non-contact processing; Small feature size and high-quality finishing. Although a mature process that is comme rcially 
available through a number of machine tool suppliers, applications have been limited to aesthetic/decorative texturing. 
To date functional applications are limited. 
Over the last decade there has been a large number of academic publications on using LST, mainly using expensive USP 
lasers. LST uses pulsed lasers for removing of material by ablation process and scanning optical systems for movement of 
the laser beam on the workpiece on predefined trajectories to form desired surface structure xi. L ST is a progressive 
technology used for: 
• Tribological properties enhancementxii,xiii,xiv; 
• Patterning of glass and ceramic materialsxv,xvi; 
• Light absorption increases on a surfacexvii,xviii; 
• Formation of hydrophobic or hydrophilic surfaces xvii,xix; 
• Thermal spray substrate preparationxx; 
• Biomedical implants preparationxxi; 
• Reduction of bacteria adhesionxxii; 
• Self-cleaning xvii; 
• Adhesive bonding enhancementxxiii; 
Recent methods being developed for surface texturing for a range of applications are mainly focused on manufacturing 
micro-textures with a certain pattern on the surface such as dimple shape structuresxxiv, 
xxv,xxvi,xxvii,xxviii,xxix,xxx. 
Cold ablation is achieved through USP laser (fs and ps pulse width) where the laser pulse width is much shorter than the 
thermalisation time for the electron lattice coupling avoiding melting of the materialxxxi. In this process the material  
removal is confined to the interaction volume of the laser light and hence the features created are directly related to laser 
beam spot size – smaller features require a smaller beam size. Laser ablation process using a longer pulse width (ns pulse 
width) will result in a mixture of evaporation and melt pool formation on the material surface. The main advantage of ultra-
short-pulse laser ablation techniques is that they may be applied to a wide range of materials, with high accuracy and do 
not require post processing steps. Ultra -short laser pulses are capable of producing high precision 3 -D microstructures, 
taking advantage of the “cold” ablation process. 
Despite the promising results, replication of the texture on large surface area had been proven difficult, particularly 
economically and as a result, industrial uptake has been very limited. This is preventing the technology from moving 
further to higher technology readiness level (TRL 4-6), due to a number of reasons. 
  
 
19 
Technical limitations of the current LST approaches: 
• Heat accumulation and oxidationxxxii,xxxiii,xxxiv temperature increase from residual heat accumulated in material 
from many pulses applied in a short time and its effects like material degradation). 
• Plasma shielding effectxxxv (attenuation or reflection of next laser pulse by plasma produced by previous laser 
pulse). 
• Synchronisation of every pulsexxxvi (if precise position of each pulse is necessary, then this limits maximum 
usable pulse repetition frequency and involves sophisticated hardware). 
• Precision at high speedsxxxvii (precise laser spot positioning difficult at high speed for complex objects and large 
amount of data needs to be processed in a short time). 
• Commercial limitations of the current LST approaches: 
• Inherently slow processing rates / productivity – To overcome this high average power ultrafast lasers with very 
high pulse repetition rates are essential. However, these systems necessitate very high-speed scanning techniques 
e.g. using polygon scanners. Such scanning approaches are somewhat inflexible in comparison with traditional galvo 
scanner approaches and are difficult or impossible to implement on complex 3D non-planar surfaces. 
Ultra-short pulse lasers (APL) present a new class within high -performance laser beam sources for industrial 
applicationsxxxviii,xxxix. With pulse durations <20 ns and pulse energies >2 mJ, peak power density beyond 100kW is achieved 
giving light-material interaction with most materials. Even though materials processing methods based on USP lasers has 
been demonstrated in laboratories for the last 3 decades, the rate at which pulses of this nature could be delivered on 
materials, e.g. the average power of such laser sources was very low. In more recent years, industrial grade sources with 
average powers between 10 and 50 W appeared in the market, adequate in tackling high  quality marking and high value 
manufacturing of specific surface profiles. Meanwhile, companies like APL, Lee, Coherent, Trumpf and others were 
installing industrial lasers with pulse durations between 20 and 200 ns and average powers of a few hundred watts for 
semiconductor applications.  
In 2010, the wide industrial impact that these laser sources could achieve was well evident and by 2013 we saw the release 
of industrial ps pulsed laser sources that broke the barrier of 100 W in average power, thus rendering them cost effective 
for a wide variety of industrial manufacturing processes. Examples of such systems were the APL Polaris i200, with average 
power of  200 W, the 
Edgewave PX at 400 W in the 
picosecond regime and the 
Lumentum system built under 
the APPOLO FP7 project, 
delivering 100 W, 1ps pulses. 
Many of these systems 
including th e Polaris project 
utilised some  sort of slab-
based amplifier at one of more 
amplification stages, as this 
provided optimum thermal 
management of the 
amplifying medium, while the 
seed laser was a variety of 
diodes, fibres or other more 
traditional sources. 
On a research grade system, 
FRAUNHOFER demonstrated 
a 1 kW ps amplifier by 2011, 
based on the Yb: INNOSLAB 
technology. 
 
 
  
  
Figure 4 (Left) Polaris i200, 200W picosecond laser, 0.28mJ pulse energy. 
(Right) Fraunhofer ILT, Yb:INNOSLAB based 1kW picosecond laser amplifier.  
 
Figure 5 (Left) APPOLO project, 100W, 1ps laser source by Lumentum. (right) 
400W picosecond laser source by Edgewave. 
 

 
20 
Meanwhile, APL has broken the boundary of 1 kW for ns lasers, releasing it’s Rigel i1600 laser system as a proven industrial 
laser sy stem capable of 1.6 kW average power at 60 ns pulse duration. These systems were quickly absorbed  by the 
automotive industry, in a 24/7 manufacturing schedule, in the pioneering application of tailor blank aluminium coating 
removal prior to welding of its steel substrate. Today these lasers have processed hundreds of millions of pieces which 
found their way into everyday automobiles, increasing safety and durability. 
 
Figure 6 (left) The internal components of the Rigel i1600 laser source. (middle) Tailor Blank ablation in action, 
(right) Hot stamped TB pieces installed on an automobile frame, strengthening critical sections of the frame.  
 
In 2015, APL, JP Imaging, Technijet and Liverpool John Moores University, have successfully completed t he DLIP  
collaborative project, a feasibility study, funded by InnovateUK. This allowed to assess the scalability of achieving  DLIP, 
with average power. The DLIP project demonstrated the generation of interference patterns on aluminium  and steel 
surfaces, with an 800 W laser by APL, emitting 60 ns long pulses, based  on the company’s HAP400 gain   module 
technology, thus rendering the process scalable. The long pulse duration and low spatial coherence of  the specific 
source were found to limit the definition of features. This results from the low intensity contrast  between 
constructive and destructive interference, due to the quality of the emitted beam. Thus, more  energy  is lost in thermal 
diffusion into the material over the low inten sity (destructive interference) areas, rather  than  applied on material 
ablation in the high intensity (constructive interference) areas. Nonetheless,  improvements in hydrophobicity of the 
processed materials were achieved by approximately 30-50° degrees of contact angle.  
 
It is thus evident that shorter pulse durations than 20 ns and moving towards the 
sub-ns region will help increase this contrast in pulse intensity. Moreover, by 
improving beam properties such as spatial coherence beyond 3%, and coherence 
length beyond 1 mm, the beam interference contrast ration is expected to 
increase significantly. These improvements in the laser source architecture are not 
trivial. The current laser resonator is already stressing the limits of material 
damage thresholds of the optics and amplifier. Any of these improvements will 
further increase localised beam intensity levels in the resonator and amplifier 
modules, cons equently advancing beyond the acceptable levels. In addition, 
thermally managing higher average powers at ultra -high photonic intensities, 
requires the transition into new thermal management methodologies. An 
example being the recent achievements by DiPOLE, demonstrating 1 kW average 
power sources with pulse energies of 100 J. To achieve handling such high rate of 
power delivery, the amplifier modules had to be cryogenically cooled to 150 oK 
using helium gas, cryo-amplifiers and very thin laminar amplifying media. Yet, this 
architecture can only achieve repetition rates of 10 Hz. Industrial applications will 
require repetition rates beyond 500 Hz, and most likely of several kHz in order to 
cover large surface areas at high speeds. Increasing pulse repetition  rates in the 
cryo-amplifiers significantly increases the thermal gradient in the amplifying 
filaments, thus impacting gain, and possibly endangering the material itself. 
Therefore, high repetition rates are the key limitation of cryo-amplifiers. 
  
 
 
Figure 6 The DiPOLE  
helium cooled cryo- 
amplifier schematic 

 
21 
Systems for high speed laser processing 
To avoid negative surface effects such as cone like protrusions, surface ripples, plasma interaction and thermal 
accumulation a dedicated system technology together with an adapted processing strategy is necessary. From the current 
point of view two different approaches can be seen: 
• Ultrafast scanning with moderate pulse energies and high repetition rates 
• Multiple beam processing with moderate fluences in each single beam 
Both approaches lead to high average ablation rates and can be used to optimize the usage of high power ultra - short 
pulsed lasers. 
Direct laser interference patterning (DLIP) Technology (FRAUNHOFER) 
DLIP is capable of producing both micro - and nanostructured surfaces on a wide variety of mat erials. This is a one step 
process that has the capability to produce functionalised surfaces. Direct Laser Writing has been used for pattering of 
several materials with features in the range 5 - 100 μmxl,xli,xlii typically using nanosecond (ns) pulsed lasers. In recent years, 
picosecond (ps) and femtosecond (fs) pulsed lasers have gained interest from industry scale due to the development of 
fibre-based systems. Typically, during structuring processing, the surface is scanned with the laser beam using 
galvanometric mirrors. Achieving resolutions <5 μm requires an increased technical complexity and long processing times. 
With a laser pulse frequency of 1 MHz for example, 106 structures per second can be written sequentially. With a structure 
size of 1 μm , this is equivalent to a processing speed of only 6x10 - 5m²/min. Techniques involving large-area surface 
processing for rapid fabrication of two and three dimensional (2D and 3D) structures are required. One example is Laser 
Interference Lithography (LIL)xliii, wherein the standing wave pattern existing at the inter -section of two or more laser 
beams is used to expose a photosensitive layer such as a resist, in a multi-step process. 
 
Figure 7 Principle (a) and pattern geometries of direct laser interference for two- (b) and three (c) sub-beams. 
 
The direct laser interference patterning (DLIP) technology necessitates the overlapping of two or more laser beams on the 
material surface at a defined overlapping angle 𝜃 (Figure 9). This leads to a periodic modulation of the laser intensity (in 
a distinct interference volume) which can be used to ablate locally the material at the interference maxima which results 
in the fabrication of a periodic surface pattern. The laser wavelength and overlapping angle determines the spatial period 
of the generated structure. Moreover, the structure geometry can be controlled by the number of sub-beams which can 
result in li ne-like, dot -like and pillar -like surface patterns. In order to meet particular requirements of industrial 
environments, a High-Speed DLIP concept was developed and patented at FRAUNHOFER. With the existing state of the art 
it is currently possible to (a) efficiently manufacture multiple length- scale periodic patterns (≥8 µm) and (b) achieve high 
throughputs of up to 0.36 m 2/min on metals in a one -step process. The High -Speed DLIP setup consists of a cylindrical 
telescope to expand the laser beam, followed by an arrangement of two bi-prisms for beam splitting and alignment. After 
that, a cylindrical lens is used for focusing the laser sub -beams in one dimension (Figure 8). In this way, the DLIP setup 
realizes beam forming to a long draw line in the focused area, which for functional reasons also corresponds to the area 
of beam overlap. Forming the interfering beams into the shape of long lines has advantage in achieving maximum process 
speeds which mainly depends on the laser pulse energies and laser  power. For this purpose, the laser energy must be 
distributed over the largest area achieving an appropriate laser fluence (energy density) over 1 J/cm 2 on metals. The 
dimensions of the line -like focused laser spot, with width w and the length l, can be v aried by moving the optical 
components of the cylindrical telescope and the final cylindrical lens (e.g. l = 10 mm x w = 100 µm). The interference pitch 
𝛬 is determined by the angle of the two splitting prisms (Figure 9) xliv,xlv. 
  
 
 
22 
 
Figure 9 Schematic drawing of the two-beam laser interference setup for high speed patterning 
 
DLIP has a number of clear advantages over existing approaches for surface structuring as it is based on cost- effective 
ns lasers, leading to significantly reduced capital and operational cost (>50% compared to USP lasers). DLIP  can achieve 
enhanced productivity (up to 0.5 m2/min) and process efficiency. In addition, DLIP offers increased flexibility, particularly 
for internal and/or concave cavities and other non-planar surfaces that can be patterned using relatively simple scanning 
heads and standard fibre optics for beam delivery. Spatial beam-shaping techniques such as phase plates and field 
mappersxlvi for an additional degree of control by providing e.g. top hat, square, annular or more complex beam patterns 
are also shown to be effective for LST. 
In-line inspection process 
A number of monitoring techniques exist when it comes to characterizing structures in the nano- and micro- metre ranges, 
and which have been utilised in the development of the high throughput surface fabrication techniques, including SEM 
(scanning electron microscopy) and AFM (atomic force microscopy) xlvii,xlviii. None of those are compatible with the DLIP 
setup, or can cope with the surface modification rate targeted by PROMETHEUS.  Optical inspection technologies 
(noncontact, fast, non-intrusive and non-destructive) comply with the requirements of DLIP process inspection, but the 
available solutions in the State -of-the-Art demand some additional development to be integrated in the PROMETHEUS  
system. 
Optical inspection in micro/nano-structured production processes 
Current micromachining inspection systems are traditionally based on snapshot high magnification imaging. Due to the 
high density of features and throughput requirements, inspection focusses on sampling rather than inline inspection or 
online control. Polarisation sensitive, bright -/dark-field or differential interference contrast imaging, down to confocal 
imaging and white light interferometry are supported in platforms in the microelectronics industries. The challenges of  
this project have to do with extending the scope of the inspection and process monitoring and make it compatible with 
new process regimes and applications proposed in PROMETHEUS. 
PCB-board production exploits new defect inspection tools for high throughput across large areas (fields up to half square 
meter) for detecting deviations in highly repetitive patterns (R2R or S2S), rather than precision metrology. Their lateral 
optical resolution is frequently found in the ~100-20 µm range. To cope with the massive amounts of data, high speed line 
cameras are integrated into the linear processing stream that deliver 2-20k pixels at line rates of 10 -100 kHz with high 
dynamic range acquisition, therefore delivering continuous Gbps data streams. 
Sophisticated systems use custom high -power strobe LEDs (µs -range exposures) in reflection microscopy at different  
angles, to screen localized defects using LLS (localized light scatterers) analysis. These systems suffer from the restriction 
of imaging only a limited number of exposure directions, not allowing for complete extraction of the light field and surface 
orientation information. This leads to the necessity for a priori information of the specimen (i.e.  scattering angles and 
dynamic range), precise alignment and restriction with to a limited range of flat products. 
Automated visual inspection solutions in the semiconductor industry still rely on laborious data interpretation xlix. Time 
consumed in automated visual inspection remains a critical factor for most applications in this field. 
Inline computational imaging 
Inline Computational Imaging (ICI) is an emerging field of research that combines novel image acquisition methods with 
intelligent algorithms in order to obtain information, which would not have  been available via conventional imaging l. In 
recent years, with ever decreasing prices of parallel computational power, this approach shows an increasing economic 
viability. Machine vision has experienced a tremendous expansion of depth sensing technologi es with 2D sensor arrays: 
light sectioning and laser triangulation li, time-of-flight systemslii, to light field systemsliii. These highly computational 
efficient techniques excel on large scales, but with limited sensitivity to fine surface details on small dimensions. 

 
19 
The performance of these methods is strongly dependent on the material type and the samples individual optical  
properties. Area scan camerasliv, enable high -speed image acquisition of moving objects, with speed limited to the 
available light intensitylv. 
In general, the light field is defined as radiance function of position and directionlvi. The conventional light field acquisition 
techniques are based in multi-camera (multi/angle) arrays or multilenslvii or microlenslviii arrays on high resolution sensors. 
Coded aperture imaginglix captures light fields by splitting the optical path using appropriate masks. Depth reconstruction 
from light field data is usually done making use of an epipolar plane image (EPI)lx. 
Variational fusion strategies combine advantages of different ICI approaches lxi. Shading, defocus, and correspondence 
cues from a single light field can be jointly used to generate higher quality depth information. Range scanning data using 
stripe pattern projection are combined with stereophotometry from multiple fixed light sources lxii, taking into account low 
and high frequency components of the depth information. Surface normals from polarization cues can also be used for 
depth refinement lxiii. According to a recent review paper by VISUM lxiv, selected combined optical technologies, such as 
diffractometry, but also ellipsometry and spectral reflectance provide the opportunity for inline measurement of the 
thicknesses of nanostructured layers. 
The main optical techniques currently used are the following: 
White light Interferometry : Vertically scanning white -light interferometry is a non -contact optical method for surface 
height measurement on 3-D structures with surface profiles varying between a few micrometers to a few centimetres. 
Surface features ranging from gradual slopes to vertical steps, with rough or smooth finishes. 
An inline spectral reflectance system was developed in th e THIME project25 to measure Organic PV films. White light 
interferometry has been developed into an inline system by Dr Schwablxv for measuring the thickness of spacer and cover 
layers of Blu-Ray discs but can also be applied to measure the surface topography of reflective materials. However, while 
this system measures topography with a high level of accuracy (<100 nm), its lateral resolution is limited to tens of 
micrometres. An inline system has been developed by Nanometrics27 employing spectral  reflectometry in single point 
scanning arrangement, which enables lateral critical dimension measurement with greater accuracy, but still diffraction 
limited to the spot size of around 1 micrometre. 
Scatterometry: is an optical metrology technique designed for the characterization of test samples from lithography. 
These samples are diffraction gratings with the width of the lines reproducing the critical dimension. Scatterometry 
consists in ellipsometric measurements of the light diffracted from the  samples in various experimental configurations 
and the fitting of the data to theoretic predictions. The parameters of the best fit are the most probable values for the 
parameters of the sample. 
Figure 10 Approaches for scatterometry: A: white light and spectral scattering signal, and B: 
monocromatic single scattering angle signal. Right: Wavelength filtered image based coaxial 
scatterometry setup for inspection of nanostructures. 
Scatterometry involves optical instrumentation, diffraction theories, and da ta reduction and sensitivity analysis. It  is 
possible to obtain higher resolution in lateral dimension measurements regarding the ones of SEM and AFM techniques, 
using optical techniques based on scatterometry and diffractometry, which can be applied to periodic structures of the type 
being developed in PROMETHEUS. Scatterometry uses the instrumentation of a spectroscopic ellipsometer, along with 
complex mathematical modelling lxvi and is widely used in the microelectronics industry, for example  the Nanometrics 
Atlaslxvii, and the Nova T600 lxviii. However, the complex instrumentation and high -power data processing required mean 
that the technique has not been applied inline. Coherent Fourier Scatterometry has been developed to exploit the smaller 
spot size that is possible using laser light but is currently not deployed inlinelxix. 

 
20 
 
 
Figure 11 Use of diffractive (Fourier) optics for quality control of polymer surfaces: a) laser diffraction patterns of 
rotogravure micropatterned films with good (a.1) and defective (a.2) pattern embossing quality. b) surface texture 
analysis of pseudorandom textures revealing self-organisation patterns and their spatial characteristics 
Diffractometry: using multiple diffraction orders imaged in the far-field is a versatile technique that has potential to provide 
comprehensive information regarding the 3-dimensional features of textured samples shown in Figure 11lxx. Furthermore, 
when combined with different light source, it covers a broad resolution range: UV light can detect structures with period 
in the few hundreds nm range, whereas cost competitive blue laser can be used for structures with period between 500 
and 700 nm. It has been effectively implemented in several versions for characterising the quality of the grooves in DVD 
and Blu-Ray discs, for example Dr Schwab’s DOMSlxxi. 
However, there are some barriers to be tackled in order to be able to implement on in -line systems: careful and time -
consuming sample preparation are still needed, many samples are vulnerable to radiation damage caused by the incident 
electrons and the optical system is quite complex to be settled in a typical laser equipment. 
Confocal Microscopy: is an optical imaging technique for increasing optical resolution and contrast of a micrograph by 
means of adding a spatial pinhole placed at the confocal plane of the lens to eliminate out -of- focus light. It enables the 
reconstruction of three -dimensional structures from sets o f images obtained at different depths (a process known as 
optical sectioning) within a thick object. This technique has gained popularity in the scientific and industrial communities 
and typical applications are in life sciences, semiconductor inspection a nd materials science. It may be used to obtain 
spatial resolution below the diffraction limit with resolution of 0.09 μm reported lxxii, however once again it is not 
implemented inline. 
A more salient feature of this technique is that it provides an image of the surface structure, from which specific, local 
dimensions can be calculated, whereas for the current technology under development, it is desirable to obtain a general 
overview of the shape and common dimensions repeated in the periodic pattern, especially where the sizes of individual 
lines can vary over a range. 
For this reason, it is more effective to employ a metrology that makes use of the structure periodicity, such as 
diffractometry or scatterometry, and provides a description of key featu res, including height, width, sidewall slope  and 
symmetry. Diffractometry is the more attractive option of these two for inline process monitoring since it can provide 
simple information quickly with less data processing. 
Data analysis of the surface features: This is normally performed using conventional statistical and geometrical 
parameterslxxiii. However, often these conventional analysis techniques mean that the result is a statistical property of the 
entire surface rather than characterising individual surface features (for example the size of a dimple micro-machined into 
the surface) which is of concern when developing functional surfaceslxxiv (Gavin D. MacAulay, 2016). The implementation 
of recent standards (ISO 25178 and 16610) have started to shift the focus towards 3D parameters, as well as specific filters 
such as the regression Gaussian and segmentation filters which can be implemented on datasets to analyse specific 
features. Costa et al. used these filters to identify pockets and grooves successfully in a laser interferometer scan of an 
etched steel surfaces. Other post -processing methods for feature recognition have more recently been proposed in the 
literature, for example using hybrid area parameters such as  Std  (texture  direction),  Vv  (measure  of  void  volume  at  
various  heights)  and  Str (indication of isotropy)lxxv. MacAulay et al. recommend a new technique for structured surfaces 
- in which individual surface features are identified and extracted as standalone units, so that they can be subjected to 
geometric verification; the data used in this study was captured using a focus variation system and gave reasonable results 
for feature diameters. 
  

 
21 
Knowledge of temperature and expressions of connecting physical processes during a pulsed laser treatment is crucial for 
understanding and a control of the processes. Various experimental procedures are us ed for the temperature 
measurement, which mostly combine different methods. As an example, can be cited (Moon et al, 2002), where authors 
analysed in detail mechanisms of Si thin film phase change transformations induced by a pulsed laser irradiation. 
The non-contact methods are based on a detection of a radiation emitted during the process or generated by an external 
excitation source and influenced by the process. The methods can be categorized based on detection principle: 
measurement of reflectance or t ransmittance of a laser beam, measurement of radiation (visible, near infra -red, infra-
red) detection of Raman radiation excited by a testing laser and X-ray diffraction analysis 
Measurement devices can be based on infrared detectors, photo -detectors X-ray radiation detectors, spectrometers or 
charge-coupled device (CCD) cameras. A different sorting of the methods can be based on time- or temperature-resolution 
ranges. 
The process monitoring and control for laser material processing is intensively studied i n last years. For laser welding  of 
metals and plastics there exist or are under development several methods (MAShES, 2013; COMBILASER, 2017; RADICLE, 
2015; Mrna, 2017) but for laser texturing or micromachining based on pulsed processes it is more difficult . The process 
based on short or ultrashort laser pulses cannot be easily controlled during the laser pulse in nano- or picoseconds. Once 
the laser pulse is sent, it cannot be controlled. A system based on on-line measurement of surface topography is currently 
under development in (ADALAM, 2015). A precise noncontact distance measurement in combination with software 
prediction of targeted distance on the actual position of laser beam should help to increase precision and correct defects. 
The innovations and Challenges to be addressed by PROMETHEUS. 
PROMETHEUS will further develop and industrially demonstrate a novel laser texturing method which enables high 
productivity, precise laser surface texturing with minimal thermal degradation on large area and geometrically complex 
surfaces. The main Challenge is to achieve texturing large surface areas more quickly whilst still retaining features  
necessary for advanced functionality. This will be achieved through the innovative application of individual technologies 
from our consortium partners that will be integrated into a demonstration system: 
• Ultra-Short Pulse (USP) lasers from EW. 
• Direct Laser Interference Patterning (DLIP) from FRAUNHOFER. 
• A novel M2 transformation beam shaping method based on diffractive optics from HOLO-OR. 
• Process monitoring and control from IRIS. 
Development of USP Lasers & fibre deliver. 
The PROMETHEUS project will address key challenges in laser source manufacturing. The current architecture using Nd:YAG 
rods as amplifying media reaches the peak power density of most optic materials used in the resonator at approximately 
2 GW/cm2. This takes place simultaneously with the thermal loading of these materials at rates of 10,000 cycles per second 
and with an excess of 10 kW of thermal energy. Thus, thermal gradient across cooled optics reaches at tens of calories per 
mm or kilocalories per second. The same conditions are replicated in the fibre delivery cable which at the moment forms 
another weak point in the system. The maximum capability of the present  industrial grade solid core silica fibre cables 
presents a limit of 1.2 GW/cm2 that is easily reached with pulse energies of 250 mJ emitted by the EW sources. 
In order to transcend beyond these limitations, three key-barriers will need to be surpassed. 
1. Handle more pulse peak power by the laser source components. 
2. Maintain or reduce thermal gradients on key optical and electro-optic components inside the laser source while 
emitting at rates of several kHz and average power above 1 kW. 
3. Increase the capacity of peak power density that can be conveyed by the fibre optic cable beyond the GW/cm2. 
As the material damage threshold is a physical limitation, architectures that distribute power build up in space are most 
suitable to transcend the first limitation on pulse peak power. For example, in contrast with the small spot size handled 
by the EW HAP400 gain modules, the DiPOLE project has expanded the beam over the large facets of the Yb:YAG filaments 
used in the cryogenic amplifiers consequently reducing power density to 0.25 GW/cm 2 and allowing for further 
possibilities to continue scaling up pulse energy that can be handled by the system. EW will aim at developing a low pulse 
energy seed, based on semiconductor and fibre pre-amplification technologies. 
  
 
22 
The beam will then be expanded as it progresses to rod based amplifying stages of higher peak power and average power, 
thus continuously reducing power density as the peak energy increases. For the last stages of amplification, the company’s 
proprietary z-slab technology will be adopted to a large beam variant, in order to achieve best thermal management of 
the amplification stage and avoid the material limitations of the rod-based amplification stages used in the current 1600 
kW product. The z-slab amplifying solution has already been demonstrated by EW as fully scalable in the Polaris product 
line, effectively transitioning pulse energy capabilities from 100 μJ  to 200 μJ and eventually 400 μJ for custom products, 
while the model permits pulse energies up to 2 mJ for 10 ps pulses. This will ensure scalability of the PROMETHEUS laser 
source technology, past the point of 1 kW average power, and opening the opportunity to approach several kW of average 
power. 
 
Figure 12 (left) A APL HAP200 gain module. (right) A APL fibre pre-amplifier module. 
Thermal gradients are currently handled by industrial lasers using sophisticated closed loop control systems of de- ionised 
water or other liquid heat convection media. In order to manage the intense thermal gradients across the optical and 
electro-optical components of the PROMETHEUS laser source, APL will add a second stage of temperature monitoring and 
control per component. This will allow for component specific thermal management of all critical components, designed 
and implemented specifically for the needs of each active or passive material in the component of interest and for the 
power being handled and dissipated. This step adds a significant amount of further monitoring and control digital circuits, 
which though becomes necessary in ensuring industrial grade reliability of the source, with planned operation of minimum 
of 10,000 hours prior to any major maintenance operation. 
The capability of peak power transmission through the fibre is a key limitation that renders the system deployable in a 
typical heavy industry manufacturing environment or a science lab. Although the beam can be delivered into the Prima 
Power system by a sequence of mirrors like the multi-kW CO2cutting laser systems, a fibre delivery cable will allow 
maximum flexibility of beam delivery on the surface of complex shaped components by the Prima Power system. The 
current limitation arises from the silica-air interface limitation in light intensity transmission. A relatively straight forward 
approach is to improve the trace-elemental constituency of the fibre material and increase the core diameter to beyond 
1 mm. This will allow some  scalability to approximately 4 times the current limit, until the core eventually becomes too 
rigid to accommodate bending radii necessary during normal robot manufacturing routines. Another approach is to use a 
hollow core fibre where the beam will be gu ided by Bragg reflection  within an air or vacuum medium. PHOT can 
manufacture hollow core fibres. These will be tested in small lengths against the APL laser source and then produced to 
larger lengths of minimum 3 m. An optimum solution will  be to couple the beam into a multi-core fibre. PHOT can  
manufacture multi-core fibres with 8, 12, 16 and even as many as 32 cores. Such a scenario can permit transmission of up 
to 6.4 kW average power at the current rate of ns pulse emission by the APL products. APL will utilise its proprietary 
licensed lenslet beam launching technology to couple the open-air beam into the multi-core fibre. 
Within the PROMETHEUS project APL will: 
• Transcend the current thermal and laser architecture limitations that limit  pulse peak power generation to 10 MW 
and simultaneous average power of 1 kW, with an aim of achieving pulses with peak power beyond 50 MW and 
simultaneous average power beyond 1.2 kW. 
• Currently, the laser resonators that can handle such high average power and emit ns pulses are multimode lasers that 
suffer from low coherence between the modes. APL will improve coherence length of the full laser beam to reach 
between 1 and 3 mm and the spatial coherence of >10% of the beam profile disk. 
• The smallest pulse duration feasible from a source emitting average power above 1 kW is currently 30 ns. APL will 
initially start with pulse durations in the range of 5 -15 ns and then seek to develop the seed laser source to achieve 
pulse durations between 800 ps and 2 ns. The pulse energy of the final laser source will be a minimum of 40 mJ. 

 
23 
• Beam delivery fibres capable of transmitting the high pulse energy, high average power beam will be developed by 
PHOT in collaboration with APL. The fibre will have to transmit peak power densities in excess of the current limitation 
of 1.2 GW/cm2 and in the range of a minimum of 5 GW/cm2 and typically above 10GW/cm2 potentially reaching above 
50 GW/cm2. 
• Pulses of such power and intensity will need to be transferre d at rates of 1 kHz and typically reaching 50 to 100 kHz 
and average power up to 2 kW. Their duration will initially be around 50 ns and subsequently will reach below 2 ns, 
to potentially 800 ps, while today, no industrial fibre technology exists to accommodate pulse durations below 10 ns 
when they carry pulse energies above 1 mJ. 
• The fibres should be capable of transferring multimode beams with M2 ranging between 12 and 40. 
• Minimum length of the final fibre deliverable will be 3 m, with the possibility to extend to 20 m in length. 
• The beam will be delivered as multi-mode (mode degeneration is acceptable). 
Development of high-speed beam delivery system 
An improvement of the average power and the repetition rates of pulsed laser systems increases the demands for laser 
beam delivery over the current upper limit of beam deflection when the maximal average power is used. In addition, an 
increase of the processing speed is in general associated with a decrease of the structuring resolution (increase of feature 
size) which is linked to a reduced surface function performance. The approach addressed in PROMETHEUS  from the 
FRAUNHOFER side is an optimal and effective energy delivery for the realization of a highly efficient micro -structuring 
concept based on interference structuring. FRAUNHOFER aim to break the 1 m²/min processing speed barrier for 
extensive surface structuring. To date high-speed DLIP structuring has demonstrated the possibility to achieve 0.4 m²/min 
for metal structuring (based on linear stages). The breakthrough aimed in PROMETHEUS is to reach a processing speed of 
2-5 m²/min, and this can be reached in two solutions that will be addressed  depending on the requisites (area to be 
treated, 2.5D topography, heat accumulation) of the specific use case. 
1. DLIP High-speed Multiplexing: 
In this approach (front view Figure 13) the main laser beam is delivered in multiple DLIP sub-modules for high-speed 
processing, aiming: 
• To distribute the high pulse energy into different optical systems; 
• Process in parallel a larger area (several centimetres on a line). 
Each High-Speed DLIP sub-module consists of a Diffractive optical element (DOE), a prism and a cylindrical lens. The sub-
modules will be spatially displaced from each other (not shown in the figure) in order to achieve compactness and assure 
a correct simultaneous coverage of the structuring area, theoretically with a speed proportional to the number of the 
integrated sub-modules. 
Figure 13 High-speed DLIP Multiplexing Figure 14 Scanner-based High-speed DLIP 
Although this solution permits to efficiently distribute the laser energy avoiding heat accumulation on the sample, 
the challenge for this solution is to build an optical head, which inc orporates multiple DLIP -modules, still 
guaranteeing: 
• Compactness, in order to be incorporated in real processing environments; 
• Robustness, in order to minimize the intervention of external operators; 
• Homogeneous coverage of the treating area. 
  

 
24 
x y 
2. Scanner-based High-speed DLIP: 
In this approach (Figure 14) the conventional DLIP methodology (DOE -prism) is combined with a galvanometer scanner, 
which delivers the beams to a cylindrical concave mirror and finally to the sample. The sub -beams are scanned  in the 
direction parallel to the long axis of the cylindrical mirror and focused (and overlapped) in a single direction on the sample 
plane. A translation stage permits to cover larger area by moving the sample after the completion of a scanner raster. The 
solution can be considered as an evolution of the linear-stages High-speed DLIP approach, combining the large area 
structuring with the use of fast galvanometer scanners. 
Although this combination will guarantee the aforementioned goals in terms of speed, compactness and feasibility, the 
challenges for this solution are: 
• To guarantee the correct delivery of the parallel beams into the galvanometer scanner, where the main limiting factor 
is the size of the mirror’s facets; 
• Management of the heat accumulation by an “intelligent” scanning approach; 
• Flexibility in the achievable interference spatial periods; 
• To require high damage thresholds for the single optical components (DOE, prism, mirrors). 
Development of M2 Transformation technology 
The high-power pico second laser envisioned in this project will have a highly multimode beam, with M2 in the range of 25-
30. Such multimode beams do not generate efficient interference patterns, as the optical modulation depth is very low. 
This can be seen in the VirtualLab™ interference simulation of a single mode laser Vs an M2=9 laser is shown in Figure 15. 
 
Single mode: