1.2 
 
0.6 
 
0 
-90 -30 0 30 90 
Position [µm] 
 
Multimode M2=9 (5 Hermite modes with equal weighting) 
 
 
3 
 
 
1 
 
-90 -30 0 30 90 
Position [µm] 
 
The modulation depth decreases by factor of 4 even for a relatively low M 2 such as 9. 
 
Figure 15 VirtualLab™ interference simulation of a single mode laser Vs an M2=9 laser  
 
To utilize an M 2=30 source for DLIP, the coherence of the beam needs to be improved. The beam quality factor M 4 is 
defined as M4 = M2 M2 ,the product of the beam quality factors in both Cartesian axes. In general, M4 can only be increased, 
and is the equivalent to entropy in optical systems. 
However, using beam steering and shaping, it is possible to decrease the M 2 value in one axis while increasing it in the  
other. This creates a rectangle with a very coherent narrow dimension and a high non-coherent wide dimension. Such a 
rectangle can then be shape and split to interfere with itself along the narrow axis, giving highly efficient interference, 
which is suitable for 2 beams DLIP writing. 
 
Figure 16 Far-field Multimode laser beam 
  
A^2 SumA^2 
 
25 
A Far-field Multimode laser beam can be depicted as a grid of rectangular segments, with the x or y linear dimension  of 
each rectangle equal to the beam diameter at e-2 divided by M2 value in the corresponding x or y axis, as shown in Figure 
16. 
Each rectangle’s wave front is close to zero (in terms of geometrical representation), or close to a constant phase value in 
complex field representation. Thus, its optical characteristics are as close to a pure single mode Gaussian beam as possible. 
Although each segment has a non -Gaussian amplitude, the focused spot of each segment (sub- beam) would be very 
similar to a Gaussian one – the Sinc function (the Fourier transform of a plane wave). 
By utilizing advanced optics, it is possible to re -arrange the rectangles so that the beam is transformed into a line with 
asymmetric M2, with the y axis having almost single mode coherence properties. After the sub -beam are re- arranged, a 
line diffuser is usually applied in the long axis to achieve a uniform line. 
State of the art refractive methods used to transform M 2 suffer from many limitations, including: High NA causing high 
sensitivity to alignment, internal foci, and multiple thick elements adding significant temporal dispersion to ultra -short 
pulses. 
HOLO-OR's novel M2 transformation concept is based on a unique diffractive technology, enabling a low NA system that is 
robust to alignment and has thin fused silica elements that do not cause large temporal dispersion. 
 
 
Figure 17 Current HOLO-OR laboratory demonstrator 532nm 
The HOLO-OR design will consist of 2 modules: the 1 st accepts the laser beam from the fiber and has an M 2 transformed 
output line. The second module (designed in cooperation with FRAUNHOFER) takes this beam and collimates the line and 
then splits it in the narrow axis and projects the split lines to a focal region, as shown in Figure 18. 
The proposed optical system will combine the high -power output of the low coherence multi -mode ps laser with the 
precision of high coherence interference patterning, by transforming the beam coherence properties utilizing a novel, 
robust and optically thin diffractive method. 
Figure 18 M2 transformation 
The main challenges to be addressed by HOLO-OR are defined as: 
• Laser power damage thresholds: Depending on laser beam size, the extremely high -power density would require 
some special design consideration including beam expansion and working with larger than typical component. 
• Effect of M2 transformation on interference modulation is unknown, as this is usually done to focus a single beam into 
a narrow line, not to interfere it. 
• High efficiency Transformation: At least 85% of input beam power needs to be in the transformed beam. Production 
process development and optimization for the diffractive component is required. 
In-line inspection process – Advance b eyond the state of art:  A surface inspection system for ultrahigh throughput 
patterning will be proposed and tested. A simplified, rugged and vibration immune optical configuration will be integrated 
in the processing head (combined off-axis multi- illumination with coaxial optical information gathering) to provide sub-
micron resolution identification of critical pattern parameters. High frequency sampling will contribute to reducing 
vibration influences and other noise sources. It will be optimized for the target height range and required resolution. 

 
26 
Samples characterization will allow defining best optical interferometric techniques and configuration to reach expected 
resolution. Optics Sampling strategy will be defined with partners for reducing samples and accelerate data transmission. 
Fast CCD sensor technology, such as lock -in cameras featuring pixel level synchronous demodulation,  will be considered 
for integration for increasing acquisition speed and processing of data. Algorithms will be developed and programmed for 
extracting (inference) height information from microtopography and simplify  data array to be sent to laser controller 
(height value for x-y position, and possible defects, as well as hints of process deviations). High communication rate with 
laser head controller will be implemented. 
Regarding the coherent light measurement system, the challenge to progress beyond the state of the art will be to 
effectively implement diffractometry for inline process monitoring. This will require the design of compact, high numerical 
aperture optics to capture the maximum number of orders possible. Similar optical systems have been used to apply sub-
wavelength optical diffraction metrologylxxvi,lxxvii to characterise structures as small as  50 nm in periodic patterns. 
As such, VISUM will start by calibrating the system on parts of known geometries with several patterns required for 
obtaining the effects for each application. Variations of the basic system may be developed, having adjusted light sources 
and optics to the resolution and spot size needed, and for compatibility with flat surfaces and non - flat surfaces. These 
will be integrated in the related production lines to provide dimensional information on the  structures in real time. 
Resulting data can be used to feed the processing models where appropriate. 
Regarding scatterometry and image-based inspection, the main challenge is the use of a single matrix sensor with adequate 
wavefront shaping and filtering, to gather the 2D scattering function of the surface being patterned and extract relevant 
information on the pattern homogeneity, quality and process deviations, at the high processing speed imposed by 
PROMETHEUS DLIP unique process. This will be done combining precisely timed lock-in loops of illumination and snapshot 
image capture (coaxial to the laser incidence), and heavily relying on dedicated  on-board hardware processing with 
programmable architectures: cascaded Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) and General-Purpose Graphic Processing 
Units (GPGPUs). 
On-line close-loop operation and process digitalization: 
Using the online measurement and imaging systems developed, it will be possible to adapt the laser focal spot, synch and 
power, as wel l as correcting the laser optical chain in real time, to respond to variabilities in workpiece behaviour and 
light-matter interactions, to optimize the overall production yield. A global interface will allow for communication  
between the different tools in the production chain: sensors, process parameters, laser and optical components of the 
processing heads. The whole data for a complete production chain will be available for process monitoring and  
optimization. 
Different sensors, readout electronics (digitalization) and data managing strategies are considered for the three main 
types of process sensors considered: laser beam sensors, active scatterometry, and image -based inspection tools. As 
control algorithms not only standard PID-control algorithms will be implemented and evaluated, but also more advanced 
control approaches (neural networks) will be evaluated, in the case the performance of the PID- control algorithms does 
meet the system specifications (in particular, productivity). 
So far Single Input Single Output (SISO) controllers have been discussed, which is a relevant approach in the case signals 
from several sensors are “fused” into one input signal for the controller. As several sensor signals (inputs) are sampled 
during laser processing, and more than one process output can be identified, allows to control the processes on the basis 
of a Multi Input Multi Output (MIMO) algorithm, or Multi Input Single Output (MISO) algorithm. This is particularly 
relevant for DLIP, where a multiplicity of geometrical variables in the optical chain affect in a combined and coordinated 
way the various characteristics of the resulting energy distribution pattern to be adjusted. 
  
 
27 
Fibre delivery - Advance beyond the state of the art: 
 
PHOT will addres s the current issues relating to fibre delivery of the high -power lasers through innovative new fiber 
designs: 
• The first approach will be an extension of current work performed internally. Specially design hollow core fiber based 
on a single ring of anti -resonant elements (AREs) surrounding a central hollow core will be designed. Thanks to the 
signal propagation in the air hollow-core fibers are a versatile optical transmission medium. They are used in a large 
number of applications thanks to their low non -linearity, tailorable dispersion, and the freedom to control the 
composition and pressure of gasses in the core. Fiber design will have to be optimized for the MW power project goal 
and in particular improving the fiber injection to prevent fiber end facet damage. 
• The second approach relies on multicore technology. PHOT technical staff brings an experienced staff recognized in 
Spatial Division Multiplexing records capacity transmission in multimode as well as single mode MCF. This approach 
offers the opportunity to mutualize peak power among several cores. This enables to increase fiber damage threshold 
as power is divided among N cores and offers the possibility to tailor the fiber design to suit best the application in 
particular bean shape at the out put. Considering that 100 W nanosecond pulse as a potential limit per core, it is 
expected a 12-core fiber geometry could meet end goal project. It is to be noted that project partners will have to 
develop imaging system to couple efficiently into the fibe r, although fiber design could cope with insertion losses 
into the individual cores. 
 
Although PHOT is confident in this technical approach, those innovative designs have not been tested to the power 
required in this project. Consequently, it is also expected that some more traditional fiber design approaches, large core 
fiber design with diameter of 1000 um or more will have to be fabricated. Work performed through this technical  
approach will be more straightforward and will focus on finding the optimize fiber core NA best suited to optimize beam 
quality at the fiber output. 
Table 1.6 Summary of innovative steps in PROMETHEUS project 
 
 USP laser 
architectures 
Direct Laser 
Interference 
Patterning (DLIP) 
Laser beam 
manipulation.  
Process monitoring 
and control 
 
Fibre delivery 
Current 
technology APL Rigel i1600 with 
1.6 kW at 60 ns pulse 
duration - proven 
industrially. 
Period texturing at a 
rate of achieve 
0.4 m²/min for metal. 
HOLO-OR existing M 2 
transformation at 
powers <1 kW. 
Coaxial point to point 
metrology 
Area scans and image 
tools 
Industrial grade solid 
core silica fibre 
maximum power 
density=1.2 GW/cm2. 
Limitations of current 
technology 
Components can’t 
handle more pulse 
peak power. 
High thermal 
gradients on key optical 
and electro - optic 
components at kHz 
freq and >1 kW. 
Increased speed = 
decreased structure 
depth and structure 
performances 
High-power ps laser 
has highly multimode 
beam  (M2  = 25-30) – 
Beam doesn’t 
generate efficient 
interference patterns.
  Current 
system concept exists 
for  UV  focusing, not 
for DLIP at 1064 nm. 
Trade-off between 
resolution and speed 
Point based tools are 
incompatible with DLIP 
Huge computational 
demand 
Peak power that can 
be carried is
1.2 GW/cm2. 
Advancement 
of        
PROMETHEUS USP laser with pulse 
duration <10 ns, 
powers >1 kW and 
pulse repetition rates 
above 500 Hz. 
DLIP with multiple 
length-scale periodic 
patterns with 
processing speed 2- 
5 m²/min. 
USP laser 
architectures of M2 
beam quality ≤5 or 
spatial       coherence 
>15%  and coherence 
length 3 mm. 
Development of new 
tools compatible with 
the unique setup of 
DLIP, for feature 
extraction and 
Industrial ibres that 
transmit peak power 
densities in the range 
5-50 GW/cm 2 over a 
minimum 3 m length. 
Benefits of 
PROMETHEUS 
approach 
Increased  laser 
power and reduced 
pulse duration with 
good beam 
coherence. 
Commercially 
attractive speeds for 
textural patterning. 
Excellent M 2 and 
coherence for 
multiple, high -power 
USP applications. 
Cost effective, high 
throughput and easy to
 calibrate 
techniques. 
Fast detection of 
process deviation 
(pulse to pulse in 
multi kHz regimes). 
High power fibre 
delivery for multiple, 
high-power USP 
applications. 
 
28 
Innovation potential (patent search) 
Searching by key words and phrases, and by 
Cooperative Patent Classification [CPC] codes 
A thorough patent search was carried out on behalf of 
the PROMETHEUS consortium by EUREXPLOIT LTD using 
the powerful patent citation analysis algorithms that 
underpin the Ai and AS engines which together enable 
Network Patent Analysis [NPA]. 
First the Google Patent, USPTO and Espacenet databases 
were interrogated using key words and phrases such as 
‘direct laser interference patterning ’, ‘ ultrashort pulse 
laser’, ‘ laser texturing ’, ‘ diffractive optical elements ’, 
‘galvo-scanners’ ‘ interferometry’, ‘ tophat b eam’, 
‘multiplexing’ and ‘3D processing’. 
Then, the Cooperative Patent Classification [CPC] system 
was searched using key CPC codes that define the 
PROMETHEUS consortium’s inventions, and are useful in 
identifying those of their competitors, such as: 
B23K26/00 Working by laser beam, e.g. welding, 
cutting or boring - B23K26/0084, relating to texturing 
G02B5/00 Optical elements other than lenses - 
G02B5/1842, relating to gratings for image generation 
Finally, the publication numbers of relevant patents and 
applications were fed into the NPA engines to identify 
those that disclosed inventions closely related to the 
PROMETHEUS technology developments. This process is 
illustrated below for the AS citation engine with 
 
 
 
Figure 8 NPA search with Ambercite layout 
partner FRAUNHOFER’s granted US Patent US9764424B2 (PROM-1) as focus: 
Each disk represents a published patent or patent application. Violet arrows pointing to the focus patent are from 
patents or applications cited in it by the applicant or the patent examiner. In turn, green arrows lead to subsequent 
patents or applications that cite the focus patent. In this way a network of closely related patents and applications 
is created which can be analysed for the most relevant to the proposed PROMETHEUS developments. 
The violet arrow from the Samsung patent disc to the PROM-1 disc indicates that the former was cited in the latter 
by the applicant or the USPTO examiner. 
A non-exhaustive selection of examples of the most recent and relevant patents and patent applications identified 
in these NPA searches are discussed below with respect to characteristics of the HS-DLIP process described above. 
Table 1.7 Most recent and relevant patents and patent applications 
PROM-1 US9764424B2 ‘Method and arrangement for forming a structuring on surfaces of components by 
means of a laser beam’. 
Assignee: Fraunhofer Gesellschaft [DE] 
Published: Sep 19th 2017 
PROM-1 from partner FRAUNHOFER is included here as it discloses the basic technology behind the proposed 
PROMETHEUS developments – beam splitting using DOEs or acousto-optical modulators – and it is the focus of 
the AS searches that gave rise to the charts above. 
PROM-2 WO2018060308 (A1) ‘Electric energy storage unit with structured arrestor plate and method for 
structuring an arrestor plate of an electric energy storage unit’ 
Assignee: Fraunhofer Gesellschaft; Univ of Dresden 
Published: Apr 5th 2018 
PROM-2 is a very recently published patent application from FRAUNHOFER that discloses a practical, 
potentially commercial use of HS-DLIP technology for simultaneously modifying an arrestor plate and providing 
indelible proof of its origin. 
 

 
29 
PROM-3 WO2018010707 (A1) ‘Method and system of ultrafast laser writing of highly-regular periodic structures’ 
Assignee: FYZIKALNI USTAV AV CR V V I [CZ], et al. 
Published: Jan 18th 2018 
PROM-3 is a recently published patent application that discloses ‘…a method for obtaining periodic structure on 
a surface of a substrate, said method allowing ultrafast writing by the laser, and achieves highly regular periodic 
structures having preferably an angle dispersion of FFT signal smaller than 15º.’ It is included here as it describes 
a high-speed laser writing system such as the PROMETHEUS project targets. 
1. DLIP coupled with galv(an)o-scanners 
PROM-4 US9290008B1 ‘Laser marking method and system and laser marked objects’ 
Assignee: NLIGHT Photonics Corp [US] 
Published: Mar 22nd 2016 
PROM-4 discloses ‘…a laser marking process for producing high quality marks… A pulsed laser beam operating at 
10-1000 kHz and an average power of less than 20 W is directed to a target object for marking such that a sub- 
surface interface between an oxidized surface layer and underlying non-oxidized substrate of the target object is 
in a mark zone of the pulsed laser beam. …The pulsed laser beam and target object are scanned relative to each 
other in a predetermi ned pattern such that a mark is created below the surface of the object and into the 
underlying substrate.’ and 
‘…a laser system (that) includes a laser source for providing a pulsed laser beam, a galvo-scanner for scanning 
the pulsed laser beam in a pre-determined pattern, and a focusing optic for focusing the pulsed laser beam to 
a mark zone…’ 
2. DLIP multiplexing approaches 
PROM-5 KR 101834917 (B1) ‘4- SERS method of fabricating nanodot pattern and SERS plate using 4 -beam laser 
interference lithography’ 
Assignee: Korea Advanced Inst Sci and Tech [KR] 
Published: Mar 8th 2018 
PROM-5 discloses ‘…a method of fabricating a nanopattern, comprising: forming an organic metal compound ink 
layer on a substrate; Curing the organic metal compound ink layer in a semi-solid phase; Irradiating a vertically 
crossing laser onto the substrate using 4-beam interference lithography to form an organic metal compound 
ink layer on the semi-transparent substrate to form a pattern by locally curing a portion to be patterned; And 
removing the organic metal compound ink layer on the semi-insulating layer to leave the pattern.’ 
3. Reduced optical path differences between sub-beams, employing novel DOE configurations 
PROM-6 WO2017041174 (A1) ‘System and method for phase-readout and active stabilization of optical 
interferometers’ 
Assignee: Institut National de la Recherche Scient [CA] 
Published: Mar 16th 2017 
PROM-6 discloses ‘A system and method for phase-readout/control and active stabilization on arbitrary 
interferometric phase in the optical interferometer platform is disclosed. The method makes use of a bi-colored 
2. polarization-multiplexed reference laser scheme.’ 
3. 4. Fabrication of homogeneous surface patterns by employing: 
4a. ‘Tophat’ beam profiles 
PROM-7 US20170329146 (A1) ‘Laser interference lithography system with flat-top intensity profile’ 
Assignee: Nat Sun Yat-Sen Univ [TW] 
Published: Nov 16th 2017 
4. PROM-7 discloses ‘…a laser interference lithography system with flat-top intensity profile, which is adapted to 
flatten/uniformize the Gaussian intensity profile of laser beams to enable a more uniform light field before the 
interference takes place, hence uniform exposure dose over a large sample area can be possible.’ 
4b. Optimization of process parameters (e.g. stitching) 
Nothing recent concerning ‘stitching’ was discovered in the current NPA searches. Outside of the patent 
databases, the following scientific paper perhaps provides options for assessing/improving process parameters: 
‘Determination of the laser beam quality factor (M2) by stitching quadriwave lateral shearing interferograms 
with different exposures.’ 
Han ZG et al. Applied Optics [01 Sep 2017, 56(27):7596-7603] 
5. http://europepmc.org/abstract/med/29047737 
6. 5. Development of 3D processing schemes for HS-DLIP 
PROM-8 
7. DE 10 2011 011 734 B4 – (High-speed DLIP concept, possibility to coupling with robot arms and/or scanner) 
 
30 
Summary of patent searches – The current NPA searches have not uncovered any system or process that mimics the 
entire range of characteristics of the proposed PROMETHEUS s ystem. It seems that the partners in the consortium are 
working at the cutting edge of their individual technology developments sectors and that the combination of their 
expertise in the proposed RIA is not foreshadowed by any alternative for which patent protection has been or is being 
sought. 
The overall conclusion from the patent searches is therefore that the deliverables of the PROMETHEUS project are unlikely 
to infringe existing patents or published patent applications and that the partners in the project currently have freedom-
to-operate [FTO] in this field. However, any patent or literature search is only a snapshot of invention activity up to the 
date of that search. We therefore plan to incorporate three iterations of the NPA, and accompanying literature searches, 
at the beginning, middle and end of the project to maintain surveillance of competitor developments of the SotA whilst 
also establishing our continued FTO (see WP9, Task 9.3). 
Management of IP 
The management and ownership of Intellectua l Property and Exploitation is described in Section 3. The management 
process for new IP generated during the project will be governed by the Consortium Agreement (DESCA model), which 
will ensure fair exploitation rights for all partners. Any new IP will b e the property of the partner responsible for its 
development with access beyond the PROMETHEUS project being under fair and reasonable conditions (or as agreed by 
partners). The aim is to fully commercialise the technology as soon as the results of the project are available, and the IPR 
is fully secured. 
Our Exploitation Strategy will be further developed into a detailed Exploitation Plan, which will be clear and robust in its 
protection of the IPR. In the project we will ensure that the results are adequately protected and that the dissemination 
is carried out without threatening the partners’ ability to protect the knowledge. The basis of our strategy is to allow the 
new scientific knowledge created by the project to be actively disseminated amongst  academic communities to validate 
it and industrial communities to take it up. 
  
 
31 
2. Impact 
2.1. Expected Impact 
Europe’s highly dynamic photonics industry is already the world’s innovation and market leader in many of the products 
and services that will power the digital economy of the 21st century. Some 5,000 technology-intensive companies (many 
of them SMEs) directly employ over 300,000 people. A global market share of 15.5% leaves Europe second only to China. 
Photonics is a fiercely competitive global market that was worth EUR 447 billion in 2015 and is growing with a CAGR of 
6.2% per year. Tripling annual Europea n production to more than EUR 200 billion by 2030 is realistic – provided we can 
stay at the forefront of photonics innovation. 
The European Photonics Market totals €69Bn per annum. European based photonics production has increased by over  
62% over the last 10 years. The European Photonics production has grown with a CAGR of 5% since 2005, more than 3.4 
times higher than the EU GDP growth rate. Today, European manufacturers represent 50% of the global market share of 
production technology, 35% global market share for optical measurement and image processing and 32% global market 
share for optical components and systems. 
The Photonics21 Vision Paper "Europe's Age of Light! How photonics will power growth and innovation" presents the 
vision of the Europe an photonics community for 2030. The report was prepared as outcome of 8 thematic strategy 
workshops with the European photonics community and outlines the great challenges facing Europe and the world. 8 
missions present a vision of how photonics technolog ies which are already in the innovation pipeline today can solve 
these challenges by 2030 and beyond to turn this vision into reality. 
European leadership in photonics will deliver these benefits in 2030: 
• A truly circular economy – surface texturing reduces surface coating, making recycling easier 
• A million new jobs 
• 10% higher productivity – higher value products, increased speed of processing and reduced defects 
• Photonics as a flagship science for innovation 
PROMETHEUS will support a truly circular economy by developing technologies capable of delivering longer lifetimes for 
parts and components enabled by high precision, zero defect production with optimal wear characteristics. In addition, 
laser surface texturing and surface engineering will remove the necessity for applying protective coatings which in many 
cases make recycling complex and not cost effective. Developments in hyperspectral imaging will further facilitate 
material identification enabling efficient separation and utilisation. 
PROMETHEUS further supports widespread uptake of photonics in manufacturing and production, empowering industry 
4.0, particularly by integrating the quality control within the process rather than as a stand-alone separate process, to 
detect defects in real time, thereby maximising yield and reducing downtime. By facilitating flexible on- line manufacturing, 
the technology will accelerate the shift to re -shore production to Europe. Companies will seek to  be closer to their 
customers, speed up the product development cycle and reduce the complexity of their global logistics as well as air miles. 
PROMETHEUS directly addresses a key emerging technology identified by Photonics 21 to deliver the next generation of 
high power ultra-short pulse lasers to deliver higher throughput and flexibility for faster and more efficient production. It 
will further support the production of micro and nanomaterials and structures enabling high value nanotechnology enabled 
products to commercialise from the lab and into the market. 
PROMETHEUS will support the Digitising European Industrylxxviii initiative by establishing next generation digital photonic 
platforms and benefitting a broad range of interdependent economic sectors. The technology will enable numerous 
sectors and application areas to adapt, transform and benefit from digitisation enabled by photonic processing, notably 
by also empowering smaller players to capture value. 
Further progress in ultra -short pulse laser technologies will accelerate changes to the way industry de signs, produces, 
commercialises and generates value from products and related services. Recent studies lxxix estimate that digitisation  of 
products and services will add more than 110 B€ of revenue for industry per year in Europe in the next 5 years. Close to a 
third of the growth of the overall industrial output in Europe is already due to the uptake of digital technologies lxxx. 
PROMETHEUS will deliver novel photonic technologies, ensuring that European Industry is supported  by delivering the 
building blocks for digital transformation, enabling European industry to seize fully the opportunities presented. 
 
32 
The European economy is underpinned by a strong and historic manufacturing industry that is recognised as one of the 
frontrunners globally for manufacturing excellence. Manufacturing across Europe still remains a champion of European 
excellence with 2.1 million active enterprises, employing almost 33 million direct employees to generate €1.6 trillion of 
value added currently which is responsible for 15% of GDP (Frost and Sullivan, 2016). Manufacturing turnover in 2013 was 
almost €7 trillion, with a share of 80% of all EU exports (Eurostat, 2016). It is evident that manufacturing is of key strategic 
importance to Europe, especially as it brings a large-scale potential to generate growth and opportunities to the industry 
itself with trickledown to the wider economy. 
The Factories of the Future (FoF) Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) initiative is the key driving force to ensure that industrial 
growth continues, and Europe remains at the forefront of global manufacturing excellencelxxxi. Rejuvenation is top of the 
agenda, and the FoF-PPP has distinct and clear objectives to: increase EU industrial competitiveness and sustainability in 
a global world through R&I to develop solutions for sustainable and automated production; support the EU Industrial 
Policy targets to increase the EU manufacturing share of GDP to 20%,  raise investment to 9% and ensure technology 
transfer and training across sectors. A range of other initiatives such as the European Factories of the Future Research 
Association (EFFRA) and Manufuture-EU are focused on encouraging the FoF-PPP activities. PROMETHEUS directly aligns 
to the goals of both EU Industri al Policy and the FoF -PPP by supporting EU manufacturing enterprises and SMEs. The 
technologies and DLIP processes developed in PROMETHEUS  will help EU industry to meet the increasing consumer 
demand for more efficient, more controllable, customised higher quality products. This will be delivered through a simple-
to-operate low capital cost transition from current surface engineering techniques to flexible, fully digitised laser 
machining and texturing. With the strong  focus within PROMETHEUS on digitising the process for surface texturing, the 
project also strives to enforce the  key objective of the Digitising European Industry policylxxxii to create a Digital Single 
Market – ensuring that every industry across Europe is prepared to fully benefit from digital innovations. 
Almost every sector of industrial manufacturing will utilise a method of surface processing/ engineering techniques in order 
to coat, structure and polish aesthetic or functional surfaces, Whilst the Surface Engineer ing (SE) industry is large and 
lucrative, many factors have prevented the industry from reaching maximum potential. Surface texturing and in particular 
Laser Surface Texturing (LST) is emerging as a viable alternative to overcome the issues with currently known SE methods 
and technologies. LST is expected to bring a range of technical, operational and economic benefits. 
 
 
Figure 20 Industrial Laser Revenues by Type ($m) 
Recognition of these benefits is proving a catalyst for growth in  
the industrial laser market. Strategies Unlimited report that 
between 2014-2016, fibre lasers have shown the  largest year-
on-year growthlxxxiii. As shown in Figure 20, both CO 2 and Solid-
State lasers have declined, whereas fibre laser revenues have 
grown from €1.48bn in 2014 to 
€1.65bn in 2015, with 2016 forecast to show year -on-year 
growth of 11% to reach €1.83bn in 2016. Fibre lasers continue to 
be the major contributor to industrial laser revenues, with a 54% 
share of the market in 2015 driven by the popularity of the 
technology in all industrial applications. In terms of laser 
manufacturing: EU-based manufacturers are competing directly 
with the US. Trumpf are the leading EU manufacturer with their 
Laser Division revenues  increasing  5.1%  to  €935m  in  2016  
(2015  = €890m)lxxxiv. Many laser manufacturers operate in the 
US: 
challengers to Trumpf, IPG Photonics are strong performers with overall sales for 2016 expected to reach almost €950m 
($981m to $996m dependant on 4th Qtr performance)lxxxv. Rofin with EU foundations has recently merged with Coherant, 
a US laser manufacturing heavyweight which based on 2015 figures would have combines revenues of €1.24bn. 
  

 
33 
2.1.1 Industrial Case Studies 
The PROMETHEUS case studies have been selected to demonstrate the technical capability of the system as well as the 
application to large commercial applications. Many of the applications require well defined surface structures over  
relatively large areas, many with 3-dimensional complexity or profiles and within industrial sectors where high throughput 
and yield are important. 
Table 2.1 Overview of end users 
Company JJVC ARCELIK FCA MAIER 
Company turnover €66bn €3.2bn €111bn €385 million 
Global Reach All countries >145 countries 140 countries 11 countries 
 
Industries addressed 
Pharmaceutical 
Medical Devices 
Consumer Care 
Consumer Durables 
White goods 
Automotive Automotive 
 
2.1.1.1 Fast Moving Consumer Goods – Johnson and Johnson 
JJVC are a well -known household name with a portfolio of products ranging from 
consumer goods through to medical devices. JJVC have over 134k employees across  the 
globe working to generate over €66bn of revenues across all of the 250  
companies that reside under the JJVC umbrellalxxxviii. Johnson and Johnson are one of the world’s largest consumer goods 
manufacturer. JJVC’s Consumer segment is focused on baby care, oral care, skin care, wound care and other consumer 
products, owning global brands such as Johnson’s baby lotion, Aveeno, Listerine, Neutrogena, Dabau and clean and clear. 
The Consumer products segment contributed $13.6 billion in revenue last year representing ~17–18% of the company’s 
revenue at $76.5 billion in 2017. 
JJVC experience two substantial challenges within this sector, both 
resulting from the same issue, namely the adherence of creams and 
lotions to the packaging walls. This manifest itself in two main challenges, 
firstly during product filling and secondly from customer complaints when 
customers cannot manage to extract all of the product out of the 
packaging, leaving significant amounts in the bottle or container. JJVC 
currently address this issue during packaging by overfilling the containers 
with up to 15-20% more product than necessary, costing the company 
tens of millions of dollars per year. Coatings may provide a potential 
solution, however an additional material within the packaging makes 
recycling complex and cost prohibitive. Surface structuring to form easy fill bottles will further improve recyclability. 
Recently, the Ellen McArthur Foundation announced at the World Economic Forum in Davos that the list of leading brands, 
retailers and packaging companies working towards 10% reusable, recyclable or compostable packaging by 2025 had 
grown to 11 representing more than 6 million tonnes of plastic packaging per year. Textured bottle interiors will accelerate 
the filling process and simultaneously reduce the need for overfilling. In addition, the new packaging will satisfy customer 
requirements to access all of the product purchased and reduce water consumpti on within the recycling process. JJVC 
typically fill > 1 million bottles per day which necessitates an extremely rapid and cost- effective solution. 
 
Figure 21 JJVC 
The Johnson & Johnson (JJVC) case study is based on oleophobic surfaces to improve lotion and cream bottle filling 
and customer product extraction with broader applications in wider FMCG and food industries. 
The global personal care product market was valued at €493bn in 2016, expected to reach €526.5bn by 
2024lxxxvi. 
The global plastic packaging market was valued at €258bn in 2017, forecast to reach €324bn by 2023 growing at a 
CAGR of 3.4%lxxxvii. 
PROMETHEUS will deliver: 
Improved product filling valued at €25m p.a. saving for product overfilling 
Improved customer satisfaction 
Improved sustainability as customers use more product from their purchases 
From PROMETHEUS, JJVC will have a superior range of consumer care products 
These factors combined will enable JJVC to capture an additional 4% of the market share for consumer goods 
based on offering differentiated packaging within their products valued at an additional ~€440m p.a globally. 
 
34 
Surface Modification of Polymers using Laser Technology : Johnson & Johnson is the world’s most comprehensive and 
broadly based manufacturer of healthcare products, as well as a provider of related services for the consumer, 
pharmaceutical and medical devices and diagnostics markets. The Medical Device business sector produces a broad range 
of innovative products and solutions used  primarily by healthcare professionals in the fiel ds of orthopedics, neurological 
disease, vision care, diabetes care, infection prevention, diagnostics, cardiovascular disease, and aesthetics. 
CASE STUDY 1. SURFACE MODIFICATION OF PROLENE® POLYPROPYLENE SUTURE 
Background and Justification: PROLENE Sutures (clear or pigmented) are non-absorbable, sterile surgical 
sutures composed of an isotactic crystalline stereoisomer of polypropylene, a synthetic linear 
polyolefin. The suture is pigment blue to enhance visibility. PROLENE Sutures are indicated for use  in 
general soft tissue approximating and/or ligation, including use in cardiovascular, ophthalmic 
procedures, and neurological procedures. PROLENE Sutures have been trusted by cardiovascular 
surgeons for over 40 years having been used in over 100 million 
people worldwide. Sutures can serve as a Site of Infection. 
Generally, in a typical patient, the infective dose is 2 – 8 million 
microorganisms per gram of tissue. However, sutures — like all 
implanted material — can substantially lower the infective thres hold. Three globally 
recognized health authorities now recommend the use of triclosan-coated sutures for 
surgical site infection (SSI) prevention. The CDC, WHO, and ACS/SIS guidelines on 
reducing the risk of SSI are general to triclosan-coated sutures and are not specific to 
any one brand. In order to avoid SSI, surface modification of suture material to achieve 
similar anti -microbial properties will benefit patients without additional chemical 
addition. This could help in creating products with better patient outcomes.    
 
CASE STUDY 2. SURFACE MODIFICATION OF PEEK FOR ORTHOPEDIC APPLICATIONS 
Background and Justification: Since the late 1990s, polyether ether ketone has become a go -to material for companies 
that manufacture orthopedic implants, thanks to its radiolucency and anatomical properties. Now, custom formulations 
of PEEK are enabling new potential applications for the polymer. As PEEK continues to expand into new temporary and 
long-term implantable devices, the availability of custom formulations as  well as surface modifications designed to 
enhance key properties will expand. At the forefront of consideration for suitable additives will be the elevated 
compounding and component processing temperatures of the polymer. This technology has potential to provide, without 
adding additives, functional properties that may play a key role in achieving better patient outcomes such as improved 
bond strength. Depending on the size (length, width, and height) of the implant required, DePuy Synthes may design a 
single or multi-piece implant. Multi-piece implants allow the surgeon greater flexibility when treating larger defects. Multi-
piece implants may be joined together using DePuy Synthes standard cranial and craniofacial fixation systems. 
  

 
35 
2.1.1.2 Super hydrophobic surface texturing - ARCELIK 
ARCELIK A.S is a major global compa ny manufacturing consumer durable goods, home appliances and 
consumer electronics. ARCELIK had a turnover of €4.69 billion in 2016 with over 27,000 employees in 
six countries including Turkey and Romania. ARCELIK’s 11 global Brands include: Arcelik, Beko, Grundig, 
Dawlence, Altus, Blomberg, Arctic, Defy, Leisure, Arstil, Elektra Bregenz and Flavel. ARCELIK has 14 R&D 
and Innovation Centres in Turkey, Taiwan, England, USA and Portugal with over 1000 R&D personnel 
dedicated to new product development. In 
2016, ARCELIK was the number three white goods manufacturer in Europe, maintaining its market leading position in 
Turkey, Romania and South Africa, with Strong growth and market share throughout Europe including UK, Germany, 
France, Italy, Spain, Russia and Poland. 
Tecnavio forecast that the global dishwasher market is projected to reach €917 million by 2021 and will grow with a CAGR 
of close to 7% lxxxix. The sector is experiencing a growing trend towards using stainless steel interiors due to low 
maintenance, low power heating elements for drying and lower overall energy consumption. Whilst the macroeconomic 
driver of growth is through the increase in the middle-class populations of Asia and emerging markets, there is an overall 
key market driver t oward highly rated energy efficient appliances. Dishwashers are more energy and water efficient, 
hygienic and use less detergent than hand washing approaches. A study undertaken at the University of Bonn concludes 
that dishwashers use typically less than half the energy and one sixth of the water of hand washing. The study compared 
washing 12 place settings by hand which uses 122 litres of water and 2.5 kWh of energy on average to heat the water. By 
comparison, an energy efficient dishwasher uses approximat ely 18 litres of water and 1 kWh of energy per load 
(representing a 85.3% reduction in water usage and a 60% reduction in energy). In addition, the dishwashers cleaned 
better and save up to 400 hours a year of labour. 
The global tumble dryer market is estimated to be €1.7 billion p.a growing with a CAGR of 2.4%. Condenser dryers 
represent 67% of the market today. Heat pump condensers represent the fastest growing segment with 10% of the current 
market and estimated to be 4-5 times larger within 5 years. 
Two case studies have been specifically considered to show case the PROMETHEUS technology for large area surface 
texturing, including dishwasher base and side panels and condenser heat exchangers. The case studies will include 1. The 
texturing of a 304 B1 grade stainless steel base plate for a dishwasher, and the 430 -grade stainless steel side panels and 
2. The texturing of selective hydrophilic and hydrophobic areas onto Aluminium 8000 series heat exchanger fins. ARCELIK’s 
customers are increasingly requiring energy efficient products with high quality surface finish. The PROMETHEUS textured 
surfaces will deliver the following targeted functionalities; 
• Hydrophobic/superhydrophobic/hydrophilic surfaces for improved drying efficiency and for reduced co rrosion and 
maintenance of the surface aesthetics. 
• Biomimetic surfaces with specific hydrophilic and hydrophobic areas for controlled water vapour condensation 
reducing energy consumption. 
 Dishwasher 
47% of total energy is consumed for drying dishes per cycle for a dishwasher. Water is 
heated to a predetermined temperature in the rinsing stage to prepare the dishes for  
drying. In the drying cycle, water droplets on the surface of dishes are evaporated due to 
the hot surface of dishes that were heated during the rinsing stage. Then water vapor 
inside of cabinet is extracted by natural or forced convection. Finally, most of the water 
vapor transferred to the outer cabinet and dishes dry. During the drying period, not only 
dishes surface but also cabinet surfaces are wet so water on surface of cabinet should be 
evaporated and transferred to outside of dishwasher. The dishwasher base panel is 
manufactured from 304 B1 grade stainless steel, side panels are 430 grade stainless steel. 
Sheets are approximately 60x 50cm and are typically pressed into shape. 
 
  
 
Figure 22 Industrial 
Dishwasher 
The Arcelik case study is based on creating biomimetic superhydrophobic surfaces that could be applied into a wide 
range of manufacturing industries. The case study will focus upon the use of superhydrophobic surfaces to improve 
energy efficient drying in dishwashers and condensation within heat exchangers 
The global white goods market was estimated to have reached 508 million units worth €149 billion in 2016, 
growing at a CAGR of 1.2% . 
 
36 
The main objective of the dishwasher case study is to change the surface energy of the 
base plate and side plates of the dishwasher to facilitate the drying process. Current  
systems typically retain approximately 125gms of total water on the surface of the lower 
cabinet just before the drying period. If we texture the surface with a superhydrophobic 
profile and drain the water via a sump well, the total amount of water to evaporate will 
be decreased. In addition, the surface texturing itself may facilitate the evaporation 
process. In this way, the energy consumption will be decreased too. Current dishwasher 
systems use 980 Wh per cycle (3528kJ). ARCELIK estimate that we can decrease 50% of 
the volume of water on bottom surface. We can therefore calculate the energy demand 
to evaporate water from the bottom surface: 
 
𝑚 ∗ ℎ𝑓𝑔=125𝑔 ∗ 2406 = 300 𝑘𝐽 
 
If water is decreased by 50%, the total energy demand to evaporate will be 300kJ/2 = 150kJ Total energy consumption = 
150kJ / 3528kJ = 4.25% saving. 
Based on the industrial average of 280 cycles per year for EN Standard: 280*150 = 42000 kJ/year equivalent to 11.7 kWh 
/ year. 
ARCELIK currently manufacture 2 million dishwashers per year and we estimate that the new energy efficient system will 
enable us to secure sales of in excess of 2.3 million units, thereby saving: 11.6*2.3m = 26.7 GWh / year energy saving. 
In addition, ARCELIK believe that the PROMETHEUS technology has potential to save up to 9% energy savings yielding up 
to 26.3 kWh savings per year per system and a total potential energy saving of 60.5 GWh p.a. 
A+ rated products currently command retail prices in the range of €300 with retail margins of typically 20%. ARCELIK 
will seek to secure a wholesale price of €240/unit with a nominal 30% gross profit margin. 
ARCELIK estimate that the new system will generate an additional 300k sales and can command a further €3 / unit, securing 
additional revenues of €6.9 million p.a + 300k units at €240 / unit = €78.9 million p.a. 
For the Dryer: 
Increasingly, laundry dryers have heat pump 
technology. In this system, humid air is circulated 
to the evaporator to decrease amount of humid 
inside of air and then this air is passed through in a 
condenser to be heated. During  cycle, humid air is 
condensed on surface of evaporator fins. Water 
layer on surface of evaporator fins caused two 
undesirable result. 
1)   Heat   transfer   between   fins   and   air  is 
decreased 2) Total air passage area is decreased. If 
we prevent exist ing of water layer, heat transfer 
and total air passage won’t be decreased so we can 
save energy consumption thanks to good heat 
transfer and higher fluid flow rate. In addition, we can enhance the condensation within the condenser surface by creating 
biomimetic surfaces of selective areas of hydrophilic and hydrophobic functionalities. The aluminium fins are ~ 1mm thick, 
the aluminium is typically flat with dimensions 20cm x 10 cm. Coatings have been trialed unsuccessfully due to poor 
lifetime. The aluminium is typically 8xxx series, uncoated using 8006 or 8009 or coated systems using 8097 or 8011. The 
aluminium fins are currently cut from rolled aluminium. The texturing will be explored both prior to pressing and post 
pressing. 
  
Figure 23  
Dishwasher Lower cabinet 
 
Figure 24 Schematic of the refrigerant side thermocouple layout 
on evaporator and condenser (B: Evaporator, Y: Condenser) 
ARCELIK have calculated energy saving potential for tumble dryer. By modifying the surface energy of heat 
exchangers, we can decrease almost 5% energy consumption of tumble dryer. 
Annual average energy consumption of tumble dryer is 176 kWh/year. 
5% energy saving means 8.8 kWh/year 
ARCELIK manufacture almost 700k tumble dryer with heat pump technology 
8.8 kWh/year * 700,000 = 6,160,000 kWh/year = 6.16 GW hour / year for tumble dryer 
 
37 
Using a high-quality heat exchanger with the PROMETHEUS technology, combined with an efficient brushless motor, the 
overall energy rating of a heat pump tumble dryer with ARCELIK’s RapiDry™ technology is kept at A+++. Systems with these 
high efficiency ratings command premium prices and each unit would typically have a wholesale price of €300. ARCELIK 
estimate that the novel PROMETHEUS technology will help them to grow market share within the rapidly growing heat 
pump dryer market, projecting 2.8 million-unit sales, generating €840 million of sales revenues within 5 years. 
 
2.1.1.3 Automotive Powertrain and Body in White – CRF (FCA) 
Centro Ricerche Fiat (CRF) is part of the wider Fiat Chrysler Automobile (FCA) group. 
CRF’s mission is to develop innovative technologies to improve the competitiveness 
of FCA products. The Fiat Chrysler Automotive (FCA) Group sold more than 4.6 million 
vehicles in 2017 generating over €111billion of Net revenues xc. The group 
manufactures and sells vehicles under the Abarth, Alfa Romeo, Chrysler, Dodge, Fiat, 
Jeep, Lancia Ram and Maserati brands and has 159 manufacturing fa cilities, 87 R&D 
centres and dealers and distribution in more than 140 countries. FCA also operates in the automotive components sector 
through Magneti Marelli and Teksid and the production systems sector through Comau. The group employs more than 
236,000 employees worldwide. 
In 2014, ~89.7 million cars were manufactured globally, with 17 million of these in the EU. Within the EU there are 
currently an estimated 231 million cars, consuming ~150 billion litres of fuel each year. Automotive OEMs are being 
increasingly driven by legislation to reduce fuel consumption and CO 2 emissions. CO2 Emission targets and fuel economy 
regulations globally are the major drivers. Within the EU, the Euro VI legislation requires that vehicle emission levels will 
be ≤ 95gCO2/km in 2020. By 2015 ACEA stated target CO 2 emissions levels of 130 g/km of CO 2. To date this has not been 
achieved by European Automotive OEMs. As a result, the need to achieve these emission levels is becoming severe. 
An essential component of the automotive sector technology roadmap (2018 - 2020) is the development of lightweight 
structures and joining methods. As legislative emission targets continue to reduce from <130gCO 2/km in 2015 to 
<95gCO2/km, the user need and demand for commercially viable solutions is becoming more urgent. 
Reducing the weight of the Body in White (BIW) can have a large impact on the fuel economy of vehicles. The US 
government reported that a 10% reduction in vehicle weight can result in a 6%-8% fuel economy improvement and that 
replacing 25% of US cars with a lighter weight vehicle could save more than 5 billion gallons of fuel annually by 2030 in the 
US alonexci. 
The global automotive market is expected to surpass 95.7 million-unit sales in 2017 (up from 91.5 million in 2015). Growth 
will be driven in the western world, which will offset the slowdown in the emerging marketsxcii. The manufacture of motor 
vehilces within the EU employs 2.2 million people directly within the EU27 and 12.9 millio n people indirectly within the 
associated supply chains. Light weighting will remain a game changer with aluminium and multi-material technology being 
increasing utilised to meet CO 2 regulations. Light weighting strategies applied to the 1 billion cars on the road globally 
could lead to approximately €36 billion savings in annual fuel costs. Automotive OEMs and the automotive value chain 
are under increasing pressure to meet strong emission legislation (Euro 6/7, EPA & 2020 ACEA) and will continue to 
innovate in light-weighting technologies to achieve this. 
 
 
PROMETHEUS will deliver: 
Improvements in energy efficiency for dishwasher drying of up to 4% 
Improvements in energy efficiency for heat exchangers 5% 
The PROMETHEUS technology , will create for ARCELIK enhanced superior products to those they offer today at 
higher prices. 
Enhanced products, enhanced performance, enhanced reliability will attract new customers. it 
is expected that dishwasher sales revenues will increase by ~€78.9m p.a. 
Heat pump enabled tumble dryer sales will generate €840 million p.a. from 2026. 
CRF have two end user case studies, one based on laser surface texturing of piston cylinder liners and the other is 
based is on metal mold tools wide applications into all industrial industries across automotive, aerospace and many 
others. 
The global automotive market is expected to reach €82.65bn by 2022 growing at CAGR of 4.8%. 

 
38 
The use of aluminium engine blocks in automotive application is well established. However, due to the soft nature  of 
aluminium and its poor wear performance, and dependent upon the alloy characteristics, the cylinder piston liner is either 
covered by an expensive plasma coating process or a different cylindrical insert (eutectic aluminium alloy or iron or steel) 
is forced inside the engine block (with higher mechan ical properties). The insert is then machined  to get the required 
tolerance and surface finish using a form honing process.  
Finally, a helical slide honing process is used to create 
specific scratches on the  inner surface to promote oil 
entrapment. This oil guarantees the correct lubrication 
between the piston and liner during engine operation, 
reducing wear and improving engine efficiency. In order to 
achieve the optimal  engine efficiency, the optimisation of 
the tribological system involving the cylinder bore surface 
and piston rings needs to be achieved. Existing honing 
processes generate cylinder bore surfaces with surface 
deviations of a few µm from the ideal cylindrical shape. 
 
 
However, there are other deformations, including deformations of the cylinder bore caused by assembly forces of the 
cylinder head and other components. Furthermore, there are additional thermal and dynamic deformations which can 
add up to approximately 40-70 µm of local deformation xciii. This reduces engine efficiency due to blow by and increases 
oil consumption. The PROMETHEUS approach will replace the existing machining and honing process with a ultra -short 
pulse ablation and texturing process that will limit the forces experienced and enhance the surface finish. The technology 
will enable the design of optimal final honing shape and roughness. This approach has  a number of main benefits; a 
reduction in the number of manufacturing steps in the production process and an increase in the engine life, a reduction 
in the oil consumption and an overall efficiency gain for the engine. 
Studies by Hoen et al. xciv undertaken on helical 
slide honing of cylinder inserts, evidence that 
surface roughness is a key influencer on 
lubricant consumption. The roughness is 
required to improve the oil entrapment during 
engine work and reduce friction and wear. The 
optimal cond ition is achieved with a smooth 
core roughness depth and plateau roughness 
(see Figure 27). Reducing Rpk from 0.4 to 0.1 
(typically from the range of conventional 
plateau to  the range on helical honing) the 
relative oil  consumption is reduced by 30% 
(from 0,7% to 0,5% of overall diesel oil consumption). Moving to ideal Rpk 0.0 we could achieve a relative further 10% oil 
consumption saving. The PROMETHEUS process will therefore replace conventional plateau honing with an ultra -short 
pulse DLIP surface structuring capable of reducing manufacturing steps and delivering optimal surface structures. 
The existing machining of internal combustion engines demands cylinder bores with high cylindricity and surface quality. 
However, the machining macro shape is not pres erved. In operational condition, complex distortive mechanisms  occur 
 
Figure 25 CRF case study 
  
Figure 27 Surface Roughness 
 
Figure 26 CRF case study details 
 
39 
which deform the cylinder bore. The application of the PROMETHEUS technology to the surface shaping and surface 
texturing of piston cylinder liners can deliver 25-30% less blow by losses and piston skirt friction with 40- 50% less piston 
ring friction. These savings have been used to project total fuel consumption reduction in the range of 1.1 – 1.5%xcv. This 
will further enable advanced internal combustion engines (such as Mazda’s advanced HCCI engine and Nissan’s variable 
compression engine) to secure market share from diesel engines. Turbo petrol engines are projected to experience strong 
growth outlook in the medium term with forecasts to secure an additional 2 million sales in the next five yearsxcvi. 
In terms of weight reduction, PROMETHEUS will enable increased use of multi-material BIW by enabling more cost- 
effective hot-pressing processing of aluminium parts and high boron steels. Multi-material BIW could yield weight savings 
of 30-40%. The EU produces 16 M passenger vehicles per annumxcvii; if just 5% of those vehicles could reduce their BIW 
weight by 5% (20 kg), which is realistic with the PROMETHEUS benefits, then the net saving to the EU would be in the 
region of 16,000 tonnes of vehicle weight which corresponds to €36 M of fuel cost (at 3% fuel reduction). 
BIW typically represents 28% of the total mass of a vehicle. CRF estimate 
the application of multi-material BIW will enable a 30% weight reduction 
based on calculations made on a Giulia Alfa Romeo with existing  BIW of 
1000kg. On average in Europe, a 100 kg mass reduction achieved on a 
passenger car saves 0.35 litres of fuel per 100 km, 9 grams of CO 2 
emissions per km. Estimating an average BIW weight today of 700kg, 
multi material BIW will save on average 210kg of weight. This will reduce 
fuel consumption by 0.735 litres per 100km and offset 18.9g of CO 2 
emissions per km. 
Assuming that this technology is applied to all FIAT vehicles by 2025, and that FIAT Chrysler Automobile have a 2.64%  
Global market share of 105 million-unit sales in 2025 (conservative estimate), the PROMETHEUS technology will be applied 
to ~ 2.77 million vehicles p.a. Assuming that the average annual distance driven is 12,700 km per vehicle, this approach 
will save over 93 litres of fuel per vehicle per annum. Across the F CA group, this equates to a saving of over 257 million 
litres of fuel p.a. offsetting 664 million tonnes of CO2 p.axcviii. 
Hot metal forming process 
Metal (aluminum or steel) hot sheet are placed over the tool, and in few 
second the press with punch is closed and the sheet shaped. After the die is 
completely closed, the cooling system start to cool the sheet. 
The cooling procedure has the aim to reduce the overall temperature to 
confer mechanical properties (for steel is quenching, with martensite phase 
creation, for aluminum is a thermal treatment to confer the right 
microstructure on sheet), and to reduce the overall temperature to let the 
shaped sheet to be extracted from the t ool without further deformation. 
Cooling is dependent on two main variables: channels design (amount of 
water/cooling liquid circulating, and distance from the surface) and surface 
roughness or texture. 
The sequences involved during the hot metal forming p rocess are: metal 
sheets are heated in a furnace, up to the forming temperature (in the range 
of 400-500ºC for aluminium, while 900ºC for steel), then sheet is placed in 
the press, tool die is closed shaping the sheet. For steel, at this stage, after 
the p art is shaped, in the tool cooling is activated and then the part is 
extracted. 
Aluminium hot stamping process. Currently most of the aluminium parts for BIW are cold shaped.  
The trend is to introduce more and more high strength aluminium alloys, which need to be shaped at higher temperatures. 
In order to achieve the right quality during stamping, lubricants are used. Lubricants would be preferably avoided since 
shaped sheets need to be cleaned later: the presence of lubricant or other contaminant on aluminum sheet surface could 
also introduce defects during welding operations to enable multi -material usage (inclusions, but  mainly porosity).  
Lubricants also influence the sliding of the aluminium and the tool surface, increasing the lifetime  of the tool. Th e 
PROMETHEUS technology will enable an aluminium hot stamping process without the necessity lubricants, whilst 
maximizing the heat transfer for optimal cooling speeds whilst maintaining good wear performance of the tool. This could 
have a big impact on cleaning reduction (pollution, cost and cycle time) as well on final quality (welding operation without 
 
 
Figure 28 Typical Automotive Component 
Weight Distribution 
 
Figure 29 BIW with typical mould 
tool for B-pillar application 

 
40 
porosity or inclusion). 
Whilst there is huge potential for the application of high strength aluminium alloys in BIW, we have based our initial 
exploitation on hot aluminium stamping for B-pillar application. The introduction of multi-material applications typically 
occurs within premium vehicles and then migrates into more main stream vehicles. Considering a premium segment within 
the FCA family alone, we can estima te a production scenario of 30,000 cars/year requiring 60,000 B pillars/year. Once 
proven, the PROMETHEUS technology will then be applied to optimise other mould tool applications. 
2.1.1.4 Automotive Exterior – MAIER 
 
Founded in 1973, MAIER’s headquarters are based in Gernika, Basque Country. 
MAIER are European leaders in the decoration of plastic parts and manufacturer of 
complex injection mouldings for the automotive industry. The technologies MAIER 
works with comprise chrome plating, painting, laser etching and hot stamping. MAIER is part of the prestigious Mondragon 
Corporation (global sales above 13,200 M€ and a workforce above 82,000 employees), one of the biggest cooperative 
organizations worldwide. 
MAIER is an experienced company in the design and development of co mponents (injection, finishing/decoration and 
assembly); design and manufacture of prototype and production moulds, the analysis and implementation of industrial 
facilities; and research, development and innovation. The MAIER innovation procedure is always  based on quality and 
accuracy methodologies which have led to more than 20 patents, from 1993, in automotive components and related 
processes. 
MAIER is a tier 1 plastic component supplier with up to 3,200 employees in 11 countries with global sales above 385 M€. In 
Europe, MAIER heads, in particular, the development and manufacture of body colour painted front grilles, chromed caps, 
wheel-trims, wheel caps and petrol cap lids, as well as producing a wide array of other automotive components and body 
modules (mudguards, consoles, air vents, fascia, door trims, handles...). MAIER owns plants in Spain, the United Kingdom 
and Czech Republic, joint ventures in Turkey and Japan, and offices in France, Sweden and Japan. MAIER supplies plastic 
components for the most important automotive OEMs (Renault, Toyota, Honda, Ford, Opel, Seat, Citroen, Peugeot, 
Jaguar, Mercedes, Rover, Suzuki, Volvo, Nissan, Bentley, Skoda, Audi…). MAIER has a dedicated technical centre with more 
than 100 employees offering support to new product development, OEMs and Equippers. 
Automotive OEMs are looking for surfaces that are easier to clean because of three main reasons: Comfort for the final 
user; Improved brand image and Less use of water and cleaning agents for the vehicles. 
Chrome-plating together with painting is one of the main decoration technologies on thermoplastic parts for the 
automotive industry. The automotive designers are looking for different metallic colours in order to differentiate 
themselves from their competitors. 
The global passenger car production is dominated by Asia -Pacific region followed by Europe, North America, and rest  of 
the world. In Europe the major players are Volkswagen (Germany), Peugeot SA (France), Fiat SPA (Italy), and BMW  
(Germany). Since the slowdown in market during 2008 to 2010, the passenger car market is now on the path of recovery. 
The global passenger car production is expected to grow from 63.1 million units in 2012 to 94.4 million units by 2018 at an 
estimated CAGR of 6.9% from 2013 to 2018. As it can be seen in the figure below, sales in Europe are expected to increase 
up to 14,7 M€ in 2020. 
The MAIER automotive exterior case study is based is on superhydrophobic surfaces for easy clean and superior 
aesthetics with wider applications into automotive, marine and rail sectors. 
The Global automotive market reached 95.7 million units sales in 2017 and is project to grow with CAGR of 3%xcix. The 
Global automotive plastic parts market is expected to reach €32.5 bn by 2020 and has been growing with CAGR of 
10.9% since 2015c. 
PROMETHEUS will deliver: 
An ultra-short pulse laser texturing process capable of delivering piston cylinder inserts which exhibit 30% less 
blow by and with 40% less friction enabling engines with> 1.1 % reduced fuel consumption. 

 
41 
Apart from this macro view of the automotive  industry 
the potential economic impact of the PROMETHEUS 
project for MAIER is very important; as MAIER is currently 
the second chrome -plater for the automotive  industry. 
The new technology will provide a differentiation from its 
competitors and will help not only to consolidate MAIER’s 
current market share but will also improve it. 
In EMEA market 14 million new vehicles were registered 
in 2016 ci. A car has usually more than 20 parts that are 
chrome plated or painted with a metal like finish. Among 
others, these parts can be handles, trims, buttons, frame, 
grills, badges. 
 
 
Figure 30 Europe’s vehicle sales in thousands of units 
Superior finish with easy clean or self-cleaning components offer MAIER the potential for differentiation within the market 
place. The digital nature of the PROMETHEUS process additional opens up the opportunity to personalise components or 
include holographic brand logos within components such as trims (e.g. for AMG, M-Sport or S-Line branding). The use of 
laser means that it is flexible and versatile and that any geometry can be treated. The PROMETHEUS Laser process offers 
precision and robustness necessary within the automotive sector with extremely small variations between components. 
The selected case study is an exterior decorative metallised PP component 
that forms part of an automotive bumper trim.  The part is injection 
moulded and either painted in the car body colour  or metallised with a 
chrome plating effect finish both for aesthetics. The part has approximate 
dimensions 330mm x 30mm x 20mm and is nearly flat with some curvature. 
The key driving factors of this market include the utilization of automotive 
plastics in automotive designs which in turn serves various purposes 
including light -weighting which reduces carbon emissions and fuel 
economy, improves aesthetics, facilitates unibody design, reduces vehicle 
noise and vibration, and also acts as insulator for cabin air conditioner.  
The market is restrained due to various factors, such as the high capital cost 
and infrastructure due to process reengineering which  incurs huge capital 
cost. The intensity of competitive rivalry in the automotive plastics  market for passenger cars is moderate to high. The 
automotive plastics market is experiencing high growth, which is expected to continue in the near future, mainly driven by 
types of plastics used, such as polypropylene, polyurethanes, and polyvinyl chloride. The high growth potential of the end-
user industries for the above-mentioned types is driving the market for automotive plastics in Asia-Pacific. 
2.1.1.5 Additive Manufacturing – PRIMA 
 
  
Figure 31 Exterior decorative metallised PP 
component 
PRIMA will additionally explore the use of the PROMETHEUS technology for post processing laser surface finishing 
of additively manufactured parts. The technology can also impart additional surface functionality to high value 
customised parts. 
The global additive manufacturing products and services market was valued at €4.91 bn in 2016 and is growing 
at CAGR of 17.4%cii. 
The global production value of machine tools was $74.9billion in 2016ciii, market to grow steadily at a CAGR of 
6% up to 2020civ 
PROMETHEUS will deliver: 
Reproducible superhydrophobic textured surfaces onto polymer components capable of maintaining aesthetic 
chrome appearance and easy clean functionality. 
PROMETHEUS provides a superior performance part ensuring the optimal visual appearance is maintained Through 
PROMETHEUS, MAIER can further build their brand image and customer relationships with automotive OEMs 
worldwide. 
With this superior self-cleaning/easy clean high value product, it is expected that MAIER will increase sales by up 
to 6% valued at ~€23m. p.a by 2025 
 
42 
2.1.2 Expected Impacts from the Work Programme 
The call ‘ICT-04b-2018’ emphasises two key expected impact areas. PROMETHEUS will address these expected impacts in 
a number of ways: 
Strengthening industrial manufact uring based on ultra -short pulse lasers and extending its field of applications by 
simultaneous improvement of precision and productivity; significant contribution to the digitization of European 
industry. 
PROMETHEUS focusses upon the industrial application of ultra-short pulse lasers for manufacturing. The project focusses 
on the development of high power ultra-short pulse laser technologies in the range of 10 ns – 700 ps and will be applicable 
to future high -power developments in shorted pulse systems. Th e DLIP technology is uniquely suited to deliver high 
precision (with features in the range of 1µm) and high productivity (with processing speeds up  to 5m2 / min) opening up 
new potential industrial uses. The digital application of the DLIP technology will enable manufacturers to select 
customisable functionalities, surface finishing effects and bespoke personalisation within high speed manufacturing 
processes. In Particular, PROMETHEUS significantly extends the field of applications of Ultra short pulse las er processing 
by enabling simultaneous 3D and large area texturing. The exceptionally high processing rate enables unequalled cost -
effective processing delivering novel technology to more price sensitive industrial sectors such as the automotive, fast -
moving consumer goods (FMCG), white goods and consumer durables. For example, for the end user case studies outlined 
above, it was estimated the effective cost of laser processing. 
 Automotive exterior (MAIER case study)           
Component effective dimensions are 33cm x 3 cm = 99 cm2 area. The PROMETHEUS process will texture the surface within 
0.12 seconds with an effective cost of €0.0016. 
 Dishwasher base plate (Arcelik case study)           
Component effective dimensions are 50cm x 50cm = 2500 cm 2area. The PROMETHEUS process will texture the  surface 
within 3 seconds with an effective cost of €0.041. 
 Automotive Piston cylinder liner (CRF case study)          
Component effective dimensions are a cylinder with 84mm diameter and 88mm length = 487.7 cm 2area. Th e 
PROMETHEUS process will texture the surface within 0.59 seconds with an effective cost of €0.008. 
 FMCG packaging (JJVC case study)            
Component effective dimensions are 18 cm x 8 cm x 2 cm = 360 cm 2area. The PROMETHEUS process will texture  the 
surface within 0.43 seconds with an effective cost of €0.006. 
Ultra-short pulse Laser processing is currently viewed as an unconventional technology when compared to other surface 
engineering applications. PROMETHEUS will bring this unconventional tech nology into the mainstream industry  for 
surface engineering. PROMETHEUS represents the entire value chain from technology developer (EW, IRIS, HOLOOR, 
PHOT) to machine integrator (PRIMA) to end users (ARCELIK, MAIER, CRF & JJVC). The demonstrations within the project 
together with PRIMA will drive and create the widespread adoption for wider applications. 
The PROMETHEUS case studies have been chosen to challenge the technology application into a range of price sensitive 
industrial sectors. Based on our current experiences and knowledge base, we have projected the processing rates using 
a 1.5kW ns laser. The target processing speeds outlined within PROMETHEUS are up to 5m2 
/ min using the DLIP process with a 1.5 kW laser source. This equates to 833 cm2 /sec. 
The overall target cost of the PRIMA integrated PROMETHEUS system is €800k, inclusive of the control system, 1.5kW ns 
laser, fiber and DLIP optics (inclusive of the diffractive optic elements). Given the high efficiency of these lasers, the capex 
cost dominates the OPEX costs per minute. Therefore, we have estimated the cost of processing based  entirely on the 
depreciated capital cost, with a 7 year utilisation, single shift 38 hour working week. Whilst in reality there will be some 
downtime during processing and additional cost for component manipulation, these will be calculated during the project. 
Based on these calculations, the cost per minute equates to €0.83 / minute. 
 
43 
  
Figure 32 PROMETHEUS Value Chain (and development chain)   
 
 
Substantial contribution to digital photonic production with increased productivity, flexibility and customized products 
("first time right") at significantly reduced costs. 
The unique characteristics of the PROMETHEUS technology, including the ability to deliver precise periodic arrays of 
surface features at an unprecedented processing rate will deliver a substantial contribution to digital photonic processing, 
enabling it to be applied within a broad range of mainstream manufacturing processes rather than for niche  ultra-high 
value applications. The DLIP technology enables the full utilisation of the high-power laser systems to deliver significant 
increased productivity. 
If we compare the projected processing rates within PROMETHEUS to those reported within the SMARTSURF and 
TRESCLEAN projects, where processing rates of 40mm2/sec (0.4 cm2/sec), PROMETHEUS will exhibit productivity gains of 
in excess of 2000 times (with processing rates equating to 833 cm2/sec). 
The PROMETHEUS approach is flexible to the processed material, capable of ablating and texturing polymers, metals and 
ceramics. In addition, the technology is  capable of texturing 3D complex geometries.  The digital nature of the 
PROMETHEUS system, enables rapid reconfiguration to deliver customised surface functionalities and patterns  on a 
component by component basis. The embedded control systems will impart quality control as part of the process, enabling 
errors to be corrected quickly and to generate right first-time manufacturing platforms. 
Table 2.2 Summary of products and users in PROMETHEUS project. 
Product  
and User 
Performance 
Functionality Current Performance Post PROMETHEUS 
performance %Age improvement 
Johnson & 
Johnson 
Packaging 
Oleophobic 
Reduced adhesion of 
product 
 
N/A 
Oil contact angle 
>130° 
Roll-off angle < 20° 
N/A 
CRF 
Cylinder 
inserts 
Reduced friction 
Improved wear 
resistance 
 
Surface roughness Rpk 
= 0.2 - 0.8 µm 
Reduced surface 
roughness value Rpk < 
0.1µm 
>50% - 800% 
 
ARCELIK 
Dishwasher super-hydrophobic Retained water of 150g Retained water of 75g 50% 
 
MAIER 
Auto exterior 
super-hydrophobic easy 
clean 
Water contact angle = 
60°-75° 
Roll-off angle= 60° 
Water contact angle = 
>130° 
Roll-off angle= 20° 
Water Contact Angle 
=~100% 
Roll-off angle = 300% 
 
  

 
44 
2.1.3 European Added Value - Environmental and Societal Impacts 
The PROMETHEUS project supports the European 2020 grand societal challenges. Creating a high potential high power 
ultra-short pulse laser processing technology with unprecedented processing speeds with in -line characterisation  
interferometry and associated control systems will contribute specifically to at least two out of five of the grand challenges, 
namely; 
• Supporting employment – 75% of 20-64 years old to be employed: based on expected revenues, >1000 jobs will be 
created across the consortium will be mainly 20-64-year olds; 
• Increasing investment in innovation – 3% of the EU’s GDP: new approaches to surface engineering through ultra-short 
pulse laser processing will generate direct increased in R&D spending, both in photonic component development 
necessary to control the increased power densities and in widespread application development; 
In addition, the project supports the general objectives of the Factories of the Future PPP, including; 
• increase EU industrial competitiveness and sustainability in a global world through R & D activities for the timely 
development of new knowledge-based production technologies and systems: 
o competitive and sustainable production plants; 
o industrial automation, machinery and robotics; 
o industrial software for design and plant management; 
• promote EU 2020 targets of a smart, green and inclusive economy: 
o energy- and resource-efficient manufacturing processes; 
o socially sustainable, safe and attractive workplaces; 
o high-tech companies involved in innovative manufacturing; 
• support EU industrial policy targets (EC industrial policy communication October 2012): 
o raising the share of manufacturing in EU GDP from 16 % to 20 % by 2020; 
o raising industrial investment in equipment from 6 % to 9 % by 2020; 
o ensuring technology transfer and training across manufacturing sectors; 
• underpin EU trade and investment policy: 
• EU to remain the leading trade region in the world, keeping the share of EU trade in goods between 15–20%. 
 
PROMETHEUS will achieve several environmental and societal Impacts both within the manufacturing sector and wider. 
Specifically: 
• Replacement of chemical etching processes resulting in reduced harmful chemical usage in accordance with REACH 
legislation 
• High-throughput efficient material removal at up to 5m2/minute 
• PROMETHEUS ultra -short pulse technology can be used on a range of diverse materials – metals/ polymers/ 
ceramics and cermets 
• Improved wear properties on mould tools will reduce the need for lubricants and existing lubricant removal 
washing processes and increase the lifetime of tools overall 
• The specific application of PROMETHEUS into the end user case studies will deliver the following environmental 
benefits; 
1. Dishwasher application: the PROMETHEUS surface texturing applied to the dishwasher for improved 
drying will save 26.7 GWh p.a. offsetting 11000 tonnes CO2 per year (based on emissions of 0.41205 
kgCO2/ kWh of central power generation from gas fired power stations) 
2. Tumble dryer application: PROMETHEUS will enable the next generation of energy efficient heat  pump 
enabled dryers, saving 6.16 GWh of electrical power p.a. and offsetting 2538 tonnes of CO2 per year 
3. Automotive cylinder piston liner application: the laser honing process will save in excess of 1.1% fuel 
economy due to reduced friction and 25-30% less blow by losses. Based on an average 12700km annual  
use and a typical 5.5 litres / 100 km fuel starting fuel efficiency, the technology when applied across the 
FCA group of 2.77 million vehicles has potential to deliver savings of 49,611 tonnes of CO2 per year 
4. Automotive high strength aluminium pressing application: The ultra-short pulse laser textured hot press 
mould tools have the capability to deliver step change improvements to the manufacture of aluminium  
components for BIW application. This will enable multi-material BIW application to deliver considerable 
weight saving 257 million litres of fuel p.a. offsetting 664 million tonnes of CO2 p.a. 
 
45 
2.1.4 Outline Business Plan and Exploitation 
The Technology will demonstrate a number of highly differentiated features and USPs, including; 
1. High precision laser surface texturing down to 1µm feature sizes 
2. Ultra-high throughput productivity capable of texturing up to 5m2 / min 
3. High power fibre laser source facilitating enhanced flexibility of processing and laser head configurations. 
4. Integrated In-Situ surface measurement and control system enabling right first-time production capability 
PROMETHEUS will enable PRIMA to demonstrate the technology within their 5 -axis system and additionally for 
exploitation within the growing additive manufacturing sector for part finishing. PRIMA will obtain first mover advantage, 
entering the market at least 18 months prior to their competition. 
The Consortium has been recruited to represent the complete value chain. The exploitation is therefore based on the 
component suppliers delivering the PROMETHEUS components (high power 1.5 kW ns laser, fibre optics, DOE and optics 
for the DLIP) into PRIMA initially on a nonexclusive basis. PRIMA will then market directly using their existing sales  force 
and sales channels. PRIMA will additionally seek high volume markets based on the PROMETHEUS case studies both within 
the consortium end user partners and elsewhere. 
The Commercial products will have the following value propositions; 
• Maximum part throughput and productivity in the marketplace. 
• High resolution feature sizes capable of delivering a broad range of value adding functional surfaces. 
• High power fibre laser enabling end users to configure their manufacturing set up without constraint reduci ng 
downtime and cost of implementation 
• Integral surface measurement and control system delivering zero defect methodologies within a production  
environment. 
How the Consortium Partners expect to work together beyond the project. 
The superior product offered by PRIMA will be enabled by integrating the component developments from the whole 
consortium. PRIMA will work with the supply chain partners to commercialise the technology and be the first to market 
with this product. The consortium partners will continue to work with the RTOs to further enhance the technology and in 
particular to optimise the process conditions of the end user case studies including new end users. It is the intention that 
all of the commercial technology providers will work together to develop long term relationships subject to ensuring that 
mutual commercially beneficial terms are agreed. 
The unprecedented high processing rates delivered by PROMETHEUS will open up a broad range of industrial sectors  in 
addition to those identified within the end user cases. The case studies will make excellent dissemination material for 
further exploitation within the identified markets of packaging, FMCG, white goods, mould tools, additively manufactured 
components and a wide range of au tomotive applications. In addition, post project, the consortium will explore other 
markets such as medical (initially through JJVC), aerospace, machine tools, oil and gas and power generation. The partners 
will benefit as a number of the consortium already sell to these sectors or are end users within these markets. 
2.1.5 Overall Growth Impact on PROMETHEUS Participants 
 
The PROMETHEUS solution is based on input, developments and expertise 
of all technology providers within the consortium. While individual partners 
will be able to freely sell their newly developed technologies 
independently, they will additionally benefit from every integrated system 
sold by PRIMA. 
The anticipated selling prices for each individual partner component is 
shown in Figure 33. 
Table 2.3 shows the forecast sales  revenues from the PROMETHEUS 
exploitation. These forecasts are the initial projections based on the  targeted system performance. Work package 9 
contains tasks to deliver a more robust complete business plan, that will cover the business models (including leasing) and 
more details on the sales projections. Whilst some initial prototype system and component sales may be made prior to 
2024, the real commercial exploitation through full commercial systems is envisaged to start from January 2024. 
Partner and Product  Price/unit 
PRIMA 1.5kW system €800,000 
PLASE – 1.5kw Laser €315,000 
Perfos optical fibres €15,000 
VISUM Inspection €70,000 
HOLOR - DOE €46,000 
Figure 33 Sales Price per Component 
 
PROMETHEUS will enable PRIMA to launch a new high power ultra-short pulse laser texturing, ablation and 
surface finishing machine 
 
46 
 
The system configuration for each customer will depend upon their specific applications and requirements, however for 
forecasting purposes we have assumed that all sales will be based upon the most cost effective 1.5kW ns laser system. 
However, for certain applications it is expected that the solution may require the higher power 2.4kW or 3.2kW system. 
In addition, for some applications, customers may require a dual laser system where the second laser is used for other 
purposes. We believe that the 1.5kW system will be initially sufficient for approximately 90% of industrial applications. 
 
Table 2.3 PROMETHEUS 5-year forecasts 
 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 Total 
PROMETHEUS 1.5kW PRIMA 
Unit Sales 5 25 35 50 85 200 
PROMETHEUS 1.5kW PRIMA 
Sales Revenues €4,500,000 €22,500,000 €31,500,000 €45,000,000 €76,500,000 €180,000,000 
APL 1.5kW ns laser Unit Sales 5 25 35 50 85 200 
APL 1.5kW ns 
Sales Revenues €2,100,000 €10,500,000 €14,700,000 €21,000,000 €35,700,000 €84,000,000 
PHOT optical fibres Unit Sales 5 25 35 50 85 200 
PHOT optical fibres Sales Revenues €75,000 €375,000 €525,000 €750,000 €1,275,000 €3,000,000 
HOLO-OR DOE 
Unit Sales 5 25 35 50 85 200 
HOLO-OR DOE 
Sales Revenues €215,000 €1,075,000 €1,505,000 €2,150,000 €3,655,000 €8,600,000 
FRAUNHOFER DLIP optics Unit Sales 5 25 35 50 85 200 
FRAUNHOFER DLIP optics 
Sales Revenues €300,000 €1,500,000 €2,100,000 €3,000,000 €5,100,000 €12,000,000 
VISUM inspection system Unit Sales 5 25 35 50 85 200 
VISUM inspection system Sales 
Revenues €350,000 €1,750,000 €2,450,000 €3,500,000 €5,950,000 €14,000,000 
 
€7,540,000 €37,700,000 €52,780,000 €75,400,000 €128,180,000 €301,600,000 Annual Totals 
 
Overall, all of the partners of the consortium will benefit from being part of a larger pan-European cross disciplinary 
collaboration. The outputs will have a direct implication on their ongoing business and open up considerable opportunities 
for future activities. The consortium has been carefully recruited to deliver all of the skills and competencies necessary to 
deliver the PROMETHEUS technology. Whilst the direct exploitation through commercial sales of the PROMETHEUS 
system is highlighted above, each partner has additional specific benefits outlined below. 
Impact for European Industry and SMEs 
Participation in the PROMETHEUS project will strengthen the competitiveness and growth potential of both the LE’s (APL, 
JJVC, MAIER, ARCELIK, FCA through CRF) and the SME’s (PHOT, HOLO-OR and VISUM) of the consortium. Each individual 
partner has identified their prospective benefits; 
APL: Andritz Powerlase Ltd are a leading laser manufacturer, specialising in high power ultra-short pulse Q-switched diode 
pumped lasers. The PROMETHEUS project is a significant development opportunity for APL, whereby they will be able to 
develop world leading ns and ps laser capability delivering three high power systems, namely 1.5kW, 2.4kW and a 3.2kW 
system. The project additionally opens up significant business opportunities into new market sectors for APL and 
technically builds on previous work relating to DLIP developments that align perfectly to APL’s future laser offerings. APL 
will generate cumulative sales revenues from 2024-2028 inclusive of €84 million directly, yielding approximately  €21 
million of gross profits. APL will seek to sell their high-power lasers to other suppliers maximising their commercial return. 
 
47 
HOLO-OR: Holo-or are global leaders in the development and manufacture of diffractive optic elements and micro- optical 
elements. The PROMETHEUS project enables HOLO -OR to expand their current DOE offerings into the rapidly growing 
ultra-short pulse laser market. HOLO-OR have identified that this sector is strategic to their growth and will use the project 
to develop core ultra-short pulse DOE systems for beam splitting, beam shaping and M2 enhancement. Sales of the PRIMA 
integrated system will generate additional cumulative sales revenues of €8.6 million with gross profit projections of €2.6 
million. HOLO-OR will additionally seek to sell their DOE’s to other markets and users. 
VISUM: VISUM will generate cumulative sales revenues of €14 million as a result of the project and secure €4.06 million  
of gross profit. VISUM will seek to explore the commercial exploitation of their system within other surface texturing 
markets including the semiconductor industry. Additionally, VISUM will explore the opportunity of supplying its existing 
inspection technologies into some of the end user companies. 
PHOT: PHOT will generate cumulative sales of €3 million and secure gross profits of €750k. 
PRIMA: PRIMA is a major beneficiary of the PROMETHEUS project. PRIMA will benefit by commercialising the first high 
power, ultra-high throughput DLIP system and enjoy first to  market advantage. The technology will exhibit substantial 
differentiation in the market place and will enable PRIMA to conservatively sell 200 units by 2028. PRIMA will generate 
€180 million of cumulative revenues and gross profits of €45 million. Through the PROMETHEUS project, PRIMA will secure 
market share and raise their profile within the surface texturing market. PRIMA will additionally explore the potential of 
selling the PROMETHEUS system as a post processing laser surface polishing technology for their additive manufacturing 
division. 
JJVC: JJVV are one of the world’s largest consumer goods manufacturers generating $13.6 billion of revenues within this 
sector last year. JJVC have identified a packaging challenge within this market sector. The proposed PROMETHEUS surface 
texturing will save JJVC and associated Johnson and Johnson companies an estimated €25 million p.a. in reduced product 
losses and the potential for 4% increased sales revenues estimated at €440 million 
p.a. Additionally, the packaging solution delivered will enable JJVC and group companies to deliver on their corporate and 
social responsibilities for recyclable packaging. 
ARCELIK: ARCELIK are one of Europe’s largest consumer durable goods, home appliances and consumer electronics 
manufacturers. ARCELIK will apply the ultra-high-speed surface texturing technology to deliver superior energy efficient 
products. The novel dishwasher products will enhance energy efficiencies and lead to additional sales revenues of €78.9 
million p.a from 2026. The enhanced heat exchangers developed for the rapidly growing heat pump enabled tumble dryers 
will secure annual revenues of €840 million p.a from 2026. ARCELIK will act as one of the first end user case studies to be 
taken to large scale market. 
MAIER: MAIER are European leaders in the decoration of plastic parts and manufacturer of complex injection mouldings 
for the automotive industry. The c ost-effective laser surface texturing developed within the PROMETHEUS  project will 
deliver MAIER a highly differentiated self-cleaning/easy clean product. The PROMETHEUS technology will enable MAIER to 
secure an addition 6% sale from 2026, securing up to €24 million additional sales revenues per annum. 
Impact on Research Institutions 
CRF (Fiat Chrysler Automobiles): CRF are the research centre for the Fiat Chrysler Automobile group of companies. CRF 
will benefit from PROMETHEUS directly by developing their internal expertise in the areas of industrial scale processing 
of ultra-short pulse laser surface texturing for a range of automotive applications. CRF will develop the technologies and 
then apply them into the wider FCA group. The piston cylinder liner application will reduce emissions from petrol powered 
(and future alternative ICE fuels) by over 1.1%. The application of the surface texturing to high strength aluminium hot 
press components will deliver cost effective, robust defect free parts enabling significant weight reduction in all vehicles. 
MTC: MTC are the UK’s leading high value manufacturing catapult. The organisation has established a world class non -
conventional machining division. PROMETHEUS will enable MTC to extend this capab ility and combine the knowledge 
gained with that developed within the SHARK project that they lead. MTC will seek to further develop end user cases 
working predominantly with their extensive blue-chip membership base. 
  
 
48 
FRAUNHOFER: the focus is on high application-oriented technical solutions, starting with a state-of-the-art 
knowledge and ending with high performant systems, developed through the experience in laser technology and surface 
texturing. FRAUNHOFER will benefit from the PROMETHEUS project by in creasing their world leading DLIP knowledge 
base and by extending their commercial contract development offerings. Additionally, FRAUNHOFER will explore whether 
they will create a spin out company to exploit the DLIP optics manufacture. 
AIMEN: AIMEN is a membership based not for profit RTO with a strong background in laser processing and control systems 
development. The PROMETHEUS project will enable AIMEN to develop their expertise within both areas and to generate 
licence revenues for their developed control systems. 
TWI: TWI is one of Europe’s largest independent RTOs. The company has a division dedicated to laser processing which 
has leading capability in laser welding technologies. More recently, TWI have developed additional competencies related 
to surface structuring and the use of ultra -short pulse lasers. PROMETHEUS will enable TWI to work with world class 
technology development where they will focus on industrial application development. 
 
2.1.5.1 Improving Innovation Capacity and Integration of New Knowledge 
 
The PROMETHEUS project will improve the innovation capacity of the participants and generate new knowledge that they 
can directly benefit from. The project focuses on high power ultra -short pulse laser developments and the  associated 
optics development. In addition, the emphasis on solving application-based case studies which meet the needs of the EU 
and the wider global community. The participants are comprised of research -focussed organisations, engineering 
excellence and industrial organisations. By working together within an open innovation framework, the participants will 
all benefit from the knowledge, equipment base and expertise in a synergistic manner. 
 
2.1.6 Barriers to Achieving Expected Impact 
The consortium has considered any likely barriers tha t might exist to achieving the expected technical and commercial  
impacts as outlined by the call text. One potential barrier that has been identified is the lack of common standards and 
measurements for surface textures. This could cause a reluctance to uptake and use of the PROMETHEUS  technologies. 
The planned mitigation is the knowledge of surface analysis that is to be created during the project and beyond. 
  
 
49 
2.2. Measures to maximise impact 
 
a) Dissemination and exploitation of results 
 
2.2.1 Draft Plan for the dissemination and exploitation of Projects results (PDER). 
The PROMETHEUS PDER is a strategic document for all the beneficiaries aimed at two main issues: 
1) Protection (Intellectual Property Strategy) - Data, knowledge and information and Contractual mechanisms (e.g. 
Non-disclosure agreements, trade secrets etc.). 
2) Dissemination and Exploitation - Research activities, Commercial exploitation activities, Standardization, Skills and 
educational training and Policy making; 
The PDER will have clear objectives - specific to the consortium, to the technology and to the target markets and will 
clearly define both how the research results will be implemented and how they will impact on the market, on future 
developments and policy making. The initial PDER will focus on the following: 
• The needs that PROMETHEUS responds to. 
• How PROMETHEUS addresses these needs and is better than existing solutions. 
• What new knowledge (results) PROMETHEUS project will generate. 
• Who will use these results both internally and externally to the PROMETHEUS consortium. 
• Quantification of the benefits delivered. 
• How will other stakeholders like scientific community, general public and policy makers be informed about the 
generated results. 
Within the PROMETHEUS project itself, the following deliverables associated with the PDER will be achieved: 
• Initial Plan for the Dissemination of Results. Month 12 
• Interim Plan for the Dissemination and Exploitation of Results. Month 24 
• Final Plan for the Exploitation of Results. Month 48 
The planned management structures and procedures are outlined in Section 3 and will be part of the PROMETHEUS 
consortium agreement to be signed by all of the consortium members. This cover: Governance; Policies; Systems; 
Structures; Operational processes; Risk management and defines who will be involved in the exploitation and 
dissemination activities and how they will be managed. The Dissemination and Exploitation of the results will be based on 
the PROMETHEUS PDER. Each of the consortium partners have agreed that the PDER will form the basis of the 
dissemination and exploitation of the PROMETHEUS results both during the project and post-project which will cover: 
• The Post Project Structure – How our partners will work. Def initions of products and services that will be offered. 
Long-term aims and objectives of the partnership. SWOT analysis of the partnership. 
• Commercialization Plan – PROMETHEUS will move the technology towards TRL 6 (Technology validated in relevant  
environment). A post-project plan on how to commercialize the project results will be included (TRL 7 to 9). 
• Market Analysis – Target market and value, market segments, competitor profile, competitive strategy (Porter’s 
• Five Forces), end-user requirements and benefits. 
• Intellectual Property – How the intellectual property from the PROMETHEUS project will be managed (ownership, 
patent costs, access, licensing, etc.). Future R&I developments. 
• Funding requirements – Funding needs post-project. Potential sources of funds. Investment required and strategy for 
acquiring it. 
During the PROMETHEUS Project (TRL 4 -6): The specific exploitation activities to be undertaken within the project are 
described in detail in Work Package 9. 
Post-project (TRL 6+): PROMETHEUS will be primarily brought to market through the industrial partners to end - users in 
a range of end -users sectors FMCG (consumer health, white goods and automotive). The PROMETHEUS partners have 
already identified key areas where the results of the project will be directly used. 
  
 
50 
Table 2.4 Planned use of project results 
 
 
Planned use of project results 
 
Timetable for (commercial) use 
Enabling PROMETHEUS laser surface texturing at 
commercial processing rate. 
Demonstrated directly after the project and brought to 
market within 2 years 
High-power USP laser architectures with M2 beam 
quality ≤15 or spatial coherence >15% and coherence 
length equal to 3mm. 
 
Within 2 year Post-Project 
High-speed process and control optical inspection methods 
and control. 
 
Within 4 years Post-Project 
Industrial grade fibre cables that are able to transmit peak 
power densities above 5GW/cm2 over a minimum 
3m length. 
 
Within 2 years Post-Project 
Patents on relevant parts of surface texturing, 
optical/thermal control and in-line monitoring and 
control. 
3-5 years after first filing for IP protection during the project 
Use of developed technologies for further development 
work in national and European projects 
 
1-2 years after project depending on calls 
 
2.2.2. How proposed measures will help to achieve the expected impact of the project. 
The PROMETHEUS project will provide our consortium members with specific knowledge, technology and products that 
will enable them to further differentiate and strengthen our competitive position relative to global competitors. Strategic 
competitive developments will be achieved in the following key areas: 
• Direct economic business growth through exploitation of the PROMETHEUS technology, enabling further investment 
in capital and resources; thereby expanding the companies’ skill base, technology portfolio/production capacity. 
• New knowledge in the application of the PROMETHEUS technology, products and services; thereby enabling value -
added services and deeper integration within end-user R&D activities. 
• Protection of IP and development of own innovative products; enabling expansion and further exploitation. 
• Development of the activities towards higher value, sustainable and more profitable business growth. 
• Technical demonstrators for multiple end-user scenarios will show the capability of PROMETHEUS  
Each partner has identified specific competitive and economic benefits to their business resulting from: 
• Their specific activities within the supply chain which will lead to increased business growth, increased profits and 
new employee recruitment. 
• The commercial realisation of existing knowledge and production capabilities which will enable the industrial 
partners to expand production and invest in new manufacturing facilities. 
• The outputs of PROMETHEUS will be disseminated by the academic partners through conference attendance, 
publishing research papers and close integration with industrial partners including periods of time where 
postgraduate researchers will spend prolonged periods of time with the industrial partners. 
 
  
 
51 
2.2.3 Strategy for Knowledge Management and Protection 
PROMETHEUS consortium partners are expected to bring background IP to be developed and used in the project to 
develop the PROMETHEUS technology which will generate foreground IP. 
Background IP: The Background IP is outlined in the table below. During the project, access to background IP will be free 
to all other organisations. Access rights after the project will be under fair and reasonable conditions. To be defined in the 
Consortium Agreement. 
Table 2.5 Background IP brought to project 
 
Partner Background IP brought to project 
 
 
EWF 
Knowledge and know-how in the elaboration of education and training guidelines in welding, joining, 
and additive manufacturing technologies. Knowledge in the creation of new professional profiles and 
new competence units, both for Vocational Education and Training and Higher Education. 
 
 
APL 
1. Laser architecture and design concepts of a q-switched laser at high repetition rates and average 
power above 1kW. 
2. High power short pulse YAG amplifier architectures. 
3. High power short pulse fibre amplifier architectures. 
4. IEnLIP, Indirectly Enhanced Laser Interference Patterning. 
 
HOLO-OR Designs of Diffractive optical components for beam splitting and shaping , Unique concept and design 
of M2 transformation system based on diffractive components 
 
VISUM Knowledge and know-how on laser diffractometry, optics monitoring and user interfaces for in- line 
monitoring devices. 
PHOT 
 
Knowledge on fiber development 
PRIMA 
Expertise in laser processes and mechatronics. Know how in machine design and control and high-
power lasers. 
JJVC 
No formal background IP, but will bring confidential know-how and information on JJVC products and 
processes 
ARCELIK 
 
Knowledge and expertise about white goods manufacturing 
 
MAIER 
Knowledge and expertise about thermoplastics injection molding and chrome-plating technology. 
MAIER will also bring its expertise about automotive sector requirements 
 
CRF 
 
Knowledge on automotive piston liner performance 
 
MTC 
 
Knowledge on surface texture relationship to functionality and the laser parameter processing 
FRAUNHOFER 
 
No patent will be shared for the execution of the project 
AIMEN 
 
Hardware based image processing, real time data fusion and laser process control 
TWI 
 
No background IP will be brought to the project 
IRIS Knowledge and know-how on laser diffractometry, optics monitoring and user interfaces for in- line 
monitoring devices. 
EW InnoSlab q-switched laser oscillator and InnoSlab amplifier for laser system with high repetition rates 
and high average power 
 
  
 
52 
Foreground IP: The Foreground IP is outlined in the table below. Patent protection will be sought if appropriate 
otherwise internal company know-how or trade secrets. Access rights to the technology after project will be under fair 
and reasonable conditions (To be defined in the Consortium Agreement). 
Table 2.6 Foreground IP generated in project 
 
Partner Foreground IP generated in project 
 
EWF 
 
Training materials. 
 
APL 
1. Effects of amplifier current, pulse repetition rate and beam quality refinement on spectral 
bandwidth, spatial coherence and coherent length of the emitted beam. 
2. Effects of amplifier temperature distribution on average power, pulse energy, pulse shape, 
spectral width and beam coherence. 
 
HOLO-OR 
System for M2 transformation of high power ps laser input into a line with M2<5 in the 
narrow axis, Unique beams splitters to generate DLIP patterns with high efficiency (2, 3 and 4 
beam splitters based on sub-aperture approach or another novel concept). 
 
VISUM On-line and in-line monitoring device for the inspection of nano-textures using laser 
diffractometry 
 
PHOT Form of new fiber design based on hollow core fiber based on a single ring of anti-resonant 
elements (AREs) surrounding a central hollow core 
 
PRIMA New experience in ultrafast laser and relative applications, especially related to texturing and 
ablation processes 
 
JJVC 
JJVC will not generate any specific IP but will gather know-how on surface processing, and will 
require access to the developed technology for exploitation in the consumer health 
products sector 
 
ARCELIK New experience and know-how on surface texturing of core components within white goods 
 
MAIER After the project, MAIER would study the possibility of protecting the obtained results by a patent. 
 
CRF 
 
Knowledge on automotive piston liner laser texturing 
 
MTC Broader knowledge and know-how in relation to functional surface texturing and laser parameter 
processing. 
 
FRAUNHOFER 
 
Know-how for high-speed DLIP strategies 
 
AIMEN Image based and colour scatterometry system for high speed quality control of regular 
microstructured and nanostructured surfaces. IP to be further developed and licensed. 
 
TWI Broader knowledge and know-how in relation laser surface texturing 
IRIS On-line and in-line monitoring device for the inspection of nano-textures using laser 
diffractometry 
EW Thermal effects in oscillator and amplifier on pulse repetition rate and beam quality, spatial 
coherence and coherent length of the emitted beam. 
Throughout the project, all partners will continuously contribute to the identification of project results that may qualify 
for IP protection. When certain IP is identified to be attractive for the future business opportunities of the involved 
partners, the necessary steps are taken to acquire protection for that specific result/idea. 
For this, PROMETHEUS will implement a procedure of timely notifying consortium members and allowing each partner to 
reject publication of results or ideas by another partner, which would jeopardize potential value generation. The patenting 
procedure will be carried out according to the regulations and guidelines described in the Consortium Agreement. 
  
 
53 
b) Communication activities 
 
Communications activities represent a significant step towards achieving a wider awareness of PROMETHEUS 
Identifying and collaborating with potential users; identifying potential partners: End-users (including SMEs) who will be 
the potential customers for the technology will be an integral part of the PROMETHEUS development, with potential 
project exploitation partners will be engaged with when appropriate. 
Verification and Testing: Within the PROMETHEUS project, a production unit will be created at the MTC (built by PRIMA) 
that will used to demonstrate  the specific case studies in automotive, white goods and fast -moving consumer good, in-
line with the requirement of the end-users (JJVC, ARCELIK, MAIER and CRF) and validated against their specification and 
requirements (from WP1). Targeted potential customers will be invited to the demonstrations and they will be filmed for 
dissemination purposes. This will allow us to validate the technology in an ‘industry-like’ environment (TRL 6). 
Open Access – The Project Coordinator will implement an open access project portal to allow all the consortium members 
to store publications and widely communicate and disseminate project results. This portal will centralize all project -
related publications in a dedicated repository, together with automatically popu lated structured metadata. The portal 
will allow project administrators to check and validate the publication import, its metadata and license information. The 
portal will also support the development of a partner community and will include a scientific  profile for each project 
researchers, allowing them to join the global MyScienceWork community. Project visibility will be ensured through search 
engine optimization (SEO), in order to make sure that the project results are well referenced by traditional search engines 
like Google, Bing, Yahoo, Ask, etc. The communication activities will include medias such as the Horizon 2020 newsroom, 
the research*eu results magazine, the research*eu focus magazine and other EC publications as applicable. 
Measures for the communication of Knowledge & Results – The communication strategy (Table 2.7) have been designed 
to ensure that the commercial impact of the project is not endangered. Therefore, the project results to be communicated 
will split into: 
• Publicly available information that will be widely communicated 
• Confidential information which will not be communicated outside of the consortium. 
The communication activities will be outlined in the Consortium Agreement to be signed before project start. 
Communications will be undertaken throughout the duration of the project. In addition to communicating our knowledge 
and results to our potential end users, we also intend to share all the publicly communicable deliverables within the 
scientific and academic communities related to our end-users. 
This project is funded by one of the calls under the Photonics Public Private Partnership (PPP). All communication activities 
related to the project will acknowledge the context of the Photonics PPP, for example by sta ting that the project is an 
initiative of the Photonics Public Private Partnership. 
Specifically, for workshops, press releases, presentations etc, the EU emblem and Photonics21 logo will be displayed 
prominently together with the text "Photonics Public Private Partnership". The link www.photonics21.org will also be 
included. When communicating on Twitter or other social media about project activi ties, #Photonics will be included 
together with @Photonics21 and @PhotonicsEU. 
The project will make a press release when the project launches and also when the project has reached a significant 
milestone. The project will also provide a communication kit about the project (as a minimum a narrative text, 
photographs, slides possibly complemented by a video and any other suitable communication material, accompanied with 
copyright licences for the European Commission and for Photonics21). Th e narrative text will target a general audience 
and focus on the technical achievements as well as on the economical and societal benefits for the EU. This communication 
kit will be provided to the Commission at the mid-term of the project with updates at the end. 
Project communications such as project press 
releases, workshops announcements, websites, 
brochures will respect the principle of fair visibility for 
all partners. If the logo of any individual beneficiary is 
included, then the logos of all beneficiaries will  be 
included.   
Figure 34 Photonics Logo 

 
58 
 
Table 2.7 Communication strategy 
 
General communication activities 
 
PROMETHEUS Web- 
site 
 
A PROMETHEUS website will be created in the first year with the purpose to communicate up-to-
date information relating to the project. After the end of the project, the website will continue 
functioning, providing information about the project’s results and products. 
 
Marketing Materials 
 
During the project flyers and posters will be created presenting the project objective, impact 
and results when will be available. 
Newsletters will be issued and communicated to the partners networks. 
 
Video 
 
A project video will be produced and made publicly available via channels such as YouTube. 
Testimonials with best practices and success stories are considered to showcase the 
PROMETHEUS impact. 
 
Social Media 
 
Social media platforms such as Twitter/LinkedIn will be used as communication and 
dissemination channels, to communicate the project, to raise awareness about its impact and to 
create a community around it. 
 
Publications 
 
Press releases and articles text based on the project narrative text will be send to several 
publications based on the consortium network. The objective is to bring the project objectives, 
benefits and impact into the attention of a broader audience. 
 
Conferences,  
Events and 
 Trade Fairs 
Presentation posters/exhibition stands at major international academic conferences for the  
presentation of the project results and prototype demonstration to potential partners and end 
users. The international academic conferences will be identified with the  support of the project 
consortium. Events such as IIW International Conference, FORMNEXT Exhibition and Conference 
are aimed to be reached too. 
 
 
Interactions with 
related projects and 
initiatives 
Research activities related to the objectives of PROMETHEUS have been investigated in the 
preparation phase of the project to properly define the state of the art and mark sources that 
could provide useful information to PROMETHEUS. Such activities are at National, European or 
International level. More specifically, there are research projects funded by the  European 
Community under previous framework programmes that can provide useful input  for the 
technological background of PROMETHEUS. Most of the consortium members are currently 
involved in several EU or national funded projects and the existing liaisons will be used  for 
dissemination. 
 
Training 
 
Training activities as a part of an educational programme defining objectives, target audiences, 
training needs and skills. Undertaken as lectures at consortium meetings and distributed to the 
collaborating partners. 
 
Course material 
 
Course material resulting from the project will be gathered and used to be delivered in advanced 
university courses, in the form of web-based demos, as well as courses for companies. 
 
  
 
59 
The target audiences and communication activities appropriate to these audiences are shown below. A detailed analysis 
of the target groups and the optimal communication methods for each of these groups will be determined as a part of the 
PROMETHEUS plan for the dissemination and exploitation of results. 
Table 2.8 Dissemination plan 
 
Dissemination activity Main objective of Dissemination Target audience 
Public presentations 
(Web-site, social media 
activities, Video) 
Raise public awareness of the positive impacts 
resulting from EC funded projects and 
showcasing the benefits of PROMETHEUS 
project and its impact on the general audience 
(based on the narrative text). 
General Public Policy makers, Funding 
Agencies including EU & national digital 
agencies European Manufacturing SMEs 
and Mid- Caps Innovation platforms and 
clusters 
Scientific and Technical 
Publications 
To share with the scientific community the 
research results. Authorship of papers in 
relevant peer reviewed journals, promoting the 
scientific and technical results of the 
PROMETHEUS project inclusive of: Optics and 
Lasers in Engineering, Laser Systems, Laser 
Technik Journal, etc. 
SMEs and Mid-Caps from the relevant 
sectors: Photonics, Materials engineering, 
and Manufacturing Researchers and 
Academia 
Conferences, Events, 
Trade Fairs and 
Workshops 
To disclose PROMETHEUS results to support 
the commercialisation activities. 
European Manufacturing SMEs and Mid- 
Caps Innovation platforms and clusters 
Researchers and Academia 
Promotion to 
professional bodies, 
networks and trade 
associations 
To disclose the PROMETHEUS results to 
support the commercialisation activities across 
a wide industrial base. This will be aims at 
appropriate Professional bodies and 
associations, including: (AILU) Association of 
Industrial Laser Users; European Laser 
Association; Stuttgart Laser Technology Forum 
(SLT) 
Policy makers, Funding Agencies including 
EU & national digital agencies European 
Manufacturing SMEs and Mid- Caps 
Innovation platforms and 
clusters. 
Workshops 
To disseminate research results and 
technologies by the organisation of two 
workshops, one at midterm and one at end of 
the project, to let the scientific community 
know about advances with our project. The 
consortium will seek for opportunities to hold 
the workshops as side events of these main 
conferences to maximize the visibility of the 
project outcomes. 
Policy makers, Funding Agencies including 
EU & national digital agencies European 
Manufacturing SMEs and Mid- Caps 
Research and Academia representatives 
Public Day 
At the project’s mid-term, a public day event 
will be organised as part of the project 
workshop. Leading organisations and persons 
of the manufacturing industry will be invited. 
Current PROMETHEUS results will be presented 
and discussed with experts. 
Leading organisations of the 
manufacturing industry. 
Policy makers, Funding Agencies including 
EU & national digital agencies European 
Manufacturing SMEs and Mid- Caps 
Innovation platforms and clusters 
Interactions with related 
projects and initiatives 
Effective information exchange between 
related projects. 
Participants in other related 
projects. 
Training To exchange knowledge to optimise 
collaboration between partners Consortium partner’s staff 
Course material Industrial/academic training. Researchers and Academia Industrial and 
academic students & professionals. 
 
 
60 
To enhance internal consortium communication or confidential communication with EC a private area (intranet) on the 
project website will be used for sharing management and financial related information, working documents, data, periodic 
reports and project deliverables which may be internally shared. Access to the project intranet will be limited to partners 
and the European Co mmission. While the coordinator (EWF) will take a leading role in data management, it will be the 
responsibility of all the partner organisations to ensure that the data they generate in PROMETHEUS is managed in 
accordance with and meets appropriate local legal and ethical standards. 
PROMETHEUS will generate and collect a range of data types as summarised in Table 2.9. Each data type will use an 
internationally accepted file format for its effective sharing, re -use and preservation. All data will be accompanied by 
appropriate data documentation which will include the names, labels, descriptions of variables, the explanations of any 
codes or classification schemes, as well as descriptions of derived data explaining how the data was processed, and what 
analyses or algorithms were used. 
 
Table 2.9 The types and nature of data to be generated in PROMETHEUS and the appropriate file formats 
 
Type of data Nature of data Selected file format (sharing/re-use/ 
preservation) 
 
Raw laboratory 
data 
Laboratory experiments, protocols, results 
Laboratory notebooks – a lab notebook policy 
will be implemented requiring meticulous lab 
book maintenance and regular sign off 
 
Qualitative 
data 
 
User requirement specifications, design 
specifications 
eXtensible Mark-up Language (XML) text 
according to an appropriate Document Type 
Definition (DTD) or schema (.xml) 
Quantitative 
tabular data 
with minimal 
metadata 
Analytical performance data, laboratory 
experimental data 
comma-separated values (CSV) file (.csv) or tab-
delimited file (.tab) 
 
Digital image 
data 
All images of project activities incl. consortium 
meetings, images of devices and device 
components, experimental data stills 
TIFF version 6 uncompressed (.tif) 
 
Digital video 
data 
PROMETHEUS news and media items MPEG-4 (.mp4) 
 
Documentation 
Draft and published manuscripts, project reports 
and deliverables documents etc. Portable Document Format (PDF) (.pdf) 
 
  
 
61 
3. Implementation
3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables  
The overall structure of the work plan. 
The work plan is set into 4 distinct phases: 
1. Phase 1: Determination of the end-user requirements and the specifications. 
• During this initial phase, the end -users will fully define their requirements in terms of component functionality and 
performance. These inputs will be used to determine the initial system design and technical requirements and 
specifications for the PROMETHEUS system. 
2. Phase 2: Consists of two elements in parallel: Development of system component parts and high-speed surface 
texturing that aims to determine the optimal surface texturing required to achieve each of the end- user’s 
requirements. 
• The individual system components: USP laser, fibre delivery, dif fractive optical elements (to split and shape the 
beams to optimise M2) and DLIP head will all be developed and optimised by the specific technology partners. There 
will be significant interactions between the partners during this phase to optimise  systems and to allow for 
transportation of these elements to ensure that all of the components are compatible with the USP laser. 
• In parallel with this work, TWI will undertake a series of experiments (design, texturing, testing against requirements 
and iteration) using existing equipment available within the consortium to achieve fundamental understanding of 
the optimal surface texturing required to achieve each of the end-user functional requirements. In addition, TWI will 
develop the 3D texturing approach. This  approach will reduce risk and time for developments and utilise existing 
equipment to maximum effect. 
• At the end of this phase, the consortium will have developed the optimal components for the integrated system and 
will also have identified the optimal texturing surfaces that this integrated system will need to produce to satisfy the 
end-users. 
3. Phase 3: PROMETHEUS system integration. 
• During this phase of the project, the individual tested components will be integrated into a final operation system by 
PRIMA – this system will be housed at MTC prior to Phase 4. Importantly this phase will overlap Phase 2 by 6 months, 
to enable PRIMA and the technology delivery companies to swap knowledge and achieve the optimal design by 
Month 24. 
4. Phase 4: End user case study demonstrations. 
• This will be led by MTC, who will utilise the integrated equipment and knowledge generated to achieve the optimal 
surface texturing effects (determined by TWI in WP4). The aim of this phase will be to achieve  the optimal 
functionality for the end-user challenges within an industrially relevant environment (TRL6). 
For the Work Packages descriptions, please refer to Part A of this document. 
  
Figure 35 PROMETHEUS Pert Chart 

 
62 
Gantt Chart 
 

 
60
3.2 Management structure, milestones and procedures Organisational structure and decision making 
The management structure is designed to be appropriate to the complexity and scale of this project, covering 
effective management of the consortium, innovation and IPR. The approach will ensure the achievement of the 
project objectives and maximise the project impact. The management structure is designed to achieve the following 
objectives that will enable our consortium to effectively perform all of the activities described in the WP8 ‘Project 
Management’: 
• Ensure that the project objectives are achieved in a timely manner; 
• Coordinate the activities of the consortium; 
• To put in-place robust decision making, quality control and conflict resolution mechanisms; 
• To monitor the project risks as a continuous activity and maintain the project risk log as well as the 
implementation of approved contingency actions; 
• Ensure that the financial and administrative co-ordination of the project is undertaken in a timely manner; 
• Provide a robust interface with the EC to ensure that project progress and achievements are visible to the EC. 
The partners’ previous extensive experience in large 
commercial and publicly funded projects will act as a strong 
foundation point for the management structure based  on 
the previous lessons learnt and the application of methods 
and tools that have been proven to be effective. 
The management structure is based on, and fully - 
consistent, with the Consortium Agreement that the 
partners have agreed and will sign prior to the 
commencement of the project. The consortium outlines the 
access rights to pre -existing background know -how and 
protection and access rights to for eground knowledge 
created in the project. 
The management structure and the accountabilities within 
the structure are shown in Figure 35. 
Figure 36 PROMETHEUS Management Structure 
• The Project Coordinator: Eurico Assunção (EWF) who is responsible for all aspects of the interface between the 
project and the EC. Eurico is the Deputy Director of the EWF and has a Diploma of Mechanical Engineering 
(Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon) and PhD in laser welding from Cranfield University. Eurico is an experienced 
Coordinator; he has coordinated four recent EC projects in this area of critical importance to the European 
welding industry; TailorWeld (FP7), FlexiFab (FP7), Weldaprime (FP7) and LASIMM (H2020). 
• The Project Manager: Luisa Coutinho (EWF) is responsible for the technical implementation of the project under 
the direction of the Steering Committee. Professor Luisa Coutinho is the Executive Director and has been involved 
in the management of European Funded projects since FP4. 
The decision-making bodies 
The project Steering Committee: This is the governing level, top -decision making body in PROMETHEUS. Partners 
will vote on all major decisions within the project. This is composed of one representative per participant organisation 
chaired by Eurico Assunção (EWF), the project coordinator. The Steering Committee will be responsible for the 
strategic orientation of the project. Each partner will have one vote. 
• Program of activities, budget and financial allocations will be decided by qualified majority. 
• Entrance of new contractors and sub-contractors, measures towards defaulting partners up to exclusion will be 
decided by unanimous decision 
• Arbitration of all decisions of the Management Committee will be decided by qualified majority. 
The Management Committee: This will manage the project at the operational level to ensure that the technical 
direction is fully aligned with the overall innovation and commercial aims. The man agement committee will 
coordinate the scientific/technical work at the Work Package level by the WP leaders, and coordination of reporting 
tasks, financial and administrative management, provision of logistics for consortium operations, etc. 

 
61 
The Management Committee consists of the work package (WP) leaders and the Coordinator. It is anticipated that 
the majority of technical matters will be decided at this level. The Management Committee will propose important 
strategic decisions to the Steering Committee where appropriate and will implement decisions taken by the Steering 
Committee. 
The Management Committee is chaired by the Project Manager and consists of the WP leader partners who will be 
responsible for: 
• Implementing the technical orientations decided by the Steering Committee 
• Preparation of the programme of activities 
• Preparation of budgets and their allocations 
• Coordinating activities and synchronising developments with other relevant projects 
• Arbitrating on deadlock situations occurring in the work packages 
Decisions within the Management Committee will be taken upon simple majority. The Management Committee will 
meet every three months via teleconferencing and link call meetings and hold a fac e-to-face meeting at least every 
six months. Whenever possible, these meetings will take place in the premises of partners to take this opportunity  
to visit them. It is envisaged that major project meetings will be held throughout the life of the project. Table 3.1 
details the proposed meeting locations. 
Table 3.1 Proposed meeting locations. 
 
Month Location Purpose 
M1 EWF, Portugal Project kick-off meeting 
M6 FRAUNHOFER, Germany First Progress review meeting – Presentation of DLIP to partners. 
M12 APL, UK Second Progress review meeting – Presentation of USPs to partners. 
M18 TWI, UK Mid-term project meeting – Presentation of laser patterning. 
M24 PRIMA, Italy Third Progress review meeting. 
M30 MTC, UK Fourth Progress review meeting. 
M36 On-line Fifth Progress review meeting – Discussion of equipment integration 
M42 On-line  Sixth Progress review meeting – Presentation of demonstrator 
M48 MTC, UK Final project meeting – Final presentation of demonstrator. 
 
The Support Team 
The Support Team will be in charge of the administrative work and of the coordination of the logistics within the 
project. The Support Team will be provided by EWF and will consist of an experienced Project Manager and advice 
and support from other members of staff with relevant specific skills and knowledge. The support team will be 
responsible for the administrative management including: 
• Archiving all project related documents; 
• Providing and updating a list of performance indicators to objectively assess the status of the project according to 
the EC Grant Agreement (deliverables, milestones, person-month and budget consumption, planning and action 
lists); 
• Establishing and maintaining financial records; 
• Providing a web-based secured virtual workspace and communication environment to support efficient remote 
collaboration; 
• Supporting the organisation of the Management Committee meetings; 
• Managing reservation of teleconference and web-conference services; 
• Coordinating the logistics with the organisation responsible for the meeting; 
• Assisting the Coordinator in the financial management with the collection of information from the partners, the 
consolidation of periodic contractual reports, the monitoring of expenses against budget allocations and the 
consolidation of financial summary sheets; 
 
62 
The Work Package Management Teams are composed of the task leaders in the relevant work package. Task 
leaders have been selected among the key scientists involved in the project. Each WP Management Te am is 
responsible for: 
• The execution of the overall technical objectives of its WP during the project lifetime 
• The proper implementation of the quality plan and the risk management plan within each WP and of changes 
according to the project needs and practices. 
• The exploitation plans of the WP and corresponding agreements between participants. 
The WP Management Teams report and interact with the Management Committee through 
• Progress reports 
• Proposals on programme 
• Proposals on task and budget allocation 
Each WP will have task leaders responsible for the technical activities within their tasks. They will be responsible for 
reporting on the progress of their work packages to the WP leader, who will report the global WP progress to the 
Management Committee and the Project Manager. The specific WP leaders are identified in Table 3.2. 
Table 3.2 WP leaders 
WP Title Leader 
1 Specification and user requirements Luisa Coutinho, EWF 
2 USP laser development Keming Du, EdgeWave 
3 High speed laser surface texturing - system Tim Kunze, FRAUNHOFER 
4 High speed USP laser surface texturing - Process development Andy Wilson, TWI 
5 Process monitoring and control Nerea Otero Ramudo, AIMEN 
6 USP/DLIP integration and testing Eleonora Marino, PRIMA 
7 End user case study demonstrations Mohammad Antar, MTC 
8 Project Management Luisa Coutinho, EWF 
9 Commercial Exploitation and Dissemination Luisa Coutinho, EWF 
Project Management 
The Project Coordinator, EWF, has appointed Luisa Coutinho as the Project Manager. The Project Manager will be 
responsible for the overall coordination of the project as well as for administrative and financial matters. The Project 
Manager’s responsibilities will be to: 
• Maintain two-way communications with the EC Project Officer; 
• Handle and distribute the funds in accordance with the Consortium Agreement; 
• Maintain and manage updates of contractual documents; 
• Maintain regular contact with the partner organisations; 
• Organise and chair the Management Committee and the Steering Committee meetings; 
• Ensure overall project coordination with the aim of meeting the project schedule and objectives; 
• Continuously monitor project risk, maintain risk log and implement contingency actions; 
• Undertake quality management in line with the management plans. 
Scientific and technical management 
The scientific and technical coordination of the project will be done through: 
• Monitoring of the work being carried out in the work packages and the risks associated with them and 
undertaking the necessary changes to the work plan as a result of those findings; 
• Maintaining and following-up the work plan, monitoring of project progress, identifying and handling trouble 
shooting of technical and organisational problems, co-ordinating technical meetings; 
• Preparing the required reports and (if and when required) proposals for changes in the project strategy for 
implementation or adoption by the decision-making bodies; 
• Evaluating the scientific content of deliverables and publications produced by the project, including assessing 
progress reports, new work plan and deliverables; 
• Establishing relationships with other relevant EU funded projects with a view to exchange results whenever 
appropriate. 
  
 
63 
Conflict Resolution 
If there is an un -resolved conflict, either technical or otherwise even after going through the above process then the 
responsibility of resolving the issue will lie with the Management Committee. The resolution of issues can be dealt with 
in the following manner: 
1 The Management Committee will first hear a report from the Project Manager (and WP leader and Task leader, if 
related to a technical dispute) 
2 A response by all partners including a discussion to establish possible ways forward. 
3 The chairperson shall summarise the proposed options 
4 A vote shall be held on each idea with each partner having one vote 
5 The most popular option should be motioned (majority voting) 
6 In the event of a tie, Project Coordinator shall cast the deciding vote on the tied option. 
Where a majority decision cannot be reached, external arbitration may also be used, either through consultation with the 
EC or a third-party arbitrator. 
Project Progress Monitoring against Milestones 
The overall Work Plan structure (Section 3) developed consists of distinct, achievable Work Packages that all complete at 
milestone control points (Go/No-go decision points). The control points allow us to assess the technical progress of the 
individual Work Packages against the specific objectives associated with these Work Packages and implement any 
necessary corrective actions. Within the individual Work Packages themselves, each task leader & WP leader will 
continually review status of each task’s achievement against its objectives. 
The Project Manager will prepare a Miles tone Report to the Management Committee. The content is expected to 
summarise the planned against actual achievements of the previous project stage. It will also cover any major issues and 
risk strategies implemented and will define the risk management strategy for the next stage. This report will be blended 
together from the Technical Progress Reports and will be utilised by the Project Board to endorse the next project stage. 
The list of Milestones associated with the project is included in Part A of this document. 
Exploitation Management 
Exploitation Management of the project will be led by an Exploitation Manager, Eurico Assunção, Deputy Director at EWF. 
As Deputy Director of EWF, Dr. Assunção counts with extensive experience in project collaborations, having acted as 
project coordinator in 6 collaborative projects (from the FP7 and H2020 programmes) in the past 8 years - one of which, 
LASIMM, belonging to the Factories of the Future topic. Eurico’ main role will be to act as a champion for the project and 
its exploitation. He has been nominated for this role by the consortium as he shows strong leadership and has excellent 
cross function and cross-sectorial knowledge and skills. 
The Exploitation Manager will be responsible for the coordination of all the projects exploitation activities. In order to 
achieve this, a Sub -Committee (chaired by this Exploitation Manager) will be selected from both the industrial and the 
research partners to address both the market issues and the technical issues associated with the commercialisation of the 
project results. The Sub -Committee will determine how best to protect and exploit the IPR that is expected to be 
generated throughout the project whilst still ensuring that the dissemination activities  are undertaken effectively to 
support the commercial exploitation of the project results. 
The specific tasks that will be undertaken as a part of the Exploitation Management of the project will include: 
• Collation of relevant market; 
• Identification of market conditions and drivers; 
• Identification of internal and external opportunities; 
• SWOT analysis of markets and technological issues; 
• Ensuring that all the IPR is suitably protected and in a timely manner; 
• Identify suitable exploitation routes for project results; 
• Watching brief on technology, markets, legislation and standards; 
• Responsible for building and maintaining the Plan for the Dissemination and Exploitation of the results (the 
Business Plan); 
• Ensure confidentiality is protected during dissemination and exploitation; 
• Undertake 6-monthly meetings (chaired by the Exploitation Manager) – These meeting will coincide with the 
regular 6-monthly the face-to-face Management Committees and will form an integral part of these meetings. 
 
64 
Critical Risks 
The Work Plan structure has been developed to consist of discrete, achievable Work Packages that are completed at 
milestone control points. The control points will allow us to assess the progress of the individual Work  Packages against 
the specific objectives associated and implement any necessary corrective actions. Within the individual Work Packages 
themselves, each task participant, the Project Coordinator & WP Leader will continually review status of each task’s 
achievement against its objectives. This approach allows us to continuously monitor progress and  evaluate the risk 
throughout the duration of the project and implement any corrective actions without wasted resource. 
The PROMETHEUS consortium has been recruited and developed with risk minimisation in mind from the outset. The 
project has already been de -risked substantially by the nature of the world leading expertise, knowledge and facilities 
contained within the consortium. The partners generally have  a critical mass of expertise such that in the event of that 
any individual is incapacitated or unable to work on the project for any length of time, a skilled colleague could substitute 
without any significant loss of momentum or overall knowledge of the area. In addition, the project also has inherent 
contingencies in that the partners have substantial facilities available to them. In the unlikely event that any equipment 
becomes compromised or damaged, alternative similar facilities can be utilised from within a given partner or more widely 
within the consortium. 
The consortium has identified the key technical, commercial and environmental risks. For each identified risk, an 
assessment has been made including: the likelihood that the risk will occur, the impact of the risk occurring, the risk 
mitigation and contingency actions that will be implemented (e.g. prevention, reduction, acceptance or contingency). 
The risks identified at the proposal stage will be included, monitored and updated in the project risk register implemented 
by the Project Coordinator. The most important risks and corresponding mitigation measures are included in Part A of this 
document. 
 
Risk Management 
PROMETHEUS will undertake detailed and continuing project risk management actions. The Risk Management Plan for the 
project will: 
• Identify those risks which might impact the project, 
• Provide the basis for plans for containment of risks, 
• Ensure that there is an agreed mitigation plan for each risk, 
• Identify appropriate contingencies for high risks, 
• Establish and monitor a procedure for reviewing and evaluating risks on an on-going basis, adding new risks, 
removing obsolete risks and updating current risks, and 
• Report the status of current risks. 
A periodic review by the  Management committee of the risks identified, and any necessary contingency plans will take 
place: an outline Risk Management Plan is provided in the table below. All risks will be assessed as part of the periodic 
review of the Risk Management Plan by the Management committee. 
 
65
3.3 Consortium as a whole 
The PROMETHEUS consortium includes all of the critical parts of the value chain for the demonstration of novel Pulsed 
Rapid ultra-short laser surface texturing technology. The consortium consists of 1 5 partners (Figure 36) – 5 Research 
providers and 9 industrial partners and a leading European Trade Association (EWF, the Coordinators) from 8 different 
member states with a balanced geographical distribution across Europe. 
The partners have carefully been selected amongst the leading groups in Europe to have complementary technical 
capabilities, infrastructure and know-how to reach the ambitious technological goals of the project. In addition, the 
consortium has the capability to credibly exploit the project results both in short -term and in making plans for the long -
term exploitation. PROMETHEUS beneficiaries have already collaborated in other European projects and have thus shown 
their capability of efficient project collaboration and effectively generating, protecting/exploiting IP. 
The capabilities of the different partners – 6 research institutes, 3 SMEs and 5 large industry partners – are well 
equilibrated to complement each other in all major activities which en sures that there is no unnecessary overlap of 
activities as clarified in the WP descriptions. In Table 3.3, next, is shown that the activities of the PROMETHEUS project 
cover the full value chain and for each major part of that chain the activity is suppor ted by a variety of partners ranging 
from academic to industry participation. 
 
Figure 37 PROMETHEUS consortium partners and their EU locations. 
 
Table 3.3 Activity matrix indicating balanced distribution of partners over major activity across the value chain 
 
  
USP laser 
architectures 
Direct Laser 
Interference 
Patterning 
(DLIP) 
 
Laser beam 
manipulation 
Process 
monitoring and 
control 
 
Fibres Delivery 
Integration, 
demonstration 
and end user 
requirements 
Research 
Institutes FRAUNHOFER FRAUNHOFER FRAUNHOFER 
TWI; MTC 
AIMEN 
TWI 
TWI; MTC 
PHOT CRF; MTC; TWI 
SMEs EW EW HOLO-OR, EW VISUM, IRIS, 
EW 
EW HOLO-OR 
IRIS 
LEs APL APL APL APL APL PRIMA; JJVC 
ARCELIK; MAIER 
 
  

 
66 
Industrial involvement 
The consortium includes the full value chain of laser surface engineering to deliver a project of this nature. It includes 
world-leading organisation in terms of: USP lasers, DLIP, optical and thermal control, fibres, monitoring, equipment 
design and build and large multi-national end-users in three key sectors of automotive, white good and fast-moving 
consumer goods as well as leading research institutes. 
The EWF is the Project Coordinator and provide a wide range of skills and knowledge to validate the project results. 
The dissemination and ex ploitation of the results is managed by the EWF who will further disseminate the results 
and products into relevant sectors. 
We believe the PROMETHEUS consortium is scientifically excellent with a strong industrial focus, our partners 
complement each other, and the project provides them an opportunity to work together to deliver a robust solution, 
enabling the further adoption of laser surface engineering solution into European high value manufacturing. The 
SMEs involved will specifically benefit from this project as it will help them in building unique capabilities in the 
surface engineering area which can be exploited in different domains beyond this project. The interaction with large 
end users and other technology providers will also give them significant business opportunities for growth. 
The industrial partners in the PROMETHEUS project are all well respected multi -national companies with major 
market share and SMEs: 
• APL – A cutting edge company developing short pulsed laser products into EU and global markets. 
• HOLO-OR – Manufactures DOEs and micro-optical elements for various applications globally. 
• VISUM – Optical engineering company specialising in commercialization of equipment for the national, EU and 
global markets for food & packaging, pharmaceutical and chemical applications. 
• PRIMA – A division of the Prima Industrie group, a worldwide leader in the field of industrial laser systems with a 
comprehensive product range in laser systems and sources. 
• JJVC – A global company for consumer goods with 134k employees and annual revenues of €66bn. 
• ARCELIK – A major global company manufacturing consumer durable goods, home appliances and consumer 
electronics with a turnover of €4.69bn and 27,000 employees. 
• MAIER – Are a part of the prestigious Mondragon Corporation with global sales > 13,200m€ and 82,000 
employees. 
• EW – medium size company developing, producing and marketing advanced short pulse and ultra-short pulse lasers 
worldwide 
 
Other Countries: All beneficiaries of the PROMETHEUS consortium are automatically eligible for EU funding. 
3.4. Resources to be committed 
The resources committed to the project are included in Part A of this document and shown in the Table 3.4. A detailed 
breakdown of other direct costs is provided. The person -months (PM) of effort for each partner, by WP is shown 
below in Table 3.4, with WP Leaders’ PM months shown in bold. 
Sub-contracting justification: The resources committed are shown in the tables below. A detailed breakdown of 
other direct costs is provided where these are > 15% of a participant’s direct labour. Within the Action the 
following tasks will be sub-contracted, with the justification contracts is shown in Section 4.2: 
• MTC will sub-contact €33,000 of work for the Network Patent Analysis in Task 9.3. 
These sub-contracts will be undertaken in-line with Article 13 of the General Model Grant Agreement (GMGA). We 
can confirm that there is NO known conflict of interest and that there will be NO subcontracting between 
beneficiaries or to affiliates. NO Coordination tasks will be subcontracted. All of the procedures that will be followed 
for sub-contractors will ensure best-value for money through achieving the optimal price -quality ratio. Each of the 
sub-contract agreements to be put in place by the beneficiaries will ensure that confidentially is maintained and that 
liabilities for any damages will be covered. 
Responsibility for the sub -contracted work will lie solely with the beneficiaries sub -contracting the tasks. The 
beneficiaries have the rights to commercially exploit all of the results generated by the sub-contractors. 
  
 
67 
Table 3.4 ‘Other direct cost’ items (travel, equipment, infrastructure, goods and services) 
 
1. EWF Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 19,000 Project meetings (€7,000) 
Dissemination and standardization events in Europe (physical and on-line participation) (€7,000) 
Dissemination and standardization events outside Europe (physical and on-line participation) (€5,000) 
Other goods and 
services 
1,500 
4,500 
Dissemination materials  
Audit costs 
Total 25,000  
 
2. APL Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 948.18 Travel to meetings  
Other goods and 1,192.49  
services    
Total 2140,67  
 
3.HOLO-OR Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 9,500 Travel to project meetings (€4,000); Hotels & subsistence while attending work meetings (2 -3 days per 
meeting) (€2,000); Travel to support assembly of M2 transformation module on -site (2 visits assumed) 
(€2,000); Hotels & subsistence while integrating M2 transformation module on site (5 days per visit X 2 
visits) (€1,500). 
Equipment 24,879 GD Nano imprint lythography machine for development of high-efficiency M2 transformation DOE. 
Other goods 
services 
and 3,200 Photoresist for DOE process development 4 units 1 litre Shipley/ KamLab (€2,400); Developer Shipley MIF 
developer 4 litres (€800) 
Custom Cylindrical Lenses for M2 transformation system (€12,000); High accuracy translation + tip/tilt mounts 
M2 transformation system (€10,000); General off the shelf opto mechanics (cage system parts, holders, posts, 
standard lenses ) for M2 transformation system (€5,000); UV fused silica raw material for DOE fabrication  
(€2,500). 
Mechano-Optical design (GilGash Engineering) (€5,000); Mechano-Optical assembly (€15,000); High LDT 
anti reflective coating services for diffractive components (€12,000). 
  29,500 
   
32,000 
Total 99,079  
 
4. VISUM Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 1,129.13 Travel costs for attending project meetings  
Other goods and 
services 
- - 
Total 1,129.13
4.1 IRIS Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 3,500 Travel costs to 4 project meetings 2 people or dissemination events or other partners visits for capturing 
specifications. 
Other goods and 
services 
10,078.53 Mechanical parts (for the integration of the sensors, transport, insurance and shipment costs, 
mechanical modelling software licenses. Servers and computing systems. 
Total 13,578.53  
 
5. PHOT Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 3,000 
 
Attendance at project meetings, 2 days per meeting. 
Equipment 5,000 
 
Drawing tower and Preform Analyser (auto financed cost). 
Other goods & 
services 
79,700 
3,000 
Small equipment (various) – €17,500. Silica Tubes/Rods – €31,000. Gas €31,200 
Audit costs 
Total 90,700 
 
 
 
6. PRIMA Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 20,000 Travel costs to project meetings, dissemination events, other partners visits for trials. 
Equipment 50,000 Optics unit components, laser source integration auxiliaries. 
Other goods & 
services 
30,000 
 
60, 000 
materials, specimens preparation, electrical consumables, characterization consumables, machine 
consumables, sensors, industrial connectors, mounting components, financial audit. 
Materials and new platform resulting from the redesign of the machine (new panel, mounting components 
and mirrors for FSO solution) 
Total 160,000  
 
7. JJVC Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 11,000 Project Meetings 
Other goods & 
services 
141,250 21,970 - Materials and audit costs  
119,280 - Researchers recruited from temporary work agency (the temporary work agency is not carrying out 
directly any of the tasks of the action) – nature and content of the provision: research and development 
activities  
Total 152,250  
 
 
8. ARCELIK Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 30,000 Attendance for two people at all half yearly project meeting. 
Other goods and 
services 
21,000 Standard Dish Washer load for energy tests (€4,000); standard detergent and rinse for dish washer tests 
(€500); AFM tips for characterization tests (€2,500); Demonstrators dishwashers (€2,000); Demonstrators 
dryer (€2,000); Stainless steel sheets (€1,000); Al sheets (€1,000); 3D printing polymers (€8,000) 
Total 51,000  
 
 
9. Maier Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 8,000 Travel to consortium and WP meetings 
 
68 
Other goods and 
services 
33,000 Raw material: ABS thermoplastic, chemical raw materials for chrome plating, chrome plating frames and 
validation tests 
Total 41,000  
 
 
10. CRF Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 15,000 Kick Off meeting (€1,500); 6M meeting (€1,500); 12 M meeting (€1,500); Mid Term meeting (€1,500); 24 M 
meeting (€1,500); 30 M meeting (€1,500); Final meeting (€1,500); EALA conference attendance (€1,500); 
Technical WP8 meeting 1 (€1,500); Technical WP8 meeting 2 (€1,500) 
Other goods and 17,000 Cylinder block for testing (€5,000); Consumable for engine block wear and friction testing in off condition 
services    (without combustion) (€2,000); Monocylinder test set-up for friction testing in off condition (€5,000); 
    Consumable for wear and friction test on tool die for hot stamping operation (€5,000) 
    Cylinder block for testing (€5,000); Sample tools for die stamping texturing by different tool material (e.g. 
   10,000 sleipner, …) (€5,000) 
   15,000 SW simulation and CAE reverse engineering for laser process specifications 
   1,500 Audit 
   30,000 Cylinder block machining and preparation for test (€15,000); Simplified tool die sample for tribological 
    and friction test preparation (€15,000). 
   5,000 IP patent on automotive application 
Total 93,500  
 
12. FRAUNHOFER Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 20,000 Travel to biannual project meetings (€10,000), Technical meetings and travels for integration (€5,000), 
dissemination activities (€5,000) 
Other goods and 83,000 Laser consumables (optics, mirrors, etc.) and scanner, prototype housing, electronics for system 
services    control, etc. 
   8,000 Audit (€4,000); 2 open access publications (€4,000) 
Total 111,000  
 
13. AIMEN Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 17,000 Travels to biannual project meetings (9,000), technical meetings and travels for integration (5,000), 
dissemination activities (3,000) 
Other goods and 
services 
107,000 
 
 
 
8,600 
3,500 
Laser consumables for laser processing tests and calibration tests: €22,000 (optics, gasses, cooling fluid and 
filters). Components for the inspection prototype: €85,000 (optomechanics, goniometrer mounts, illumination 
LED bars and rings, CCD array, optics, Electronics (signal conditioner, trigg line generator, delay lines, ADC, DAQ, 
FPGAs, GPGPUs, microcontroller) 
Final CFS (€2,500); Organization of one project meeting (€2,500); Shipment (€2,000); Conference fees for 
dissemination (€1,600_)). 
RCWA software license  
Total 136,100  
 
14. TWI Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 25,000 Annual consortium meetings (€20,000); Dissemination - 2 conferences (€5,000) 
Equipment 16,000 2.5D scanner & software 
Other goods and 
services 
20,000 
5,000 
Cover slides, optics, sheet materials, formed materials Audit 
Total 66,000  
 
15. EW  Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 8,000 Travel to 8 project meetings 
Other goods and 
services 
139,382.83 
 
 
Optics handling and cleaning material (€5,000) 
Laser Controller including monitoring and control electronics (€10,000) 
Cooling System (€11,750) 
Beam shaping, guiding and compression optics (€20,000) 
Seed and pumping Diodes and Fiber units (€70,000) 
Beam manipulation and control units (€15,000) 
Other low-cost materials and equipment (connectors, sensors, electronics, small supplies) (€7,632.83) 
Total 147,382.83 
 
 
 
16. IRIS  Cost (€) Justification  
Travel 8,000 
 
7,000 
Travel costs for attending 8 project meetings 2 people, dissemination events, other partners visits for 
capturing specifications. 
Travel costs to 4 project meetings 2 people or dissemination events or other partners visits for capturing 
specifications. 
Other goods and 
services 
51,792.34 
 
 
 
 
 
22,000 
Cost of the optical components and test rig (including objectives, light sources, camera, lenses, etc.), 
mechanical parts (for the integration of the prototype, transport, insurance and shipment costs for samples 
and for 1 prototype (UV for nanoscale and visible for microscale). 
Optical modelling software licenses. Financial Audit. 
Cost of IPR protection, dissemination material and events registration fees, and publication fees for open 
access journal. 
Mechanical parts (for the integration of the sensors, transport, insurance and shipment costs (10,000€), 
mechanical modelling software licenses (5,000€). Servers and computing systems. (7,000€) 
Total 88,792.34  
  
 
69 
4. Members of the consortium
4.1 Participants (applicants) 
1 - EWF 
 
 
 
 
Organisation Short Name: EWF 
Website: www.ewf.be 
 
 
Organisation Type: Assoc. 
Organisation Size: <20 
Organisation Description: 
EWF is a European organisation established as an international non-profit association that acts as a representative 
of manufacturing community in Europe, providing the exchange of scientific and technical information and 
contributing to the removal of technical barriers. EWF, was created in 1992 by all the welding institutes of the 
European Community with the aim of updating and harmonisation training and education in the field of welding 
technology. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EWF – 31 European Countries 
IIW – 16 Non-European Countries 
TOTAL: 45 Countries 
The EWF network is composed by 31 European + 16 Non-European members – the national Welding Institutes. 
The EWF Members are organizations active in Training, in RTD and transfer of technology and cover a wide range 
of industrial sectors in their own member networks, including sectors as automotive, aerospace, metalworking, 
naval, appliances, etc. EWF also manages a harmonized system for training, qualification and certification of 
personnel, with more than 250.000 diplomas awarded and covering different levels of qualification and different 
industrial requirements. 
 
 
 

 
70 
Current EWF membership includes approximately 50,000 companies where around 75% are SMEs (approximately 
37,500). Through its members, EWF aims to address technological issues and needs, improving quality and 
stimulating competitiveness, by disseminating the opportunities created by the results of EU-funded projects to 
potential users and by training professionals in the use of the emerging technologies such as AM. EWF provides 
world class, European focussed, value -added products and support services to its members and their 
communities in the field of joining, welding and related technologies on an international basis. EWF is also 
member of EFFRA and one of the founding organisation s of the Joining Sub -Platform to ManuFuture. This will 
ensure a wider dissemination of the project results to the relevant stakeholders. EWF is also a liaison member to 
CEN and ISO with involvement in standardization activities at the European and International level. Particularly 
relevant is the fact that EWF is a liaison member of CEN/TC 438 and ISO/TC 261- Additive Manufacturing as well 
as CEN/TC 121 – Welding and allied processes. 
EWF Overview: 
− Manages a Qualification, Training and Certification system of personnel in Joining, Welding, AM and 
Cutting 
− 30 European + 15 non-European Countries 
− 41 Authorized National Bodies, responsible for national implementation of the EWF System. 
− 683 Authorized Training Bodies, schools, centres, institutes using EWF Course Guidelines and awarding 
EWF diplomas. 
− Network of Large Companies and SMEs (50.000+) 
− Harmonized VET system for all European countries, from EQF level 2 to 7 
− Implementation of the system in Higher Education institutions (EWF Level 6/7) 
− Certification of Companies 
− 300.000+ Diplomas 
− Dissemination of results 
− 23 years of working and collaborating with industry in the field of manufacturing processes and additive 
manufacturing 
− EWF is also a liaison member to CEN and ISO with involvement in standardization activities at the 
European and International level. 
− Member of the Additive Manufacturing and the Joining Platform to ManuFuture 
Role in the Project: 
EWF as the project coordinator will provide the resources required to ensure that the project remains on track 
and within budget while aiming to achieve all objectives set out. 
Eurico Assunção is the overall project coordinator, and Luisa Coutinho is appointed as the Project Manager. EWF 
will liaise with all work package leaders during the project. 
EWF will also lead the exploitation and dissemination activities covering WP9. 
Key Personnel: 
 Title: 
Dr. 
First Name: 
Eurico 
Surname/Family Name: 
Assunção 
Gender: 
M 
Job Title: 
Deputy Director 
 
 Background / Education: 
Diploma of Mechanical Engineering (Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon); 
Doctor of Philosophy (Cranfield University, Cranfield). 
European/International Welding Engineer Diploma 
Post-Graduation Business Administration and Management 
 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Dr. Eurico Assunção has participated in several European projects heavily supporting 
the management in their delivery. Eurico is also an Invited Assistant Professor at 
Instituto Superior Técnico since 2013. Eurico will also bring his technological knowledge 
of LASERS Manufacturing to the project, as well as his relevant training experience. 
 
 
 
71 
 
 Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Dr. Luísa Coutinho F Executive Director 
 
 Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Professor Luisa Coutinho, EWF’s Executive Director, has 35 years of experience in 
welding and joining, and heavily supports the development and implementation 
strategy, promotional activities, financial reporting, execution of projects and their 
management. Luisa is a Full Professor of Mechanical Engineering (Instituto Superior 
Técnico, Lisbon, since 1994), Visiting Professor at Cranfield University, UK and Member 
of the Investments Committee of the venture capital company ASK, since 2003. 
Having published more than 100 papers and books, Professor Coutinho’s expertise has 
been recognized internationally through several awards. Among them we point out: 
− Adams Memorial Membership Award, American Welding Society, 1994. 
− International Meritorious Award – AWS-American Welding Society, 2000. 
− The Jim Kape Memorial Medal, the Institute of Metal Finishing, Aluminium Finishing Group, 2000. 
− Honorary Professorship from Timisoara University, Romania, 2003. 
− Honorary Professorship from Galati University, Romania, 2004. 
− Brooker Medal, TWI-The Welding Institute, UK, 2004. 
− Honorary Fellowship Award from The Welding Institute, UK, 2015. 
 
Relevant Publications / Presentation Events: 
1. L. Quintino, E. Assunção, "Conduction Laser Welding”: Part 1 Developments In Established Laser Welding 
Technologies, Handbook of laser welding technologies, Edited by S Katayama, Osaka University, Japan, 
Woodhead Publishing Series in Electronic and Optical Materials n. 41, ISBN 0 85709 264 2, DOI: 
10.1533/9780857098771.1.139, June 2013. 
2. Eurico Assunção, Stewart Williams, David Yapp, “Interaction Time and Beam Diameter Effects on the 
Conduction Mode Limit”, Optics and Lasers i n Engineering; vol. 50, n. 6, pp. 823 -828, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.optlaseng.2012.02.001, June 2012. 
3. Quintino L., Fernandes I., Assunção E., “European Harmonised System for Training a nd Qualification of 
Adhesive Bonding Personnel”, Applied Adhesion Science, vol. 1, n.1, DOI: 10.1186/2196 -4351-1-2, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/2196-4351-1-2, 2013. 
4. Silva F.F., Quintino L., Assunção E., Vaz F., “Metal Additive Manufacturing: a Review of the Existing 
Technology Advances”, submitted on Materials & Design, 2015. 
5.  E. Assunção, L. Quintino, “Tailoring Laser Welding for Complex Applications”, 68th IIW Annual Assembly, Doc. 
IV-1238-15, Helsinki, Finland, June/July 2015 
Relevant Projects / Activities: (Please list 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of 
this proposal) 
1. H2020 – “ModuLase” – Development and Pilot Line Validation of a Modular re-configurable Laser Process 
Head 
2. FP7 – “TailorWeld” – Energy Distribution for Laser Welding 
3. H2020 – “Radicle” – Real-Time dynamic control system for laser welding 
Infrastructure/Equipment: 
EWF are an Association and therefore do not directly have relevant equipment. 
 
 
72 
2 - APL 
 
 
 
 
Organisation Short Name: APL 
Website: http://www.powerlase- 
photonics.com 
Organisation Type: Large 
Organisation Size: 40 in 
Powerlase, 26,000 in 
Andritz 
Organisation Description: 
Andritz Powerlase was a spin-off from Imperial College London, with initial technology that enabled emission of 
short yet high energy ns pulses from a YAG based resonator at high repetition rates and thus high average powers. 
The initial products emitting only up to 200W were quickly accepted by the semiconductor industry for very 
specific photonic applications on semiconductor and multi -layer flat panel display applications. Powerlase 
maintained its global advantage in combining emission of high pulse energy with high average power, through 
nearly the last 2 decades. 
In 2013 Powerlase broke the barrier of 1kW average power of an industrial grade short pulsed laser. This enabled 
Powerlase to engage the market of heavy industry manufacturing with processes relating to pre -weld coating 
removal, surface property modification on steel and aluminium, architecture glass edge deletion and laser 
cleaning. In 2014 Powerlase released the Polaris product, the only industrial picosecond laser in the global market 
achieving 0.28 mJ pulse energy at 200W average power. In 2016, Andritz AG acquired 50% of Powerlase, as a 
multitude of its sheet metal manufacturing processes have a strong dependency on the company’s laser products. 
Today, Powerlase is expanding with a fast pace, continuing to develop short pulsed laser products of world leading 
performance in average power. 
Role in the Project: 
APL will be leading WP2 – Ultrashort Pulse Laser Development. During WP2, APL will research and develop the 
required architecture to achieve pulse durations below 10ns at powers above 1kW and pulse repetition rates 
above 500Hz. This development will also include: research improved beam quality, research into modular laser 
amplification architectures that can work with interference patterning and diffractive optics i n the processing 
tool. 
APL will support in WP3 High-speed laser surface texturing system development, WP4 High-speed laser surface 
texturing process development, WP5 Process Monitoring and Control, WP6 USP/DLIP Integration and Testing and 
WP7 – End User case study demonstration. 
Key Personnel: 
 Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name:   Gender: Job Title: 
Dr. Ioannis Metsios M Senior Applications Development Manager 
 
 Background / Education: 
Professional Project Manager 
Chartered Engineer 
Member of the Welding Institute 
Member of the Physics Institute 
PhD: Laser Induced Forward Transfer of II-VI semiconductors 
MSc: Tuning of CO2 laser for optimum interaction with glass 
BEng: Acoustical surface roughness and porosity characterisation 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Ioannis Metsios (male) holds a Masters in Laser applications and a PhD in Physics of photonics materials from 
the University of Hull. Dr. Metsios has 11 years of experience in managing the development of industrial laser 
products and industrial laser applications, and 8 years of experience in managing multiple R&D projects for 
collaborative partnerships. After joining Powerlase Photonics Ltd in January 2014, Dr. Metsios managed various 
company activities, including collaborative projects, development programs, production, operations, supply 
chain issues, key clients and business administrative tasks of several company transitions. Ioannis is currently 
appointed the role of Senior Applications Development Manager, with the key duty of developing new global 
 

 
73 
 scale market opportunities for the company’s products in technically challenging applications, based on current 
and future industry needs. 
 
 
 
Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Dr. Simon Chard M Principal Laser 
Engineer 
Background / Education: 
PhD: Q-Switched slab lasers and high power slab amplifiers 
8 years of experience in short and ultra-short pulse laser engineering 
Developed picosecond lasers with global leading power capability 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Simon Chard completed his PhD at Imperial College in 2010, where his thesis was on Q- 
switched slab lasers and high power slab amplifiers. After working as a laser engineer at 
Cobolt, Dr. Chard joined Powerlase Photonics in 2012, where he led the engineering of Powerlase's new slab 
amplifier based laser platform, culminating in the release of the Polaris series of picosecond lasers. 
Dr. Chard is the most qualif ied technical leader for this development. He has several publications in high 
performance, short pulse, and high average power lasers. Simon Chard led the development of the Polaris 
picosecond laser which became an undisputable reference point for industrial picosecond lasers worldwide. 
 Title: 
Dr. 
First Name: 
DeChang 
Surname/Family Name: 
Dai 
Gender: 
M 
Job Title: 
Applications 
Engineer 
 
 Background / Education: 
PhD: Laser spectroscopy of rare earth solids 
17 years of experience in scientific and industrial laser development and 
experimentation 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
DeChang Dai after completing his PhD, has gained work experience in several world 
class research laboratories, like Institute der Max-Planck-Society in Berlin, FOM- 
Institute for Plasma Physics in Utrecht, University of Hong Kong, Durham University and the Photon Science 
Institute at the University of Manchester. DeChang has in -depth knowledge of ultra -short pulse laser 
architecture and amplifying media technology an d characterisation. DeChang Dai joined Powerlase in 
December 2016 where he developed numerous new laser manufacturing processes. DeChang has standardised 
manufacturing methodologies that achieve world leading speed and performance materials processing using 
Powerlase high power q-switched lasers. 
 
Relevant Publications / Presentation Events: (Please list 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content) 
1. Rigel i1600E, The only ns laser source that emits 1.6kW average power with ns pulses and pulse energy 
beyond 100 mJ. 
2. I.Metsios et. al., High pulse energy, kW average power nanosecond lasers enable breakthrough in rapid 
coating removal, SPIE Photon ics Conference: High -Power Laser Materials Processing: Applications, 
Diagnostics, and Systems VII, Feb 2018, DOI: 10.1117/12.2290200 
3. Polaris i200, Picosecond pulsed laser source with 10 ps pulse duration, 0.28 mJ pulse energy and 200 W 
average power. 
4. S. Chard et. al., 100W class green 10ps 280μJ laser with M2<1.4 using Z-slab amplifier, SPIE Photonics 
Conference paper, lasers, March 2016, DOI: 10.1117/12.2210986 
5.  Procyon g2000, only visible laser radiation industrial source that can emit 2kW average power. Emission is 
in ns pulses. 
Relevant Projects / Activities: (Please list 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of 
this proposal) 
 
 
74 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. CLEANSE, Funded by InnovateUK, Project No. 102178, 2-year collaborative project on integrating a high 
average power pulsed UV laser in a station to process hard surface coatings. 
2. DLIP, Funded by TSB, Project no. 131564, 1-year collaborative feasibility study project in the use of an 800W 
ns pulsed laser for interference surface patterning at high speed. 
3. Privately funded cross-continent collaborative feasibility study on marine vessel surface structuring for 
improving coating adhesion. 
4. ARIES proposal to ECSEL innovation actions for a 3-year collaborative development of an EUV light source 
utilising a low M2 ns pulsed laser with power >1kW. 
5. Privately funded, cross continent collaborative development in fastest possible process of removing 
aerospace paints for refurbishing. 
Infrastructure/Equipment: 
The company facilities house a 
4000sq.ft cleanroom laboratory for 
assembly, alignment and test of the 
sensitive laser components into 
reliable industrial systems. The 
laboratories are equipped with 3 
building booths for amplifier and 
sensitive optic al modules, 5 laser 
assembly booths, ultrasonic 
component cleaning equipment and 8 
laser alignment and testing bays. 
Each alignment bay is fully equipped 
with beam characterisation equipment, 
electrical testing and monitoring, 
computer monitoring and controls. 
Other major technical equipment are 5 
beam divergence measurement units, 
0.01nm resolution spectrometer, 3 
beam profilers and a number and range 
of laser power meters and fast 
photodiodes, fibre splicing equipment. 
All engineers have a minimum of 5 and 
average of 10 year of experience with 
high energy pulsed laser systems. The 
company is the only one globally that can 
offer off-the-shelf proven and tested q- 
switched product at 1.6kW NIR, 400W 
green and 180W UV emission. Sources 
available in the applications test lab for 
initial feasibility studies are 1.6kW NIR, 
60ns, 200W green, 50ns and 80W UV, 
50ns, accompanied by optical microscopy 
and optical phase profilometry 
equipment. 
 
 
75 
3 - HOLO-OR 
 
 
 
Organisation Short Name: HOLO-OR 
Website: www.holoor.co.il 
Organisation Type: SME 
Organisation Size: 24 employees 
Organisation Description: 
HOLO-OR Ltd. (Est. 1989) develops, designs and 
manufactures diffractive optical elements (DOEs) and 
micro-optical elements. HOLO -OR’s DOEs are being used 
for various applications mainly involving high precision and 
high-powered lasers. Our main customers are laser system 
integrators in industries such as material p rocessing, 
medical/aesthetical, metrology and many more. 
During the last three decades, HOLO -OR has gained 
considerable expertise in the design, simulation and 
manufacture of DOEs, using its in -house IP software and 
tools. Our products portfolio includes (but is not limited to): 
beam splitters, beam shapers (top -hat), 
homogenizers/diffusers,     multi-focal,     beam   samplers, 
vortex lenses and more. These elements can be fabricated for any wavelength, from DUV to Far IR. 
In addition to individual elements, HOLO-OR also designs and assembles refractive-diffractive modules and sub- 
systems. 
HOLO-OR works with hundreds of customers and 8 active distributors on 4 continents. We work with most of the 
largest laser companies in USA, Germany, China, South-Korea and Japan. 
Diffractive Optical Design: 
 
HOLO-OR has gained over the last three decades vast experience in designing and developing diffractive optical 
elements (DOE). Using our in-house software and algorithms, our designs reach top quality in terms of 
efficiency, uniformity and other required parameters. 
HOLO-OR now holds an extensive multifunctional design database, enabling us to give fast solutions for many 
different applications and customer needs. 
Integrating manufacturing tolerances into the diffractive design enables us to predict the actual performance 
after production. 
 
Optical Systems design: 
 
In addition to the mentioned diffractive designs, HOLO-OR also designs both refractive optical systems and hybrid 
refractive/diffractive systems. 
 
Special R&D projects and tailored optics: 
 
HOLO-OR has a broad experience in managing R&D projects in different areas and applications, for example 
diffractive eyeglasses, endoscopy, material processing, metrology, as well as aesthetical and medical 
applications. Our multidisciplinary R&D team is highly qualified to meet any challenge in the field of optics and 
computer science. 

 
76 
 
 
DOE Beam Shaper optical setup 
 
Unique energy distribution achieved using DOE 
 
Multi-Spot 1x6 propagation in dispersive medium 
Role in the Project: 
HOLO-OR will focus on development on diffractive optical element beam splitting and M2 Transformation 
Systems in WP2. HOLO-OR will also support in WP3 High-speed laser surface texturing system development, WP4 
High-speed laser surface texturing process development, WP5 Process Monitoring and Control, WP6 USP/DLIP 
Integration and Testing and WP7 – End User case study demonstration. 
Key Personnel: 
 
Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Mr Israel Grossinger Male CEO 
Background / Education: 
B.Eng Electrical Engineering from Ben-Gurion University 
 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Founder and President of HOLO-OR, one of the pioneers in the commercialization of 
diffractive optical elements and is a (co)inventor on 46 patents. Israel has 29 years of 
experience in developing diffractive optical elements 
 
 
Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Mr Valery Sherman Male Process Engineer 
Background / Education: 
M.Sc. in Physics , Novosibirsk State University. 
Physicist – Process engineer 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Valery has worked at HOLO-OR since 2000, as a process engineer is diffractive optics technology. He is co- 
author of 15 articles and 4 inventions and has 45 years of experience in research. 
 
 Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title:  
 

 
77 
 Mr Lior Shachaf Male Head of New Applications  
 Background / Education: 
B.Sc in Physics from Technion – Isreal Institute of Technology, Haifa (2002) 
M.Sc. in BioPhysics from Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, (2012) 
MBA From Technion – Isreal Institute of Technology, Haifa (2008) 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Lior works in the field of diffractive optics at HOLO-OR since 2013, through multiple 
positions: 
• Head of new applications (current) 
• R&D manager 
• Project manager and system engineer. 
Lior has more than 10 years of experience with research and development of multidisciplinary optical systems 
in academy and industry. Published 3 articles in the field of diffractive optics for material processing (see 
above). 
 
 
Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Mr Natan Kaplan Male R&D Manager 
Background / Education: 
M.Sc. Applied Physics from Tel Aviv University (2009) 
 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Natan Kaplan is HOLO-OR’s R&D manager working at HOLO-OR since 2015, first as a 
process development student, then application engineer and currently R&D 
manager. Natan specialises in subwavelength structures for antireflective purposes, 
he has more than 9 years of experience in micro-optics development, from both 
design and process si des. Co-author of two articles in the laser material processing field and several white 
papers on diffractive optics. 
Relevant Publications / Presentation Events: 
1. Sundqvist, J., Kaplan, A. F. H., Shachaf, L., Brodsky, A., Kong, C., Blackburn, J., … Quintino, L. (2016). Numerical 
optimization approaches of single-pulse conduction laser welding by beam shape tailoring. Optics and Lasers 
in Engineering, 79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optlaseng.2015.12.001 
2. Sundqvist, J., Kaplan, A. F. H., Shachaf, L., & Kong, C. (2017). Analytical heat conduction modelling for shaped 
laser beams. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 247. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2017.04.011 
3. Zibner, F., Fornaroli, C., Holtkamp, J., Shachaf, L., Kaplan, N., & Gillner, A. (2017). High -precision laser 
microcutting and laser microdrilling using diffractive beam -splitting and high -precision flexible beam 
alignment. In Proceedings of SPIE - The International Society for Optical Engineering (Vol. 10377). 
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2270948 
4. Diffractive Optics: How ultrashort laser pulses influence beam-shaping optics - 
https://www.laserfocusworld.com/articles/print/volume-53/issue-09/features/diffractive-optics-how- 
ultrashort-laser-pulses-influence-beam-shaping-optics.html 
5. http://holoor.co.il/Diffractive_optics_Applications/MaterialProcessing.htm 
Relevant Projects / Activities: 
1. TailorWeld - TAILORed Energy Distributions for Laser WELDing (EU - FP7 project, 2013-2016) 
http://www.tailorweld.eu/ 
2. UltraSurface - Ultra Dynamic Optical Systems for High Throughput Laser Surface Processing - (H2020 project, 
2016-2018) https://www.ultrasurface.eu/ 
3. LASHARE - Laser equipment ASsessment for High impAct innovation in the manufactuRing European industry 
(EU - FP7 project, 2013-2015) 
 
 
78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. EuroStars-MultiLas (Multibeam Laser Micro Drilling and Cutting. 2016-2017) https://www.eurostars- 
eureka.eu/project/id/9621 
5. http://holoor.co.il/Diffractive_optics_Solutions/LeanLine.php 
Infrastructure/Equipment: 
Equipment: 
• Photolithography: 
o Contact lithography – Mask Aligner 
o Direct Laser Writer & photomask preparation 
• Etching: 
o Reactive Ion Etching (RIE) – Fluoride and Chloride processes 
o Wet etching 
o Plasma Ashing 
• Measurements: 
o Stylus profiler 
o Optical microscopes 
o Lasers and light sources (UV/VIS/NIR/IR) 
o Power meters, Beam analysers 
o Large stock of unique Diffractive and Refractive UV-VIS-NIR-IR optics 
• Other: 
o Wafer dicing machine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
79 
4 - VISUM 
 
 
Organisation Short Name: VISUM 
Website: 
www.seeingnewdata.com 
Organisation Type: SME 
Organisation Size: 12 
employees 
Organisation Description 
VISUM ( www.seeingnewdata.com) is an optical engineering company from Dublin that specializes in the 
development and commercialization of Near Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS) -based portable and inline analyzers 
and measurement systems for process monitoring and quality control applications in the food &  packaging, 
pharmaceutical and chemical applications. The company was established in 2014 and currently employs 12 staff 
from its facilities in Nexus UCD (technology park at the University College Dublin campus). In 2016, the company 
launched the VISUMPalm (a handheld NIR measurement instrument) and has secured first sales. An integration 
platform (VisumNIR) for the inline version is currently under development in cooperation with early adopter 
clients from the food processing industry (dairy, meat and olive oil) and pharmaceutical industries. VISUM Ltd. is 
an SME Champion-awarded a Phase 1 and a subsequent Phase 2 Grant under H2020’s SME Instrument. Moreover, 
the company is involved in 3 more H2020 projects in which their main responsibilities is to develop monitoring 
on-line and in-line systems for different industries. 
The optical engineering and smart systems teams at VISUM Ltd. have specialized expertise in sensor integration, 
optical engineering, chemometrics, data analytic s, cloud infrastructures and data management systems, which 
fits perfectly with the requirements of the project. 
Role in the Project: 
VISUM will be contributing for the WP5 Process Monitoring and Control developing of an in-line monitoring unit, 
which addresses the development of the in-line quality control system for the different case studies. Moreover, 
will contribute on defining the optical technology suitable for nanometric surface features quality control. 
Developing a functional prototype s uitable for industrial settings use and testing and validating the new nano - 
metrology prototype surface functionalities and performance. Finally, transversal contributions will be given to 
the management team in terms of Exploitation and Dissemination aspects with the knowhow acquired during the 
project. 
Key Personnel: 
Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Dr. Timothy Kehoe Male Team Leader Optics 
Background  /  Education:  PhD in Engineering, University College Cork, Ireland- 
developed an IR photometric measurement system for thermal diffusivity in 
anisotropic materials. Masters in Optoelectronics, Queens University Belfast. Designed 
an Echelle spectrometer while based at Andor Technology Ltd. Worked at Tyndall 
National Institute, Cork, and Catalan Institute of Nanotechnology, Barcelona. 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: Tim is the Optic Technical Lead at VISUM 
Ltd. and he brings vast optical integration and device instrumentation expertise. He has 
expertise in developing diffractive optical and acousto-optical metrology techniques for 
nanotechnology applications, in particular for characterising of nanoscale structures fabricated by nanoimprint 
lithography and directed self-assembly. Other research activities: quantification of ordering in self-assembled 
structures by image analysis techniques and optical sensors using hydrogel materials. 

 
80 
 
Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Dr. Severine Philippe Female Optics Engineer 
Background / Education: graduated with a 1st class Hons. B.Sc. in Applied Sciences 
(Physics and Physics Technology) from Dublin Institute of Technology, Ireland, in 2002 
and received her PhD in Physics from Trinity College Dublin in 2007, for the study of 
polarisation effects in semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOA). She went on to work 
on the development and characterization of low noise SOAs, as well as THz generation 
by multimode lasers and their detection using four wave mixing in SOA, both in the 
Semiconductor Photonics Group, Trinity College Dublin, and the School of Electronic 
Engineering, Dublin City University. She previously worked as a R&D technician for the 
plastics industry and in quality control for electronic appliances. 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: She joined VISUM in 2014 as an optical engineer and is currently 
involved in projects including various microscopy techniques, planar waveguide technologies and MIR 
spectroscopy. 
 
Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Ms. Marie Callanan Female Project Manager 
Background / Education: Project Manager at Visum has an Electronic Engineering 
Degree from "Trinity College", Dublin, and a Masters in Business Administration from 
the European University Barcelona. Marie comes from an engineering background with 
more than 15 years of experience in monitoring and control. She specialised in 
modelling system dynamics of engineering processes with particular expertise in wind, 
fuel cell, space and environmental applications. Marie has led and participated in many 
R&D projects in the fields of energy, environment, materials development and process 
monitoring. She has managed projects funded under national and international 
programmers and has expertise in best practices in the European Framework Programme project management 
going back to FP5. 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: As a project manager Marie is adept at interpreting and 
communicating requirements, team building and risk management. 
 Title: 
Ms. 
First Name: 
Nikolina 
Surname/Family Name: 
Mikulcic 
Gender: 
Female 
Job Title: 
User Interface Designer 
 
 Background / Education: User Interface Designer. Nikolina comes from web design 
and development background with more than 15 years of experience in this field and 
she is an expert on UI/UX design strategy and front-end development (CSS/HTML). She 
studied graphic design and she started to learn web design due to her deeply 
interested for digital world. 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: Since joining VISUM in September 2016, 
she has been creating a new User Interface for the VISUM product lines. Prior to 
VISUM, she has an extensive experience in the online world, having worked in 
companies such as EuroArt93 – digital agency, BlueBOX IT, Biroval. She also was a founder of design studio In 
Love With Blue and she worked as Project Manager, UI/UX designer and front -end developer. She was leader 
numerous digital projects for different clients as Erste Bank, Unicredit Bank, Telenor Bank, Komb Bank, ZAMP 
etc. 
 
Relevant Publications / Presentation Events: (Please list 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content) 
1. Development and commercialisation of the VISUM instruments- NIR spectroscopy devices- in-pipe, handheld 
2. Publication in relation to Innovation Management: O. Mc Nerney, A. Stachowicz, P. Czuprynski, E. Philpott, D. 
Kolman, D. Martin, E. Herrmann (2010). Strategic Guide to Successful Use and Dissemination of the Results 
of Research and Development Projects. 1st edition, Steinbeis-Edition Stuttgart 2010. ISBN 978-3-941417-27- 
4 
3. On 08/02/2016, VISUM was awarded the Seal of Excellence form the European Commission 
 
 
81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Relevant Projects / Activities: (Please list 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of 
this proposal) 
1. LASER4SURF: Laser for mass production of functionalised metallic surfaces (Grant Agreement number: 
768636) VISUM Ltd. Is the responsible of WP3 to develop and in -line monitoring system for measuring and 
analysing nanotextures. 
2. Phase 1 SME Instrument: An IR-spectroscopy-based platform for the rapid integration and customisation of 
affordable, real -time monitoring solutions for the food and pharmaceutical industry (Grant Agreement 
number: 684767). 
3. Phase 2 SME Instrument: Cloud-enabled IR spectroscopy platform for the rapid integration and 
customisation of affordable, real-time chemical monitoring solutions for food and pharmaceutical industries 
(Grant Agreement number: 731043) 
4. PREVIEW- PREdictiVe system to recommend Injection mold sEtup in Wireless sensor networks. (Grant 
Agreement number: 636892). VISUM Ltd. is responsible for the development of the Data Acquisition System 
and in in developing the Signal Conditioning, its integration with the ARM main board, as well as 
implementing a prototype. 
5. OPTINANOPRO: Processing and control of novel nanomaterials in packaging, automotive and solar panel 
processing lines (Grant Agreement number 686116) VISUM Ltd. Has acted as a third party together with 
VISUM, developing the optical hardware and software part for the monitoring system. 
Infrastructure/Equipment: 
Spectroscopic Laboratory: equipped with several instruments, namely, an FTIR-ATR (Interspectrum), two UV- VIS 
(PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), one Extended-SWIR (StellarNet) and one NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as 
well as a SWIR Hyperspectral imager (Specim-Xenics). The associated staff are trained and skilled in chemometrics 
modelling by using a commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc n on-commercial 
chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes). 
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops: equipped with up-to-date hardware and tools: signal generators, 
wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development  kits for programming 
microcontrollers, CNC-milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD software 
[SolidWorks], among others. ZEEMAX 
software for the design of optical systems and design setup by means of advanced optical components and 
facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and related “opticalware”). 
On the picture on the left, we can see a VISUM Inline Device, fully developed by VISUM and ready for 
commercialise in order to insert inside in  side the production lines, to detect and analyse complex parameters. 
On the picture of the right, we can see the monitoring device developed in OptinanoPro Project, which can 
analyse the texture of the solar panels, together with the software developed at VISUM. 
 
 
82 
5 - PHOT 
 
 
 
Organisation Short Name: PHOT 
Website: www.photonics-bretagne.com 
Organisation Ty 
Organisation 
employees 
pe: RTO 
Size: 
 
 
<15 
Organisation Description: 
Photonics Bretagne is a Photonics Innovation Hub located in Lannion (Brittany, France) integrating a cluster 
supporting innovation in the field of Photonics and its applications and a research and technology organisation 
(RTO) expert in the development of specialty optical fibers and components (Product line Perfos). With brand 
new facilities inaugurated in 2017, the RTO of Photonics Bretagne offers a range of high quality specialty optical 
fibers (standard and custom): supercontin uum PCF fibers, nonlinear PCF fibers, airclad PCF fibers, polarization 
maintaining PCF fibers, endlessly single mode PCF fibers, suspended-core PCF fibers…The RTO also develop optical 
components such as capillaries, stress rods and fiber tapers. More precisely, Photonics Bretagne is currently 
working on projects that are directly linked to the objective of this proposal: Hollow-core fibers, Multicore Fiber, 
Passive and active fibers for next generation high-power Yb lasers. 
Role in Project: 
Photonics Bretagne will on a form of new fiber design during WP2. The first one will be an extension of current 
work performed internally. Specially designed hollow core fiber based on a single ring of anti-resonant elements 
(AREs) surrounding a central hollow core will be designed. 
Key Personnel: 
Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Dr Thierry TAUNAY M Technical Manager 
 
Background / Education: 
Thierry F. Taunay received a Ph.D. degree in Physics in 1997 from the University of Lille, France. He 
subsequently joined the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC, where he worked on fibre 
photosenstivity, fiber optic sensors, radiation effects on optical fibre waveguides and optical materials, and 
fundamental defect centers in glass. Since 2007 he is a member of technical staff at OFS Laboratory where his 
current research interests include design and processing of new transmission fibers and specialty fibers for 
high power fiber lasers. He has authored/co-authored more than 60 journal and conference papers. Thierry 
Taunay is a member of the Optical Society and served two terms as an associate editor of Optics Express 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Dr Taunay has extensive experience in manufacturing fiber for high power laser -based application. He 
pioneered a new type of fiber design tailored to prevent modal instability in narrow linewidth high power fiber 
amplifier that resulted in the successful demonstration of a 3.5 kW diffraction limited amplifier by Lincoln Labs 
scientists. His innovative fiber design solution led to the commercialization of the 2 kW+ all-fiber laser combiner 
with beam parameter of 2. 
Dr Taunay was also instrumental at OFS in the design and fabrication of MM and SM multicore fiber for SDM 
applications. His designs led to world record capacity transmission data rates presented in prestigious 
conferences such as OFC and ECOC. In this project Dr Taunay will coordinate and lead all aspects of fiber design 
and manufacturing and interact with partners. 
 Title: 
Dr 
First Name: 
Laurent 
Surname/Family Name: 
PROVINO 
Gender: 
M 
Job Title: 
Modeliing Research Engineer 
 
 Background / Education: 
Laurent Provino received the PhD Degree in "Sciences Pour l’Ingénieur" from the Université de Franche - 
Comté, France, in 2002. From 1998 to 2002, he has worked on parametric amplification, optical fibres, and 
continuum generation in microstructured optical fibres. After t wo years of Post -Doctoral positions at the 
Institut Fresnel (University of Marseille) and University of Science and Technology of Lille, he joined PERFOS in 
2005, as an Optical Fibre Modelling Engineer. His current activities are simulations and design of 
microstructured optical fibres for various applications. 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
 

 
83 
 Dr Provino has pioneered complex and extensive fiber modelling on non-linear propagation in highly non- 
linear fiber for the generation of supercontinuum fiber. For this project he will be responsible for all aspects 
of fiber design and modelling. 
 
 
 Title: 
Dr 
First Name: 
Achille 
Surname/Family Name: 
MONTEVILLE 
Gender: 
M 
Job Title: 
Fiber Draw Research Engineer 
 
 Background / Education: 
Achille Monteville received a PhD in materials chemistry from the University of Rennes in 1999. He was in 
charge of material research for optical fibre at Alcatel in Marcoussis in 2000 and at Highwave optical 
technologies from 2001 to 2002. Dr Monteville is currently Research Engineer for optical fibres at PERFOS. 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Since 2002 Dr Monteville has led all projects related to microstructure fiber. Through his leadership, Perfos 
now Photonics Bretagne achieved world recognition in the manufacture of highly efficient Supercontinuum 
lasers. His innovative preform manufacturing skills have led to the successful fabrication of complex PCF, rod 
type high power fiber and multicore fiber. Dr Monteville will direct all aspects of fiber draw and preform 
manufacturing. 
 
Relevant Publications / Presentation Events: 
1. https://www.photonics-bretagne.com/en/perfos-rto/products/ 
2. http://www.photonicsviews.com/french-photonics-park-dedicated-to-optical-fibers/ 
3. https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01151471 
4. http://spie.org/PW18L/conferencedetails/components-packaging-laser-systems?SSO=1 (Paper 10513-54) 
Relevant Projects / Activities: 
1. National PSPC 4F project: LMA fibers : http://www.cnop-france.org/pages/commissions/projet-4f/ 
2. National FUI Efflam project: Multicore fibers: https://www.photonics-bretagne.com/fr/2016/10/20/zoom- 
projet-collaboratif-efflam/ 
3. Regional NANF project: Hollow core fibers 
4. Regional project FEDER “Rég. Bretagne FEDER PROJETS DE RECHERCHE COLLABORATIVE 2016” : Flylight 
Infrastructure/Equipment: 
Photonics Bretagne houses all the relevant manufacturing tools to design and fabricated any kind of specialty 
fibers; In particular, Photonics Bretagne houses a fully automated SG Controls MCVD preform fabrication set up 
and a Optacore high temperature vapor phase delivery system for the fabrication of rare earth doped preform. 
In its brand new 150 m2 fours stories clean room draw tower facility, Photonics Bretagne houses a 12 metre high 
dual-sided fibre drawing tower which is suitable for a range of fibres. Preforms up to 55 mm in diameter can be 
drawn into fibre using a unique furnace design. The drawing tower is designed for the fabrication and coating of 
large diameter fibre, up to 1 mm as well as ribbon geometries, and forms part of our research into high power 
fibre lasers. moreover a dedicated 8 meters stretching draw tower is used for preform resizing as well capillaries 
and microstructured preforms (multicore and PCF) fabrication. In addition we also have complete post - 
processing and characterisation of silica fibre tools which include preform and fibre index profilers, fibre proof - 
testing and high-resolution OTDR as well as full line microscopic tools such as high resolution optical microscope 
and SEM electronic microscope. 
 
84 
6 - PRIMA 
 
 
 
Organisation Short Name: PRIMA 
Website: www.primapower.com 
 
Organisation Type: LE 
Organisation Size: 1670 
Organisation Description: 
Prima Power is the Machinery Division of the Prima Industrie group, a worldwide leader in the field of industrial laser systems 
and sheet metal working machines with years of experience in Photonics, Mechatronics and automation. Prima Power is 
among the four most prominent global specialists in sheet metal working technology, with a comprehensive product ra nge 
in laser systems and sources, punching, shearing, bending and automation for sheet metal industry. Moreover the product 
range has been developed towards greater flexibility and operating economy through versatility, high automation level and 
low energy and maintenance cost. It is market leader in laser systems for automotive, aerospace and energy markets. Today’s 
performance is backed by over 40 years of experience in the sector and well over 10,000 machines and systems installed in 
more than 70 countri es. Products and services are available through a worldwide sales and service network consisting  of 
Group units and distributors. Prima is a solid, international group listed to the Italian Stock Exchange since 1999. 
 
  
Prima Power Headquarters in Turin 
Role in the Project: 
Prima Power will lead WP6 USP/DLIP Integration and Testing. Prima will develop a system architecture that will 
be optimised with all the requirements and adaptations for integration of the newly developed USP las er head 
and the DLIP process. Prima will also integrate the process monitoring system in to the Laser Processing 
Workstation. Once completed, this workstation will be used to complete a number of performance trials including 
end-user demonstrations. 
Key Personnel: 
Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Ms Eleonora Marino F Innovation & Strategic Project Manager 
Background / Education: 
BSc degree in Production and Process Management Engineering (2011) at the 
Polytechnic of Turin 
MSc in Industrial Management Engineering in 2013 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Eleonora works in the Innovation and Additive business development 
department at Prima Power. After completing her MSc that provided business 
planning experience for a start-up focused on 3D printing technology Eleonora 
joined Prima Power since 2014. Starting in granted projects management for 
machinery division. In 2016 she joined the Innovation & strategic projects department, as granted projects 
manager for the group. Today her focus is on Prima Industrie strategic projects dedicated to Industry 4.0 and 
Additive Manufacturing division. 

 
85 
 Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
MR Paolo Calefati M Additive Innovation Manager 
 
 Background / Education: 
Engineer degree in automation and electrics (2003) from the Polytechnic of 
Bari  
Master degree in Industrial Research from the National Research Council 
(Mechanical Dept. of the University of Alberta) 
MBA from the SAA of the University of Turin (2009) 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
After an academic experience into the artificial intelligence and statistical 
algorithms field he joined Prima Ind. (2006). His research background is in the 
artificial intelligence applied to the laser process and the signal processing 
into the field of the process sensor for the real time application. Got an MBA from the SAA of the University 
of Turin (2009). Today he is the referent of the Innovation and strategic projects department of Prima 
Industrie and responsible of Additive projects and activities. 
 
Relevant Publications / Presentation Events: 
1. International Business Awards SM 2016 as one of the most innovative company in Europe 
2. European Business Awards 2014 as one of the ten best European companies in its category. 
Relevant Projects / Activities: (Please list 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of 
this proposal) 
1. Borealis: the 3A energy class Flexible Machine for the new Additive and Subtractive Manufacturing on next 
generation of complex 3D metal parts. EU H2020, Coordinator, Project completed. 
2. 4DHybrid: development of a new concept of hybrid additive manufacturing based on the modular integration 
of compact, low cost modules including laser source, deposition head, sensors and control. Applications in 
the aerospace, oil & gas, and power generation equipment. EU H2020, Coordinator, Project ongoing. 
3. Symbionica: reconfigurable Machine for the new Additive and Subtractive Manufacturing of next generation 
fully personalized bionics and smart prosthetics, EU H2020, Industrial partner, Project ongoing. 
4. MASHES Multimodal spectral control of laser processing with cognitive abilities. EU H2020, indust rial 
partner, project completed. 
5. Stamp: improvements in additive manufacturing approach by working on the two main technologies of 
additive with two different machines respectively for Direct Deposition and Powder Bed to enhance the 
design phase, the process control and monitoring, the productivity d the process towards a zero-defect 
production. National, Coordinator, Project on going. 
Infrastructure/Equipment: 
Prima Industrie activities can be supported today with a series of infrastructures dedicated to the laser, the 
mechatronics developments, the software and CN improvements. Smart Software as a part of Prima Power 
Industry 4.0 concept, provides sufficient connectivity possibilities to address increasing production requirements 
caused by dynamic market change. The main R&D area is based in Italy where innovation topics and R&D 
activities are carried on, for the different products of the group. All infrastructures support the production of the 
machine, including automation systems, dedicated solution for CN and software and services support. Prima can 
also rely on infrastructure for R&D, focusing the developments in the main aspects of Innovation, as smart factory 
concept, photonics improvements and advanced manufacturing processes. Very large expertise in machinery 
and laser process, providing new advanced solutions for industrial partners. Development of industrial systems 
for laser processing for different applications. Mechanical systems simulation. Advanced and flexible automation 
systems. Technological centre, AM lab. 
 
 
86 
7 - JJVC 
 
 
 
Organisation Short Name: JJVC 
Website: https://www.jnj.com/ 
Organisation Type: Large 
Organisation Size: >1000 
employees 
Organisation Description: 
Johnson and Johnson Manufacturing Technologies and Innovation Centre of Excellence (MTI) is a corporate 
centre of excellence focused on the development of sensing systems for process, product control and predictive 
maintenance, advanced manufacturing technologies and materials for all the companies of JJVC. MTI’s legal 
entity is Vision Care (Ireland), although the scope includes advanced manufacturing solutions, materials and 
innovation for all the medical device, pharma and consumer companies of JJVC. Our mission is to empower our 
customers and influence our leadership, by offering state of the art, advanced manufacturing solutions, expert 
judgement and education, to deliver a world’s leading agile supply chain. The key activities of MTI within the 
global supply chain of JJVC include: 
• Leverage technology expertise across JJVC across the full supply chain. 
• Crisis management through agile, cross-functional teams to solve the crisis quickly and efficiently by utilizing 
MTI’s global capabilities. 
• Systematic investigation of novel manufacturing technologies and materials using advanced innovation tools. 
• Strategy leadership for the implementation of key enabling technologies for Industry 4 within JJVC. 
 
MTI’s key areas of focus for innovation are: 
• Transformational manufacturing technologies 
• Focusing on our JJVC Internal Labs in collaboration with academic and strategic partners, MTI develops 
disruptive materials with the objective of understanding what signific ant advances in materials are likely to 
come about which are likely to be disruptive to JJVC 
• Advanced sensing solutions: The convergence of cheap ubiquitous sensing, computing, and communications 
has ushered in the sensing era. Strategy addresses trends and key investment areas for JJVC 
Role in the Project: 
JJVC will provide the requirements and specifications for the consumer-packaged goods use case in WP1 
Specification and User Requirements and will assist in defining the laser surface texturing in WP4 High-speed USP 
laser surface texturing process development. 
Key Personnel: 
 Title: 
Dr. 
First Name: Surname/Family Name: 
Sonia Ramirez 
Gender: 
F 
Job Title: 
Sensors Platform and Innovation Manager 
 
 Dr. Sonia Ramirez -Garcia is Sensors Platform and Innovation manager in the Manufacturing Technology & 
Innovation Centre of Excellence, Johnson & Johnson. Her focus is on developing sensing solutions such as 
adaptive process and product control and predicti ve maintenance for JJVC. Sonia’s responsibilities include 
managing Research and Innovation projects through strategic collaborations with academia and other 
industrial partners in the areas of transformational manufacturing technologies, materials and sens ing 
technologies. Furthermore, Sonia’s work has a particular focus on enabling Industrie 4.0 for JJVC. Sonia received 
her Ph.D. in 2003 from the Universitat Autonoma of Barcelona, Spain, developing electrochemical biosensors. 
She worked as a postdoctoral researcher and a lecturer in Dublin City University, in the Adaptive Sensors Group 
developing sensors. Sonia was also Materials Manager in the EU FP7 NeuroNano project and the EU FP6 
NanoInteract project. Finally, Sonia joined Johnson and Johnson in 2011 as  WW Research Projects Portfolio 
Lead in DePuy Synthes until Jan 2016, when she joined ACoE. 
Key relevant skills: 
- Materials science research: polymer-carbon composite materials as transducers for sensor applications 
and microelectrochemical structure characterisation 
- Currently participating in a EU project based on laser micro/nano engineering of metal surfaces 
(PROMETHEUS) 
 

 
87 
 - Involvement in industrial research on the manufacture of metal foams for orthopaedic applications 
- Involvement in industrial research on the surface engineering of metals for orthopaedic applications, 
including laser technologies and chemical edging. 
 
 
 Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Dr. Bill Rion M Engineering Fellow 
 
 Dr. Bill Rion is Engineering Fellow for Johnson and Johnson Manufacturing Technology and Innovation group. 
BS, MS, and PhD in Chemical Engineering. Certified Johnson and Johnson Master Black Belt. 34 years of 
experience in process design, scale -up, and commercialization. Specialties include: Process engineering, 
polymer processing, combination pharma/device product regulations and design, rapid technical response and 
resolution, characterization of chemical and physical systems, data analytics. 
Key relevant skills: 
• Technical lead for Vicryl polymerization near infrared monitoring and process control improvement 
teams at Ethicon. 
• Technical lead for Joint development program with SLIPS technologies 
• Lead Dupont Tyvek packaging change project for all JJVC franchises. 
• Developed reactive extrusion process for polyester/polycaprolactone copolymer for constant force 
strain relief for seatbelt applications. 
• Developed a group of customer specific high-tenacity/low shrinkage polyester products for tire 
sidewall application for new Allied-Signal PET plant in Longlaville, France 
 
Relevant Publications / Presentation Events: 
RELEVANT PRODUCTS AFFECTED: 
• Aveeno 
• Neutrogena 
Relevant Projects / Activities: 
1. Internally funded project based on the development of coatings to reduce product adhesion to the container 
2. Internally funded study of fluorinated lubricant suspended in microstructures 
Infrastructure/Equipment: (Please provide a bullet point list of any significant infrastructure and/or any major 
items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work – including any pictures of equipment/products as 
relevant) 
Sensors and chemistry laboratory in Ringaskiddy (Cork, Ireland) as testing facility (HPLC, analytical scales, and 
other chemical testing equipment) 
JJVC will supply product containers and testing materials 
Testing facilities in Jacksonville (US) 
Neurovascular R&D laboratory in Blue Lagoon (Miami, US) 
 
88 
8 - ARCELIK 
 
 
 
Organisation Short Name: ARCELIK 
Website: http://www.arcelikas.com 
Organisation Type: 
Organisation Size: 
employees 
OEM 
28103 
Organisation Description: 
Having operations in durable consumer goods industry with production, marketing and after -sales services, 
Arçelik A.Ş. offers products and services around the world with its 28 000 employees, 18 different production 
facilities in seven countries (Turkey, Romania, Russia, China, Pakistan, Thailand an d South Africa), its sales and 
marketing companies all over the world and its 11 brands (Arçelik, Beko, Grundig, Blomberg, ElektraBregenz, 
Arctic, Leisure, Flavel, Dawlance, Defy and Altus). 
The Company’s vision is “Respects the Globe, Respected Globally. As one of the foremost companies in KOÇ Group 
and Turkish private industry, Arçelik, founded in 1955, has always been the leader in Turkish private sector with 
its efforts for industrial development. 
Today, Arçelik Group is the third largest company in home appliances sector in Europe. Arçelik Group achieved a 
consolidated turnover of EUR 4.5 Billion in 2017. There are over 1300 R&D employees in 11 Arçelik R&D Centers 
located in Turkey, Taiwan, UK, USA and Portugal. Arçelik is IPR leader in Turkey  and ranked 74 th in World 
Intellectual Property Organization’s Top Patent Applicants list. The annual production volume of Arçelik is 
approximately 20 million units. Arçelik participates in EU Framework Programmes since FP5 and had completed 
1 FP5, 1FP6, 12 FP7, 1 H2020 projects and still involved in 11 H2020 projects actively. 
Role in the Project: 
Arcelik will provide the requirements and specifications for the white-goods industry use case in WP1 
Specification and User Requirements and will assist in defining the laser surface texturing in WP4 High-speed USP 
laser surface texturing process development. 
Key Personnel: 
Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Dr Basak Bengu F R&D Senior Specialist 
Background / Education: 
BSc in Chemistry from Hacettepe University, Turkey (1998) 
MSc in Chemistry from Middle East Technical University, Turkey (2000) 
PhD in Materials Science from University of Cincinnati, OH, USA (2007) 
 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: Dr. Basak Bengu is a senior specialist and has 
extensive research experience in surface modification and characterization of polymeric 
materials. She has 10 years’ experience of collaborative research projects 
which includes functional coatings, bonding and advance prototyping. She has several publications and patent 
applications. 
 Title: 
Dr 
First Name: 
Yusuf 
Surname/Family Name: 
Koç 
Gender: 
M 
Job Title: 
R&D Senior Specialist 
 
 Background / Education: 
BSc in Mechanical Engineering from Yildiz Technical University (2007) 
BSc in Metallurgical and Materials Engineering from Yildiz Technical University (2008) 
MSc in Mechanical Engineering (Heat & Process) from Yildiz Technical University (2009) 
PhD in Mechanical Engineering (Heat & Process) from Yildiz Technical University (2015) 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Dr. Yusuf Koç, R&D Senior Specialist of Arçelik (since 2014). Specialist of heat & mass 
transfer, fluid dynamics and thermodynamics. He manages multidiscipline R&D projects 
 

 
89 
 for 8 years includes energy, drying and filtration subjects. He has almost 10 years’ experience of energy transfer 
calculation and modelling. He will organize tests for dishwasher and laundry dryer and calculate energy 
consumption for these products. 
 
 
 Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Dr Merve Metin F R&D Engineer 
 
 Background / Education: 
BSc. Chemical Engineering, Yildiz Technical University (2013) 
BSc. Bioengineering (Double Major), Yildiz Technical University (2014) 
MSc. Polymer Science and Technology, Istanbul Technical University (2017) 
PhD. Polymer Science and Technology, Istanbul Technical University (in progress) 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
MSc. Merve Metin, R&D Engineer at Arçelik A.S. Central R&D Centre at Material 
Technologies Department. The undergraduate thesis is about superhydrophobic coatings. 
She has been working in Central R&D Centre for 4 years. She has 5 years’ experience of collaborative research 
projects about different hydrophobic surfaces. Her expertise area includes advanced materials and surface 
chemistry such as sol -gel chemistry, thin film coating, hydrophobic coatings, super hydrophobic coatings, 
resin-based coatings, anti-reflective coatings, real anti-fingerprint coatings, anti-icing coatings, biobased resin 
coatings. 
 
Relevant Publications / Presentation Events: (Please list 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content) 
1. G. Sir, Ö. Balioğlu & S. U. Onbaşıoğlu. “An Experimental Investigation Into The Effects Of Fin Structure And 
Surface Type On The Efficiency Of Heat Exchangers Used For Dehumidification”, WIT Transactions on 
Engineering Sciences, Vol 83, 2014, pp. 123-131 
Relevant Projects / Activities: (Please list 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of 
this proposal) 
1. FP7 Innoshade: Innovative Switchable Shading Appliances based on Nanomaterials and Hybrid 
Electrochromic Device Configurations 
2. H2020 Shield: Development of a novel, low-cost fireproof Insulation Material 
3. H2020 Bugworker: New tailor-made PHB-based nanocomposites for high performance applications 
produced from environmentally friendly production routes 
4. H2020 BIO4SELF: Biobased self-functionalised self-reinforced composite materials based on high 
performance nanofibrillar PLA fibres 
Infrastructure/Equipment: 
At ARCELIK R&D Center for designing and producing prototypes there are several additive manufacturing 
machines such as fused deposition modeling, selective laser sintering, multi jet modeling and stereolithography. 
 
    
 
Additive manufacturing machines from left to right: Stereolithography, selective laser sintering, multi jet 
modeling, Optic Profilometer, fused deposition modeling) 
 

 
91 
9 - MAIER 
 
 
Organisation Short 
MAIER 
Website: www.maier.es 
Name: 
 
Organisation Type: LE 
Organisation Size: 3,000 employees 
 
Organisation Description: 
MAIER is an experienced company in designing and development of components (injection, finishing/decoration 
and assembly); designing and manufacturing of prototype and production molds; analysis and implementation of 
industrial facilities; and research, development and innovation. MAIER innovation procedure is always based on 
quality and accuracy methodologies which have led to more than 20 patents, from 1993, in automotive 
components and related processes. 
MAIER is one of the first plastic component supplier with up to 2,000 employees in 8 countries with global sales 
above 212 M€, being part of the biggest co -operative group in the world (global sales above 13,200 M€ and a 
workforce above 82,000 employees). MAIER manufactures components for the automotive industry. In Europe, 
MAIER heads, in particular, the development and manufacture of body colour painted front grilles, chromed caps, 
wheel-trims, wheelcaps and petrol cap l ids, as well as producing a wide array of other automotive components 
and body modules (mudguards, consoles, air vents, fascia, door trims, handles...). MAIER owns plants in Spain, 
the United Kingdom and Czech Republic, joint ventures in Turkey and Japan, and offices in France, Sweden and 
Japan, being supplier of plastic components for the most important automotive OEMs (Renault, Toyota, Honda, 
Ford, Opel, Seat, Citroen, Peugeot, Jaguar, Mercedes, Rover, Suzuki, Volvo, Nissan, Bentley, Skoda, Audi…). 
Besides, its technical centre with more than 100 employees offers support to OEMs and Equippers. 
 
MAIER will bring to the project its experience and knowledge on metallised thermoplastic components and 
processes for the automotive industry. This means that MAIER will participate in the following tasks: 
- Definition of the requirements for the automotive customers 
- First trials using a 2D sample geometry in order to define which are the key points in the technology and carry 
out first validations taking into account critical requirements to improve the technology. 
- Up-scaling of the technology to a 3D real geometry and based upon the key points already defined, establishing 
the process window of the developed technology. After this up-scaling, MAIER will also carry out the validation 
of the technology according to the requirements defined before. 
Role in the Project: 
Maier will provide the requirements and specifications for the automotive plastics use case in WP1 Specification 
and User Requirements and will assist in defining the laser surface texturing in WP4 High-speed USP laser surface 
texturing process development. 
Key Personnel: 
Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Mr JOSEBA ARRIEN URZAA M Process development specialist 
Background / Education: Technical engineer 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: specialist in innovative and ground-breaking decorations for the 
automotive sector 
 
Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Ms Alicia KANALAETXEBARRIA ZABALA F R&D Technician 
Background / Education: Industrial Engineer 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: She has been working at MAIER for 10 years. She has been involved 
in several R&D projects regarding aesthetics at national and regional level. 
 Title: 
Mr 
First Name: 
Aimar 
Surname/Family Name: 
Izaguirre 
Gender: 
M 
Job Title: 
R&D Technician 
 
 Background / Education: Mechanical Engineer  

 
92 
 Relevant Experience & Role in the project: wide experienced in R&D projects related to marking technologies 
and plastic manufacture. 
 
Relevant Publications / Presentation Events: (Please list 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content) 
1. Maier was awarded with the Innovation Prize of the Basque Enterprise association in 2011 and recently, as 
consequence of our participation in the European project Roll-out 
2. MAIER has been appointed as “Key innovator” by the Innovation Radar of the European Commission 
Relevant Projects / Activities: (Please list 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of 
this proposal) 
1. FP7-NMP-2008- NANOCLEAN - Optimisation and upscaling of self-cleaning surfaces for automotive sector by 
combining tailored nanostructured machined injection tools and functional thermoplastic nanocompounds 
2. FP7-2012-NMP-ICT-FoF – MUSIC - MUlti-layers control & cognitive System to drive metal and plastic 
production line for Injected Components 
3. FP7-2013-NMP-ICT-FOF - SCAIL-UP - SCALING-UP OF THE ALUMINIUM PLATING PROCESS FROM IONIC 
LIQUIDS 
4. H2020-NMP-2014 - TRASH-2-CASH - Designed high-value products from zero-value waste textiles and fibres 
via design driven technologies 
5. H2020-NMP-2015 - BIO4SELF - Biobased self-functionalised self-reinforced composite materials based on 
high performance nanofibrillar PLA fibres 
Infrastructure/Equipment: 
MAIER is a well-equipped industry with advanced research and manufacturing facilities in thermoplastic injection 
molding as well as in decorative processes and mold design and manufacture. 
MAIER will offer the following services and expertise: 
- Style definition. 
- Design, engineering & manufacturing of injection tools. 
- Injection molding of up-scaled components. 
- Final component characterisation (some testing procedures) according to OEMs’ specifications and market 
requirements. 
- Technical and economical assessment for further industrialisation. 
Apart from these general capabilities and infrastructure, MAIER is one of the leading chrome plating companies 
in Europe (currently, MAIER is the second most important chrome plater). This means that MAIER has several 
industrial production lines for chrome plating, but also the capability, equipment and knowledge to carry out 
preindustrial validations of processes on its own; in order to do this, MAIER has a pre -industrial line that is 
representative of the real industrial process which is a necessary step when it comes to the up -scaling of new 
electroplating processes and technologies. 
 
 
 

 
94 
10 - CRF 
 
 
 
Organisation Short Name: CRF 
Website: https://www.crf.it/EN 
Organisation Type: RTD 
Organisation Size: >900 
employees 
Organisation Description: 
Centro Ricerche Fiat (CRF), founded in 1978, has the mission to develop and transfer innovative products, 
processes and methodologies in order to improve the competitiveness of the products of the Fiat Group. Also 
through the cooperation with a pan-European and increasingly global network of more than 1800 partners from 
industry and academia, CRF conducts collaborative research initiatives at the national and international levels in 
partnership with all the key public and private stakeholders concerned with sustainable mobility, targeting 
specifically the industrial exploitation of research. 
CRF’s mission lies within three main goals: 
• To develop innovative power units, vehicle systems, materials, methods and processes to improve the 
competitiveness of FCA products 
• To represent FCA as part of European and national collaborative research, taking part in pre -competitive 
research projects and promoting the development of a network of contacts and partnerships on an 
international scale 
• To support FCA in enhancing the value of its intangible capital 
It’s main CRF headquarters are situated in Orbassano (Turin). Smaller offices, dedicated to specific activities and 
topics, are dotted around Turin, at the Mirafiori plant, in Pomigliano d'Arco (Naples), at the Magneti Marelli plant 
in Bologna, in Valenzano (Bari) and in Trento. 
On a national scale, the Centro Ricerche Fiat plays an active role in several public and private research 
consortiums and collaborates with the Ministry for Universities and Research, the Ministry for the Environment 
and the Ministry for Economic Development. Particular attention is paid to relations with the surrounding 
territory: CRF is involved in projects and initiatives undertaken not only by Regions and Industrial Unions but also 
by Municipalities, Chambers of Commerce, Consortiums and by the local industrial fabric. 
With a workforce of approximately 900 full-time professionals, CRF develops research and innovation along the 
three principal axes of sustainability: Environmental Sustainability, which encompasses all aspects relatin g to 
energy efficiency as well as to the reduction of the impact on the environment over the entire lifecycle of the 
vehicle; Social Sustainability, focusing on the safety of transportation systems through the development of active, 
passive, preventive and cooperative solutions while addressing the mobility of all users irrespective of their 
specific needs; Economically sustainable competitiveness, oriented towards viable innovation, i.e., improving the 
performance and functionality of new vehicles in a cost-effective manner while reducing the time-to-market of 
research results. 
The CRF research activities imply strategic competences not only in the field of automotive engineering, but also 
in the fields of manufacturing, advanced materials, ICT and electronics, as well as a wide range of state -of-the- 
art laboratories and extensive test facilities, including advanced engine & vehicle testing facilities, EMC chambers 
and a dynamic driving simulator with immersive virtual reality. 
CRF participates with a leading role in the European “Green Vehicle Initiative” and “Factories of the Future”, the 
Public Private Partnerships conceived by the European Commission in 2009 to focus public and private research 
on issues of direct and significant relevance to the Europe with regard to the competitiveness of industry and 
employment. Within this context, CRF is also actively involved in key European Technology Platforms including: 
ERTRAC (road transport), EPOSS (smart systems),  EUMAT (materials), MANUFU-TURE (manufacturing), each of 
which has proved to be particularly effective at bringing together key stakeholders within an integrated approach 
to research and innovation. 

 
95 
CRF is industrial member EFFRA, The European Factories of the Future Research Association, an industry-driven 
association promoting the development of new and innovative production technologies. 
By December 2013, the Intellectual Property developed by CRF included a total of 2722 patents, both granted 
and pending, protecting 662 inventions. Over recent years the technology-driver role of CRF has enabled the 
industrialization and commercialization of a significant number of distinctive and highly innovative products for 
Fiat including, in the powertrains area: the Diesel Common Rail system (UNIJET and MultiJet), the MULTIAIR 
system with the TwinAir engine, the CNG (Compressed Natural Gas) and the DDCT (Dry Dual Clutch Transmission) 
technologies; and in the vehicles area: energy saving air-conditioning systems, the Blue&MeTM connectivity 
product, Driving Advisor and Magic Parking driver-assistance systems and the ECODriveTM eco-navigation 
solutions. 
 
 
 
 
Role in the Project: 
CRF will provide the requirements and specifications for the automotive piston liner and mold tool use cases in 
WP1 Specification and User Requirements and will assist in defining the laser surface texturing in WP4 High-speed 
USP laser surface texturing process development. 
Key Personnel: 
 Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Mr Daniele Bassan M Senior Project Manager 
 
 Background / Education: 
Mechanical Degree at Politecnico of Turin 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Daniele Bassan, Mechanical Degree at Politecnico of Turin, currently project manager in 
the WCM (World Class Manufacturing) Research and Innovation business line in CRF since 
January 2015. Is operating in EFFRA (European Factories of the Future Research 
Association) and ESTP (European Steel Technology Platform) as FCA industrial committee 
representative and in EUCAR (European council for Automotive R&D) Affordability and Competitiveness 
working group. Part of his current role is to focus on technology roadmaps, partnership s and collaborative 
projects. 
Joined CRF in 2000 he started working on new manufacturing processes, also as numerical and manufacturing 
process simulation designer, achieving great experience in developing and transferring innovative 
technologies from research to industrial applications. He was leader of the technological development in FP6 
SuperLIGHT-CAR (SLC) IP project, focused on innovative forming and assembly technologies for new 
lightweight multi-material BiW. 
He was leader since 2005 until 2013 of Eucar Working Group on Materials. 
He has gained project management experience and relevant responsibility role as project representative for 
CRF through various EU, national, and international projects over the last 15 years, from early IV FrameWork 
up to H2020 such as: DILIGHT, HIGHDENS, ADITECH, LISA, MUST, EMC2, ENEPLAN, LoCoLite and ALIVE. 
Currently is Work Package leader on Manufacturing Technologies in ENLIGHT H2020 Large Scale Integrating 
Collaborative project, and is Exploitatio n Manager in H2020 CSA FOCUS (Factory of the Future Clusters)  
project. 
 
 

 
96 
 Main relevant project are OPENHYBRID and ENCOMPASS, based on AM processes. The first for hybrid 
additive and subtractive technology, while the second on SLS process. 
 
 
 Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Ms. Eva Butano F Process Research Specialist 
 
 Background / Education: 
Degree in Chemistry from University of Turin in 2002 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Eva has a degree in Chemistry and works from 2003 in CRF. She operates in the 
same group as Process Research Specialist within the Machining and Process 
Technologies and have several years of experience and background in the field 
of materials engineering and manufacturing processes. She is, also, experienced 
in chemical characterization with XRD and Microscopic techniques (LOM, SEM) 
for metallurgical evaluation. Over the years she has achieved a good experience 
in the Transmission & Powertrain manufacturing technologies.  
She has been  involved in several European Funded Project on materials and technologies for powertrain 
applications like ADACOM, CONTEMP, PROMACH, MAC D and in National Funded project within INDUSTRIA 
2015 program, like FLEXPROD and in innovation activities towards FIAT sectors. In particular, she has been in 
charge of internal FCA technological transfer activity on Form Honing process on automotive engine block. 
 
Relevant Publications / Presentation Events: 
1. G. D’Angelo, G. Pasquettaz, A. Terreno -. “Laser process monitoring at FIAT group”. In: Proc. EALA 07 - Bad 
Nauheim/Frankfurt, Germany, 30/31 January 2007 
2. FORMING IN CAR BODY ENGINEERING 2017 conference Bad Nauheim, Germany, 26- 27 SEPTEMBER 2017 
3. Supporting lightweight design: Virtual modelling of hot stamping with tailored properties and warm and hot 
formed aluminium, David Lorenz, ESI GmbH, DE; Daniele Bassan, Centro RicercheFiat S.C.p.A., IT 
Relevant Projects / Activities: (Please list 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of 
this proposal) 
1. EU H2020 Encompass. Call: H2020-IND-CE-2016-17. The ENCOMPASS project aims to create an 
Integrated Component and Process Design tool which will be a comprehensive integrated additive 
manufacturing (AM) process chain decision support tool to flexibly optimise the exploitation of AM and 
to enable a significant reduction in the time and cost of the overall AM process chain. Focus is on AM 
based on SLS technology. 
2. EU H2020 OpenHybrid. Call: H2020-IND-CE-2016-17. The OPENHYBRID project will overcome the technical 
and commercial barriers of current hybrid manufacturing systems to deliver a single manufacturing system 
capable of undertaking a wider range of processes in a seamless automated operation. The new system 
will offer unrivalled flexibility in terms of materials, including the ability to switch between powder and 
wire feed-stock within a single part. Moreover, the process can be fitted to a diverse range of platform to 
produce parts from 2cm to 20m in length. The capability of the OPENHYBRID approach will be validated 
through the production of industrial demonstrators from the power generation, automotive and mining 
equipment sectors. 
Infrastructure/Equipment: 
 
 
98 
11 - MTC 
 
 
 
 
Organisation Short Name: MTC 
Website: http://www.the-mtc.org/ 
 
Organisation Type: RTO 
Organisation Size: 650 
Employees 
Organisation Description: The world class Manufacturing Technology Centre (MTC) represents one of the largest 
public sector investments in UK manufacturing for decades. The West Midlands based research and development 
centre represents a unique collaboration between four of the leading manufacturing -focussed universities and 
technology organisations in the UK. MTC is also part of the High Value Manufacturing (HVM) Catapult network 
of seven research and innovation centres created in 2011 by the UK government to bridge the gap between 
academic research (TRL1-3) and industrial exploitation (TRL6-9). 
 
The MTC provides a high-quality environment for the development and demonstration of new technologies on 
an industrial scale, providing a unique opportunity for manufacturers to develop new and innovative processes 
and technologies with minimal risk. The MTC has over 100 company members which span across aerospace OEMs 
(Roll-Royce Plc, Airbus, BAE Systems, CDS), key parts/system suppliers (GKN Aerospace, Spirit Aerosystems, etc) 
and equipment/material suppliers (DMG Mori, Agie Charmilles, Arcam, Renishaw, LPW, Sandvik etc). In addition 
to a block grant from the UK Government, the MTC undertakes industrially funded projects and collaborative 
research projects supported by the UK and EU. The MTC now employs over 600 staff, as well as supp orting 
doctorate student research, graduate placements and engineering apprentices. 
 
The MTC has outstanding facilities covering 10 technology themes: Net shape & Additive Manufacturing, High 
integrity fabrication, Non -conventional machining, Manufacturing  simulation, Informatics, NDT & Metrology, 
Intelligent Automation, Advanced Tooling & Fixturing, Electronics Manufacturing, and Manufacturing 
Operational Efficiency. In 2014, the MTC has adopted a matrix management system to cope with the significant 
growth experienced since it was established in 2010. Research themes have been categorised into 3 main 
technology groups: 
• Component Technology (CT): Net Shape and Additive Manufacturing, Non-Conventional Machining and 
High Integrity Fabrication 
• MIS: Metrology, Informatics and Simulation 
• ATFE: Automation, Tooling, Fixturing and Electronics Manufacturing 
 
More specifically within the Component Technology (CT) area the MTC has a number of laser-based systems that 
are used for wide -ranging research projects; and the Non -Conventional Machining theme has significant 
experience within the laser processing field. One of the key research aspect is in surface engineering where the 
main focus is on texturing and surface modification for functional surfaces. The theme has enormous experience 
in the fundamental understanding of laser ablation process with different laser type on different materials for 
cutting, re -melting, cleaning and texturing applications. In addition, the theme has good background and 
technical knowledge in metallurgy and surface metrology characterisation using different techniques and 
equipment. Nonetheless, the theme also has vast experience in functional testing capabilities for various 
applications and the analytical  ability to correlate functionality performance to surface structure and chemical 
compositional changes. Over the years, the Non -Conventional Machining theme has built up laser capabilities 
through various funding routes resulting in several laser processi ng cell. The types of lasers that the MTC has 
range from CW to short pulsed laser (ms to ns) to ultrashort pulsed laser (ps to fs); laser wavelength range from 
infrared (IR) to ultraviolet (UV); laser power range tens of Watt to kilo Watt range for applica tions in surface 
texturing, machining, cladding, welding and polishing. 
Role in the Project: 

 
99 
MTC will bring their expertise and know -how to support: WP1 Specification and User Requirements, WP2 USP 
Laser Development, WP4 high-speed USP laser surface texturing process development, WP5 Process Monitoring 
and Control (modelling) WP6 USP/Integration (laser processing test plan, end -user component and texturing 
trials). MTC will act as the liaison for the end-users in the consortium for the demonstration trials in WP7 End 
user case study demonstrations. 
Key Personnel: 
Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Dr Tian Long See M Senior Research Engineer 
Background / Education: 
Dr Tian Long See has an academic background in laser surface engineering and 
completed his PhD at University of Manchester in 2015 in collaboration with Rolls - 
Royce, BaE Systems and Dyson. He studied laser-material interaction using laser of UV 
to IR wavelength on common engineering material from polymer to composite and 
metal. In addition to laser surface texturing, he has vast experience in surface 
metrology, metallurgy and functional surface analysis which he acquired through his 
PhD work. 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: Dr Tian Long See is a senior research 
engineer working under Dr Antar in the Non -Conventional Machining theme. He is the technical lead for 
surface engineering activities at the MTC. He is mainly working on developing lase r surface texturing 
technology from laser cleaning to polishing and texturing. He has developed a cleaning cell here at the MTC 
for reconditioning as well as assist in setting up the laser polishing cell for AM manufactured components. He 
is experienced in  project management and has been working on many industrial projects as well as large 
collaborative projects. 
 
Title: First Name:        Surname/Family Name:         Gender: Job Title: 
Dr Sundar Marimuthu M Senior Research Engineer 
Dr. Sundar Marimuthu (M) is Senior Research Engineer for the Non -Conventional 
Machining theme at the Manufacturing Technology Centre (MTC). He has 12 years’ of 
experience in experimental and theoretical studies on laser material processing, 
including laser drilling, laser micro -machining and laser surface modification. Prior to 
joining the MTC, Dr Marimuthu worked as a lecturer in laser processing at the 
Loughborough University, UK, and as a research associate at The University of 
Manchester, UK. He has initiated and worked on number of research projects through 
funding from Industries, EPSRC and Innovate-UK. 
 
Title:       First Name:     Surname/Family Name:      Gender: Job Title: 
Dr.         Katy Milne F Technology Manager 
Dr. Katy Milne (F) is Technology Manager for the Metrology & Non-destructive Testing 
research group. The group’s strategic research is focussed on the use of digital tools to 
optimise inspections, to feedback quality data through the process chain and to share 
quality data through the supply chain. In addition, the group carries has extensive 
experience using measurement and imaging technologies to validate novel 
manufacturing processes including powder metallurgy routes (AM and hot isostatic 
pressing) and joining methods (f riction welding, electron beam welding etc.) for the 
power generation, aerospace and defence sectors. Capability includes tactile 
coordinate measurement, optical scanning, ultrasonic testing, radiographic testing, eddy current testing X-ray 
Computed Tomography and surface measurement. Dr. Milne carried out her doctorate supervised by Imperial 
College and sponsored by Rolls-Royce in ultrasonic testing of solid state welds. 
 Title: 
Dr 
First Name: 
Lina 
Surname/Family Name: 
Huertas 
Gender: 
F 
Job Title: 
Senior Manager 
 
 
 
100 
 Dr. Lina Huertas (F) is the Head of Strategy for Digital Engineering which develop 
integrated solutions to advance in the journey towards the factories of the future. 
She has a BEng and MEng in Mechanical Engineering followed by a Doctorate of 
Philosophy on novel modelling, simulation and analytics tools to support high 
value manufacturing in the UK. Dr Huertas has 10 years’ experience on the design, 
development and implementation of ICTs  for decision support and systems 
control alongside 8 years’ working for manufacturing applications. She has 
significant academic and industrial experience working on customer facing 
industrially focused research projects for companies such as GE, Rolls-Royce, Ford and several manufacturing 
SME’s. 
 
Relevant Publications / Presentation Events: (Please list 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content) 
1. T.L. See, Z. Liu, S. Cheetham, S. Dilworth and L. Li, Laser abrading of carbon fibre reinforced composite for 
improving paint adhesion, Appl. Phys. A, 117 (3) (2014), pp. 1045-1054 
2. T.L. See, Z. Liu, H. Liu, L. Li, J. Chippendale, S. Cheetham, S. Dilworth, Effect of geometry measurement on 
characteristics of femtosecond laser ablation of HR4 nickel alloy, Opt. Lasers Eng. 64 (2015), pp. 71-78. 
3. T.L. See, Z. Liu, L. Li, X.L. Zhong, A comparison of the characteristics of excimer and femtosecond laser ablation 
of Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), Appl. Surf. Sci., 364 (2016), pp. 467-476. 
4. Jagdheesh, R., Diaz, M., Marimuthu, S. and Ocana, J.L., 2017. Robust fabrication of μ -patterns with 
tunable and durable wetting properties: hydr ophilic to ultrahydrophobic via a vacuum process. 
Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 5(15), pp.7125-7136. 
5. Marimuthu, S., A. Triantaphyllou, M. Antar, D. Wimpenny, and H. Morton, Laser polishing of selective 
laser melted Components, International Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture (2015). 
6. S. Marimuthu, A.M. Kamara, M F Rajemi, D. Whitehead, P. Mativenga, L. Li, Laser Surface Cleaning: 
Removal of Hard Thin Ceramic Coatings, In the book “Laser Technology: Applications in Adhesion and 
Related Areas”, Edited by Wei-Sheng Lei and K. L. Mittal, ISBN13:9781119184935, Dec-2017. 
7. J M López, S Marimuthu, A M Kamara, Droplet-Assisted Laser Cleaning of Contaminated Surfaces, In 
the book “Developments in Surface Contamination and Cleaning, Volume 10”, Edited by R Kohli and 
K L Mittal, Elsevier Publication, ISBN 9780323431583, 2017. 
Relevant Projects / Activities: (Please list 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of 
this proposal) 
 Project 
Acronym 
Partners Involved RTD 
Programme 
Link with this project  
 SHARK MTC, GFMS, FRAUNHOFER, 
Heriot-Watt, ATS, Sensofar, 
MAN, JJVC, Unilever, Sandvik, 
Simtec 
EU-H2020 Development of a digitally enabled functional 
laser texturing solution 
 
 CLEANSE Powerlase, MTC, ALT, Sandvik 
Coromant 
Inn-UK Complex surface cleaning using laser 
technology 
 
 FlexLase MTC, TEC Systems, 
Loughborough University 
Inn-UK Robotic laser cutting of composites, using 
camera system to improve robot accuracy 
 
 FlexFinish MTC, Sandwell, TTL, GE, JRI, 
Meggitt 
Inn-UK Laser polishing and integrated inspection 
processing cell 
 
 ENCOMPASS MTC, CRF, EWF, Altair, ESI, 
DePuy, ITP, RR, Liverpool 
University, Renishaw, ILT 
EU- H2020 Complex modelling and integration of additive 
and inspection equipment in process chain 
 
Infrastructure/Equipment: The MTC has access to the AgiesCharmilles P400U laser texturing machine, as well as 
a number of other laser sources for cleaning, polishing and cutting. 
 
101 
 
The MTC has one of the best equipped industrial metrology labs in Europe. In addition to six fixed bed CMM (including PMM -C 
1210.7, PMM-F 302010, Reference HP543, DEA Global 15.33.14) with a part size capacity up to 3 x 3 x 3 m, f itted with touch -
trigger, Revo®, Sprint® and non -contact laser scanning heads, the facility has several GOM ATOS III structured light scanners 
supported by TRITOPs Photogrammetry for part geometry measurement. Surface finish measurement using Mahr LD120 contact 
surface roughness/contour and Alicona G4, SL non -contact units. NDT equipment includes Nikon XTH225 (225 kV) and XTH450 
(450 kV) X-ray CT units, immersion ultrasonic inspection, conventional X -ray and eddy current inspection. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
102 
12 - FRAUNHOFER 
 
 
 
 
Organisation Short Name: FRAUNHOFER 
Website: www.iws.fraunhofer.de 
Organisation Type: RTO 
Organisation Size: about 
25.000 employees 
Organisation Description: 
The Fraunhofer -Gesellschaft develops products and processes right up to commercial maturity. Individual 
solutions are sought in direct contact with the customer. The key objective of the Fraunhofer -Gesellschaft is to 
transform scientific expertise into applications of practical utility. Founded in 1949 as a non-profit organization, 
the Fraunhofer society maintains nowadays 72 institutes in Germany and 40 institutes outside Germany with an 
annual research budget totaling 2.3 billion Euro. As it stands today, the Fraunhofer -Gesellschaft has attained a 
size and influence that makes it an undisputedly vital element in Germany’s industrial and scientific landscape. 
 
The research and development work at the Fraunhofer Institute for Material and Beam Technology (IWS) is based 
on its substantial expertise in materials- and nanotechnologies combined with the resources for comprehensive 
materials analysis and characterization. In the field of laser technologies the Fraunhofer IWS has ov er 20 years 
of experience in welding, hardening, structuring and cutting of various materials (metals, polymers, FRPs). The 
working group surface functionalization includes 10 years of experience in laser surface treatment processes for 
the functionalization of materials as well as optics development and simulation. 
Role in the Project: 
FRAUNHOFER will lead the development of the Digital Laser Interference Patterning (DLIP) system in WP3 High - 
speed laser surface texturing system. Alongside this core focus, FRAUNHOFER will support in WP1 Specification 
and User Requirements (requirements analysis and specifications), WP4 High-speed USP laser surface texturing - 
process development (initial surface textural definition; surface texturing work programme) WP7 End User 
Demonstrations (demonstrator refinements) 
Key Personnel: 
Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Dr Tim Kunze M Group Leader 
Background / Education: 
PhD Natural Sciences at Technical University Dresden (2014) 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Dr. Tim Kunze received his M.S. degree in Computational Science from the TU in 
Chemnitz (Germany) in 2008. From 2009 to 2013 he carried out his PhD at TU Dresden 
(Germany) focusing on tribology simulation. In 2014, he joined the Fraunhofer Institute 
of Material and Beam Technology (IWS) in Dresden as a senior researcher involved in 
the R&D of Direct Laser Interference Patterning technology. Since September 2017, Dr. 
Kunze leads the group surface functionalization at Fraunhofer IWS Dresden. His main 
expertise is in the field of laser surface structuring, in particular Direct Laser Interference Patterning, as well 
as in the field of physical simulation and project management. 
 Title: 
MSc 
First Name: 
Sabri 
Surname/Family Name: 
Alamri 
Gender: 
M 
Job  Title: 
Research assistant 
 
 Background / Education: 
MSc Materials Science and Technologies at University of Bari, Italy (2015) 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Sabri Alamri is a researcher in the Group of Surface Functionalization at the Fraunhofer 
IWS (Germany), and a doctoral student at the Institute for Manufacturing Technology of 
the Technical University of Dresden since 2016. 
His main expertise is in the field of Laser surfac e structuring, in particular Direct Laser 
Interference Patterning, optical design and analytical methods (optical, electronical and 
spectral analyses). 
 
Relevant Publications / Presentation Events: 

 
103 
1. V. Lang, T. Roch, A.F. Lasagni, High -Speed Surface Structuring of Polycarbonate Using Direct Laser 
Interference Patterning: Toward 1 m2min-1 Fabrication Speed Barrier, Adv. Eng. Mater. 18 (2016) 1342–1348. 
doi:10.1002/adem.201600173. 
2. V. Lang, T. Hoffmann, A. -F. Lasagni, Optimization for high speed surface processing of metallic surfaces 
utilizing direct laser interference patterning, Laser -Based Micro - Nanoprocessing XII. (2018) 21. 
doi:10.1117/12.2290320. 
3. T. Kunze, C. Zwahr, B. Krupop, S. Alamri, F. Rößler, A.F. Lasagni, Development of a scanner-based direct laser 
interference patterning optical head: New surface structuring opportunities, in: Proc. SPIE - Int. Soc. Opt. 
Eng., 2017. doi:10.1117/12.2251745. 
Relevant Projects / Activities: (Please list 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of 
this proposal) 
1. Laser4FUN (EU-Project): New surface micro/nano-structuring/patterning methods by using SP/USP laser 
technologies 
2. SHARK (EU-Project): laSer surface engineering for new and enHanced functionAl performance with digitally 
enabled Knowledge base 
3. High-Speed-F (BMBF): Laser Interference High Speed Surface Functionalization (National funded project) 
Infrastructure/Equipment: 
The structuring equipment at the IWS Surface Functionalisation group count, among the others, a high power  
and high repetition rate ns-Laser (IR, green, UV), a compact module for ns UV-DLIP (b), a compact module for ns 
IR-DLIP (c) and a scanner-based compact module for ns green-DLIP (d). 
 
 
The analytical equipment at the FRAUNHOFER Surface Functionalisation can be summarised with a  
confocal/white light interferometry microscope (a), a scanning electron microscope (b) and a contact angle  
system (c). 
 
 
 

 
104 
13 - AIMEN 
 
 
 
Organisation Short Name: AIMEN 
Website: www.aimen.es 
Organisation Type: RTO 
Organisation Size: 211 
employees 
Organisation Description: 
Located in the Northwest of Spain, AIMEN Technology Centre is a highly professionalized organisation with over 
220 employees specialised in Materials Science, Process Engineering, Automation, and Laser Processing. AIMEN 
is a non-profit private research association with more than 100 industrial members, established to increase the 
technological competence in the manufacturing industry, through the following activities: (i) R&D+i projects, (ii) 
Monitoring technology evolution, (iii) Acquire and develop emergent technologies, (iv) Promot e technology 
innovation in the companies. Around 2/3 of all projects are in direct collaboration with the industry and around 
1/3 of projects have the objective to search medium -long term industrial applicability. AIMEN participates in 
numerous regional, national R&D+i projects, and has an increasing presence in international research activities 
in photonics. 
The R&D+i activity can be grouped into the following research fields: 
– Materials processing with laser technologies at macro and micro-scale (laser machining, drilling, precision 
cutting and welding, surface engineering and nanofabrication). 
– Joining technologies and advanced forming processes. Solutions for multi material and special 
applications. 
– Materials Science, metallurgy, plasturgy, multimaterial systems, hybrid materials, composites and 
coatings. 
– Robotics and control: process monitoring, embedded systems, RT control, adaptive production machines. 
– Environmental technologies: waste management, water quality, lifecycle management. 
The Laser Applications Centre of AIMEN provides facilities and expertise for R&D and validation activities in laser 
materials processing. These facilities enable industry to make an informed judgement on the technical feasibility 
of laser processes in their applications. AIMEN makes use of prototype machinery and optical components, 
balancing industrial production needs with beyond-state of the art production capabilities. AIMEN also provides 
high-end knowledge in the design and development of factory automation solutions applied to different 
manufacturing systems. In addition, AIMEN provides high -end engineering services to industrial companies in 
design and assembly of prototype systems, supported by industry oriented multi-disciplinary capacities. 
As part of the core consortium of LASHARE (FoF -ICT-609046, an I4MS initiative), AIMEN is recognized as an 
European Laser Competence Centre, supporting the uptake of new advanced laser equipment in the 
manufacturing industry. This place s AIMEN in a privileged position in the European innovation community in 
laser materials processing. The Laser Applications Centre of AIMEN has also been awarded with a REGPOT project 
to enhance its capabilities in the field of laser surface modification at the micro and nanoscale (FAIERA, CSA-SA 
316161), qualifying AIMEN as a high innovation potential centre. The economic and institutional support from the 
EC and Euroregion allowed the centre to reinforce knowledge, infrastructure and human resources in la ser 
nanofabrication, as well as providing tools to improve the quality excellence of the research activity of the 
institution. 
AIMEN has active presence in the main European and National technology platforms and initiatives related with 
materials and manufacturing technologies, specifically in Photonics21, 4M2020, NanoFutures, ManuFUTURE and 
EuMAT, as well as their Spanish mirror groups. Besides, AIMEN currently hosts the Technical Secretariat and 
Coordination of the Spanish Technology Platform of Photonics (Fotónica21cv), mirror of Photonics21. 

 
105 
AIMEN has contributed to the Strategic Research Agendas of such platforms, and other documents generated 
for the European Commission and Galician authorities (including the RIS3-Galicia strategy) and is currently 
working in a new national multiannual roadmap for the Spanish research in Photonics, for the years 2018-2025. 
AIMEN is also present in other national and international expert panels, consulting committees, groups and  
societies, including EARTO, EARMA, the ELIcvi (European Laser Institute), SECPhO (Southern European Cluster of 
Photonics) and EPIC (European Photonics Industry Cluster). 
AIMEN hast not a specific equality plan related with gender issues; nevertheless, AIMEN applies gender equality 
criteria at all the company levels, in particular including women in decision making positions as well as in all the 
research activities developed by the company. At present, AIMEN encourages women to participate in 
management activities of several projects to ensure that a balance representation is achieved. Besides that, 
AIMEN also encourages women to present their results and research activities at conferences and in the media. 
In this project, the high power ultrafast laser systems available at the AIMEN Laser Applications Centre, together 
with robust optomechanical workbench and advanced nanopositioning systems, will allow testing the current 
upper limits of laser beam micro and nano -structuring. AIMEN will test, produ ce, characterize and optimize a 
range of micro and nanostructures using optical, electron and confocal microscopy, spectroscopy and optical 
interferometry. 
In addition, infrastructures available in Robotics and Control Unit of AIMEN, will contribute the de sign and 
development of automation and control solutions within the project 
Role in the Project: 
AIMEN will lead WP5 Process Monitoring and Control and will support in WP1 Specification and User 
Requirements (laser texturing system design), WP4 high-speed USP laser surface texturing process development 
(initial surface textural definition, surface texturing work programme), WP6 USP/DLIP Integration and Testing 
(System Architecture Development, Integration into Laser Processing Workstation) 
Key Personnel: 
Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Mr. Pablo Romero M Research Strategy Manager 
Background / Education: 
Materials Engineer with 20 years research experience in Process Technology. 
AENOR expert and member of the Technical Committee CTN 209 and ISO TC 172 (Laser 
and Electrooptical Systems) 
Active member of WG2 of Photonics21 and member of the Steering Committee of ELI 
Coordinator of the Spanish photonics platform Fotonica21 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Since 2003 he is Senior Researcher and Project Leader for Laser Materials Processing, with five patents and 
over 20 papers in laser materials processing and microfabrication. He has coordinated more than 15 National 
and European projects related w ith industrial laser processing on diverse application fields. He is currently 
Research Strategy Manager for AIMEN and coordinator of the Spanish photonics platform Fotonica21. 
 Title: 
Ms. 
First Name: 
Nerea 
Surname/Family Name: 
Otero 
Gender: 
F 
Job Title: 
Senior Researcher 
 
 Background / Education: 
Industrial Engineer. 
DAS in Materials Science. 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Nerea has experience in surface processing by laser and thermal spray. Since 2008 she is 
a researcher and project leader in the Laser Applications Centre of AIMEN, working in 
laser materials processing and specifically in laser microprocessing of silicon, metals and 
polymers where she holds several patents, papers and communications to international congresses. She has 
 
 
 
106 
 been involved in the development of applications of laser processing of silicon for PV applications in the 
European Projects ECOSOLAR, REPTILE and PhoSil, and in the national project DOSIL for development of the 
knowledge and methodology to produce new silicon doping process and equipment. She also has been involved 
in the project coordination and process development of laser micromachining and laser-based surface 
functionalization for several applications in different European projects: FAIERA, FABIMED, PHENomenon, etc. 
and national projects (SURFER). 
 
 
 Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Mr. Camilo Prieto M Senior Researcher 
 
 Background / Education: 
Industrial Engineer with a M.S. on Laser Physics and Technology from the Salamanca 
Univ. 
Relevant Experience & Role in the project: 
Camilo has developed his professional career in research centres and technology 
companies, being involved in National and European R&D programs for over 10 years, 
both in Research and in Tech. Transfer roles. In 2011, through an EU Marie Curie 
Fellowship, joined M-Solve Systems Ltd (UK) for 5 years. He was firstly involved in the 
R&D Department developing novel laser processes and afterwards in the Engineering 
Department where he gained experience on the design, development, integration and installation of CNC Laser 
Systems in production environments (particularly galvoscanner systems for PV). He has contributed to several 
publications and holds two patents in the field of laser process applications. He joined AIMEN Laser 
Applications Centre in 2015, where he is Senior Researcher on Control and Automation of Laser Processes. 
 
Relevant Publications / Presentation Events: (Please list 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content) 
1. N. Otero, P. Romero, et al: “Laser heating surface finishing for adapting the nucleate boiling heat transfer”; 
Photonics West 2016, San Francisco (USA). 
2. P. Romero. N. Otero, J. Otero, J. García, A. Dannheisig: “Laser Assisted Rollforming Process of Ultra-High 
Strength Steel using a novel Plug-in Diode Heating System”, LAMP2015, Kytakiushu (Japan). 
3. N. Otero, P. Romero, C.Hoff, J. Hermsdorf: “Surface conditioning of copper to improve the continuous wave 
laser micro welding”; LIM2015, Munich (Germany). 
4. N. Otero, P. Romero, I Coto, C. Leira:” High aspect ratio microfeatures with laser surface texturing”, LPM2014, 
Vilnius (Lithuania). 
5. J. L.Mato, M.Pereira, J. J.Rodríguez-Andina, J.Fariña, E.Soto, and R.Pérez, “Distortion mitigation in RF power 
amplifiers through FPGA-based amplitude and phase predist ortion”, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 55, pp. 
4085–4093, (2008). 
Relevant Projects / Activities: (Please list 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of 
this proposal) 
1. SURFER: “Development of applications of laser technologies in modification and finishing of functional 
surfaces”. National Project (PID-600300-2009-16) from 2009 to 2011. 
2. FABIMED “Fabrication and functionalization of biomedical microdevices”. FP7-2013-NMP-ICT-FOF (RTD). 
Grant agreement no: 608901 from 2013. 
3. LASHARE: Laser equipment Assessment for high impact innovation in the manufacturing european industry. 
Grant Agreement no: 609046. 
4. FAIERA: Fostering AIMEN research potential in laser technology for materials processing. GA no: 316161. 
5. MASHES: Snapshot spectral imager for cost effective IR surveillance (2014) - GA645114 
6. PHENOMENON: Laser Manufacturing of 3D nanostructured optics using Advanced Photochemistry (from 
2018) – GA780278 
Infrastructure/Equipment: 
 
 
108 
AIMEN has carried out a considerable effort to consolidate as a national reference in R&D activities and at the same 
time, encourage increased competitiveness in the industrial environment. In the last 10 years AIMEN has recruited 
more than 50 researchers and has invested more than 8.5 M€ in State of the Art research equipment. 
Furthermore, AIMEN has completed more than 250 R&D&i projects in the last decade, most of them in collaboration 
with Spanish and European industrial companies. This has consolidated the position of AIMEN as a research centre in 
the Spanish and European industrial environment with major impact in industrial competitiveness of nearby 
companies and creating wealth and high quality jobs. 
Important investments have been performed in the last decade in order to create AIMEN Laser Applications Centre 
and push forward its activity in the fields of Macro and Micro processing. As a last step, AIMEN has recently finished 
a new building dedicated to laser applications (co -funded by the Galician Government a nd the Ministry of Economy 
with FEDER funds).  
 
Figure 1: Laser based manufacturing equipment available in AIMEN~ 
The equipment related to laser processing (microprocessing, welding and assisted forming), materials 
characterization, heated assisted forming, process automation, monitoring and control, etc., that will be available for 
the project includes: 
- Nanosecond laser sources: three wavelengths, 1064, 532 and 355 nm, 20 W, at rep-rates up to 200 kHz. 
- Sub-nanosecond passively Q-Switched microchip lasers at 532 nm. 
- 1070 nm single mode fibre laser, 400 W, Trumpf, with 11 microns fibre core. 
- Amplitude Satsuma HP2 systems 20W@500kHz, 40 μJ, 280fs, laser source in 3 wavelengths (1030, 515 and 343 
nm). 
- SpectraPhysics Nd:YAG laser, 1.7 J/pulse, 8 ns, 50 W @30Hz. Harmonic generation up to fourth harmonic. 
- EOLITE systems 40W@2MHz, 30 μJ, 30ps, laser source in 3 wavelengths (1030, 515 and 343 nm). 
- Four and five axis micro and nanopositioners from Newport and Aerotech, with precision air bearing servo stages, 
Newson galvo heads, high numerical aperture optics, integrated range-finder enabled surface scanner. 
- CAD/CAM based development tools for micromanufacturing equipment offline programming. 
- Process monitoring instrumentation: including Photron high speed (100 kfps) camera, Ocean Optics spectrometer, 
PhotonFocus high dynamic range scientific camera, NIT high speed infrared matrix ... 
- FPGAs and development tools, laboratory for fast prototyping of electronics, libraries for hardware processing 
development and firmware programming. Development tools for hardware image processing. 
- Characterization equipment, including Electronic Microscopy with microchemical analysis probe, Optical 
Microscopy, Confocal Microscopy,  profilometry, micromechanical and nanomechanical testing, instrumental 
chemical analysis (ICP, FTIR, XRS, HPLC, …), X-Ray diffraction, and extensive sample preparation equipment 
 
 
Figure 2: High precision manufacturing equipment available in AIMEN 
 
 
 

 
109 
 
 
 
Infrastructures available in Robotics and Control Unit of AIMEN: 
• A Laboratory for Industrial Robotics with several manipulators (from ABB, KUKA, MOTOMAN) that could be 
easily integrated with different systems and tools to test different pilot applications into laboratory 
environment. 
• A laboratory equipment for the development of innovative sensors and embedded systems. 
• Machine vision laboratory including different vision systems and vision software.  
 
Figure 3: Control systems developed by AIMEN for Laser based manufacturing 
 
 
 
 

 
109 
14 - TWI 
 
 
 
TWI Limited 
www.twi.co.uk 
RTO 
 
930 employees 
Organisation Description: 
TWI Ltd (TWI) is one of Europe's largest independent RTOs, specialising in all aspects of materials joining and 
associated technologies. TWI is a non-profit-distributing organisation with approximately 700 industrial member 
companies; supporting activities on ~3,500 sites in 60 countries across all sectors manufacturing. Furthermore, 
TWI also has a proven record of accomplishment in successfully managing and participating in projects funded 
both by the European Commission and  the UK government. TWI operates a Quality Assurance scheme certified 
to ISO 9001:2000. 
TWI has been involved in the development of laser materials processing since the late 1960s. TWI’s expertise 
includes the modelling, process development and industrial application of laser welding and laser surface 
texturing for high -performance, multifunctional applications. There is a significant amount of complimentary 
expertise available at TWI to support this project, including laser welding and surface texturing, t ribological 
testing, extensive material knowledge, material characterisation and testing. Part of TWI’s focus in this project is 
to promote the high speed manufacturing benefits, add durable functionality for various critical applications 
across industries such as automotive, marine and aerospace. 
Role in the Project: 
TWI will lead WP4 High -speed USP Laser Surface Texturing – process development and will support in WP1 
Specification and User Requirements (industrial case study requirement capture, laser te xturing system design, 
business and operational requirements), WP2 USP Laser Development (Research and design development of 
shorter pulse and improved beam quality source architectures), WP5 Process Monitoring and Control (analysis of 
characteristic optical signals and modelling of surface texturing), WP6 USP/DLIP Integration and Testing (system 
architecture development), WP7 End User Demonstrations 
Key Personnel: 
Title:         First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Dr Andy Wilson M Senior Project Leader 
Dr. Andy J Wilson is a Senior Project Leader in the Laser and Sheet Processes Section 
at TWI Ltd. He has a BEng (Hons) in Automotive Materials from Loughborough 
University and an Engineering Doctorate (EngD) from the University of Surrey on ‘The 
Influence Of Laser Parameters on the Surface Processing of Materials’. Andy has over 
6 years of experience in ultrashort pulsed laser processing for ablation, surfacing and 
microprocessing. Andy is also the leader of the  ‘laser surfacing’ and ‘laser processing 
of polymers’ activities within TWI. 
 Title: 
Dr 
First Name: 
Jonathan 
Surname/Family Name: 
Blackburn 
Gender: 
M 
Job Title: 
Group Manager 
 
 Dr Jonathan Blackburn is the Manager of the Laser and Sheet Processes Section at 
TWI, and Group Manager for Operations for the Joining Technology Group. He joined 
TWI in 2010 as a Project Leader with an Engineering Doctorate in Manufacturing 
Engineering from The University of Manchester. In 2008 he completed a Postgraduate 
Diploma in Management Sciences at Manchester Business School. He has experience 
in the development of high integrity laser welding processes for a range of metallic 
materials, and in the application of analytical and statistical techniques to understand 
key process mechanisms. He has been involved in several UK and European 
collaborative research programmes and has managed numerous industry projects 
with values in the range €10k - €1.3M. 
 

 
110 
 
Title: First Name:     Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Dr Paola De Bono F Team Manager 
Paola De Bono is Team Manager in the Laser and Sheet Processes Section at TWI 
Ltd. She has a Master Degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of 
Palermo, in Italy, and studied to gain the status of Chartered Engineer with the 
Italian Engineering Body Association. Paola has over 7 years of specific experience 
in laser processing for micro-scale applications, including joining of high reflective 
metals and dissimilar materials applications. Paola has undertaken an Engineering 
Doctorate in Birmingham University to investigate ‘Laser Welding of Copper and 
Aluminium Alloys for electrical Interconnects’. She has been involved in several UK 
and European co llaborative research programmes, and has managed numerous 
industry projects with values in the range €10k - €1.3M. Examples are the H2020 
projects QCOALA – Grant agreement no: 260153 and ModuLase - Grant agreement 
no: 723945. 
 Title: First Name: Surname/Family Name: Gender: Job Title: 
Dr Amit Rana M Senior Project Leader 
 
 Dr Amit Rana - Senior Project Leader in the Tribology and Coatings Engineering (TCE) 
group. He has a PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from The University of 
Sheffield (2011) and has over five years’ experience in materials characterisation, 
failure analysis, tribology and detailed investigation of materials for industrial 
applications. He has gained an in -depth understanding of tribological study of the 
wear c haracteristics and surface properties of materials under different service 
conditions and is a Fellow of the Royal Microscopical Society and is also a 
Professional Member of the Institute of Materials, Minerals and Mining. Prior to his 
PhD and professional career, Amit gained a BSc Honours Degree on Forensic 
Engineering from Sheffield Hallam University. Amit has experience in the processing of transparent conductive 
films by sol-gel synthesis and has managed a range of industrially focussed research and development projects. 
 
Relevant Publications: 
1. Wilson A, Jones I, Salamat-Zadeh F and Watts J F, 2015: Laser surface modification of poly(etheretherketone) 
to enhance surface free energy, wettability and adhesion. International J. of Adhesion and Adhesives 62, S. 
69- 77. 
2. PPP FoF Impact Workshop, 2014 March 24 -25, Brussels (Belgium), Invited Speaker: to present the project 
QCOALA (FoF.ICT.2010.10.1 theme - QCOALA – Grant agreement no: 260153) as example story of successful 
EU funded project. 
Relevant Projects: 
1. TailorWeld, FP7 Grant number 606046 - Use of interchangeable Diffractive Optical Element (DOE) to split and 
direct a laser for development of tailored energy distributions. 
2. LASHARE, FP7 Grant number 609046 – Multiple smaller laser-related development projects 
3. RADICLE, H2020, Grant number 636932 - Development of a dynamic control technology for process control 
and demonstration to the materials processing sector. 
A series of none publicly supported projects (i.e. single client projects) have been undertaken to date; the work 
has been contract research of TRL 4 to 6+. 
Significant relevant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment: 
• 25W picosecond pulsed laser (1064nm and 532nm wavelengths) 
• 100W nanosecond pulsed laser 
• 50W nanosecond pulsed fibre laser 
• 40W nanosecond pulsed fibre laser 
• 200W single-mode Yb-fibre laser. 
• 1kW single-mode Yb-fibre laser. 
 
 
114 
5kW multi-mode Yb-fibre laser. 
• Arges 3D elephant galvanometer driven laser beam scanner. 
• Modular Optoskand, Precitec and HighYAG laser welding heads. 
• Range of 6-axis articulated arm robots and XY tables. 
• Metallography laboratory. 
• Destructive and non-destructive testing equipment. 
The technologies available at TWI for the PROMETHEUS project for tribological testing are: 
• Surface profilometry – White light interferometry 
 
• Surface profilometry – Atomic Force Microscopy 
 
 
 
• Surface hardness and scratch resistance - Nanoindentation and Nanoscratch 
 
 
• Tribological testing instruments and abrasion testers. 
- Test capabilities include Linear, fast reciprocating, rotary, block-on-ring and elevated temperature 
(1000oC) drives, 0.1mN to 100N contact loads, Inert gas atmosphere and lubricated tests 
 
 
TWI has further capabilities in materials testing including accelerated UV weathering, harsh environment testing and 
a range of mechanical and corrosion tests. 
 
  

 
115 
15 – EdgeWave 
 
EW 
 
www.edge-wave.de  
SME 
65 employees 
Organisation Description: 
EdgeWave is an innovative provider of high -end laser sources. EdgeWave is the pioneer and leader of innovative slab 
(InnoSlab) technology. Based on InnoSlab technology EdgeWave developed and introduced commercially short and 
ultra-short pulse lasers. In combination of peak power, pulse energy, beam quality, flexibility, compactness and 
scalability InnoSlab lasers are one of the most effective and affo rdable laser sources. InnoSlab lasers enable users to 
improve existing manufacturing processes and to develop and to introduce new manufacturing processes and new 
products. 
Role in the Project: 
EdgeWave will be leading WP2 – Ultrashort Pulse Laser Development. During WP2, EW will research and develop the 
required architecture to achieve pulse durations below 10ns at powers above 1kW and pulse repetition rates above 
500Hz. This development will also include research improved beam quality, research into modu lar laser amplification 
architectures that can work with interference patterning and diffractive optics in the processing tool. 
EW will support in WP3 High-speed laser surface texturing system development, WP4 High-speed laser surface 
texturing process development, WP5 Process Monitoring and Control, WP6 USP/DLIP Integration and Testing and WP7 – 
End User case study demonstration. 
Key Personnel: 
Dr. Keming Du; 
Dr. Rüdiger Haas; Mr. Alexander Schell; Dr. Daijun Li 
Relevant Publications / Presentation Events:  
- 1st prize of the "Innovation award laser technology 2010” 
- 1st prize of the " Innovation award laser technology 2012" 
- Stifterverband’s Science Award 2012 
- 2. Leibinger price 2012 
- Arthur L. Schawlow Award 2015 from Laser Institute of America. 
Relevant Projects / Activities:  
VDI-Technologiezentrum: FKZ: 13N8504 „Grundlagen für Slablaser mit einer Ausgangsleistung größer als 500 W“ 
VDI-Technologiezentrum: FKZ: 13N11623 „Untersuchungen von InnoSlab-Verstärkern für Kilowatt 
Femtosekundenlaser und Hochleistungs-Faraday-Rotatoren“ 
VDI-Technologiezentrum: FKZ: 13N9581 „Untersuchungen eines Slabverstärkers für die Leistungssteigerung eines 
Pikosekundenlasers 
ZIM: FKZ: ZF4322502SY7 „Pikosekunden-Laserstrahlquelle mit TopHat-Intensitätsverteilung für das 
produktionstaugliche Laserinterferenzverfahren“ 
VDI-Technologiezentrum: FKZ: 13N13092 „Mikro- und nanoskalige Oberflächenfunktionalisierung durch Multistrahl-
Laserverfahren (Multisurf)“ 
Relevant Publications / Presentation Events:  
M. Du, N.-L. Wu, J.-D. Xu, J. Giesekus, P. Loosen, R. Poprawe, Partially end-pumped Nd:YAG slab laser with a hybrid 
resonator, Opt. Lett. 23, 370 (1998) 
K.-M. Du, D.-J. Li, H.-L. Zhang, P. Shi, X.-Y. Wei, R. Diart, Electro-optically q-switched Nd:YVO4 slab laser with a high 
repetition rate and short pulse width, Opt. Lett. 28, 87 (2003) 
Peng Shi, Daijun Li, Hengli Zhang, Yongdong Wang, Keming Du, An 110 W Nd: YVO4-slab laser with high beam quality 
output, Opt. Comm, 229 (2004) 349–354 
K Du, High-power diode lasers and their applications, Proceedings of SPIE, 1998  
Citations: 2 
K.-M. Du, Unique performances and favourable applications of INNOSLAB lasers, SPIE Proc. Photonics West 2009, San 
Jose, 7193 
Relevant Projects / Activities: 
VDI-Technologiezentrum: FKZ: 13N14643 „Strahlvorverstärkung, Verstärkung und effiziente Frequenzkonversion 
IMPULS-EW“; PT-Jülich: FKZ: WABC100355714 „Hochgeschwindigkeitsbearbeitung von Batterien nächster Generation – 
3DBat-EW“; PT-Jülich: FKZ: 03EE1008B „Entwicklung von frei -triggerbaren ps -InnoSlab Laser zur 
Hochgeschwindigkeitsstrukturierung von Si-Solarzellen“ 

 
116 
16 – IRIS  
 
 
 
IRIS 
 
www.iristechnologygroup.com 
RTO 
Organisation Description: 
IRIS Technology Group (http://www.iristechnologygroup.com/) is an advanced engineering Group that was 
established in Barcelona in 2007. Since 2011, it also operates from Dublin (Ireland) whereas the Barcelona office is 
referred to as IRIS Technology Soluti ons S.L. It specialises in the manufacture and integration of Process Analytical 
Technology (PAT)-based real-time quality monitoring solutions for the process industries and IoT systems for smart 
manufacturing, predominantly targeted at the food, pharmaceutical and chemical industries. In particular, our product 
line comprises proprietary state-of-the-art IR analysers for at-line and in-line process monitoring.  
On the one hand, our solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics in the fields of MEMs, Near Infrared 
Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral Imaging, and Raman. On the other hand, we leverage ICTs, whereby we apply Machine 
learning, Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining techniques for predictive and active control, as well as for decision 
support systems. In addition to photonics-based analysers, we also work with IoT sensors for enabling equipment and 
machinery for smart manufacturing and transitioning industry to the Industry4.0 paradigm. Our solutions are cloud -
based for mobility, remote monitoring and multi-site applications.  
Our Innovation Division which is governed by an Innovation Committee comprising Senior Management, and an 
Innovation Unit for managing and executing the companies innovation roadmap, has 3 core strategic lines, for shaping 
the Factory of the Future: 
• New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process optimisation 
• ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms) 
• Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorisation 
In addition to running an internal R&D programme, as well as carrying our various joint private projects with industry 
partners, our Innovation Division is highly experienced in working in collaborative R&D projects in H2020 (both as 
coordinators and partners), principally in the SPIRE, FoF, and BBI programmes. The company was established in 2007 
and currently employs 60+ staff with a turnover of € 5 M. It is equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing 
and wet chemistry laboratory, opt ics labs (2), and an electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 
certified and also is certified under UNE -EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i. We are also certified by the 
local (Catalonian) government as a provider of technological R&D services (Tecnio Certification). IRIS is a member of 
the following sectorial networks: SPIRE, SPIE and SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial collectives such as Smart 
Space (association of companies and organisations that specialise in the ‘smartification’ of industry). 
 

 
117 
Role in the Project: 
IRIS will be contributing for the WP5 Process Monitoring and Control developing of an in -line monitoring unit, which 
addresses the development of the in-line quality control system for the different case studies. Moreover, will contribute 
on defining the optical technology suitable for nanometric surface features quality control. Developing a functional 
prototype suitable for industrial settings use and testing and validating the new nanometrology prototyp e surface 
functionalities and performance. Finally, transversal contributions will be given to the management team in terms of 
Exploitation and Dissemination aspects with the knowhow acquired during the project. 
Specific competences and experiences:  
IRIS has a matrix of multidisciplinary knowledge groups in the company with strong expertise in engineering and science. 
With its team and resources, including electronics, mechatronics, mechanical, optical, industrial design engineers, as 
well as specialists in system engineering, application programming and web development etc. the group can carry out 
full system design and engineering, including electronic design and assembly, firmware and software development, 
electrical harnesses and interconnections, mecha nical design for enclosure and prototype integration, as well as 
installation, validation and industrialisation of prototypes and equipment in production plants. As such they have 
recently delivered advanced plastic sorting devices. In addition to this bro ad cross-disciplinary engineering team, IRIS’ 
research team consists of data scientists, chemiometricians, chemists and physicists, among others, who have the 
expertise to validate the technologies developed. 
Key Personnel: 
Dr. Ing. ELODIE BUGNICOURT (female) Project manager and Leader of the innovation unit in IRIS since 2009. Masters 
in Material Science & Engineering (2002), PhD in Polymers and Composite Materials (2005), both from National Institute 
of Applied Science (INSA), Lyon, France . Coordinated several European projects in the fields of bio -based packaging 
materials development, process monitoring, surface treatment. Previous industry experience: Arkema; Wacker Chemie, 
Ashland. 
MSc ALBERT TORRES. PMO Manager (Male)  at IRIS. Masters in Industrial Engineering (2009) from the Polytechnic 
University of Catalonia (UPC-ETSEIB) in Barcelona. Postgraduate in Project Management (2013) from the University of 
Barcelona (UB-IL3) and currently developing a Postgraduate in Business Innovation, fro m the University of Catalonia 
(UPC). He spent almost 5 years as being member of the International Project Office of LEITAT Research Centre, where 
he could deployed the knowledge and experience of managing and coordinate Public Funded Research Projects unde r 
the different financial International, National and Regional schemes: H2020, ERA -Nets, JTIs, CIEN, RIS3CAT,… sharing 
experiences with the top R&D performing entities around Europe. At IRIS, he is leading the PMO Office with a team of 
five Project Managers, leading them with passion and optimistic attitude, believing that great results are achievable in 
well-functioning teams. Moreover, contributes on the business strategy development and commercial decision-making, 
sharing his experience in risk management and portfolio management.  
 
Dr. DAVID NETTLETON. (male) Data Mining Analyst. Has a Ph.D in Artificial Intelligence from the Universitat Politécnica 
de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, M.Sc. In Computer Software and Systems Design from the University of Newcastle 
upon Tyne, U.K., and B.Sc. (Hons) Computer Science from the University of Wolverhampton, U.K. Has over 20 years 
experience of applying data mining algorithms (including neural networks, rule induction) and statistical techniques 
(including ANOVA, regression, principal components) in a diversity of data ana lysis and modeling projects, such as 
medical diagnosis/prognosis, fraud detection, customer loyalty and segmentation, online user web search behaviour 
and data privacy. As well as commercial projects, he has conducted research and lectured at two universit ies. He has 
published a diversity of articles in specialised data analysis journals/congresses and three books. He has participated 
in several competitive multi -partner research projects and has a European patent application for a graph matching 
algorithm.  
JOSE ANTONIO IBARRA FUSTE (male).  Scrum Master. PhD. in Signal Theory and Communications, Universitat 
Politècnica de Catalunya, Spain (2014), Thesis title: “Design Rules and Optimization of Electro-Optics Modulators Based 
on Coplanar Waveguides”; the project dealt with the development of new models to design high speed electro-optical 
modulators based in LiNbO3, where a novel software to design and optimize these modulators was created. Master 
Degree in Telecommunication Systems from Universidad de Orient e, Cuba (2005).  Telecommunication Engineer 
Degree from Universidad de Oriente, Cuba (2003).  Author of several papers in journals of high international impact. 
Experienced in optical communication softwares as Virtual Photonic (VPI), OptSim, and in electromagnetic structures 
simulators as High Frequency Structural Simulator (HFSS) and ADS. Experience for more than 5 years in many 
 
118 
programming languages. 
Relevant Publications / Presentation Events 
1. Patent Application No. 1716193.6 "AN INTEGRATED OPTICAL SYSTEM FOR THE EXAMINATION OF SAMPLE 
MATERIALS"  
2. Relevant product lines: Monitoring devices for real-time quality control: 
• VisumPALM: NIR technology for incoming material quality control and detection of adulteration.   
• VisumNIR: In-Line NIR monitoring for product standardization and increase of production efficiency.   
• Hypera: Hyperspectral imaging solutions for the industry 
3. Related services: Chemiometrics model development and training 
4. B2B contracts in the field of multilayer plastic films sorting 
Relevant Projects / Activities 
1. Cloud-enabled IR spectroscopy platform for the rapid integration and customisation of affordable, real -time 
chemical monitoring solutions for food and pharmaceutical industries (SMEI -Phase 2-Grant Agreement number: 
731043) 
2. OptiNanoPro, Processing and control of novel nanomaterials in packaging, automotive and solar panel processing 
lines, H2020- NMP-PILOTS, 2015-2018 
3. OPTIJECT, A novel spectroscopic instrument for in-line monitoring during injection moulding; Grant agreement; FP7 
R4SMEs, 2010-2012 
4. Hypera, Affordable hyperspectral Imaging System for on -line foreign body detection and chemical composition 
analysis, H2020- SMEInst, 2016-2017 
5. MULTICYCLE (H2020 SPIRE) Advanced & sustainable recycling processes and value chains for plastic -based multi-
materials, 2018-2021 
PROMETHEUS relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:  
Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, a FTIR -ATR (Interspectrum), 2 UV -VIS 
(PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), an Extended -SWIR (StellarNet) and a NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as well as a 
SWIR Hyperspectral imager (Specim -Xenics). The associated staff are properly trained  and skilled in chemometrics 
modelling by using a commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non -commercial chemometric 
tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes). 
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up -to-date hardware and tools: signal 
generators, wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for programming 
microcontrollers, CNC-milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD software [SolidWorks ], 
among others.   
Our optical engineers work with ZEEMAX software for optimally designing of optical systems and to setup the designs 
by means of advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and 
related “opticalware”). 
Food and wet chemistry lab equipped with a DSC, a Surface Energy analyser, an HPLC, a Cobb tester, microbiological 
equipments, microspcope and microtome for structural analysis, migration cells, colourimeter (for colour and opacity 
measurement), Ford cup viscometers, water vapour permeation cells, turbidimeter, climatic chambers, manual and 
automatic coaters, electrospray, different drying technologies, plasma surface activation, etc. 
 
119 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
Networks: 
SecPhO, SPIE, CLP: networks related to photonics and optical technologies 
ISPE, SPIRE: partnerships related to sustainable production respectively in pharma and other processing industries 
(chemicals, plastics, etc.).  
IRIS is a member of the following sectorial networks: SPIRE, SPIE and SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial 
collectives such as Smart Space (association of companies and organisations that specialise in the ‘smartification’ of 
industry). 
In the frame of the H2020 SPIRE10-2018 project MultiCycle, coordinated by IRIS, a Circular Plastics Helix will be set up 
and will be proposed as dissemination channel to all projects of related thematics like REMADYL 
 
  
 
120
4.2 Third parties involved in the project (including use of third party resources) 
 
o ORGANISATIONS USING SUBCONTRACTORS: 
• MTC 
o ORGANISATIONS USING THIRD PARTIES: 
• Maier 
• VISUM 
 4 - VISUM 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
 
NO 
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted: 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties?2 YES 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the 
foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party: 
The involvement of IRIS (Innovació i Recerca Industrial i Sostenible, S.L.) as third party of VISUM LTD, will 
allow to increase the level of excellence of the technical work planned in the project as IRIS staff are familiar 
with validation of the monitoring devices performance and control systems development. IRIS has performed 
activities as a linked third party of VISUM from the beginning of the project until the 31st December 2019.  
IRIS is an advanced engineering company that specialises in process monitoring and control, and process 
optimisation. Its commercial division offers advanced monitoring and control solutions based on: NIR 
chemical monitoring (handheld device and in-line solutions); hyperspectral imaging solutions for foreign body 
detection and chemical composition analysis; data management solutions for data processing, decision 
support, automation and data analysis (big production data). 
Our research division has three core research lines: 
1. Optical and spectroscopy technologies (e.g. MEMs spectrophotometers, fluorescence and Raman) for 
process monitoring for on-line and PAT applications in food, pharmaceuticals and the process industries 
2. Novel processing technologies (ultrasound, plasma, microwave…) for process intensification and non -
thermal decontamination 
3. Sustainable processing technologies: waste valorisation strategies, biocompounds and biopackaging for 
the circular economy 
The company was established in 2007 and currently employs 56 staff with a turnover of €2 M. It is equipped 
with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an 
electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified and al so is certified under UNE -EN-ISO 
166002: Management Systems R&D&i. While VISUM is specialised in optical engineering, IRIS has instruments 
and specific skills for supporting VISUM in the validation of the developed sensors and in creating control 
systems. Key staff at IRIS who will be involved in carrying out this work: 
Mr. DAVID MONTES MONTESERIN. (male) BSc in Mechanical Engineering (2011), Polytechnic University of 
Catalonia (UPC), Barcelona. Prior to joining the Production Processes group at IRIS as Mec hanical Design 
Engineer, he gained wide experience in product design and development, including dosing systems for the 
 
121 
chemical industry and both industrial and domestic appliances for the water treatment sector. He has also 
held positions as Engineering Team Manager, applying renewable energies to industrial-sized drinking water 
plants among other projects. He is specialised in design for manufacturing and is proficient in SolidWorks, 
design software which has taught to several companies as a freelancer.  
MSc. ALEJANDRO ROSALES (male) has a M. Sc. in Physics from the Universidad de La Habana (1986). His 
background comprises theoretical and technical skills in several scientific and technological areas: optics, 
lasers, high vacuum, colorimetry, UV-VIS-NIR-MIR spectroscopy, chemometrics and design of measurement  
instruments. He has extensive practical experience in programming, electronics and mechanical CAD design 
as well as R&D methodology and management. His career has included positions as researcher appli cations 
engineer, design engineer, business developer and R&D manager. In 2000s, he worked in the FTIR 
spectroscopy field applied to quality control in the agro-food (wine) industry, whereby he developed two new 
measurement instruments for wine analysis. His career as industrial physicist has been focused in applying 
his wide expertise  to provide solutions for industrial problems. Since 2011, he has been the Technical 
Manager in IRIS, leading a staff of 20 engineers and researchers involved in R&D projects aimed at developing 
novel high-end solutions for industry. Currently, he is the Science & Technology Manager in IRIS. 
Dr. LAURA RODRÍGUEZ TURIENZO. (female) B.S in Food Science & Technology (2008) Masters in Innovation 
in Safety & Food Technolog ies (2010), PhD in Biological Sciences (2011), all from University of Santiago de  
Compostela (USC), Spain. She has participated in a number of R&D regionally and nationally funded projects 
aimed at developing and validating new bio-based active edible packaging, physico-chemical characterization 
of novel foods and valorisation of food industry wastes. She is author of several papers in peer -reviewed 
journals and has participated in different national and international conferences. 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions: 
 
 
 
9-MAIER 
 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
 
NO 
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted: 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties?2 YES 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the 
foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party: 
In order to achieve the objectives planned in the project, the industrial partner MAIER (profit organisation) will 
work along with its research centre called MTC ES (MAIER TECHNOLOGY CENTRE), in which MAIER has a 
participation of 84.62%. MTC ES will participate as a linked third party of MAIER in the achievement of some 
tasks in the project. MTC ES is an R&D a non-profit organisation dedicated to the research and development in 
the field of thermoplastic injection molding, decorative and assembly technologies and analysis and 
implementation of production facilities for automotive. The technological capacity of the centre is based on its 
team, currently formed of more than 100 people, mostly with technical skills (higher engineering with a strong 
 
122 
vocation for research, development and innovation). 
Short description of the work to be carried out 
MTC ES will support the partner MAIER in the specification and requirement definition, characterization and 
dissemination activities. MTC ES contribution and knowledge will be crucial to obtain the pursued results 
throughout the project 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions: 
 
 
10-CRF 
 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
 
NO 
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted: 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties?2 NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the 
foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party. 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
 
YES 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions: 
Contribution in kind against payment for specialists seconded at CRF’s premises from CRF’s parent company FCA 
Italy. Seconded specialists are involved in WP4 and WP7 on the CRF case study development with particular focus 
on the tool specification for both hot and cold forming stamping process including the material specification, the 
load cases definition and the comparison between the current tool die manufacturing processes with respect to 
the PROMETHEUS process.  
The secondment represent 17% of the total effort of CRF planned in the GA-Annex I. 
 
 
11- MTC 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
 
YES 
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted: 
EUREXPLOIT LTD [EUX] is a micro -SME registered in England and Wales and situated in Leicestershire, UK. It is 
the only enterprise in Europe  licensed to provide Network Patent Analysis [NPA] consultancy services to 
European companies and project consortia. 
 
EUX uses powerful, proprietary, spring algorithms, embodied in two software suites (Ai and AS) to provide NPA 
services. These algorithms are unique in the world and enable EUX to offer exceptional ‘Value for Money’ 
because, in comparison to standard searc h practices, NPA not only identifies relevant patents and applications 
significantly faster (approx. 50% reduction in search time), and therefore at lower cost, but also offers many 
additional benefits to the DLIP consortium including, but not limited to, identification of: 
• clusters of patents (‘patent thickets’) and the ‘white spaces’ between them which represent areas in 
which new technologies might be developed; 
 
123 
• no-go areas in which HS-DLIP developments might infringe third-party patents; 
• new opportunities (markets) for exploitation of both background and foreground IP in the project; 
• trends in patenting activity in relevant technology sectors; 
• competitor activities; 
• the most recent patents and applications in the pertinent technology sectors. 
Which is all at a lower cost than standard fees charged by European Patent Attorney practices and other 
consultancies. 
In summary, the combination of unique algorithms enabling NPA offers exceptional value for money and the fact 
that EUX is the sole European agent for their use in collaborative research projects means that it provides the 
best option for a robust patent analysis. 
EUX was involved in the development of the PROMETHEUS proposal through confidential assessment of the 
consortium’s backgrou nd IP and the anticipated foreground IP and is therefore intimate with the partners’ 
positioning in the relevant industrial sectors and with the overall patent landscapes for those sectors. 
EUX has already been sub-contracted to carry out NPA activities in other H2020 projects across a wide range of 
technology sectors including:  
RADICLE (FoF – defect-free laser welding), PERFoRM (FoF – manufacturing apps), E-ferry (all-electric car and 
passenger ferry), StreetHopper (small cell back-haul for mobile service providers) and OpenHybrid (hybrid 
additive manufacture) – all of which can be found in the CORDIS database. 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performance by linked third parties? NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the 
foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party: 
 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
 
NO 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions: 
 
 
14-TWI 
 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
NO 
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted: 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties?2 NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the 
foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party. 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
 
YES 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions: 
TWI has established and manages the National Structural Integrity Research Centre (NSIRC), which is a state -of-
the-art postgraduate engineering facility, working closely with a number of academic partners and a range of 
industrial partners. The collaborating partners provide academic excellence to address the need for fundamental 
research, as well as high-quality, industry-relevant training for the next generation of structural integrity engineers. 
TWI envisages entering into a Studentship Agreement with one of the NSIRC academic partners to second a Student 
to TWI to work exclusively on the Action at TWI premises. The student will provide a dedicated, cost effective 
resource to support the delivery of the project. The cost will be included in the budget under direct personnel costs. 
 
124 
 
125 
5. Ethics and Security 
 
5.1. Ethics 
Having considered the ethical issues around the project, it is concluded that: 
• This project involves experiments with lasers. The appropriate laser safety rules need to be complied with in 
accordance with Grant agreement article 34.1.b and the applicable law [notably EU directive 2006/25/EC on 
"health and safety requirements regarding the exposure of workers to risks arising from artificial optical 
radiation" including amendments thereof, with the related national law. 
• This project involves material processing with high -power lasers, which may lead to emission of ionising 
radiation (e.g. x-rays). The appropriate health and safety rules need to be complied with in accordance with 
Grant agreement article 34.1.b and the applicable law [notably EU directive 2013/59/Euratom on "basic 
safety standards for protection against the dangers ari sing from exposure to ionising radiation" including 
amendments thereof, and the related national law]. 
• This project possibly involves the use of hazardous substances. The appropriate protection measures for 
workers need to be complied with in accordance with Grant agreement article 34.1.b and the applicable law 
[notably the EU directive 98/24/EC on the "protection of the health and safety of workers from the risks  
related to chemical agents at work" including amendments thereof, and the related national law. This is to 
be seen also in the context of the European regulations 1907/2006 on the Registration, Evaluation, 
Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) and 1272/2008 on Classification, Labelling and Packaging 
of substances and mixtures (CLP) with the included lists of substances. 
• The project involves delivery of technical items to project partners from non-EU  countries  i.e.  Israel and 
Turkey. The applicable export restrictions, notably Council regulation (EC) No 428/2009 (including 
amendments thereof) need to be complied with. 
• The project involves processing of basic personal data (e.g. contact details and job function) for 
communication/dissemination measures including public workshops. Privacy of personal data needs to be 
respected in accordance with the General Date Protection Regulation (EU) 2016/679. 
 
 
 
 
5.2. Security 
 
Please indicate if your project will involve: 
• activities or results raising security issues: NO 
• 'EU-classified information' as background or results: NO 
 
126 
 
 
 
i E. Willis, “Surface finish in relation to cylinder liners,” Wear, vol. 109, pp. 351 -366, 1986. 
ii Y.R. Jeng, “Impact of plateaued surfaces on tribological performance,” Tribol. Trans., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 354 -361, 1996. 
iii R. Ranjan, D.N. Lambeth, M. Tromel, P. Goglia and Y. Li, “Laser texturing for low -flying-height media,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 69, 
no. 8, pp. 5745-5747, 1991. . 
iv L. Zhou, K. Kato, G. Vurens and F.E. Talke, “The effect of slider surface texture on flyab ility and lubricant migration under 
near contact conditions,” Tribol. Int., vol. 36, no. 4-6, pp. 269-277, 2003. 
v K. Komvopoulos, “Adhesion and friction forces in microelectromechanical systems: Mechanisms, measurement, surface  
modification techniques and adhesion theory,” J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 477 -517, 2003. 
vi D.B. Hamilton, J.A. Walowit and C.M. Allen, “A theory of lubrication by microirregularities,” ASME Journal of Basic  
Engineering, vol. 88, no. 1, pp. 177-185, 1966. 
vii J.N. Anno, J.A. Walowit and C.M. Allen, “Microasperity lubrication,” ASME Journal of Basic Engineering, vol. 91, no. 2, pp.  
351-355, 1968. 
viii J.N. Anno, J.A. Walowit and C.M. Allen, “Load support and leakage from microasperity - Lubricated face seals.,” ASME 
Journal of Basic Engineering, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 726-731, 1969. 
ix   [12] Izhak Etsion, “State of the art in laser surface texturing,” Journal of Tribology, vol. 127, pp. 248 -253, 2005. 
x E. Højlund-Nielsen, J. Clausen, A.B.Christiansen, T. Gr eibe, N.A. Mortensen, A. Kristensen,, “Fast -writing E-beam for defining 
large arrays of nano-holes,” in Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Micro and Nano Engineering, 2013.  
xi Jaeggi, B., Neuenschwander, B., Zimmermann, M., Loor, R. De & P enning, L. High throughput ps-laser micro machining with a 
synchronized polygon line scanner. in 8th International Conference on Photonic Technologies LANE 2014 1 –8 (Bayerisches 
Laserzentrum GmbH, 2014 
xii Braun, D., Greiner, C., Schneider, J. & Gumbsch, P . Efficiency of laser surface texturing in the reduction of friction under 
mixed lubrication. Tribol. Int. 77, 142–147 (2014). 
xiii Wang, Z., Li, Y. -B., Bai, F., Wang, C. -W. & Zhao, Q. -Z. Angle-dependent lubricated tribological properties of stainless stee l by 
femtosecond laser surface texturing. Opt. Laser Technol. 81, 60 –66 (2016). 
xiv Dunn, A. et al. Nanosecond laser texturing for high friction applications. Opt. Lasers Eng. 62, 9 –16 (2014). 
xv Messaddeq, S. H. et al. Self -organized periodic structures o n Ge-S based chalcogenide glass induced by femtosecond laser 
irradiation. Opt. Express 20, 29882 (2012) 
xvi Tshabalala, L. C. & Pityana, S. Surface texturing of Si3N4 -SiC ceramic tool components by pulsed laser machining. Surf. 
Coatings Technol. 289, 52–60 (2016) 
xvii Vorobyev, A. Y. & Guo, C. Multifunctional surfaces produced by femtosecond laser pulses. J. Appl. Phys. 33103, 6 –11 
(2015). 
xviii Zheng, B., Wang, W., Jiang, G. & Mei, X. Fabrication of broadband antireflective black metal surfaces with u ltra-light- 
trapping structures by picosecond laser texturing and chemical fluorination. Appl. Phys. B 122, 180 (2016)  
xix Bird, J. C., Dhiman, R., Kwon, H. -M. & Varanasi, K. K. Reducing the contact time of a bouncing drop. Nature 503, 385 –388 
(2013) 
xx Kromer, R. et al. Laser surface patterning to enhance adhesion of plasma sprayed coatings. Surf. Coatings Technol. 278, 
171–182 (2015) 
xxi Erdoğan, M. et al. Texturing of titanium (Ti6Al4V) medical implant surfaces with MHz -repetition-rate femtosecond and 
picosecond Yb-doped fiber lasers. Opt. Express 19, 10986–10996 (2011) 
xxii Cunha, A. et al. Femtosecond laser surface texturing of titanium as a method to reduce the adhesion of Staphylococcus 
aureus and biofilm formation. Appl. Surf. Sci. 360, 485–493 (2016). 
xxiii Rotella, G., Alfano, M. & Candamano, S. Surface modification of Ti6Al4V alloy by pulsed Yb -laser irradiation for enhanced 
adhesive bonding. CIRP Ann. - Manuf. Technol. 64, 527–530 (2015) 
xxiv Hamilton D B, Walowit J A, Allen C M. A Theory of Lubrication by Microirregularities. J Fluids Eng 1966: 88(1):177 -185, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.3645799 
xxv Etsion I, Kligerman Y, Ronen A. Friction -reducing surface-texturing in reciprocating automotive components. Tribol Trans 
2001; 44:3:359-366. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10402000108982468. 
xxvi Etsion I, Halperin G. Analytical and Experimental Investigation of laser -textured mechanical seal faces. Tribol Trans 1999; 
42:3:511-516, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10402009908982248. 
xxvii Hsu SM, Jing Y.1, Hua D, Zhang H. Friction reduction using discrete surface textures: principle and design. J. Phys. D: Appl.  
Phys. 2014; 47:33:335307, http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0022-3727/47/33/335307 
xxviii Vilhena LM; Podgornik B; Vižintin J; Možina J: Influence of texturing parameters and contact conditions on tribological  
behaviour of laser textured surfaces. Meccanica 2011; 46:3:567-575, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/ s11012-010-9316-x 
xxix Podgornik B; Vilhena LM; Sedlaček M; Rek Z; Žun I: Effectiveness and design of surface texturing for different lubrication  
regimes. Meccanica. 2012; 47:7:1613-1622, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/ s11012-012-9540-7 
xxx Löschner, U, Ullmann, F, Streek, A, Hartwig, L, Klötzer, S. Hochrate -Lasermikrobearbeitung. Ma C et al. Tribology 
International, 44, (2011), pags. 987-995 
 
118 
xxxi A. Luft, U. Franz, A. Emserma nn and J. Kasper, “A study of thermal and mechanical effect on materials induced by pulsed 
laser drilling,” Appl. Phys. A, vol. 63, pp. 93-101, 1996. 
xxxii Weber, R. et al. Heat accumulation during pulsed laser materials processing. Opt. Express 22, 11312 –11324 (2014) 
xxxiii Bauer, F., Michalowski, A., Kiedrowski, T. & Nolte, S. Heat accumulation in ultra -short pulsed scanning laser ablation of 
metals. Opt. Express 23, 1035–1043 (2015) 
xxxiv Schonlau, T., Hebel, R., Pause, S. & Mayer, G. Machining strategies for versatile ultra -short pulse laser applications. in 8th 
International Conference on Photonic Technologies LANE 2014 1–4 (Bayerisches Laserzentrum GmbH, 2014) 
xxxv Bulgakova, N. M. et al. Impacts of ambient and ablation plasmas on short - and ultrashort-pulse laser processing of 
surfaces. Micromachines 5, 1344–1372 (2014) 
xxxvi Jaeggi, B., Neuenschwander, B., Zimmermann, M., Loor, R. De & Penning, L. High throughput ps -laser micro machining 
with a synchronized polygon line scanner. in 8th Intern ational Conference on Photonic Technologies LANE 2014 1 –8 
(Bayerisches Laserzentrum GmbH, 2014) 
xxxvii Moskal, D., Kučera, M., Smazalová, E., Houdková, Š. & Kromer, R. Application of Shifted Laser Surface Texturing. in METAL 
2015 - 24th International Conference on Metallurgy and Materials 1016–1021 (Tanger Ltd., 2015) 
xxxviii Lasers in Manufacturing Conference 2015 - Multi parallel ultrashort pulse laser processing. A. Gillnera, M. Jüngsta, P.  
Gretzkia 
xxxix Du, K., Brüning, S., & Gillner, A,. High power pi cosecond laser with 400W average power for large scale applications. 
Paper presented at the Proceedings of SPIE - the International Society for Optical Engineering, 8244, (2012) 
xl Bringing the Direct Laser Interference Patterning Method to Industry: a One Tool -Complete Solution for Surface 
Functionalization, Lasagni et al, JLMN-Journal of Laser Micro/Nanoengineering Vol. 10, No. 3, 2015 
xli A. Bertsch, S. Jiguet, P. Renaud, J. Micromech. Micro-eng., 14, (2004) 197 
xlii F. Meriche, E, Neiss-Clauss, R. Kremer, A. Boudrioua, E. Dogheche, E. Fogarassy, R. Mouras, A. Bouabellou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 254, 
(2007) 1327. 
xliii A. Lasagni, B. Menéndez-Ormaza, Advanced Engineer-ing Materials, 12, (2010) 54 
xliv Lasagni, A., et al., Adv. Eng. Mater. 12, 54-60 (2010). 
xlv Lang, V., et al. Optimization for high speed surface processing of metallic surfaces utilizing direct laser interference 
patterning, Proc. Of SPIE Vol. 10520, 105200K-1, (2018) 
xlvi Paul Blair, Matthew Currie, Natalia Trela, Howard J.  Baker, Eoin Murphy, Duncan Walker, Roy McBride, “Field mappers for 
laser material processing,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 9727, 2016 
xlvii A. Rodriguez, et al, Femtosecond laser -induced periodic surface nanostructuring of sputtered platinum thin films, Applied 
Surface Science 351 (2015) 135-139 
xlviii A. Martinez -Calderon, et al., Femtosecond laser fabrication of highly hydrophobic tainless steel surface with hierarchical 
structures fabricated by combining ordered microstructures and LIPSS, Applied Surface Science 3 74 (2016) 81-89 
xlix Huang, S.-H., & Pan, Y. -C. (2015). Automated visual inspection in the semiconductor industry: A survey. Computers in 
industry, 66, 1-10. 
l Raskar, R., Tumblin, J., Mpohan, A., Agrawal, A., & Li, Y. (2006). State of the art report (STAR ): computational photography. 
Proc. of ACM Eurographics. Vienna 
li Newman, T. S., Jain, A. K. (1995). A survey of automated visual inspection. Computer Vision and Image Understanding, 61 , 
231-262. 
lii Foix, S., Alenya, G., Torras, C. (2011). Lock-in time-of-flight (ToF) cameras: A survey. IEEE Sensors Journal, 11, 1917-1926. liii 
Levoy, M., Hanrahan, P. (1996). Light field rendering. Proceedings of Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive 
Techniques, (pp. 31-42). New York. 
liv Pernkopf, F., O'Leary, P. (2003). Image Acquisition techniques for automatic visual inspection of metallic surfaces. Non- Dest.Testing 
& Eng. (NDT&E) International, 36, 609-617. 
lv Bodenstorfer, E., Hasani, Y., Fürtler, J., Brodersen, J., & Mayer, K. (2012). High -speed line-scan camera with multi -line CMOS 
color sensor. Proc. of IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW) (pp. 9-14). 
Providence, RI, USA: IEEE. 
lvi Levoy, M., Hanrahan, P. (1996 ). Light field rendering. Proceedings of Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive 
Techniques, (pp. 31-42). New York. 
lvii Venkataraman, K., et al. (2013). PiCam: an ultra -thin high performance monolithic camera array. ACM Transactions on 
Graphics, 32. 
lviii Perwaß, C., Wietzke, L. (2012). Single lens 3D -camera with extended depth -of-field. Proc.IS&T SPIE Electronic Imaging: 
Human Vision and E-Imaging XVII. 8291, pp. 08-15. 
lix Liang, C.-K., Lin, T.-H., Wong, B. -Y., Liu, C., Chen, H. (2008). Programmable aperture photography: multiplexed light field 
acquisition. ACM Trans. on Graphics, 27, 55:1-55:10. 
lx Bolles, R. C., Baker, H. H., David, Marimont, H. (1987). Epipolarplane image  analysis: an approach to determining structure 
from motion. Int. J. of Computer Vision, 1, 7-55. 
lxi Tao, M. W., Srinivasan, P. P. (2015). Depth from shading, defocus, and correspondence using light -field angular coherence. 
Proc. IEEE Comp. Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 
 
119 
lxii Nehab, D., Rusinkiewicz, S., Davis, J., Ramamoorthi, R. (2005). Efficiently combining positions and normals for precise 3D 
geometry. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 24, 536. 
lxiii Kadambi, A., et al. (2015). Polarized 3D: high -quality depth sensing with polarization cues. Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on 
Computer Vision (ICCV), (pp. 3370-3378). 
lxiv E. Bugnicourt et al., Recent Prospects in the Inline Monitoring of Nanocomposites and Nanocoatings by Optic al 
Technologies, Nanomaterials 2016, Review, 6(8), 150 25 THIME, Thinfilm measurements on organic photovoltaic 
(OPV) layers; FP7Grant Agreement no: 315665; 2012-2014 
lxv Dr. schwab GmbH, IQPC – Integrated Quality and Process Control.  
http://www.schwabinspection.com/index.php?puid=1&pageid=39 27 Nanometrics  Impulse, 
http://www.nanometrics.com/products/IMPULSE.html 
lxvi http://www.dfm.dtu.dk/index.php?id=309&L=-1%27 
lxvii Nanometrics Atlas, http://www.nanometrics.com/products/atlas-II.html 
lxviii Nova T600, http://www.novameasuring.com/t600.html 
lxix S.Roy, et al., Coherent Fourier Scatterometry for detection of nanometer -sized particles on a planar substrate surface, 
Optics Express 22 (2014) 13251 
lxx A. Sparavigna, Fourier optics for polymeric substrates and coating texture analysis, 2008, http://arxiv.org/abs/0801.2946. lxxi
 Dr. Schwab DOMS XE-blu, 
http://www.schwabinspection.com/index/dr.schwab+Inspection+Technology/DOMS+Optical+  
Disc+V2.html 33 http://www.singulus.com/en/innovative -technology/surface - 
engineering/crystalline.html 
lxxii Sensofar S Line, http://www.sensofar.com/metrology/sneox/ 
lxxiii H. C. A.A.G.Bruzzone, “Functional characterization of structured surfaces for tribological applications,” 8th CIRP  
Conference on Intelligent Computation in Manufacturing Engineering, no. 456 -461, 2013 
lxxiv N. S. C. L. Gavin D. MacAulay, “Study of manufacturing and measurement rep orducibility on a laser textured structured 
surface,” Measurement, vol. 94, 2016 
lxxv Digital Surf, “Surface texture - Areal Field Parameters,” 2016. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.digitalsurf.com/en/guidearealfieldparameters.html. [Accessed 03 01 2017] 
lxxvi Kehoe, Microelectronic Engineering, 86, 1036 (2009) 
lxxvii Silver, Appl. Opt., 46 (20), 4248 (2015). - Kreuzer, Proc. SPIE 9424, 942426 (2015); Kreuzer, Proc. SPIE 9628, 96281Q 
(2015)-957 (2005) 
lxxviii http://bit.ly/DigIndEU 
lxxix PwC, opportunities and Challenges of the industrial internet (2015), and Boston Consulting Group: the future of 
productivity and growth in manufacturing industries (2015) 
lxxx Estimates by LIFE + series of studies 2016. 
lxxxi European commision, “Factories of the future,” [Online]. Available:  
http://ec.europa.eu/research/industrial_technologies/factories-of-the-future_en.html. 
lxxxii European commission, “Digitising european industry reaping th e full benifits of a digital single 
market,” Brussels, 2016. 
lxxxiii David Belforte, “2015 industrial laser market outperforms global manufacturing instability,”  
Industrial laser solutions for manufacturing, 2016. 
lxxxiv Trumpf, “Annual report 2015/16,” Trumpf, 2016. 
lxxxv IPG Photonics, “IPG photonics reports 9% revenue growth for third quarter 2016,” BusinessWire,  
2016. 
lxxxvi Personal Care Products Market and Forecast, By Type (Skincare, Haircare, Oral Care, Fragrance), And Trend Analysis, 
2014 - 2024 
lxxxvii Global Plastic Packaging Market, Growth, Trends and Forecast (2018 -2023), Mordor Intelligence, Mar 2018. 
lxxxviii Johnson and Johnson Annual Report 2017. 
lxxxix Technavio, Global Dishwasher Market 2017-2021 
xc Fiat Chrysler Automobiles Annual Report 2017 
xci US VEHICLE TECHNOLOGIES OFFICE: LIGHTWEIGHT MATERIALS FOR CARS AND TRUCKS.  
https://energy.gov/eere/vehicles/vehicle-technologies-office-lightweight-materials-cars-and-trucks. Accessed 12th 
December 2016. 
xcii Outlook of the Global Automotive Industry in 2015, Frost & Sullivan, April 2015  
xciii Form honing new optimisation potential for piston engines, ATZ production Volume 4, p20-24 
xciv MTZ 04I2009 Volume 70, p46 -51, T.Hoen, J. Schmid and W. Stumpf Less Wear and Oil Consumption through Helical Slide 
Honing of Engines by Deutz. 
xcv Spitznagel T. et Al. „Reduktion von Zylinderverzügen zur Effizienzsteigerung von Verbrennungsmoto ren – Eine numerische 
Potentialstudie“, Berichtsband des 2. Automobiltechnischen Kolloquiums, Garching, 11. -12. April 2011 
 xcvi Global Powertrain Outlook 2018, Propulsion alternatives to Diesel emerging in the medium term; Strong growth outlook 
for advanced combustion technologies, Frost and Sullivan, March 2018.  
xcvii http://www.acea.be/ 
 
120 
xcviii 1 litre of diesel emits 2.67 kg CO2 
xcix Frost and Sullivan, March 2018, Global Automotive Industry Outlook, 2018  
c Markets and Markets, Aug 2015, Automotive Plastics Market, Global Forecast to 2020 
ci ACEA Pocket Guide 2016-2017 
cii Wohlers report 2017 
ciii www.statista.com/statistics/264211/world-production-of-machine-tools/ 
civ www.technavio.com/report/global-tools-and-components-machine-tools-market 
cv www.fotonica21.org