4. Members of the Consortium .................................................................................................................................... 59 
4.1. Participants .......................................................................................................................................................... 59 
4.2. Third parties involved in the project ..................................................................................................................... 95 
5. Ethics and Security .................................................................................................................................................. 98 
5.1. Ethics ................................................................................................................................................................... 98
5.2 Security72 .............................................................................................................................................................. 99 
 
  
  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 3 of 76  
  
1. Excellence    
1.1. Objectives   
The European process industry is uniquely positioned and represents the economic roots of the European 
economy (by transforming raw materials into intermediate and end -user products but also using energy, 
water, and possibly producing byproducts, emissions and wastes)1. It thus sits at the core of most industrial 
value chains via discrete manufacturing into a whole host of sectors1. The process industry is characterised 
by having a high dependence on resources (energy, raw materials and water) in production. Optimising 
the effectiveness of process control systems and strategies is vital to improve quality, reliability and 
efficiency2, as well as the sustainability of operations.   
Following the SPIRE philosophy, the ProPAT project aims to development an integrated process control 
approach (figure 1) embedding a novel monitoring system based on low cost analysers combined with 
smart sensors for monitoring in real time the critical control parameters of key processes in the minerals, 
ceramics, non-ferrous metals, and chemical process industries. The data from the sensors and analysers 
will be seamlessly managed via a versatile Global Control System Platform that will acquire, process and 
mine the data for closed loop control of the process or for decision support. The ProPAT platform is highly 
scalable for the integration of numerous analysers in the future and its flexible database enables data to 
be combined with information coming from business systems to guarantee structural consistency with the 
whole process or compatibility with existing supervision systems.  
  
Figure 1- ProPAT integrated process control approach  
The ProPAT development will deliver the following key innovations:  
a) Affordable high-end probes (low -cost NIRs and particle size analyser) that will enable their use in 
several critical points along the same process2.   
b) MEMS-based standard sensors (temperat ure, flow rate, pressure) which may, on the long term, be 
powered by energy harvesting approaches (battery -less), wirelessly connected to the data logging 
                                                
1 Pablo Tello & Ron Weerdmeester. SPIRE Roadmap. http://www.spire2030.eu/uploads/Modules/Publications/spire-
roadmap_december_2013_pbp.pdf  2 http://www.spire2030.eu/mediaroom/36/21/Process-Control-Industrial-Automation-
Summit-2014   
2 Note that although the range of the used IR sensor will be extended towards MIR (mid IR) & TIR (thermal infrared spectroscopy ) 
as required during the project, it is referred as NIR throughout the document; and the particle analyser is called Imaging Scatterometer 
(ISI).  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 4 of 76  
  
subsystem. This will open up the possibility for some of them to form part of the process ("flow tracker 
sensors") in order to report bulk properties that are very difficult  
to measure by static sensors.  
c) Process-oriented development and validation of the ProPAT platform at several subsequent scales for 
assisting in the production of minerals, ceramic, n on-ferrous metals, chemical (plastic and 
pharmaceuticals).  
d) An integrated PAT platform  with tailored hard - and soft - solutions according to the process and 
applications of interest. Analytical sensors will be combined with data handling tools, including classical 
MSPC (multivariate statistical process control), process modelling and data fusion for multisensor 
interpretation when needed.  
The specific objectives that will be fulfilled over the course of the ProPAT project are discussed below 
(effort has been made to ensure that these objectives are S.M.A.R.T. -Specific, Measurable, Achievable, 
Realistic and Timely- and clearly linked to the work plan and milestones).  
1. To perform an analysis of the quality control measures currently available to or implemented  
by the target mineral, ceramics, non-ferrous metals and chemical industries (WP1).   
This analysis will identify the critical control parameters governing variability along the process chain 
of the target industries (including major processes such as polymerisation, milling, mixing, granulation, 
drying). The currently used control strategies will be identified. Other available approaches will be 
researched from the state of the art. Initial recommendations for improvements in process efficiency 
will be made, while at the same time aiming to improve final product quality, as well as resource and 
energy efficiency. Variability will be qualified in terms of: raw material variability, in-process variability, 
final product variability, cycle time variability, product wastage and energy consumption variability. An 
assessment of the proposed ProPAT sensors and analysers will be made and discussed with the end-
users in terms of integration requirements: sampling requirements, speed of analysis, cleaning -in-
place, se nsor fusion, etc. Similarly, an analysis of requirements in terms of data analytics and 
integration with current data management systems will also be carried out. Emphasis will be placed on 
the potential adoption of ‘Green PAT’ strategies to reduce energy and waste during processing due to 
advanced process control PATs. The required and desired features of a PAT strategy for the target 
applications will be produced and used to draw up the development and adoption strategies of ProPAT. 
A concept design and an integration strategy will be established for the different versions of the ProPAT 
platform to be rolled out in the selected target production lines.  
Performance indicator: By M3, end user specifications will be defined to enable PAT development 
work to commence and by M6, the project will have a roadmap in place to effectively guide the efforts 
in relation to potential PAT strategies for various control parameters along th e process chains of the 
target industries.   
2. To set up and calibrate the novel scatterometer analyser for real -time and on -line 
measurements during granulation (WP2).   
This novel sensor will be capable of measuring particle sizes above a micron offering a  very low cost 
and rapid response. At the project start, the scattometric sensor will be integrated in a suitable test rig 
to enable the off line calibration of the sensor vs. standard measurements in the lab using relevant 
sample sets selected by the end users in the pharma, ceramics, non -ferrous metals, and minerals 
industries. In parallel, a replica sensor will be optimised for its use in an industrial environment.   
Performance indicator: By M12, the granulometric sensor will be calibrated vs. conventional sensors 
offline and by M16, an optimised robust version will be delivered for its integration with rest of the 
hardware in WP4.  
3. To set up and improve the novel low cost MEMS-NIR spectroscopic analyser (WP3).  
A novel MEMS-NIR spectroscopic analyser will be integrated to measure compositional data at low 
cost vs. commercial NIR instruments and offering a rapid response. At the project start, the NIR 
sensor will be integrated in a suitable test rig to enable the off line calibration of the sensor vs. 
standard measurements in the lab using relevant sample sets selected by the end users in the 
pharma and chemical industries. In the test rig, three basic requirements of the NIR sensor will be 
tested and optimised: 1) high accuracy to obtain reproducible measur ements, useful to develop 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 5 of 76  
  
calibration models or to be fed in other control-oriented data analysis tools, 2) design and housing in 
order to work in demanding environmental conditions, and 3) inputs for the sampling method that will 
be developed in WP4 and n eeds an exact adapted opticalmechanical system. Various techniques 
will be used depending on the compositional parameters of interest as defined in the state of the art 
review and feedback from the survey of participating industries in WP1. In parallel, IR  sensors with 
different wavelength ranges will be optimised for its use in an industrial environment so it can be 
delivered for its integration with rest of the hardware in WP4.   
Performance indicator : By M19, the different versions of the robust MEMS -NIR sensor will be 
delivered with adjusted wavelength ranges for each product of interest for their integration with rest of 
the hardware in WP4.  
4. To develop chemometric models for individual sensors and methods for analysing multisensor 
inputs (related to WP3 and 4).   
Development of software for individual sensors involves those providing a multivariate response 
(specially, the NIR sensor and, to a lesser extent, the scatterometer). For the NIR sensor, two main 
axes can be envisioned: process monitoring and control and process modelling. For the first one, 
Multivariate Statistical Process Control (MSPC) based on exploratory analysis of spectra can be 
implemented as well as control of product properties, through suitable multivariate calibration tools 
based on Partial Least Squares (PLS) or other algorithms when needed. Special attention will be 
focused on data preprocessing, wavelength selection methods, adequate sampling, and correct 
upgrading of models from well-controlled laboratory conditions to pilot-plant scale, where an adaptation 
process (known as model transfer) and new validation will be required. Complementing the process 
control aspect, NIR sensors could also be equipped with process modelling tools that could provide 
(when applicable) information on the development of a reaction (in synthesis processes) through the 
use of hard -modelling tools based on physicochemical models or to the description of the general 
transformation of a system, e.g. in blending processes, through soft-modelling methodologies, such as 
Multivariate Curve Resolution (MCR). Hybrid hard- soft-methodologies can also be envisioned to deal 
with non-ideal response behaviours or with systems in which the response variation cannot be fully 
described by a first principles model. Some multivariate raw data from scatterometer, e.g., particle size 
images, particle size vs. measurement angle, etc. will be explored with multivariate data analysis tools 
to test the possibility to obtain additional information on the variation of particle size  along the 
development of the process. Data fusion approaches can be envisioned in the framework of 
multisensor platforms. To do so, strategies to weight the relevance of the different sensor responses 
in the global response will be considered. Data fusion  at different levels and multiset or multiblock 
analysis methods to deal with data from different origin will be tested to find the best approach for the 
different applications. URV and UB will jointly coordinate for these tasks. Through URV -UB, software 
for the suitable sensor platforms will be developed. URV will focus mainly on developing chemometric 
models for the MEMS-NIR sensor for all the products of interest for laboratory data and models will be 
developed for pilot-plant scale and an optimised version will be delivered for its integration with the rest 
of the hardware in WP4. UB will mainly focus on process modelling tools and multivariate analysis 
tools to interpret the scatterometer output will also be provided. Tailored data fusion strategies for  
multisensor platforms will be designed.  
Performance indicator: By M19, chemometric models will be developed for the MEMS -NIR sensor 
for all the products of interest for laboratory data. Suitable software for the sensor platforms will be 
developed. By M22, models will be developed for the multisensors platform and ready to be integrated 
with the rest of the ProPAT system in WP5 and tested in pilot-plant scale in WP6.  
5. To develop and integrate a suite of smart sensors for use within ProPAT hardware deliveri ng 
cheap and robust, yet high performance technology with a wide range of applications (WP4).   
A promising suite of smart sensors and components will be selected and integrated, such as:   
a) MicroElectroMechanical systems (MEMS)-based components;   
b) Smart sensors that have intelligent readout electronics and the microsensor in a single chip;   
c) Sensors for in batch and in continuous processes  
d) Zero power ‘flow tracker’ sensors.   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 6 of 76  
  
These new miniaturised sensors will match the existing solutions in performance, while enabling size 
reductions, low power consumption, and low unit costs. These sensor platform technologies will be 
integrated into ProPAT prototypes (a tailored prototype w ill be designed and delivered for each 
industrial application) together with the granulometric and NIR -MEMS sensors from previous WPs. 
The sampling units and interfaces for the installing the system in the different target industries will also 
be built.  
Performance indicator: By M22, a novel platform of low cost sensor solutions ready to be integrated 
in the selected process industry operations will be developed. System performance such as accuracy 
and stability will be quantified against current standards.   
6. To develop data management strategies to analyse the vast data arising from PAT adoption and 
the Global System Control in order to successfully integrate and implement the ProPAT 
systems in the target process industries (WP5).   
One important reason wh y many companies shy away from developing NIR -based and other 
spectroscopic sensors is the lack of effective data management systems . With the inputs of the 
chemometrics developed in WP3 for NIR and the scatterometer sensor, as well as the data fusion 
strategies to handle the signals of all additional sensors from WP4, a flexible system will be developed 
which facilitates data collection from an array of sources and interprets the data for appropriate 
decisions to be taken. Robust data processing protocols for sensor methodologies, which identify and 
explain critical sources of process and product variability will be developed. An effective framework for 
interpretation of multisensor data fusion will be created to give more accurate on -line process 
performance monitoring. A model -based supervisory control system suitable for the target process 
industry applications will be produced.   
To successfully implement a PAT system, a Global Control System Software (GCSS) - provided with 
built-in multivariate analysis or data mining tools for real-time prediction and assisted decision routines 
- is required. This will holistically provide the connectivity management, interface with users and other 
business systems, and complete data management at a higher level. Managi ng PAT data is highly 
complex because of the huge information flow and because it includes mixed data formats from 
different types of sensors and instruments. This data needs to be combined with the information 
coming from the business systems to guarantee  structural consistency with the whole process or 
compatibility with existing supervision systems - a flexible database . The database architecture 
should also be suitable for integration with the open architecture software of the Global Control System. 
The PAT paradigm makes sense only if sensors and software resources are harmonically integrated 
within a specific production line. The conditioning of sensors to make them compatible with production 
line specificities, and performing minor adaptations in the production line are critical steps. A 
communication network needs to be implemented for data collection and exchange. Finally, the GCSS 
should be housed in suitable hardware, all the elements need to be integrated in a common and 
coherent setup, and pre -industry validation tests must be performed. The control system will be 
versatile to serve the purposes of the different target industries and processes.  
Performance indicator: By M24, a Global Control System Software will be developed linking the 
sensor software and global data management, and by M25 the ProPAT Global Control System will be 
validated at lab conditions and ready to be installed in a pilot plant.  
7. To validate the ProPAT system for online process monitoring at pilot scale (WP6)  
First of all, the target processes, downscaling those of participating industries, will be set up and tested 
using standard quality procedures. The ProPAT system will be integrated for online process monitoring 
in high temperature chemical pilot plants, fine chemistry m ixing/granulating as well as milling pilot 
facilities. The synthesis of pharma, resin and solid products from among ceramics, metals and minerals 
will be monitored first of all in manual mode whereby the indicators of quality such as the advance of 
the polymerisation will be provided to the user to analyse their validity and safety for the process to 
proceed, with the process conditions being changed manually. Chemometric models that were 
developed in WP3 based on offline tests of samples taken at different  points of the process will be 
updated (either by model transfer when possible, or by new modelling from newly taken samples). The 
predictive models included in the PAT approach in WP5 will be validated. Following this pre-validation 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 7 of 76  
  
work, the system will be used in closed loop. Any operational issues identified for improvements in 
terms of hardware or software will respectively feedback into WP4 and 5 for further optimisation.  
Performance Indicator: By M24, at least 3 model processes (high temperature resin synthesis, mixing 
and granulation of fine chemicals, dry and or wet milling) will be in place at pilot scale. By M36, the 
ProPAT system will be validated at pilot scale and guidelines ready for its testing in industrial scale 
and related reports will be ready at M39.  
8. To perform in -process verification and testing of the integrated PATs before PAT and QbD 
implementation case studies (WP7).   
The participating end users from the target mineral, ceramics, non -ferrous metals and chemical 
industries will test the PATs and control strategies developed and optimised by ProPAT under normal 
production conditions to assess their efficacy and performance within the process environment. Design 
issues arising from the industrial tests will be fed back to the consorti um members to facilitate further 
optimisation, and again the chemometrics models will be fine -tuned as needed. Such tests will 
reproduce in the industrial facilities the polymer synthesis previously performed at pilot scale, as well 
as easier (non -reactive) processes such grinding, suspension or dispersion processes. Finally, 
structural parts will be engineered converting the previous polymers and will be controlled via the 
ProPAT sensors e.g. in terms of any accessible compositional parameter.   
Performance indicator: By M36, the ProPAT platforms will be successfully installed in the 4 test sites 
of the process industries. By M45, a series of trials testing the ProPATs under process conditions will 
validate the performance of the ProPAT system for obtaining in-process measurements and control.  
9. To perform PAT and QbD implementation case studies in order to evaluate the impacts on cost 
reduction, resource and energy efficiency and demonstrate the advantages of using the system 
(WP8)  
Based on the results of W P6 and WP7, once a statistically significant number of batches have been 
produced the cycle time and quality of the resulting product using ProPAT to control the process will 
be compared will the existing methods. This comparison vs. existing quality contr ol will fuel into 
recommendations for future standardisation. The evaluation of the results and their impact on the 
waste reduction, cycle time, energy consumption, etc. will also fuel into the commercial feasibility study 
for the systems in different industrial environment scenarios. Finally, a life cycle analysis of productions 
using the ProPAT system vs. previous set ups will allow the environmental impact of the new practice 
to be demonstrated, along with the contribution to the sustainable chemistry platform pillars.  
Performance Indicator : By M48, the system will be demonstrated in terms of environmental, 
economic and standardisation potential.  
10. To design and implement a comprehensive knowledge transfer and training programme aimed 
at the European proc ess industry in order to overcome major barriers of expertise in relation 
to the implementation of PAT and QbD in industry (WP8).  
Performance Indicator: By M48, at least 4 training sessions will have been delivered reaching over 
200 members of the target sectors of the SPIRE community.  
11. To maximise the innovation impacts of the project by effectively managing the knowledge 
generated during the project to allow for the wide dissemination and use of the results to benefit 
the ProPAT consortium and the wider European process industry (WP9).  
In order to ensure a swift route to market for the results of the developed technologies, the protection 
of the knowledge generated will be of paramount importance. With a view to gearing up for commercial 
adoption of ProPAT in the industry, standardisation and regulatory issues will be addressed to ensure 
compliance with process conditions. The industry partners will draw up an exploitation plan for the use 
of the project results as well as dissemination activities to raise awareness about the research among 
the industry and the general public, in order to stimulate future market demand. The issue of branding 
and communication will be given careful attention.  
Performance Indicators: By M48, the protection procedures for the projects results will be in place, 
an agreement on the ownership, sharing and use of the results will be signed among all the partners, 
a business plan outlining the business model for commercial exploitation of the results will have been 
drawn up by the partners, and a comprehensive series of dissemination activities will have been carried 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 8 of 76  
  
out that will have successfully reached out to the process industry, plant and equipment providers, 
policy makers, educational bodies, the research community and the general public.  
  
1.2. Concept and approach  
The overall concept underpinning the project  
The SPIRE Public Private Partnership, which brings together cement, ceramics, chemicals, engineering, 
minerals and ores, non-ferrous metals, steel and water sectors (4 of which are represented in the project 
which together provide a range of materials to all SPIRE industries and beyond), has a strategic roadmap 
to rejuvenate the European process industry, reducing resource and  energy inefficiency and the 
environmental impact of industrial activities, leading to growth and increasing the competitiveness of 
Europe in a global market, of which Process monitoring, control and optimisation is one of the Key 
Actions (KA 2.3)1.  
Today, the industry faces major challenges including globalisation, environmental regulation, and 
shortening product life cycle. Meeting these challenges has required the development of innovative 
technologies and alternative approaches geared towards reducing costs and improving the 
environmental and economic profile of processes. Breakthroughs in process operations and process 
modelling have been necessary for achieving energy and material efficiency gains. These breakthroughs 
are made possible by the use of process analytical technologies optimally designed for real time in situ 
process monitoring, characterisation and accurate control 3 that offer benefits such as minimising 
waste, improving reaction output, increasing energy efficiency, decreasing the fo rmation of by-products, 
and minimising the potential for accidents4.   
The Process Analytical Technologies (PAT) approach, which according to the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), is a system for designing, analysing, and controlling manufacturing throug h timely 
measurements of critical quality and performance attributes of raw and in-process materials and processes 
with the goal of ensuring final product quality. The hypothesis behind PAT is that the quality of the products 
can and should be incorporated by process design and not by postproduction quality testing. In addition to 
pharmaceutical manufacture, the potential impact for PATs in other processing sectors, such as 
chemical/polymers, pharmaceutical, mineral and ceramics, as well as the other SPIRE sectors, for product 
quality and safety, process and resource efficiency, yields, and consequently competitiveness is 
tremendous.   
PAT adoption has to date been confined to large multinational companies, however there is a major 
opportunity for the develo pment of new PAT tools that are affordable, easily integrated into existing 
processes, simple to use with clearly demonstrated advantages for implementation. However, barriers 
exist for wide deployment within the European processing industry, including; se nsor costs, dedicated 
sensors targeted at the unique operations encountered in the processing industry, dedicated data 
management systems, strategy awareness, gaps in knowledge and internal expertise, and validation of 
the PAT philosophy for the target applications.  
The ProPAT platform (Figure 1) will overcome these barriers to adoption by developing a suite of 
affordable, high performance ProPAT sensors and analysers - low cost MEMS -NIR spectroscopic 
analyser, novel scatterometer probe, smart sensors that  have intelligent readout electronics and the 
microsensor in a single chip, sensors for in batch and in continuous processes, and zero power ‘flow 
tracker’ sensors- integrated into a Global Control System Platform containing the chemometric tools and 
the p redictive software to deliver an integrated process control platform. This will allow for the 
implementation of “near real time” closed -loop process control concepts making it possible to operate 
industrial processes at their optimum both economically and ecologically while ensuring a high level of 
safety, but it will also enable the uptake of the QbD approach for continuous process improvement. The 
platform provides self -learning and predictive capabilities aimed for dramatically reducing overcosts 
derived from even slight deviations from the optimum process.  
Through its use for monitoring milling, granulation, mixing, drying, synthesis  processes, which are 
broadly used in all SPIRE industries and beyond, the versatile ProPAT system will be validated in th e 
                                                
3 http://us.mt.com/us/en/home/events/webinar/ondemand/odw-going-green-pat.html   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 9 of 76  
  
minerals, ceramic, non -ferrous metals, chemistry (plastic and pharma) production, and will represent a 
major step forward towards more reliable and sustainable industrial operations in the European process 
industry, whereby there is high potential for the cross-sectorial transfer of the ProPAT technologies. 
Indeed, to facilitate this, the project will include a comprehensive knowledge transfer and training 
component to bridge the expertise gaps that are currently blocking the uptake and deployment of PAT 
and QbD approaches in the European Process Industry.   
Figure 2 shows the implementation of ProPAT in a typical pharma process. A number of our low cost NIR 
and granulometric sensors will be required along the different production steps, in order to first of all ensure 
that the mixture of the excipients and active principles is correct, to optimise the granulation process and 
obtain the optimum particle size in solid or liquid state, as well as to optimise the time to obtain it, before 
spray drying during which both the particle size and the residual water amounts will be monitored to again 
adjust the time. All in all, having access to real time data as opposed to offline analysis that can take up to 
several hours, as well as obtaining feedback on the process, will allow quality to be maximised, minimising 
energy and production time. It will also speed up the time for designing new products, and maximise the 
valorisation of the capital investments into production capacity.  
From its inception the PAT philosop hy has been one of collaboration, between sensor manufacturers, 
process & control engineers, quality control scientists and regulatory agencies. It was recognised that such 
an approach would benefit each party, be that through equipment provision, improved  processing or 
reduced risks. “Analytical” has developed to include chemical, physical, microbiological, mathematical, and 
risk analysis conducted in an integrated manner. Consequently PAT research initiatives have almost 
universally brought a diverse grouping of specialities together.  
Spread within the EC are emerging areas of 
expertise, which, when combined, meet the 
diverse objectives of developing a framework for 
innovative manufacturing and quality assurance. 
ProPAT brings such international expertis e 
together to complete the considerable aims of 
the project. This expertise will not only improve 
the processes of end -users throughout Europe 
but also lead to the development of innovative 
solutions both hardware and software. European 
PAT solution provid ers will be in a position to 
bring such innovation to the global market.  
The  ProPAT  mobilises 
 multidisciplinary  knowledge combining 
 expertise  in  sensor 
 development  and integration, optical 
engineering and integration, numerical and 
statistical modelling, software and web 
development, telecommunications, 
 mechanical  and  electronic engineering, as 
well as process expertise in relation to the 
critical process of the target industries. This 
expertise is mobilised from the academic and 
scientific communities (ICFO, VTT, 
UNIVLEEDS, URV, ZHAW, TUD, UB, IMAR), 
from  technology  providers  (IRIS,  SPECTRAL, MEMSFAB), as well as the process industry 
end-users from the SPIRE sectors (GM, GSK, MEGARA, MBN) and completed with the unrivalled PAT 
expertise of DECHEMA that groups over 5500 members from the European process industry.   
Figure 2- Schematic of the ProPAT Technology 
illustrated in a typical pharmaceutical process  
Positioning of the project   
As was discussed, one of the fundamental differentiating factors of the project is to integrate novel sensors 
developed previously by ProPAT project partners with potential to be more affordable than commercial 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 10 of 76  
  
equivalents. Both of them are currently at TRL3 and each has been successfully tested at lab scale. During 
the project these sensors will be scaled up and optimised for their integration in a robust version that can 
be validated by the industry. To this end, the work performed in the project will advance the readiness of 
these sensors increasing their robus tness for the demanding industry environment in which they will be 
tested and validated by firstly performing exhaustive tests in a close loop approach at pilot scale in 
UNIVLEEDS before being demonstrated for providing useful and reliable data in industri al facilities (TRL 
5 to 6). The Global Control System Platform will also be developed to TRL5-6, whereby it will be validated 
and demonstrated in an operational environment. This integrated PAT platform incorporating a multitude 
of smart sensors and hard - (or model driven) and soft - (or data driven) solutions tailored to the process 
and applications of interest will support the manufacturers to optimise their processes in a close loop 
fashion on the long term.  
National or international research and innovation activities which will be linked with the project  
Fundamentally for this project, continuous links will be ensured with the SPIRE PPP, in that it aims at 
integrating, demonstrating and validating systems and technologies capable (across all SPIRE sectors) 
and ProPAT will leverage SPIRE to reach the European Process Industry. Links will also be built with other 
European initiatives such as the Resource and Energy Efficiency Partnership “REP”, which is a group 
comprising a broad range of major European Industry Associations (such as the European Engineering 
Industry Association, the Industrial Minerals Association, Glass for Europe, the European Coil Coating 
Association, the European Copper Institute, the European Aluminium Association, Eurométaux, the 
Confederation of European Paper Industries, the European Ceramic Association, the European Cement 
Association and the Nickel Institute, among others) and European Technology Platforms (such as the 
European Steel Technology Platform, the European Platform for Sustainable Chemistry, among others).   
In order to maximise the European Knowledge Area , the ProPAT project will consider the results of 
relevant past and ongoing projects under past Framework Programmes, as well as national or regional 
projects, in which the partners are/were involved, such as: F3 Factory, Flexible, fast and future production 
processes (FP7-NMP), one of the lighthouse projects from which SPIRE is a follow-up4, PARTICLEPRO-
Development of a hybrid process analytical technology to characterise the physical and chemical 
properties of particles (FP7); OPTICLEAN- Effective and reliable optical system for cleaning validation in 
pharmaceuticals manufacture (FP7); OPTIJECT - (A novel NIR -based instrument for in -line monitoring 
during injection moulding (FP7); MUSE -TECH (Multi sensor technology for mana gement of food 
processes), IQFUEL (development of MEMS processing technology for NIR FPI for fuel quality sensing); 
CoNanoMet (European Project on Nanometrology development and standardization); Spanish grant: 
CTQ2012-38616 (Development and application of chemometric tools for process and hyperspectral image 
analysis);  NANODEFINE (Development of an integrated approach based on validated and standardized 
methods to support the implementation of the EC recommendation for a definition of nanomaterial); in 
addition to a number industrial innovation activities, e.g. implementation of Continuous processes in 
AstraZeneca globally; Chemometric maintenance of on-line NIR analyser technology at REPSOL refinery, 
Spain; among others.  
Moreover, in the context of the European Structural and Investment Funds through the smart specialisation 
strategies, ProPAT will engage with policymakers to communicate the benefits of the project and its results, 
as well as its replicability across Europe, in order to mobilise investment of resources which would 
stimulate knowledge-driven growth.   
Overall approach and methodology  
In relation to the overall approach and methodology that will be followed in order to successfully succeed 
in the project’s objectives, five distinct project activity phases have been envisaged: 1) Defining the ProPAT 
specifications; 2) Developing the ProPAT Technologies; 3) Validation and Demonstration; 4) Training and 
Education; 5) Deployment in the European SPIRE industries (a post -project phase, but which dr ives a 
cross-cutting or horizontal series of activities throughout the project, namely ‘Gear up for Deployment’).    
In relation to the first project phase, Defining the ProPAT specifications, the requirements of the targeted 
end-user minerals, ceramic, non-ferrous metals, chemistry (plastic and pharmaceuticals) industries will be 
                                                
4 Søren Bøwadt, DG Research and Innovation, Directorate Industrial Technologies; Presentation at Suschem Brokerage event, 
31.01.14, Brussels  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 11 of 76  
  
studied in order to define the constraints of their current processes that will need to be taken into account 
by the ProPAT integrated process control system both in terms of pote ntial improvements of process 
consistency and product quality (reduced batch -to-batch variation), and in terms of the constraints that 
might influence on the proposed sensoring systems (e.g. temperature and pressure to handle, number of 
sampling points, et c.). This phase will finish with the drawing up of the concept design of the different 
versions of PAT platform for each end user as well as their integration strategy.  
In relation to the second project phase, Developing the ProPAT Technologies , based on the 
specifications that will fed in from Phase 1, the ProPAT suite of low cost, robust and reliable ProPAT 
sensors and analysers (including the novel tailored NIR and particle size sensors) will be further developed 
and optimised for their ability to provi de fast, in-line process measurements. The Global Control System 
Platform will be designed and built to enable smooth data acquisition for subsequent processing and 
mining for real -time prediction and assisted decision routines for closed -loop. The Control  Platform will 
also manage connectivity, interface with users and other business systems, as well as complete data 
management at a higher level. The flexible database will enable data to be combined with the information 
coming from the business systems to guarantee structural consistency with the whole process or 
compatibility with existing supervision and control systems.   
Once the ProPAT hard- and software technologies have been outputted from the previous phase, the third 
project phase can commence, Validation and Demonstration. This will involve a preliminary set up of 
model processes that will mimic those of the participating end users in terms of polymer synthesis, pharma 
mixing, granulation, drying and minerals or ceramics milling before testing exha ustively the developed 
sensors and PAT system. This is a fundamental phase of the project, in that the qualification of equipment 
and validation of analytical methods are critical components for the implementation of process analytical 
technology (PAT)5. Furthermore, the sensors will be demonstrated at each of the end users where the 
value of the data they bring both in terms of product and process will be verified, as well as the ability of 
ProPAT to act as a decision support system leading to significant quality improvements.  
Training will also be instrumental to a successful ProPAT approach. Indeed at the 2014 edition of the 
Annual PAT & Quality by Design Conference6 for the pharmaceutical sector, 80% of companies surveyed 
said they plan to invest in Quality by Design and PAT solutions, yet 72 % said they do not have a fully 
established process in place, with 59% of respondents citing the reason for this gap being due to internal 
lack of expertise, which highlights the critical need for training. To this end, in addition to the comprehensive 
training activities that will be organised in the ProPAT work plan delivered to the SPIRE community, 
engagement with “teaching” experts is also planned to ensure that the knowledge generated during the 
project which is identified as an innovation outcome relevant for teaching activities can be channelled 
effectively to the education community. This will be done through the organisation of dedicated workshops 
and events for the sharing of knowledge and best practices at appropriate stages of the ProPAT project. 
This will have a major impact in terms of raising skills in Europe in the area of PAT and QbD which will 
greatly benefit implementation in industry. In relation to securing suitable skillsets in the future workforce, 
through DECHEMA and the University partners, the project will outreach to education stakeholders in 
Europe in order to build new skills in Europe through enriching education programmes.     
Finally, the Deployment in the European SPIRE industries of the ProPAT technologies in industry will 
be the true measure of the success of the ProPAT project. Indeed, with sectors such as minerals, ceramic, 
non-ferrous metals, chemistry (plastic and pharmaceuticals) that show a large number of important 
production operations throughout Europe, the SPIRE innovation and retrofitting potential is enormous1. 
As such the current manufacturing facilities establish an enormous leverage base for SPIRE innovation, 
in some cases, such as new process control, offering double d igit replication potential compared to the 
initial single pilot project in which a novel SPIRE technology will be proven and demonstrated 1. As the 
chain of development goes through many steps with corresponding increased amounts of investment, 
support meas ures such as the PPP are needed to cross the valley of death from laboratory level 
technology to mini -plant or pilot and further to the build -up of demonstration capability. Once there is 
successful technology demonstration in SPIRE, the most expensive ste p of deployment (typically with 
factors of 5 to 10+ higher than for a demonstration capability) will be made by industry 1. It is as such 
fundamental that there are well planned activities during the project to gear up for the post -project 
                                                
5 Process Analytical Technologies (PAT) and Quality by Design (QbD) Overview 2014. Pharma IQ.   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 12 of 76  
  
deployment phase (such as managing knowledge and IPRs, business and post -project industrialisation 
planning, gear up for regulatory approvals, etc.)   
Sex and/or gender analysis   
In relation to gender analysis, the ProPAT consortium understands that inventions and developments that 
incorporate the smartest aspects of gender can open new markets and enable innovation in products, 
processes, services, or infrastructures. Indeed, products that meet the needs of complex and diverse user 
groups enhance global competitiveness an d sustainability6. Inspired by how taking gender into account 
has yielded new research results and sparked creativity, opening new avenues for future research for 
those who give it serious attention7, during the work plan, gender analysis will be addressed in relation 
to the User Interface of the ProPAT platform, whereby graphic designs of the interface will be consulted 
with both men and women during the design phase in WP5, and posterior alpha and beta versions will be 
trialled by both men and women.  
Moreover in relation to business behaviour gender analysis will also be important, especially in view of 
growing trends and commitments to see more women occupy high level and decision-making positions in 
industry. For example, in Europe, Norway a decade ago mandated a 40% quota for female director’s at 
large companies, and according to reports has now achieved or even exceeded this target. Spain is aiming 
for a similar target by 2015 8. In June 2011, Belgium’s parliament voted to force stateowned businesses 
and stock market-listed firms to award 30% of managing board seats to women. Large companies have 
five years to comply, SMEs eight years. In 2012 started, the parliament of the Netherlands was poised to 
debate similar rules. By 2017, at least 40% of managing  and supervisory board members at companies 
listed on France’s CAC-40 stock exchange and all other firms with sales of more than €50m and at least 
500 employees must be female. Germany and the UK established voluntary targets for female 
representation in 20119. All of this points towards a strong movement for change.  
Indeed, with more young women than ever now leaving universities with chemistry degrees9, the ProPAT 
consortium, which is headed by a senior female researcher with a chemistry background, Dr. Elodie 
Bugnicourt, will benefit greatly from effectively addressing gender analysis issues in that there is a distinct 
European trend in process industries, and in particular the chemical industry, in boosting role of women 
decision makers. Some examples from the chemical industry include, among others: Rotterdam -based 
petrochemicals giant Lyondell Basell, appointed Karyn Ovelmen as chief financial officer in 2011; in 
October 2010, Sandra Peterson was named CEO of Bayer Crop Science and BASF has pledged to 
increase the proportion of women in what it terms ‘solid -line’ German management to 15% by the end of 
2020, from just below 10% in 2010; up to 2015, the Bayer group aims to ‘gradually’ increase the share of 
women in senior management from about 21% at pres ent ‘toward a target of 30%’ and its goal for the 
supervisory board is 20%; German chemicals firm Merck made two key appointments in December 2011 
with Friederike Rosch, being named head of corporate accounting and Isabel De Paoli, head of corporate 
strategy.  
In relation to the gender dimension of the ProPAT consortium, the team of researchers, technologists, 
industrialists and policy influencers has a significant cohort of both sexes (ca. 40% female; 60% male). 
Moreover, a recruitment policy is in place d esigned to ensure a reasonable level of balance between the 
sexes. This is important in ensuring the education and training of the next generation of scientists, 
technologists and others needed in the EU and elsewhere. It is noteworthy that a number of the  key 
management and decision-making positions within the project organisational structure have been assigned 
to highly qualified women, not least the role of the Project Coordinator (Dr. Ing. Elodie Bugnicourt), the IPR 
Manager (Dr. Silvia Carrasco), the data manager (Ms Carla Kapikian) and the Dissemination Manager (Dr. 
Renata Körfer). Interestingly, additional females are among the key drivers of this ProPAT project (Oonagh 
Mc Nerney, Dr. Cristina Serrano, Dr. Anna de Juan, Dr. Luisa Freitas Dos Santos, Dr Anna Rissanen, Dr. 
Poppy Krassa, Dr. Athina Meidani, Dr. Agnes Zoller, etc.).   
                                                
6 http://ec.europa.eu/research/science-society/gendered-innovations/index_en.cfm  
7 Londa Schiebinger (2008). Gendered Innovations in Science and Engineering. ISBN: 978080475814  
8 http://www.soci.org/Chemistry-and-Industry/CnI-Data/2012/2/Closing-the-gender-gap   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 13 of 76  
  
1.3. Ambition  
Advance beyond the state-of-the-art  
The process industry transforms material resources (raw materials, feedstock) during a batch or 
(semi)continuous conversion into a new material that has significantly different physical and chemical 
performance than the starting substance. This material is then usually shaped by discrete manufacturing 
into an end user product or intermediate component; often this requires com bining several different and 
discrete manufacturing operations to result in the final consumer product1.  
Process manufacturers require a high degree of automation, monitoring, and advanced simulation and 
control for the more challenging operations. Emphas is is on continuous or batch mixing, reaction and 
separation of materials to produce other materials of higher value. Advancing globalisation and stronger 
competition, demand the process industry to have seamless process control, greater flexibility and 
cost efficiency and many process manufacturers are becoming aware that they can benefit from investing 
in technologies to automate their often complex manufacturing processes9.  
The proposed project is highly ambitious in that it aims to open up a world of p rocess understanding 
and continuous on-line control for improved product quality and safety, process efficiency, yields, resource 
and energy efficiency, and ultimately profitability. Indeed, research -based development and 
implementation of PAT in the European process industry (as a consequence of projects such as ProPAT) 
is focused on improved control, rapid final product quality evaluation, increased resource and 
energy efficiency and productivity , will have a knock -on effect in terms of industrial innovat ion and 
enhancing competitiveness. The key innovations brought by ProPAT are, on the one hand, the use of 
novel low cost NIR (MEMS based) and granulometric (imaging scatterometer) sensors in combination with 
smart sensors capable of measuring traditional p arameters in a time/space resolved fashion depending 
on the individual processes, and on the other hand the calibration and validation of the integrated PAT 
platforms in a number of process applications including minerals, ceramic, nonferrous metals, chemi stry 
(plastic and pharmaceuticals, etc.).   
The ground breaking integrated process control approach that will be developed during ProPAT embeds 
a highly novel monitoring system . It will deliver: a) affordable high-end probes for use in several 
critical poi nts along the same process; b) MEMS -based standard sensors (temperature, flow rate, 
pressure, etc.) powered by energy harvesting approaches (batteryless), wirelessly connected to the data 
logging subsystem to allow their use in the actual process ("flow tracker sensors") to report bulk properties; 
c) process-oriented development and validation of the ProPAT platform at several subsequent scales for 
assisting in the production of chemical/polymers, pharmaceutical and mineral products.   
How the ProPAT novel sensors advance the state-of-the-art   
The fundamental differentiating factor of the project is to integrate novel sensors (particle size analyser ISI 
and MEMS -NIR spectrophotometer) with the potential to be more affordable than their commercial 
equivalents. For instance, the MEMS -NIR probe -upgraded to be used as a PAT tool - would be priced 
around €7K, compared to an equivalent NIR system costing in excess of €25K. Likewise, an off-the-shelf 
on-line particle size analyser could cost over €30K, whereas the prospective price for the ISI system will 
be in the region of €4K. As such, ProPAT is disruptive in its ability to overcome the high cost of analysers, 
which is currently one of the barriers to limiting the widespread implementation of the PAT paradigm 
in industry.   
Comparison of the novel Imaging Scatterometer (ISI) sensor with prior-art solutions for particle size 
analysis    
Particle sizing methods can be separated into three basic classes: ensemble methods, counting methods, 
and separation methods. Separation methods are disregarded from this comparison as they do not satisfy 
basic requirements because they imply destructive test methods. Ensemble methods collect mixed data 
from all of the different size particles in a sample at the same time, and then digest the data to extract a 
distribution of particle sizes for the entire population. Common ensemble techniques are Low Angle Laser 
                                                
9 http://industrialautomation.wikia.com/wiki/Process_vs._Discrete   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 14 of 76  
  
Light Scattering, Photon Correlation Spectroscopy, Back-scattering Spectroscopy, and others (compared 
in table 1).  
Table 1: Comparison of conventional particle size analysers based on ensemble methods  
Ensemble 
methods  
Physical 
 parameter 
measured  
Time/ 
Read  
Dynamic 
range  
Previous  
knowledge 
 of 
sample 
required?  
Mixtures  Size 
 distrib
ution data  
Measurement  
LALLS  Forward scattering 
light power in multiple 
angles(low angles)  
2 min  VERY 
HIGH  0.1 
µm- 1 mm  
YES  NO  YES  At-line/off-line  
PCS  Forward & Back  
scattering light 
intensity variation  
1 min  LOW  
0.3 µm – 3  
µm  
NO  YES  NO (only mean 
size and 
standard 
deviation)  
At-line/off-line  
BBS  Backscattering light 
power in multiple 
angles(high angles)  
1 min  HIGH  YES  YES  YES  In-line 
(noninvasive)  
DLS  Forward & Back  
scattering light 
intensity variation  
10min  VERY 
HIGH 
1.5nm– 
10µm  
YES  YES  YES  Off-line  
The counting methods all characterise the sample distribution one particle at a time, basically by 
accumulating counts of particles with similar sizes. Some common counting methods are the electrozone 
counter, the light counter, the time of flight counter, and the microscope (optical or electron). In each of 
these methods, particles are classified and placed in "size bins", one particle at a time. These methods 
(compared in table 2) must each ensure that multiple particles are not counted together and cause errors 
in the reported size distribution ("co -incident counting"). The accuracy and resolution of these methods 
depend on how accurately the size of each particle can be characterized during the (usually) very brief 
time that it is counted.   
Table 2: Comparison of conventional particle size analysers based on counting methods  
Counting 
methods  
Physical parameter 
measured  
Time/ 
Read  
Dynamic 
range  
Previous 
knowledge of 
sample required?  
Mixtures  Size 
distribution 
data  
Measurement  
EZC  Variation in electrical 
resistivity  in an orifice  
2 min  HIGH   
0.5 µm- 
300  
µm  
YES (previous 
preparation of the 
sample)  
YES  YES  At-line/off-line  
LC  Light power 
attenuation by 
Absorption & 
Reflection of the 
sample  
3 min  VERY 
HIGH  
0.5 µm - 2  
mm  
YES (previous 
preparation of the 
sample)  
YES  YES  At-line/off-line  
TFC  Time function of Mass 
and Volume of 
sample  
1 min  HIGH   
0.2 µm- 
700  
µm  
YES (previous 
preparation of the 
sample)  
YES  YES  Off-line  
MC  Imaging by Light  
Absorption & 
Reflection of the 
sample  
5 min  HIGH   
0.5 µm- 
500  
µm  
YES (previous 
preparation of the 
sample)  
YES  YES  At-line/off-line  
The applied standard of particle size analysers in the market is mostly the ASTM D4464 - 10 Standard 
Test Method for Particle Size Distribution of Catalytic Material by Laser Light Scattering.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 15 of 76  
  
In relation to a review of the precision of currently available com mercial analysers 10, median precision 
scores revealed that there is a marked difference between techniques that use laser diffraction11 and those 
that rely upon on other physical principles. Laser-based techniques all showed precision scores lower than 
0029, the Fritsch Analysette 22C achieving the best overall score. In contrast, the next most precise 
technique is over an order of magnitude less precise. Of the other instruments, settling methods were the 
next most precise 13, followed by electro -resistance12, dynamic image analysis 13, time-of-transition14 and 
static image analysis15.  
ICFO has developed different generations of particle size analysers: Imaging Brigthfield Cytometer (CYT-
B), Imaging Glossmeter (HZM -G) and Imaging Hazemeter (HZM -H). The CYT-B is a compact, low-cost 
cytometer based on a lens -free microscope combined with a propietary antibubble fluidic system 
(microfluidic, microscope slide or chamber slide), capable of monitoring most common particles and cells, 
minimizing false readings, with 1 -2 µm as lower particle size detection limit and 10 particles per 1ml as 
lower concentration limit. It can analyse more than 100.000 particles/cells in one image, thanks to a huge 
field of view of 20mm 2. The HZM-G is a compact, low -cost glossmeter based on a l ens-free microscope 
combined with a propietary optical system that allows measuring power backscattering diagram at low 
angles (<10 degree) in reflection configuration, gloss values  with 0.1% precision, analyse and counting 
microscopic particles and detecting imperfections with 1-2 µm resolution. The HZM-H is a compact, low-
cost hazemeter similar to the HZM-G but that operates in transmission configuration, that measures haze 
values with 0.1% precision, analyse and counting microscopic particles and detecti ng cells, particles, or 
imperfections with 1-2 µm resolution.   
The Imaging Scatterometer (ISI) developed at ICFO,  encompasses the technologies of the above 
mentioned prototypes, has a new design and method to measure the scattering of solid, gel and liqui d 
samples, to measure its associated gloss, haze or turbidity properties, using low-cost and large-consumer 
components. The design consists basically in a light source, a spatial filter or spatial filter array absorbing 
in the spectrum of the used light source, an image sensor combined with image processing based on lens-
free holographic algorithms. The combination of both elements offers a visualization system in which the 
images can be interpreted by means of image processing (counting and analysing) obtaining particle size 
statistics and the scattering map of the analysed area. As a consequence, the apparatus offers microscopic 
images of the sample at the same time that it offers the scattering power value at different predefined 
angles with an associated haze value if the measurement is in transmission from a gel or solid sample, an 
associated gloss value if the measurement is in reflection from a gel or solid sample, or an associated 
turbidity value if the measurement is in transmission from a liquid sample. This novel patent pending16,17,18 
instrument is capable of measuring power scattering parameters such as haze, gloss, turbidity, scattering 
diagram at low angles and, at the same time, analysing and counting, by lensfree imaging post-processing, 
microscopic particles in aerosol or suspension in a non-opaque medium. The concept is not limited to the 
visible part of the spectrum; it can be implemented along the whole optical spectrum –depending on the 
sensing technology and the relative optical materials that are used in each case- allowing different particle 
size resolutions. In the current configuration, which has been successfully demonstrated at lab scale, the 
resolution is 1 -2 µm; by using shorter wavelengths and denser sensors arrays, the resolution co uld be 
improved towards the sub -micrometer range. Likewise, the current field -of-view (FOV) is around 20 -mm 
diameter, which is suitable for the most common applications. Larger or smaller FOVs are compatible with 
the concept. The samples to be monitored can be isolated from the entrance aperture by a standard optical 
window. Its typical dimensions –around 15 cm sides (it will be reduced in this project miniaturizing the 
                                                
10 Goossens (2008)- “Techniques to measure grain -size distributions of loamy sediments : a comparative study of ten instruments 
for wet analysis”,  
Sedimentology (2008), Volume: 55, Pages: 65-96, ISSN: 0037-0746, ISBN: 1365-3091, DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3091.2007.00893.x  
11 Coulter LS 200 (Beckman Coulter Inc.), Fritsch Analysette 22C, Horiba Partica LA-950, Malvern Mastersizer S 
(Malvern Instruments Ltd, UK) 13 Atterberg cylinder and Sedigraph 5100 (Micromeritics Instrument Corporation, 
Norcross, GA, USA)  
12 Coulter Multisizer 3: Beckman Coulter Inc., Fullerton, CA, USA  
13 Eyetech: Ankersmid B.V., Oosterhout, The Netherlands  
14 CIS-100: Galai Production Ltd, now maintained by Ankersmid B.V.  
15 Histolab, Microvision Instruments  
16 Apparatus for measuring light scattering, V. Pruneri et al., patent application EP14382043 (2014)  
17 Optically transparent support for bubble-free specimens, V. Pruneri et al., patent application P201331446 (2013)  
18 Compact system for optical measurements using a discretized plate, V. Pruneri et al., patent application ES201330270 (2013)  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 16 of 76  
  
electronics and light source) - as well as its robustness (also to be optimised in ProPAT  for industrial 
implementation) are compatible with non -lab applications, like in -line monitoring. Finally, the estimated 
price is significantly lower than the price of the most off-the-shelf particle size analysers.  
  
Figure 3. General scheme and prototype elements of ISI sensor in reflection configuration    
Haze, glare and gloss are monitoring parameters mainly used in roll -to-roll plastic sheet, glass or film 
production. These parameters are measured with different apparatus, with high cost and large dimensions, 
in order to detect imperfections and inhomogeneities in the samples. After imperfection is detected, an 
image inspection is needed in order to determine the nature of it. Three different systems are being used 
for one unique purpose, i.e. to detect and analyse imperfections in material production. The Imaging 
Scatterometer is a portable and low -cost apparatus that can perform all the measurements needed to 
detect and analyse any artefact, imperfection or detail in a solid sample.  
With respect to commercially available and prior-art solutions, the present product allows:  
• The image sensor and the lensfree image post -processing offer amplitude and phase image with 2 
micron resolution with a ten times higher FOV t han most off-the-shelf microscopes. It does not have 
lenses offering a cost-effective solution for online applications.  
• The light backscattering from the sample is processed in the processing optics allowing instantaneous 
scattering measurements. It incre ases the performance of particle size analysers offering scattering 
diagram (power scattering per angle), particle size distribution data  (independent of particle shape or 
geometry), microscopic imaging with high dynamic range (0.5um -2mm) and at the same time still 
providing optical parameters like gloss, glare, haze or turbidity values of the sample.   
• High field of view (FOV) in microscopic images, providing high surface scanning rate (1cm2 per second) 
of the sample in roll-to-roll or continuous processes.  
• Measurements in transmission, reflection or both configurations.  
• In-line, remote and non -invasive measurements, without previous sample preparation needs.  
  
 A significantly lower cost than the price of the most off-the-shelf particle size analysers  
Table 3- Performance of the ICFO Imaging Scatterometer  
Physical parameter 
measured  
Time/ 
Read  
Dynamic 
range  
Previous 
knowledge of 
sample required?  
Mixtures  Size 
distribution 
data  
Measurement  
Forward&Back scattering 
light intensity variation 
combined with Imaging of 
light absorption & 
reflection of the sample  
1 seg scattering 
read(early alarm of 
imperfection); 1 
min imaging & 
statistics  
VERY  
HIGH   
1 µm- 
5mm   
NO  YES  YES  Inline 
(noninvasive)  
Comparison of the novel MEMS Spectrophotometer with prior-art solutions among NIR spectroscopic 
analysers    
Industry needs new low cost sensor solutions to increase the efficiency of manufacturing processes and 
quality of products. In many fields smaller and low cost spectral devices have a high potential to enable 
these targets. FTIR systems present state -ofthe-art measurement systems in MIR (Mid Infrared 
Spectroscopy) spectroscopy. FTIR systems are broadly used in laboratories, but they are still rarely utilised 
in process measurements. Big size, complexity, long measurement times and robustness have been the 
main reasons why Fourier Transform Infrared (FT -IR) systems have not been used successfully in real -
time process monitoring. The attraction to use F abry-Perot Interferometers- Infrared (FPI–IR) technology 
instead of FT-IR technology comes from being able to utilize the power of spectroscopy in a small, low-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 17 of 76  
  
cost package with high environmental tolerance. The price of an FPI spectral sensor is less than €5000 
whereas FTIR spectrometer to process environment is approx. €50,000.   
Frost&Sullivan has forecasted in their Technology Insight Advances in Process Spectroscopy (2012) the 
impact and certainty of new technological trends in process spectroscopy ind ustry. The most significant 
trend is ‘Cost-effective microspectrometers’,  which is represented here by SPECTRAL’s devices, 
incorporating the novel MEMS technology from VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland. The trend of 
miniaturisation is being tackled by several companies, such as JDSU, Pyreos, Axsun, Infratec, Insion, 
Hamamatsu and Horiba Jobin-Yvon. Most of these companies approach the miniaturization challenge by 
taking a conventional grating spectrometer arrangement and trying to find ways to make t hings smaller. 
This method works to some extent, but it is limited by the obligatory usage of infrared linear detector arrays, 
whose noise performance and cost pose severe challenges in meeting cost and performance 
requirements. An InGaAs detector array fo r instance costs approx. €500 and can only cover the 
wavelength range of up to 1.7 µm. To go further in the wavelengths one needs to have a cooled ex-InGaAs 
array, which adds to the cost and complexity and still does not go further than the Near Infrared Region. It 
is therefore a great benefit to be able to use a single point detector instead of an array.   
Miniaturisation of spectral sensors utilizing single -point detectors is commonly done using MEMS 
technology.19 The main types are Fourier Transform Spectrometers, tunable gratings and Fabry -Perot 
Interferometers. Generally speaking, an FTS provides wide wavelength range and good resolution. 
However, resolution is linked to the movement of a reference arm mirror su ch that in practice 100’s of 
micrometres of movement has to be organised by MEMS. This is not an easy task and to date has been 
tried by two means: out -of-plane oscillating mirrors and in -plane comb electrode actuators. The former 
results in cumbersome mon itoring systems and vacuum packaging and therefore has not been 
commercialised. The latter is currently being commercialised by the Japanese company Hamamatsu. 
However, in industrial sensor applications there are many challenges remaining, such as how to c ontrol 
wavelength stability with a long mirror stroke, how to couple light efficiently in and out from a planar 
structure, and how to make the system signal-to-noise ratio adequate due to small optical surfaces. Much 
of these problems are also present in t unable grating/mirror systems. The wavelength stability 
requirements for many NIR applications is down to 0.01 nm/˚C, so anything with large stroke/angular 
movement poses great challenges for wavelength stability monitoring and often results in costly 
additional measurement modules, such as stabilised reference lasers. For example, the MEMS-based 
products of ARCOptix and ThermoFisher Scientific cost approx. € 20,000, making the cost of MEMS itself 
a very small portion of the total cost.  
Table 4. Current key players in research/business for miniaturised spectrometers utilising a single -
point detector.  
Type  Current players in spectral 
sensing utilising SINGLE-
POINT detectors  
Features  
Fabry-Perot  
Interferometer  
Spectral Engines  Industrial-grade spectral IR sensors based on VTT’s MEMS technology  
VTT Technical Research Centre  Robust, fast and batch-producible MEMS-filter technology  
Vaisala  Industrial-grade CO2 sensor based on VTT’s MEMS technology  
Axsun Technologies  Commercial tunable narrow-band light sources using multiple, high-
order MEMS-FPIs  
Infratec  Commercial variable colour detectors incorporating a MEMS tunable 
filter.  
Fourier  
Transform  
Spectrometer   
ARCOptix  Commercialized FTIR instrument incorporating in-plane MEMS FTIR 
engine (MEMS product obsolete)  
Hamamatsu  Commercializing miniaturized FTIR spectrometer for NIR using Si-
Ware’s technology.  
Si-Ware  Miniaturized, in-plane FTIR engine technology  
Fraunhofer Institute  Out-of-plane resonance mirror technology  
Tunable MEMS  
gratings/mirrors  
HiperScan  Commercial tunable MEMS mirror technology  
CSEM  Rotating MEMS grating  
                                                
19 Antila, J., Tuohiniemi, M., Rissanen, A., Kantojärvi, U., Lahti , M., Viherkanto, K., Kaarre, M. and Malinen, J. 2014. MEMS - and 
MOEMS-Based NearInfrared Spectrometers. Encyclopedia of Analytical Chemistry. 1–36.)  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 18 of 76  
  
ThermoFisher Scientific  Commercial portable NIR analyser utilizing a MEMS programmable 
grating  
To fully utilize the cost and miniaturization potential of MEMS technology, a solution needs to be found 
where only a few components are needed in addition to the chip itself. Fabry -Perot Interferometers (FPI) 
offer this possibility, as the out-of-plane movement is only on the order of 1 µm or even less and the device 
can be stacked directly on a detector, making the system very compact and easy to align.  
VTT has developed structures and manufacturing methods for FPI enabling compact, low cost, 
electronically adjustable spectrometers  working from the visible (VIS) wavelengths up to thermal 
infrared (IR). Surface micromachined FPIs for the IR spectrum measurements have been developed at 
VTT since the 1990’s 20. The first commercial application has been in carb on dioxide gas concentration 
measurements by dual -wavelength absorption measurement which is commercialized in Vaisala’s 
environmental monitoring solutions. Multiple new core technologies have been developed in recent 
years21,22,23,24,25 for new sensing needs and these are now being commercialized by Spectral Engines Oy. 
The hydrocarbon gas sensor prototype developed by VTT and Spectral Engines received a Frost&Sullivan 
2013 New Product Innovation Leadership Award for the "Gas Sensor“.  
  
Figure 4. working principle of a Fabry-Perot Interferometer (left) -General structural schematics of VTT's 
MEMS FPI platform (middle)- MEMS FPI chips by VTT, size of 3x3 mm2 with various apertures around 1-2 
mm in diameter (right)  
In short, the  Spectral Engine’s MEMS Spectrophotometer (fig. 4) for the SWIR to MWIR range, is 
compact, robust, sensitive, small and affordable. The instrument is not larger than a few centimetres 
including readout electronics, data transfer and housing- and costs significantly less than the cheapest off-
the-shelf instrument currently commercially available for such a spectral region. The wavelength selector 
is based on an electronically tuneable Fabry-Perot filter, i.e. it is not a dispersive analyser; consequently, 
its signal/noise ratio and dark current are better than the typical ones for equivalent diffraction-gratingbased 
spectrophotometers. In addition, due to the robust core technology, the device is highly immune to 
temperature changes and shocks and vibration, making it ideal for industrial solutions.  
                                                
20 Blomberg, Martti; Torkkeli, Altti; Lehto, Ari; Helenelund, Christer; Viitasalo, Mauri; Electrically tuneable micromachined fabry-perot 
interferometer in gas analysis; Physica Scripta. Vol. T69 (1997), 119 - 121  
21 Tuohiniemi, Mikko; Näsilä, Antti; Mäkynen, Jussi ; Characterization of the tuning performance of a micro -machined Fabry-Pérot 
interferometer for thermal infrared; Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering. IOP Publishing. Vol. 23  (2013) No: 7, Article 
no. 075011  
22 Tuohiniemi, Mikko; Blomberg, Martti; Akujärvi, Altti; Antila, Jarkko; Saari, Heikki; Optical transmission performance of a su rface-
micromachined Fabry- 
Pérot interferometer for thermal infrared ; Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering. Vol. 22 (2012) No: 11, 115004  
23 Rissanen, Anna; Kantojärvi, Uula; Blomberg, Martti; Antila, Jarkko; Eränen, Simo; Monolithically integrated microspectrometer-on-
chip based on tunable visible light MEMS FPI; Sensors and Actuators, A: Physical . Elsevier. Vol. 182  (2012) No: August, 130 – 135  
24 Rissanen, Anna; Akujärvi, Altti; Antila, Jarkko; Blomberg, Martti; Saari, Heikki; MOEMS miniature sp ectrometers using tuneable 
Fabry-Perot interferometers; Journal of Micro/Nanolithography, MEMS, and MOEMS. SPIE. Vol. 11 (2012) No: 2, 023003-1-6  
25 Blomberg, Martti; Kattelus, Hannu; Miranto, A.; Electrically tunable surface micromachined Fabry -Perot interferometer for visible 
light; Sensors and  
Actuators A: Physical. Vol. 162 (2010) No: 2, 184 – 188  
            

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 19 of 76  
  
  
Figure 5. General principle of Spectral Engines' sensor concept. The “sample” can be gas, liquid or solid 
and the light from the light source can be coupled onto the sample and the detector either open space, 
or via a fibre probe.  
A plurality of spectral ranges are available (and additional ones, tailored to the target applications, will be 
developed in the project and especially towards MIR), which implies the possibility of using many similar 
devices in different control points along a production line for determining different analytes. This feature is 
highly valuable in terms of using these devices as "spectral probes" for PAT applications. Current standard, 
and more expensive, spectrophotometers have wider spectral ranges  although the significant analytical 
information is often limited to a specific spectral zone, as will be verified for several products in ProPAT. 
In order to serve customers having needs to measure multiple parameters, such as ethanol, glucose, 
glutamine, ammonium, hydrocarbons, CO2, moisture, protein, fats and active pharmaceutical ingredients 
(API), multiple spectrometer  modules need to be developed and combined into a single multiparameter 
sensor. New wavelength ranges and combinational sensors will be developed in ProPAT to match the user 
application requirements.  
Novelty of the ProPAT smart sensors   
By definition, smart sensors integrate the sensing elements, the readout electronics, the microprocessor 
provided and the digital communication channels  in one package. They are simpler than cyber -physical 
devices because they usually are focused in only one parameter.   
There are several major advantages of smart sensors compared to traditional ones, namely: compactness 
-which means lower sensitivity to drifts and noises and more mechanical robustness-, smaller size -which 
implies easier integration-, built-in calibration and signal processing -which provides reliable and ready to 
use numerical data and dramatically simplifies further data processing - and, finally, smart sensors are 
serially manufactured by means of mature technologies derived from the semiconductors industry -which 
is the reason of their reduced cost.  
Although there are a significant variety of commercially available smart sensors, most of them are not 
adapted to specific or even generic applications; they are bare chips which should be powered, housed 
and matched to the measurement points. For this reason they are not yet widely used in industrial 
environments. ProPAT aims at demonstrating the advantages of using smart sensors instead of traditional 
ones in high-end applications like PATs, whereby data redundancy and consistency can be increased by 
adding more sensing points without increasing the overall cost. Furthermore, the ProPAT dat a 
management strategy is based, among other concepts, on distributed data processing as the optimum 
way to reduce both data failures and handling a big amount of real time data through data buses. Among 
the considered commercially available smart sensors for the different target applications in the project are: 
pressure, temperature, flow rate, etc.  
The ProPAT online approach vs. conventional measurement techniques  
Nowadays, the different products selected for the project (polymers, pharma, ceramics, nonferrous metals, 
minerals) are mainly analysed offline along the production. One of the main challenges for ProPAT is to 
provide similar data online or at least a set of data that can still allow the respective manufacturers to take 
robust decisions on the process to optimise it without needing anymore offline controls.  
In polymer analysis, molecular weight (Mw) is one of their key features which can be determined by two 
complementary analytical techniques, including Gel Permeation Chromatography (GPC) and Matrix 
Assisted Laser Desorption Time-of-Flight Mass-Spectrometry (MALDI-ToF-MS). GPC, also referred to as 
Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC), is a mode of liquid chromatography in which the components of a 
mixture are separated on the basis of size. GPC is mainly used for samples with a molecular weight above 
  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 20 of 76  
  
2000 g.mol-1 although it is also in use for oligomer separations. There is in principle no upper limit in the 
molecular weight; even polymer analyses with molecular weights of several millions are possible. 
Currently, GPC is one of the most powerful and versatile a nalytical techniques available for analysing 
polymer. More recently, MALDI -ToF-MS has emerged as a powerful alternative / complementary 
technology for polymer analysis and has become increasingly popular. Besides it offers simple sample 
preparation procedures, fast analysis and high -throughput. It also achieves a very high mass resolution 
and high upper mass limit. Both techniques together can provide a powerful analytical technique for 
polymer analysis to support product characterisation. For lower mass polymers, HPLC based approaches, 
may also be of interest, as they achieve higher resolution and hence superior chemical information. 
Furthermore, this technique may be extended to microHPLC and possibly implemented in -line but the 
survey of commercial technology indicates there is no equivalent for GPC, i.e. suitable for greater Mw.   
In terms of following thermosetting resins (e.g. the unsaturated polyester resins (UPR) used for powder 
coatings and Alkenyl Succinic Anhydride, ASA, used for sizing paper, impr ovements to which would be 
very significant for MEGARA’s competitiveness) , which are often obtained by polycondensation (not the 
case of ASA), and which polymerisation are generally followed by titration of the end groups, ProPAT can 
provide the required information in terms of free end groups through NIR (or even MIR once the range of 
the MENS spectroscopic sensors will be extended), as well as humidity content indications. The platform 
would also couple different Smart Sensors for temperature, colour (or MEMS-VIS), and absolute pressure. 
In order to have complementary information, off the shelf inline viscosimeters 26 could also be used in the 
sampling system.   
In terms of prior art using NIR for monitoring resin reactions, searches have been made regarding the 
two aforementioned.  UPRs are the most commonly used thermoset resins around the world. These 
versatile resins are produced by reaction between dicarboxylic acids and diols leading an ester group. 
Determination of acid (AV) and hydroxyl value (OHV) is particularly used in quality control of these kinds 
of resins during the industrial process. These values are usually determined by titration method 27 in 
laboratory but this consumes time, reagents and depends on the collection of samples from the reactor, 
which implies a delay between the measurement and what is happening in the reactor. Spectroscopic 
methods are being increasingly used as analytical techniques and tend to replace wet methods such as 
chemical titrations used at MEGARA, offering shorter anal ysis times, non -destructiveness and greater 
accuracy and reliability when associated with chemometrics. NIR allows chemical groups on polymers to 
be identified and quantified and is sensitive to the O-H bonds and C=O abortions, therefore hydroxyl and 
acidic value determination is a common application. At academic level polyesterification reactions have 
been successfully monitored by NIR spectroscopy 30. In addition, the ability to reliably study the value of 
acid an hydroxyl groups by NIR has been demonstrated as is shown in Figure 6 28,29. NIR methods at lab 
scale has demonstrated being an alternative to conventional techniques to determine the classical quality 
parameters, in addition is a robust tool for monitoring in -line which makes it suitable for process control 
purposes.  
  
                                                
26 http://www.hydramotion.com/XL7_ht.html  
27 Ubranski J, C. W. (1977). Handbook of analysis of synthetic polymers and 
plastics. London 30 P-Dailin. (1997). Process Control and Quality, 167-171.  
28 M. Blanco, J. C. (2008). Control production of polyester resins by NIR spectroscopy. Microchemical Journal, 118-123.  
29 R. A. Heikkaa, K. T. (1997). Determination of acid value, hydroxyl value and water content in reactions between dicarboxylic acids 
and diols using nearinfrared spectroscopy and non-linear partial least squares regression. Analytica Chimica Acta, 287-296.  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 21 of 76  
  
Figure 6.  a) evolution of the NIR spectra during between dicarboxilic acid PA and and diol PG during 
polyestererification reaction;  
b) experimental and predicted acidic  values for calibration with no linear PLS 32  
In terms of monit oring the production of ASA  which react covalently with cellulose and are used an 
internal sizing agent for paper. ASA are produced through a reaction between maleic anhydride and C12-
C16 olefins. Regardless of the reaction pathway all products bear succin ic anhydride functional groups. 
Currently, the content of maleic anhydride is monitored at lab scale as quality parameter. Titration leads 
to quantification of the anhydride groups or their hydrolyzed forms but is time consuming, therefore 
alternatives need to be evaluated. At academic level some studies have been developed to quantify maleic 
anhydride grafted onto polypropylene by FTIR30 and have been correlated with values obtained by titration. 
Similarly, the presence of the carbonyl stretching bands at 1786-1863 cm-1 from succinic anhydride which 
is not present for olefin itself can be useful to monitor the reaction31.  
In addition, for pharma products, which will be considered more from a mixing process stand point in the 
project rather than from the init ial synthesis of the active molecules, many other analytical methods are 
used: for chromatography (gas, ion - thinlayer and liquid-chromatography with various detectors), optical 
spectroscopy, NMR, (IR, VIS -UV; NIR, Fluorescence, Raman, Flow -Injection, etc.), elemental analysis 
(XRF, ICP), electrochemistry (calorimetry, potentiometry) and on -line volatile analysis (Proton -Transfer-
Reaction Time -of-Flight Mass-Spectrometry), to name the most important ones. The planned ProPAT 
monitoring strategy in terms of c ombining novel NIR (providing data on composition during mixing and 
moisture during drying) and ISI sensors (providing dada on particle size during granulation) was previously 
described with figure 6. Similarly to resins, smart sensors could also be added as required. Previously 
indicated micro-HPLC based techniques could be of great value in pharma applications, as the molecular 
masses are generally lower than for polymers, and would perfectly fit the ProPAT smart sensor concept. 
However, this is not expected to be required during the project since no synthesis will be monitored among 
the target pharma products and chemometrics assisted NIR will be sufficient to determine composition of 
mixtures.   
Besides, going significantly beyond the previously described literature, during the ProPAT project, the data 
obtained will be optimally analysed by a combination of soft-modelling methods that only take into account 
the NIR spectra changes, such as Multivariate Curve Resolution (MCR) 32, and hard-modeling methods33 
that take into account the real physicochemical (first principle) model underlying the resin production. 
Hybrid models could eventually be used when non -ideal behaviour in production plants has to be 
envisioned34.  
Finally, for the compositional analysis of minerals, as well as other solid particles , elemental analysis 
and Ion  
Chromatography, WD-XRF, -ED-XRF, ICP-OES, continuous source AAS, conventional AAS with hydride 
system (for Hg, As, Sb), polarography and ion chromatography are among the suitable analy tical 
techniques that will be used as references for the project. Although for those at least from partner GM’s 
operation consisting in dry milling of products resulting from direct mining, size distribution is the most 
important data. In terms of ceramics  and nonferrous metal products, compositional information may be 
required (IR may apply to certain mixtures only) for the more elaborated and variable mixtures from partner 
MBN, including for example ceramic-metal materials used for wear -resistant coatings and based on 
Tungsten Carbide with Cobalt as binder. MBN produces particles that are nanostructured through high 
energy ball milling, a top-down technique yielding a wide particle size distribution. Subsequent spray drying 
then leads to greater size aggre gates presented as spherical particles. Depending on the applications, 
different particle size outputs of the milling machines are needed either in the nano, in the micro or coarser 
                                                
30 Roovers, D. (1995). Journal of Polymer Science. Part A, 829.  
31 M. Sclavons, P. F. (2000). Quantification of the maleic anhydride grafted onto polypropylene by chemical and viscosimetric 
titrations, and FTIR spectroscopy. Polymer, 1989-199.  
32 A. de Juan, S.C. Rutan, M. Maeder, R.  Tauler. Chapters in Multivariate Curve resolution in ‘Comprehensive Chemometrics’ (eds. 
S. Brown, R. Tauler, B.  
Walczak).pp 249-260,325-344,473-506 (2009) Elsevier  
33 M. Maeder, Y.M. Neuhold. ‘Practical Data Analysis in Chemistry’. Elsevier (2007)  
34 A. de Juan, M. Maeder, M. Martínez, R. Tauler. Combining hard- and soft-modeling to solve kinetic problems. Chemometrics and 
Intelligent Laboratory  
Systems, 54 (2000) 123-141  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 22 of 76  
  
ranges. The required fractions are then separated by sieving, centrifugation or by means of cyclones. The 
use of a system such as ProPAT will allow MBN to have greater control over their coarser products. As 
previously mentioned the extension (postproject) of the ISI sensors to X - rays, could allow the thinner 
products from MBN to be captured.  
Innovation potential   
The innovation potential of our ProPAT project is high, especially in context that there are many drivers 
for the uptake of the ProPAT technologies.  
The process analytical technology (PAT) initiative is improving product quality by process design  
through knowledge of the fundamental scientific principles behind it, and continuous online control of a 
process. PAT enables quality cost reduction by moving quality control closer to the production-line (in-line, 
on-line, at-line) and away from the post-manufacturing quality labs35. Indeed PAT is now the buzzword in 
the pharmaceutical industry and it is gaining interest from other sectors as a new framework for better 
understanding processes, whereby central t o PAT is improving final product quality by process design 
through knowledge of the fundamental scientific principles behind it, and continuous online control of a 
process. PAT is now an established platform for good manufacturing practice within the pharm aceutical 
industry. It is a powerful tool that when linked with processing machinery, allows companies to actually 
monitor the process itself and to come up with real time release of the process to cut down on the 
amount of testing downstream and also real ly link the PAT with the process to ensure the quality of the 
material is optimised at the end 36. Quality by Design (QbD) is designed to give the flexibility to change 
downstream. According to Brett Cooper at Mercke Sharpe and Dome: “So if you can demonstrate that you 
have a wide working margin then you can find ways to optimise and improve your process downstream 
while remaining within the QbD space that you’ve designed”40. In particular, a more efficient process results 
in greater production capacity, easier and more predictable processing, less waste generated, and 
cost savings.  
In addition, industry is beginning to equate PAT with reducing the environmental impact of 
processes37. As PAT is a system for designing, analysing and controlling manufacturing pr ocesses 
through measurements of critical quality and performance attributes of raw and processed materials to 
ensure final product quality, the idea of which is to become more efficient while reducing over -
processing, enhancing efficiency and minimising wa ste. Indeed, “GreenPAT” is an emerging term 
within the pharma and petrochemical sectors38 leading to higher production sustainability.  
There are also the benefits of cycle time reduction and increased process efficiency (e.g. increased yield, 
throughput and equipment utilisation) that are achieved by eliminating the delays associated with off -line 
assays. These competitive benefits are tangible and readily measureable: for example, in the 
pharmaceutical industry, Eli Lilly achieved a ten -fold increase in th roughput enabled by moving 
HPLC assays on-line. According to Darryl Ertl, Manager of GlaxoSmithKline’s PAT group in relation to 
their gravitation towards PAT to reduce cycle times, save energy, and cut costs: “We used to have to push 
these initiatives, but now the pilot plants are saying, ‘We want to do these things. We can save a significant 
amount of money.’ It’s a pull vs. push mentality.”42  
However, despite its potential benefits for quality control, resource, energy and cost efficiencies, its wide 
uptake in industry has been hampered by the absence of PAT tools that are affordable, easily integrated 
into existing processes, simple to use wit h clearly demonstrated advantages for implementation. As 
managing PAT data can be complex due to the huge information flow and because it includes mixed data 
formats from different types of analysers, the PAT paradigm makes sense only if analyser and softw are 
resources are harmonically integrated within a specific production line. Nevertheless, the traditional 
approach is even more complicated since the different off line data are not even centralised and may lead 
the operator to paradox information jeopardising the good decision making process.  
                                                
35 Process Analytical Technology: An industry perspective. European Pharmaceutical Review. Issue 4, 2010.  
36 Brett Cooper Research Fellow at Mercke Sharpe and Dome Development Laboratories at the 2014 PAT and QbD Conference  
37 Paul Thomas (2010) Green Processes: PAT and QbD Take Root. Pharmaceutical Manufacturing. MAY 11, 2010  
38 Thomas P (2009) Is It Time for PAT to Go Green? Pharma Manufacturing. 
http://www.pharmamanufacturing.com/articles/2009/148.html.    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 23 of 76  
  
ProPAT through its approach will address existing technology and market barriers that have been 
preventing the wide update of PATs. All in all, the capabilities and versatility of the ProPAT platform offer 
enormous advances for implementing integrated process control in in the SPIRE community and beyond 
(e.g. food, biotech industry). During the project, the system will have been demonstrated for the following 
product parameters and processes (Table 5):  
Table 5. Key product parameters and processes for which the ProPAT technologies will be 
validated  
Product Parameters  Key processes  
Polymer reaction extent  Mixing  
Levels and identification of 
contaminants  
Synthesis, Reaction, 
polymerisation  
Ratio of components  Grinding, milling   
Solution homogeneity/ 
concentration  
Granulation  
Particle size, morphology  Suspension  
Traceability/ variability  Drying   
  
While the ProPAT technologies will be validated for adopting the PAT paradigm in a number of critical 
processes in minerals, ceramic, non-ferrous metals, chemistry (plastic and pharmaceuticals), there is an  
enormous leverage base as the SPIRE sectors are the potential client-base for the outputs of the ProPAT 
project, who are eight world -leading European industrial sectors (cement, ceramics, chemicals, 
engineering, minerals, non -ferrous metals, steel and water) that through the SPIRE Public Private 
Partnership are committed to integrating, demonstrating and validating systems and technolo gies 
across sectors . This unique co -operation will enable massive leveraging of costs and faster 
implementation of technologies through closer connection and integration of innovations in industry 
and their value chains.39  
The key differential feature of ProPAT in reference to similar platforms is basically the affordability. In fact, 
the ProPAT data sources comprise a new generation of soft sensors, particularly, MEMS -based IR 
spectrophotometers and a scattering-based particle size analyser which are being developed as low cost 
solutions. The existing PAT platforms -like the ones supplied by ABB or SIPAT from Siemens- are oriented 
to integrate expensive analysers commercialized by well established companies. Consequently, these 
PAT solutions can hardly be afforded by SMEs. ProPAT could represent the significant first step towards 
the democratisation of high-end tools for achieving widespread sustainable production processes.  
A comprehensive patent search has been performed which has confirmed the novelty of  the ProPAT 
technologies and the freedom to operate. Various patented technologies were identified for the in -line 
monitoring processes, although none are specifically focused on the systems that are aimed at being 
studied during the project.   
In terms of  monitoring polymerisation processes, in general the patent search has demonstrated the 
interest of plastic companies, especially large multinationals, in on -line control process, most of them 
based on spectroscopy methods, such as: An improved interfacial  polycarbonate manufacturing process 
for online measurement of monomer concentration, specifically bisphenol A based on vibrational 
spectroscopy40; A method for online measurement of crystallinity of semicrystalline polymers by Raman 
spectroscopy enabling on-line adjustment of the crystallinity of the polymer41; A process plant of halo-butyl 
rubber with online control of process parameters based on a FTNIR spectrometer, fibre optic cables, a 
visosimeter and a resistance temperature device. An on-line real time analyser predicts the properties of 
the polymer and provides process control 42; An online continuous detection method of oil polymer resin 
                                                
39 http://www.spire2030.eu/mediaroom/34/21/European-Commission-signs-first-ever-7-year-innovation-partnership-with-Europe-s-
process-industry   
40 Method for monitoring monomer concentration in interfacial polycarbonate manufacturing process. DOW GLOBAL 
TECHNOLOGIES, Application number CN2010813218 20100224    
41 Online measurement of crystallinity in semicrystaline polymers by Raman Spectroscopy. DOW CHEMICAL CO. 
WO1998US25170 19981124     
42 On-line control of chemical process plant. EXXON CHEMICAL. Application number US19960034614P 19961231  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 24 of 76  
  
material viscosity based on various instruments in a pipeline for realtime continuous detection of mass 
flow, pressure difference, temperature of the material in the pipeline and environmental temperature. Real-
time field data acquisition is carried out and the viscosity of the material is calculated using a model 
present43; A method and systems for online analysis (melt  index, density, viscosity, molecular weight, 
molecular weight distribution, weight ratios of different polymers) of a polymeric material within a mixing 
device by Raman spectroscopy analysis to enable process control for adjusting operating parameters of 
the mixing device and/or an associated polymerisation process 44; A system for rapid determination of 
molecular weight and/or size, and/or other properties of importance to the polymer quality in a polymer 
process based on fast sample extraction, preparation and delivery techniques to convert complex polymer 
sample solutions into the diluted polymer analyte solution which passes through the flow -through 
detectors45. Similarly, numerous inventions seek to determine the end point of chemical reactions  
through infrared spectroscopy 46, 47. A method was patented for online monitoring carbamate synthesis 
process which includes real -timely monitoring of the amine, dimethyl carbonate and carbamate 
concentrations in the reaction system by FTIR, and determines the degree of the reaction48. A process for 
controlling a polyphenylene sulphide resin by online IR has also been patented 49. In general, the control 
of polymerization by IR requires the use of chemometrics. A few chemometrics models can be found in 
the patent literatur e but no conflict was identified with the project and in particular none of the patents 
covered the specific resin selected for the project.  
In terms of using smart process control in the ceramic sector, an online detector for ceramic ball mill has 
been patented. The information is collected by an optical fibre and processed with the purpose of real-time 
detection of concentration and granularity of milled clay raw material inside the ceramic ball mill drum. 50 
Other inventions refer to a method for monitori ng and controlling milling and mixing processes in the 
limestone, cement and mineral material industry or other matters that are beyond the scope of this 
project.51 52.  
With respect to the pharmaceutical industry, a patent describing a method for monitoring on line a mixing 
process of pharmaceutical production locating an optical sensor on a mixing tank which provides IR 
absorbance spectrums of mixed materials was found. The invention can process a plurality of characteristic 
sequences during the mixing process of pharma products and automatically reach a conclusion on degree 
homogeneity, which guarantee quality of the mixing process and makes the method suitable for automated 
processing of pharmaceutical production53. However the patent is in Chinese, and only granted there, and 
it is difficult to assess its novelty and extent. In any case, our project goes further and not only seeks to 
monitor the mixing process by IR but also combines particle size sensors, as well as any required smart 
process sensor and makes use of most advanced chemometrics approaches. Other patents regarding e.g. 
granulation process monitoring 54,55 where returned but were not relevant to the technologies used in 
ProPAT.  
                                                
43 Hydrocarbon resin polymer material viscosity on -line continuous detecting method. SINOPEC LANZHOU PETROLEUM CHEM. 
Application number   
CN2008118135 20080425    
44 On-line properties analysis of a molten polymer by Raman Spectroscopy for control of a mixing device. EXXONMOBIL CHEM 
PATENTS INC. Application number WO2006US23102 20060614    
45 Online monitor for polymer processes. GENERAL ELECTRIC. Application number US19980183698 19981030    
46 Online detection method for pyrolysis reaction end point in Octogen production process. Z.Gao. Patent application 
CN20131367463 20130821    
47 Online detection method of crystal -transformation reaction endpoint in production process of cyclotetramethylene tetranitramine. 
Z. Ghao et al. Patent application  CN20131367461 20130821      
48 Method for online monitoring carbamate synthetic process.  X. Zhenzhen et al. Patent application. CN20121540231 20121213    
49 Synthesis process for polyphenylene sulfide resin. J. Liu el al. Application number CN20111229715 20110811    
50 Milling process online real-time detector for ceramic ball mill. T Li et al. Application number CN20092290572U 20091225    
51 A method for the control of milling and mixing processes in the limestone, cement and mineral material industry. R. Thomas. 
Application number EP19960660015 19960524    
52 Advanced vertical mill control system based on model identification and predictive control     
53 Method and system for on-line monitoring medicaments production mixing process. D. Ruxu.el al.  Application number  
CN2007177549 20071130    
54 Sintering granulating moisture control parameter tuning method for effectively inhibiting raw material flow fluctuation. W. Min et al. 
Application number CN20111106430 20110427    
55 Online automatic powdery and granular material grain size analyser. TA. Hideo et al. Application number 
JP19860018953 19860130   59 http://www.pharmainfo.net/reviews/process-analytical-technology-pat-boon-
pharmaceutical-industry  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 25 of 76  
  
All in all, the generic use of process monitoring and feedback to opt imise the process is not novel and 
many specific systems are reported but in general they lack such a global approach as in ProPAT. In 
addition, ProPAT’s novelty lies in the use of a combination of very specific sensors and their embedding 
in the global pr ocess control platform. Therefore, ProPAT is expected to lead to a number of patent 
opportunities, particularly surrounding the proposed technological advancements in sensor components 
and data handling software.   
2. Impact   
2.1. Expected impact   
Contribution to the expected impacts set out in the work programme, under the relevant topic  
The proposed ProPAT integrated process control platform that will be developed, validated and 
demonstrated in the process industry during this project will contribute abundantly to the expected impacts 
of the SPIRE-1-2014 call.   
Improved capabilities for valid, reliable and real-time measurement of the properties and quality of 
process streams and final products for existing and for more flexible process operation concepts.  
The PAT initiative focuses on building quality into the product and processes, as well as continuous 
process improvement. Essentially, integrating on -line measurement and/or modelling of critical quality 
attributes with automated feedback control of the process parameters impacting these attributes can 
ensure more efficient control of processes, reducing product variability, which will subsequently reduce 
the risk of releasing off -spec product into downstream discreet manufacturing , and increase 
customers’ satisfaction, thereby preventing products being rejected (and discarded) further down the 
supply chain.  
ProPAT aims to open up this world of process understanding and continuous on-line control for improved 
product quality and safety, process effici ency, yields, resource and energy efficiency, and ultimately 
profitability through and affordable, robust, versatile platform, that will be validated in key process industries 
for critical unit operations. Indeed, research -based development and implementat ion of PAT in the 
European process industry (as a consequence of projects such as ProPAT) is focused on improved control, 
rapid final product quality evaluation, increased resource and energy efficiency and productivity, and will 
have a knock-on effect in terms of industrial innovation and enhancing competitiveness.   
Moreover, process understanding results in an appropriate management of variability and improved 
operational efficiency (e.g.,  
“Lean Manufacturing,” “Right First Time” strategies) 59 leading to more flexible process operation 
concepts. A defined design space for production processes offers flexibility for raw materials used and 
even process controls 29. Because the influence of raw material variations is well -known, the process 
control strategy allows adaptation to the variability of the raw material quality attributes 29. This also leads 
to safer processes because the control strategies are optimised both from a manufacturing and an 
operator point of view.   
ProPAT will develop and validate versatile and affordable sensors to provide the industry with quantitative, 
real-time in-line control of critical quality and performance attributes for raw and in-process materials during 
processing. The key innovations brought by ProPAT are, on the one hand, the use of novel low cost NIR 
(MEMS based) and granulometric (imagining scatterometer ISI) sensors in combination with smart sensors 
capable of measuring traditional parameters in a time /space resolved fashion depending on the individual 
processes, and on the other hand the calibration and validation of the integrated PAT platforms in a number 
of process applications including minerals, ceramic, non -ferrous metals, and chemicals (plastic and 
pharmaceuticals).  
ProPAT will develop improved measurement tools, which will be validated in the targeted process 
industries (minerals, ceramics, non -ferrous metals, polymers and pharmaceuticals), to move analysis 
closer to the process from off -line measurements via at -line to on-line and in-line analysis. This change 
allows for the introduction of the principles of PAT where the process industries can deliver a product that 
will not require post-process testing because it is based on active process control to achieve an in-spec 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 26 of 76  
  
product. In order to validate and demonstrate the reliable, real-time measurements of the properties and 
qualities of process streams and final products, an analysis of the current control protocols, both off -line 
and online, currently employed by the targeted end-user process industries in the unit processes that will 
be validated by ProPAT will be performed (Figure 7). As such in WP2, the novel sensors will be calibrated 
offline against established quality control and/or standardized methods used by the industry to characterise 
products. Subsequently, they will be tested for inline operations in WP6 and 7.   
  
Figure 7. Process and Product specific validation of the ProPAT system  
The impact and novelty of ProPAT solutions arise not only from the development of the innovative 
analysers and sensors, but also the overarching data management solutions, Global Control System 
Software and proposed integration strategies.   
More sustainable plant operations due to the extensive usage of all information available from 
validated PAT and PPMT measurements for model based control.  
Ultimately, large amounts of PAT data have to be collected, analysed, displayed, transmitted, processed, 
and stored in a manner that provides timely information about manufacturing process variables. ProPAT 
will develop an appropriate data management system to accommodate all these factors. One important 
reason why many companies shy away from NIR -based and other spectroscopic sensors is the lack of 
effective data management systems. The project will develop a versatile data management system to act 
as the single front end application for the developed sensors and analysers. The system will facilitate 
collection of data from a range of sources (e.g. spectral analysers, process data, LIMS -data, other 
databases). The ProPAT interface that will be developed will contextualise the collected data from different 
sources and time, align the data to bring together all relevant information from different sources.   
Key to the approach will be the performance of calculations in real time (e.g. transformation of multivariate 
spectral data into discrete CQA-values (Critical to Quality Attribute-values). Combined with integration of 
commonly used chemometrical software packages (e.g. Unscrambler, Matlab) the necessary tools to allow 
for APC (Advanced Process Control) will be developed. The ProPAT software will facilitate data mining for 
offline analysis, to provide information that will lead to a better understanding of the process.   
A flexible system will be developed which facilitates data collection from an array of sources and interprets 
the data for appropriate decisions to be taken. Robust data processing protocols for sensor methodologies 
which identify and explain critical sources of process and product variability will be developed. An effective 
framework for multi-sensor data fusion will be created to give more accurate on-line process performance 
monitoring. A model -based supervisory control system suitable for the target process industries will be 
produced.  
An important drive r for PAT is the pressing need within the industry to reduce production costs  and 
speeds59. In short, ProPAT is an enabler for the extensive usage of all information available will contribute 
to more sustainable plant operations  through measurements of cri tical quality and performance 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 27 of 76  
  
attributes of raw and processed materials to ensure final product quality, the idea of which is to become 
more efficient while reducing over-processing, enhancing efficiency and minimising waste. The conversion 
rate vs. cycle time of the polymeric resins will be improved by the access to real time information on the 
progress of its synthesis reaction as opposed to, sometimes, long offline titrations. The off spec minerals 
or ceramic particles sizes that would be separated by sieving or possibly reworked or sent to lower value 
applications will be reduced. The time required for drying powder resulting from wet milling or granulation 
will be optimised. These are just a number of examples among the very broad capabilities of the ProPAT 
system that will be demonstrated in the project.  
Improved monitoring and control of continuous plants  
As process manufacturing is distinguished by a production approach that has minimal interruptions in 
actual processing in any one production run, o r between production runs of similar products. Process 
understanding is the basis for process control and assured end product quality. PAT is an approach to 
monitoring manufacturing (and other) processes on a continuous rather than discrete basis 29. According 
to Uwe Kirschner, General Manager at Sentronic GmbH, Dresden and responsible for the Process 
Analyser business unit: “PAT is a door opener for continuous production processes, where in-line control 
is essential to achieve constant high quality.”56   
One of the prominent features of ProPAT is online monitoring, which means it is not only recording 
information, but it’s also closing the loop and making adjustments to the process as the product is being 
manufactured. In the context of the applications that will be targeted in ProPAT in terms of close loop 
process control that will be tested in UNIVLEEDS facilities for 3 models processes that will mimic those 
later implemented during industrial demonstration: 1) Solid/slurry processing: granulation, wet milli ng; 2) 
pharma/fine chemistry processing (mixtures); 3) high temperature processing (resin synthesis). This will 
allow the demonstration of: 1) the impact of the sensor on the process (e.g. benefits on quality, cycle time, 
yield, waste reduction, etc.), in a statistically reliable fashion; 2) the robustness of the sensors to scaling 
up/working at process conditions (extend of recalibration required for each scale); 3) Robustness of 
consistency of measurement in spite of batch to batch variations or in prolonged time.  
Improved support of the operators leading to safer, more reliable and sustainable process 
operation improving process efficiency.  
Management of processes by operators not fully understanding the process can result in unsafe, unreliable 
and unsustainable process operations. PAT technologies can lead to improving operator safety  and 
reducing human error 61. Through the adoption of ProPAT in process industries, operators will be 
empowered, through access to real-time process data, to monitor progress and halt and correct a problem, 
or even once the ProPAT system has been fully validated to work in close loop, rather than passing it on 
to a final quality inspector.   
To this end, processes could become safer and more flexible through the use of ProPAT, whereby the 
operator would be supported with new technology to correct or prevent a problem in the production process 
based on critical process parameters (CPPs) and an analysis of the critical operator data (COD) necessary 
and/or for integrated system control or required by an operator to effectively manage the process. Indeed, 
in addition to process parameters already available, new real-time parameters will also be measured and 
managed with the process data from smart sensors in integrated fashion via the ProPAT system. The 
identification and confirmation of CPPs will be accomplished by using neural net, mathematical modelling 
and statistical software to find correlations between key quality attributes and measured real-time process 
parameters. By using real -time methods, the process endpoint no longer needs to be a fixed time, but 
rather can be the time required to reach a specific state or condition. Some examples of expected CPPs 
are the polymerisation extent of the resins vs. its temperature of synthesis and reaction time, particle size 
vs. mechanical inputs and time, drying vs. temperature and time, whereby in each case the aim is to find 
best compromises of process in terms of quality, efficiency, sustainability, etc.   
In terms of contribution to safety, on the one hand ProPAT will allow wastes resulting from off -specs 
materials to be reduced, some of them ha ving to be treated as hazardous wastes. Moreover, for the 
workers, the need to carry out sampling along the process is sometimes hazardous (e.g. when handling 
                                                
56 Featured in: http://www.industry.siemens.com/topics/global/en/magazines/process-news/pharmaceutical/pat-industry-
perspective/pages/default.aspx 61 Blevins, T. & Beall, J. (2007) Monitoring and Control Tools for Implementing PAT. 
Pharmacuetical Technology, March 2007.     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 28 of 76  
  
hot resins, unreacted monomers, powdery particles, etc.) so the shift to online monitoring will b e a 
significant advance. Likewise, in terms of sample management or substitution of quality control tests (e.g. 
when using solvents for titrations, etc.). Finally, the particle size sensor will allow the process to be 
optimised and when required for safety  reasons, reducing the nano -sized fraction of the particles 
contributing to health and safety of workers and users of the products.  
Besides in terms of contribution to flexibility of processes , faster process set up and better control 
thanks to ProPAT will ensure the same facility can be used for a greater number of productions once the 
ProPAT system is calibrated for each of them. The present inflexibility of the process industry is often 
reported as one of its weaknesses, which is related to one of the goals of the F3 project.  
Better process operations with respect to resource and energy efficiency.  
In line with the SPIRE Roadmap, this project will deliver a short to medium term impact in relation to the 
improvement in measuring systems, process cont rol and process optimisation that can be integrated to 
significantly increase energy and resource efficiency in the “installed base” 1. “GreenPAT”, an emerging 
term within the pharma and petrochemical sectors57, will be a core objective of ProPAT leading to higher 
production sustainability. SPIRE aims to implement its research and innovation roadmap through six 
Key Components that are at the core of a resource and energy efficient process industry , of which 
one is ‘Process’, which is focussing on solutions for more efficient processing and energy systems for the 
process industry. Within the Process Key Component, is the Key Action KA 2.3 Process monitoring, 
control and optimization.63   
As novel and radically improved production processes are key to increasing the energy, resource and 
CO2 efficiency in industrial value chains 1, the adoption of the ProPAT technologies by process 
industries will improve production efficiency in terms of energy consumption and resources 
wastage through advanced process control tha t will lead to improved yields, reduced over -processing, 
reduced cycle times, energy savings, and essentially reduced costs. Moreover, integrating on -line 
measurement and/or modelling of critical quality attributes with, on the long term once fully demonstrated, 
automated feedback control of the process parameters impacting these attributes, such as is proposed by 
ProPAT, will ensure more efficient control of processes, reducing product variability, which will 
subsequently reduce the risk of releasing off -spec product into the discrete manufacturing, thereby 
preventing products being rejected (and discarded) further downstream. This will help to reduce or 
eliminates production scarp, contributing to reducing waste.   
This is very much in line with the EU’s EUROPE 2020 growth strategy for the coming decade that will lead 
the way to transform the EU into a smart, sustainable and inclusive economy. Indeed, without the 
contribution of a Sustainable Process Industry, it becomes difficult to imagine that the objectives of Europe 
2020 will be achieved1.   
In situ real -time monitoring of reactive processing of the chemical industry in general, and polymer in 
particular, is of crucial importance since it allows measuring continuously changes in physico -chemical 
properties during the process while in the current situation, resorting to off-line QC methods, there is a lag 
between the result and what is occurring in the reactor. In addition, off-line methods are time-consuming. 
For example, MEGARA has reported that process control of Alkenyl Succinic Anhydride (ASA) production 
requires the quantification of maleic content during the 20 hours of production. This measurement takes 
40 minutes. Overall, they expect that online monitoring will save a total of 4 hours, i.e. 20% reduction of 
cycle time (cumulating the savings in each stage of the synthesis) and that such immediate actions which 
result in a 20% increase in productivity and energy savings. The prompt ending of the reaction is also 
expected to help in achieving a bett er colour for the final product, a very desirable attribute for the final 
application as paper sizing. In addition, it is expected to avoid the decomposition of maleic anhydride 
(MA), eliminating the need for filtering the final product, so the properties of the product will also be 
improved and further time and energy will be saved. This improvement will not be exclusive of this process. 
ProPAT intends to also guide the manufacturers to optimise the production which will result in the 
minimization of the off-spec batches which currently account for 5% of the total annual production on 
polyester resins at MEGARA. This will be possible by the monitoring of the reaction process leading to 
                                                
57 Thomas P (2009) Is It Time for PAT to Go Green? Pharma Manufacturing. 
http://www.pharmamanufacturing.com/articles/2009/148.html.   63 http://www.spire2030.eu/   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 29 of 76  
  
timely intervention in the early stages of the reaction with appropriate corrections (addition of glycols/acids) 
when needed (inaccurate feeding, high glycol losses etc.).  
In terms of fine chemistry and more especially secondary pharma production, as planned to be used 
as a case study in GSK, benefits are expected from the installation of the ProPAT system in the different 
steps of the process, and an even greater potential is envisaged while expanding the deployment of 
ProPAT also in primary pharma production and synthesis than only in the selected model processes that 
will be tested during the project. An important asset leading to significant cost savings is expected from 
the minimisation of drying times by detecting the drying end point on each batch through access to the 
residual moisture in the powder in the spray dryer in real time. In addition, similarly as for resins, the inline 
access to compositional information of mixtures will allow corrective actions to be taken immediately 
by the operator or in closed loop on the long term. Furthermore, the real time detection of particle size 
is important for optimizing the process, reducing energy consumption, as well as for product quality but 
also for operative questions, e.g. to avoid clogging filters in case of big agglomerates in the spray drying 
system. The listed benefits in monitoring those 3 main processes will all contribute in an increased 
productivity due to better control of the industrial processes as well as reducing the off -spec product 
quantities and all in all ensure high standards of final product quality. The m ain assets of ProPAT vs. 
existing systems available on the market or already present at GSK are the use of lower cost sensors with 
good accuracy combining chemical and physical information. Finally a system like ProPAT would also 
allow reducing the time to  market by assisting in new product development and allowing the production 
facilities to be more flexible.  
Meanwhile the minerals as well as the ceramics /metals industries represented in the consortium can 
obtain benefits using ProPAT though the motorization of particle size during classical processes as milling.   
In terms of minerals, GM reported the possibility to use ProPAT to follow on-line a vertical pendular milling 
process, which is currently controlled though off line analysis taking around 1h. It is expected that the on-
line monitoring system will increase the efficiency of milling by optimising the control parameters. The 
standardised control will make even small batches efficient both cost - and production-wise. In addition, 
quicker milling parameters adjustment will also decrease the amount of out-of-spec products (reducing 
current scrap levels by around 5%), increase yield (around 10%) and save energy (around 10%).  
In terms of metal and ceramics, similarly MBN have expressed its interest in monitorisation of milling, using 
high energy ball mills. Currently, the process is monitored off line through size particle analysis which can 
take up to 2 hours. Considering also the time needed for gradual passivation of particles (20-60 min), the 
time for discharging the milling chamber, for the classification and preparation for the second batch, on -
line monitoring of the process is expected to reduce the cycle time by 30 -40% leading to considerable 
energy savings too. In addition, high energy ball milling is a process that can induce different effects on 
the material like welding, work hardening, diffusion, heating, fracturing, flattening, alloying, mixing, etc. 
which affect th e particle size distribution. The on -line monitoring of the process can facilitate the 
development of products (which is very strategic for MBN who has a lot of specialty grades) and the prompt 
detection of a malfunctioning of the machine before the process output is affected. In such applications, it 
is estimated that the overall process yield could be increased by 10%  by arriving at the optimum 
conditions on line.  
Significant decrease in greenhouse gas emissions.  
According to the IEA the energy sector ( 41%), transportation (22%) and industry (20%) are the main 
contributors to global CO 2 emissions, followed by the building sector (7%). In the industrial area steel 
(6%), cement (5%) and chemicals (3%) are the largest source of CO2 emissions58. To this end, the SPIRE 
process industries are indeed in a position to make a significant contribution to energy and resource 
efficiency within their own industries (representing 20% of the global CO2 emissions). The aforementioned 
case scenarios contributes to SPIRE go als in terms of reduction in fossil energy use of up to 30% (via 
optimum process conditions and cycle time), reduction in non-renewable, primary raw material use of up 
to 20% (by reduction of scrap), all together leading to a reduction in CO 2 equivalent footprint up to 40%. 
In addition, overall, although during the project the system will be demonstrated for a finite number of 
model process scenarios, a very broad range of benefits already appears both in terms of product and 
process consistency, process set up time, certain unique product features, operational advantages and 
                                                
58 Energy technology transitions for industry, IEa 2009 - http://www.iea.org/co2highlights/co2highlights.pdf   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 30 of 76  
  
risk prevention, etc. The potential of ProPAT is even much greater, considering the post-project calibration 
of the system (generating business in system exploitation and technical assi stance) to virtually any 
process industry in the SPIRE sectors. A life cycle analysis will consider effects along the value chain and 
will demonstrate the sustainability advantage.   
Strengthening of the competiveness of the European industry both in the d omain of PAT 
technologies and control solutions and with respect to economically sustainable industrial 
processes.  
ProPAT will strengthen the competiveness of the EU industry in the domain of PAT technologies and 
control solutions in that it will overcome many of the barriers to the adoption of PAT in industry, mainly the 
high costs of analysers, the lack of a flexible platform for the integration of different analysers into existing 
plants, and the large volumes of data to be managed. These advantages wil l contribute to technology 
push for the ProPAT technologies. In addition to overcoming the technological barriers, ProPAT will also 
prepare the European process industry for PAT adoption through comprehensive knowledge transfer and 
training activities, as well as by demonstrating the benefits through the validation work that will be 
performed by UNIVLEEDS as well as through the participating process industry representatives in this 
consortium.   
PAT represents a silent revolution in industrial quality control59, whereby it enables a shift away from 
the historical quality assurance approach (i.e. testing quality after the process is complete) to a true quality 
control approach where the process is continually adjusted to maintain product quality and consistenc y, 
as well as to optimise process efficiency. This can be a huge enabler for the competitiveness of the 
European process industry in that such industries do not lean towards a defect -oriented manufacturing. 
The approach in the process industry is direct, real-time control, whereas in discrete manufacturing its 
afterthe-fact statistical analysis to get continuous improvement. Moreover, most process industries (e.g. 
resins, pharma, powdery products obtained in suspensions) deal with liquid (or solid liquids) processing, 
which is more complex and variable than discrete manufacturing.  
Indeed, research-based development and implementation of PAT in the European process industry as a 
consequence of ProPAT is focused on improved control, rapid final product qualit y evaluation, increased 
resource and energy efficiency and productivity, which will have a knock -on effect in terms of industrial 
innovation and enhancing competitiveness. In the pharmaceutical industry, PAT has enabled processes 
to be actively managed to achieve a high degree of repeatability and efficiency, quality assurance to 
become continuous, and real-time activity, which has brought such tangible benefits as, improving asset 
uptime and availability for pharmaceutical unit operations by up to 40 %, costs are reduced by up to 30 % 
while fundamental product quality is maintained60. In addition, there are the benefits of cycle time reduction 
and increased process efficiency (e.g. increased yield, throughput and equipment utilisation) that are 
achieved by eliminating the delays associated with off-line assays. These competitive benefits are tangible 
and readily measureable: for example, in the pharmaceutical industry, Eli Lilly achieved a ten-fold increase 
in throughput enabled by moving HPLC assays on-line. Obtaining similar tangible benefits in the European 
process industry will lead to savings, profitability, growth and jobs. It will also contribute to market pull for 
the ProPAT technologies.  
In short, the competitive benefits that will be derived for the European process industry, together with the 
advances that the  
ProPAT project will make in terms of bringing disruptive analysers in terms of cost, and a highly flexible 
and powerful Global Process Control Platform will greatly stimulate demand for the P roPAT 
technologies in the EU process industry and beyond. Given that one of the fundamental goals of SPIRE 
is boosting the deployment of innovative resource and energy efficient solutions and practices among the 
partners facilitating their adaptation, transfer and take-up in a cross-sectorial way1, ProPAT will leverage 
the enormous potential of the SPIRE community as a platform for post-project deployment of the ProPAT 
results in the industry. Given that the sectors united in SPIRE represent a major part of the manufacturing 
base in Europe (EU27), including more than 450,000 individual enterprises, the market opportunity for 
                                                
59 van den Berg, F., et al., Process Analytical Technology in the food industry, Trends in Food Science & Technology (2012), 
doi:10.1016/j.tifs.2012.04.007  
60 Buijs, T. Process Analytical Technology: Integrated PAT solutions for the Life Sciences industry. Special Report 
Automation Systems ABB Review 67 Lingman et. al. (2013). European Roadmap for Industrial Process Automation. 
ProcessIT.eu   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 31 of 76  
  
deployment of the results of the ProPAT technology in industry are enormous, which will lead to growth 
and jobs for companies dedicated  to the supply of PAT technologies and control solutions (discussed 
below).   
Retention and creation of jobs for the European measurement and automation and process 
industries.  
Growth will lead to jobs being retained in the EU in industrial process automation, which is an important 
sector for Europe, and one in which many European companies are world leaders in terms of systems and 
applications development, supply and usage67. If we consider that the world market for the automation of 
process industries is €26.3 bn, with the EU market representing € 10 bn67. Should the ProPAT technologies 
secure even a 0.1% of the EU market in the first years of market activity, this would represent € 10 M worth 
of annual turnover. Using this as our starting point, and assuming a time-to-market, of 18-24 months after 
project completion (i.e. market entry by 2020), by 2025 € 50 M in turnover could be generated through the 
supply, integration and maintenance of the ProPAT technologies and some 84 new jobs could be created 
in the European measurement and automation industries over that same period. However, if we consider 
expansion into the global market, these figures could well be doubled. Importantly these new jobs would 
be in technological SMEs (IRIS, SPECTRAL, MEMSFAB), which would strengthen the positioning of SMEs 
in a sector that is dominated by large players. For example, ABB is a world leader in this area with a share 
of 22%, followed by Siemens and Schneider Electric.   
If we consider the retention and creation of jobs in the European process industries, the sectors united in 
SPIRE employ over 6.8 million employees, generating more than 1,600 billion € turnover. As such they 
represent 20% of the total European industry, both in terms of employment and turnover1. Should ProPAT 
be uptaken in 3 % of the EU process industries by 2025  
(these industries would represent € 48 bn of turnover in the EU process industry), and envisaging savings 
and profitability impacts through the competitive benefits of implementing PAT an d integrated process 
control strategies in their operations of 1 % of turnover, this would equate to €48 M per annum, which 
would lead to the creation of 400 new jobs per annum in the sector (for system manufacturing and 
implementation including creating s pecific chemometrics models). On the long term, by 2030, ProPAT 
could have generated 2000 new jobs in the process industry in Europe, and 10,000 new jobs by 2050. 
Beyond these direct jobs, ones needs to consider the indirect employment impacts from the dow nstream 
effects in the European discrete manufacturing industries.   
Contribution to improving the innovation capacity and the integration of new knowledge   
Key to improving the innovation capacity of companies is to strengthen their competitiveness and g rowth 
by developing innovations that meet the needs of European and global markets . As was discussed, 
when the ProPAT technologies are commercialised the market opportunities will be promising, yielding 
competitiveness for Europe, jobs and growth.  
ProPAT will play a positive role in the integration of new knowledge in the process industry. The 
development and adoption of PAT tools in the EU industry could play a major role in assisting companies, 
including SMEs, in increased process efficiency and producti on sustainability, reduced operating costs, 
reduced wastes, increased process validation and ultimately improved final product quality. To date, PAT 
adoption has been relatively slow due to the constraints of technology costs, complexity, etc. However 
given the nature of the process industry in the EU, it is critical that new PAT tools are developed which are 
affordable, easily integrated into existing processes, simple to use with clearly demonstrated advantages 
for implementation. For achieving the resour ce and operational efficiencies, as well as the sustainability 
target of SPIRE, it is imperative that the EU industry has the know how to implement an effective PAT 
strategy to assure product quality, increase process efficiency and ultimately maintain its competitiveness 
in the global market.   
It is clear from the SPIRE Roadmap, that the SPIRE process industries, which have a large number of 
production operations throughout the EU, have important requirements for innovation and retrofitting in 
line with further specialisation of the sectors (e.g. specialty chemicals) and to comply with stricter (future) 
environmental standards1. These companies offer an enormous leverage base for SPIRE innovation; 
in some cases (e.g. new process control) offering double digit replication potential compared to the 
initial single pilot project in which a novel SPIRE technology will be proven and demonstrated 1. 
Following successful technology demonstration at market scale and market acceptance the step of 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 32 of 76  
  
commercialising the technology needs to be taken. This is the most expensive step, typically with factors 
of 5 to 10+ higher than for a demonstration capability, even for a single commercial plant. This is the 
investment that the industry needs to make and will be very willing  to make for the successful 
projects that emerge from SPIRE as they will want to see a return on the significant R&I investment 
(200M euro/year) made in the PPP1.  
  
Fig. 8- The Innovation Gap  
In the case of our project, the strong industrial presence in the ProPAT consortium is testimony to the high 
commercial relevance of project and its outcomes. Importantly our industry mix consists of innovation 
drivers (IRIS, MEMSFAB and SPECTRAL) and innovation adopters (GM, GSK, MEGARA, MBN). On the 
one hand, the technological SMEs have a strategic business interest and capability to exploiting the project 
results and performing further development to towards industrialisation and commercialisation. They will 
stimulate technology push. On the other hand, the participating early adopters of the ProPAT system will 
adopt PAT in their plants, thereby creating market pull. This relevant presence of industry will contribute 
to bridging the “innovation gap” (Fig. 8) that frequently prevents research outputs from reaching the market. 
Moreover, ProPAT has also generated wider interest from SPIRE members such as BASF, DSM, Solvay, 
Total, DOW, as well as from the Suschem platform, with whom we will engage as part of o ur wider 
communication and industry outreach activities, as unfortunately not all industry end -users could be 
included in the bid due to various constraints such as previous commitments, budget constraints and 
eventually the impending deadline.  
To maximise the impact of ProPAT, the technologies developed will be tested and validated over as many 
suitable unit operations and products as possible (figure 7). Also it is envisaged that many of the ProPAT 
technologies developed within the project will have appl ication within the wider process industries 
and indeed the food, dairy, infant formula and other comparable process industries. The presence of a 
market actor, DECHEMA, will also ensure that any legislative or regulatory barriers to market entry are 
managed and overcome to pave the way forward for commercial use of the project outcomes.   
Barriers/obstacles, and any framework conditions   
In order to ensure that the ProPAT results do not encounter any regulatory barriers that would prevent 
industry adoption, the work plan includes a number of activities to plan the work and its outcomes in line 
with standardisation to will ensure that the project outputs are geared up for future regulatory compliance 
and to meet with all relevant industry standards. Right at  the project outset, in Task 1.4, DECHEMA who 
sit on the DIN 055, CEN 332 and ISO 48 technical committees and have been the one founders of the 
PAT initiative, will provide the consortium with the standards of all the related methods used in the target 
applications of ProPAT, which will ensure that the ProPAT sensors can be calibrated against well -
established methods. This is a very important step that will ease ProPAT’s post -project standardisation. 
TUD will also contribute knowledge and expertise at this level as they extensive experience in setting up 
ISO and DIN standards regarding particle size analysis. This will give the project every chance of success 
in relation to the fulfilment of regulations and standards to pave the way forward for uptake of the ProPAT 
integrated process control system in the European process industry. In addition, during Subtask 10.3.2 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 33 of 76  
  
Regulatory Compliance and Standardisation , under the guidance of DECHEMA a CEN Workshop 
Agreement (CWA) as best practice document that industry c an refer to, which will be announced and 
distributed via CEN and all national standardisation bodies. Moreover, quality working manuals and quality 
working procedures, datasheets, guidelines etc. based on quality standards such as ISO9000 and 
ISO14000 will be drawn up for the ProPAT technologies.   
2.2. Measures to maximise impact  
2.2.1. Dissemination and exploitation of results   
To realise the expected project impacts of contributing to the “strengthening of the competiveness of the 
European industry both in the domain of PAT technologies and control solutions and with respect to 
economically sustainable industrial processes” and the “retention and creation of jobs for the European 
measurement and automation and process industries”, at this planning stage of the ProPAT project, we 
have devised our initial strategy for the dissemination and the exploitation of the project results, with a view 
to increasing the innovation and business impacts of the project. In relation to a dissemination plan, this 
initial plan is embodied in the Communication/Dissemination Plan discussed later in this section, whereby 
the target audiences are defined and along with how they will be reached and what will be communicated 
to each. While the Communication plan discusses communication actions that will be carried out during 
the project, this will be the starting point for post -project dissemination activities that will be designed to 
boost the commercial exploitation of the project results.   
Importantly, a first exploitation/business plan has been drawn up considering the contribution of the results 
to patents, to new or existing products, services, infra structures and knowledge bases, to ensure the 
project innovations are delivered to the market. Exploitation of the project results is the most direct way of 
gaining socio-economic benefits such as improved processes and efficiencies, jobs and competitiveness. 
The industrial use of the project knowledge and outputs for increased competitiveness and growth are 
where the innovation impacts of this project lies. The expected impacts from this project can only be 
realised through a strong commitment among the Pr oPAT partners to plan a robust post -project 
exploitation strategy.     
In terms of the proposed exploitation routes, it is envisaged that the results will be used for: a) Commercial 
exploitation; b) Education and training; and c) Further research. Each partner has communicated clear 
exploitation expectations (table 6), which will be planned in greater detail during Task 10.3- Preparation 
for the practical implementation of the project results.   
Table 6- Summary of exploitation intentions of the ProPAT partners  
 
No.  Short Name  Intention for use of project results  
1  IRIS  Use of the knowledge generated in relation to the development of global process control systems for PATs 
for their commercial PATBoxTM solution (a process control platform for integrating PAT technologies in the 
food, pharmaceutical and process industries).  
2  ICFO  Use of the knowledge generated in relation to the ISI analyser in the post -project industrialisation stage 
towards a commercial device  
3  VTT  Use of increased knowledge of PAT in the industry in order to start follow-up projects in this field, and to 
transfer this knowledge to other industries, such as pulp and paper and biorefineries  
4  UNIVLEEDS  Use the knowledge generated in relation to PAT technologies to improve the analytical capabilities of 
IPSE and iPRD in  
 
 industrial process control. Specifically, developed advanced understanding of integrated inline sensor and 
control systems will be exploited in various R &  D projects being conducted at the University in multiple 
sectors, such as current collaborations with chemical, pharmaceutical, personal care, water and nuclear 
industries.  
5  URV  Use of the knowledge generated in relation to modelling of novel data types, novel preprocessing 
techniques and multivariate quality control for publication in scientific journals, presentation in international 
conferences and organization of courses for industries. Development of a doctoral thesis.  
6  ZHAW  Use the knowledge generated in relation to PAT technologies to improve the analytical technologies 
currently used in research projects   
7  TUD  Use the knowledge generated in relation to PAT technologies to improve the analytical technologies 
currently used in research projects   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 34 of 76  
  
8  UB  Use the knowledge of data fusion from a range of sensors and PATs generated in this project will extend 
the groups expertise, resulting in further development of postgraduate (and undergraduate) courses 
provided by them, including close collaboration with project partners and other potential partners on future 
student and research projects. Development of a doctoral thesis.  
9  IMAR  Use of the knowledge generated in relation to smart sensors to start follow-up projects in this field, and to 
transfer this knowledge to other industries such as dairy processing and infant formula  
10  SPECTRAL  Use of the knowledge generated in relation to the MEMs -NIR for the post -project industrialisation stage 
towards a commercial device  
11  MEMSFAB  Use of the knowledge generated in relation to the MEMs-NIR filter to be able to commercially 
manufacture chips for integrated  
SPECTRAL devices developed in this project  
12  DECHEMA  Use of increased knowledge for advisory, training and education programmes to the wider European 
process industry  
13  GM  The generated knowledge will be exploited for own use in milling installation for monitoring and quality 
control of final products  
14  GSK  Preferential use of the knowledge generated for adoption of the ProPAT system in their pharma processing 
facilities after the post -project industrialisation phase (and collaboration in the industrialisation phase as 
required)  
15  MEGARA  Preferential use of the knowledge generated for adoption of the ProPAT system in their chemical 
processing facilities after the post-project industrialisation phase (and collaboration in the industrialisation 
phase as required)  
16  MBN  Preferential use of the knowledge generated for adoption of the ProPAT system in their ceramics 
processing facilities after the post-project industrialisation phase (and collaboration in the industrialisation 
phase as required)  
In terms of the measures that will be in place in order to effectively plan for the exploitation of the results 
of the project, first of all an Innovation Committee is established, consisting of qualified representatives 
from each of the beneficiaries (as was discussed in Section 2.3.2). This Committee will be responsible for 
effectively planning for the post-project use of the results through both the commercial and new research 
routes. In order to assist in this effort and to ensure that both exploitation routes are effectively addressed 
and prioritised over the course of the project, an Innovation Manager, Alejandro Rosales from the SME 
IRIS, will lead the planning of the industrial exploitation route in the process industry, as well as in others 
to which  the technology could be transferred (food, drug pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, greenhouses, 
refrigeration, air -conditioning, as discussed). The Research Manager , Prof. Frans Muller from 
UNIVLEEDS, will lead the consortium in planning for future research directions that could emerge in order 
to build on the knowledge generated during the project. These managers will be responsible for leading 
the Exploitation Committee in implementing the measures for planning for the post -project exploitation of 
the results. They will both work closely with the IPR Manager, Dr. Silvia Carrasco from ICFO, to ensure 
that the results are properly protected in a timely manner and that access rights are defined and agreed. 
They will also work closely with the Dissemination Manager, Dr. Renata Körfer from DECHEMA, to ensure 
that the dissemination activities serve as powerful tools for stimulating future use of the ProPAT results 
(for example: disseminating in relevant international trade shows in the case of facilitating future 
commercial exploitation; disseminating in SPIRE events, and Horizon 2020 events, tradeshows, as well 
as conferences for attracting and identifying further research opportunities to build on the results; etc.). In 
addition the Data Manager, Ms Carla Kapikian (ZW AH), will ensure that all the research results data 
generated/collected during the project are well managed, including standards that will be used, how the 
data will be made accessible for verification and re-use, curated, preserved.   
How the proposed measures will help to achieve the expected impact of the project  
The realisation of the impact of this research and innovation action requires the eventual commercial 
exploitation of these results. There is a strong innovation dimension in the ProPAT approach to the work 
plan with a view to increasing the likelihood of market uptake of project results for European industrial 
sustainability, competitiveness, growth, and jobs.   
A key measure for contributing to industry adoption of research results lies in a R&D offering that is founded 
on industry requirements and robust specifications. It is noteworthy that WP1 of the ProPAT work plan is 
based on defining industry needs in relation to process monitoring, as well as defining a strategy for PAT 
implementation in the industry. This is a fundamental approach in that, based on the experiences of 
implementing PAT methodologies in the pharmaceutical manufacturing industry, barriers in relation to 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 35 of 76  
  
implementation of PATs centre on technical issues such as data centralisation, connectivity to the different 
data sources (analysers, databases, process control systems, etc.) and data management (collection, 
alignment, aggregation and contextualisation) 61. In this context, the development of a global process 
control system (WP5) will also assist in the physical implementation of PATs in the minerals, ceramic, non-
ferrous metals, and chemicals (plastic and pharmaceuticals) industries, and indeed in the wider process 
industries as the results of this project are rolled out and a dopted. Essentially PATs need to get simpler 
and easier to implement and operate68 and ProPAT will contribute to this.  
In addition, overall cost (including the investment in equipment) is a major consideration of industry in the 
adoption of PATs. WP2, WP3, and WP4 will centre on the development of affordable and versatile sensor 
technology, which can be uptaken by the PAT developments in order to arrive at cost -effective solutions. 
Each PAT platform will be tuned to the end users including only the required sensors. Moreover, simplified 
and standardised approaches for calibration and model development (WP5) could help to bring the 
implementation cost down to levels that are tolerable for the industry.  
Importantly, the involvement of end-user industries (GM, MBN, GSK, MEGARA), along with SME sensor 
developers (SPECTRAL, MEMSFAB) and an SME continuous process control and systems integrator 
(IRIS) will heighten the industrial relevance and mainstreaming of the project results, as well as ensure a 
route-to-market for the knowledge generated during the project, while will be greatly strengthened by the 
presence of a pioneer of the PAT concept in Europe (DECHEMA) who can provide the necessary training 
to ensure industry is capacitated to get the optimal benefits of developments such as ProPAT.   
The validation and demonstration of ProPAT in the target industries are important steps of applied R&D 
on its way towards commercialisation. Ensuring that measures are in place to identify and study the 
impacts of relevant regulations and the requirements of industry standards will contribute to ensuring that 
are no regulatory obstacles could prevent the future industry adoption of the ProPAT integrated process 
control system that will be planned for industrialisation post p roject. In addition the validation and 
demonstration work in the industry will quantify the improvements in terms of improved quality control 
approach, cycle time reduction and increased process efficiency (e.g. increased yield, throughput 
and equipment utilisation), which will provide valuable data for helping to push the technologies to the 
market, as well as for stimulating market pull.   
There can be a fear of the complexity and multidisciplinary character of PAT and there is a high doorstep 
for smaller  companies68 although the consortium counts 2 SMEs end users. To overcome this, a 
structured knowledge transfer and training effort towards the industry on the use of the ProPATs, and on 
the further development work required (WP9), is fundamental for raisi ng technical skills and the 
knowledge base among the industry actors in the consortium (and to a wider base of industry through 
public training sessions), to ensure the will be able to assimilate and exploit the results. This is in line 
with the SPIRE Road map, which envisages that the progressive execution of the SPIRE roadmap will 
address also the socio-economical dimension as there will be an increased demand for professionals 
with (new or adapted) skills, for the process industry but also for the related  and spin -off industries, 
facilitating the transition to a greener and more competitive European industry. Importantly, and again 
in line with the SPIRE Roapmap which emphasises workforce training and education programmes across 
and within sectors should be part of the business uptake strategies for SPIRE PPP investments1, such as 
ProPAT, DECHEMA will ensure that the knowledge generated during the project is used to create valuable 
content and case studies for their future training and advisory services.  
Finally, sound management of the knowledge generated during the project, active planning in relation to 
post-project exploitation activities for industrialisation of the most market ready results, and further 
research work for escalating along the TRL, or indeed for application of the platform knowledge generated 
during this project beyond the targeted selected process industries and into food processing sectors for 
example, such as dairy, as well as a solid communication strategy to disseminate the non -confidential 
aspects of the result to the SPIRE community and beyond, as well as to market actors and multipliers, and 
policy makers, will also increase the likelihood of market uptake of the project results.    
The exploitation plans that will be drawn up during Subtask 10.2.1, building on the preliminary exploitation 
plans outlines in this document, will provide the details on how the project’s results will be used in 
                                                
61 Process Analytical Technology: An industry perspective. European Pharmaceutical Review. Issue 4, 2010.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 36 of 76  
  
commercial exploitation activities, for training purposes, and for further research activiti es, 
including elements such as: purpose, main features and benefits of each technology or product; innovative 
aspects in comparison with existing and competing technologies and products; summary of need for further 
R&D activity (and implied risks); standar disation, approval and policy implications involved; collaboration 
required for exploitation (technology transfer activities); identification of the potential customers and the 
factors that affect their purchasing decisions; features of the target market ( size, growth rate, share that 
the technology/product could reach; any factors likely to drive a change in the market; legal, technical and 
commercial barriers; other technologies likely to emerge in the near future; how each beneficiary entitled 
to the tec hnology exploitation is positioned (or should be positioned) in the market; competing 
businesses/applications/technologies.   
The presence of three technology companies in the consortium (SPECTRAL, MEMSFAB, IRIS) who are 
committed to routing the ProPAT ana lysers and sensors to marker, and who have the in -house R&D 
capacity to perform further advancement of the TRLs to quickly navigate the ‘Valley of Death’, will paving 
the way forward for a timely industrialisation phase to see market adoption of the ProPAT  within 18-24 
months of project completion.   
How the participants will manage the research data generated and/or collected during the project  
Effective exploitation of data depends upon proper data management and curation, as such a task has 
been devoted to data management in work plan and a Data Manager has been included in the project 
organisation structure for the project, Ms Carla Kapikian (ZWAH), who has considerable experience in the 
research data management and its associated challenges. Under his leadership a formal data plan will be 
drawn up and implemented during the project that will include: which data will be generated during the 
research; metadata, standards and quality assurance measures; plans for sharing data; copyright and 
intellectual property rights of data; data storage and back -up measures; data management roles and 
responsibilities; costing or resources needed. Indeed, as ca n be seen from figure 9 below, data 
management will be embedded in the wider knowledge management of the project, and it will follow the 
Guidelines on Open Access to Scientific Publications and Research data in Horizon H2020.   
Strategy for knowledge management and protection  
To pave the way forward for commercial exploitation and dissemination of the project results, the 
consortium will implement an integral strategy for the effective management of this knowledge (Fig. 9).  
Background IPR and access rights  
Background- information and knowledge (including inventions, databases, etc.) held by the participants 
prior to their accession to the EC grant agreement, as well as any intellectual property rights which are 
needed for carrying out the project or for u sing foreground62 held by the consortium, or indeed by third 
parties- is defined in the proposal preparation phase (pre -Grant Agreement). The current status of the 
Background being brought to the project by the consortium is listed in Table 7. Each benefici ary has the 
right to exclude or limit specific Background from each other’s access by informing the other partners about 
this exclusion. Access to Background that is, or will be found to be, necessary for the implementation of 
the project will be granted royalty free and background needed to use the results of the project will 
be provided either royalty free or under fair and reasonable conditions.   
                                                
62 REGULATION (EU) No 1290/2013 Of The European Parliament And Of The Council  of 11 December 2013 laying down the rules 
for participation and dissemination in "Horizon 2020 - the Framework  Programme for Research and Innovation (2014 -2020)" and 
repealing Regulation (EC) No 1906/2006  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 37 of 76  
  
  
Fig. 9- Integrated Knowledge Management approach  
Table 7- Background per beneficiary   
 
1  IRIS  Knowledge in sensor readings, process logic and control, and modelling, Knowledge predictive and 
adaptive learning. Knowledge of Wireless Sensor Networks. Database driven web portals and User 
Interfaces. Knowledge in design and integrated automation hardware technologies; Knowledge in industry-
specific solutions for the automation of optical based systems; Knowledge in process interfaces and user 
interface systems for managing complex operations of control and process monitoring for industrial 
applications; Knowledge in risk management tools and protocols for industrial systems; Knowledge in 
product quality analysis.  
2  ICFO  Patents related to ISI sensor device made at ICFO: Apparatus for measuring light scattering, V. Pruneri et 
al., patent application  
EP14382043 (2014); Optically transparent support for bubble-free specimens, V. Pruneri et al., patent 
application P201331446  
(2013); Compact system for optical measurements using a discretized plate, V. Pruneri et al., patent 
application ES201330270 (2013)  
3  VTT  FPI technologies represent the core technologies in the VTT’s offering. VTT has a vast IP portfolio 
concerning Fabry-Perot interferometers. The main patents and patent applications are listed below (several 
other inventions like miniaturized Raman -FPI sensor and method of realizing a large gap FPI mirror 
structure in filing):  PCT/FI2010/050043, EP2394146; PCT/FI2010/ 050739, FI20095976; 
PCT/FI2010/050739; FI20095068; EP2394146 ; FI20095068; US Patent  US 8,130,380; UK Patent GB 
2445956; US2010097613; PCT/FI/2010/050258.   
Knowledge in the field of optical measurement technologies for industrial applications, especially on -line 
applications.  Knowledge in machine vision and optical spectroscopy, in all wavelength ranges (UV, VIS, 
NIR, IR, Raman, Fluorescence, etc.). Knowledge in optics, electronics, high precision mechanics, software, 
embedded software, system engineering, low cost manufacturing techniques, calibration, and various 
aspects of applied physics and chemistry.  
4  UNIVLEEDS  Knowledge in Chemical Engineering, mu ltiphase particulate processing and industrial chemistry. World 
leading expertise in pharmaceutical chemical synthesis and production, milling, granulation and online/in 
situ sensor development. Knowledge of multiscale analysis and control systems validati on. Facilities and 
expertise to run batch and continuous processes on 20L scale. Facilities and analytical equipment for 
required complimentary ex situ  particle characterisation studies; including laser particle sizers, SEMs, 
morphology and structural analysers.  
5  URV  Knowledge in multivariate calibration and classification, knowledge in multivariate statistical process control 
(MSPC), knowledge in experimental design and statistics, knowledge in qualimetrics and quality control, 
knowledge in Matlab programming.  
6  ZHAW  Knowledge in chemical analysis techniques. Knowledge in on -line, and time resolved analysis of volatile 
organic compounds at very high time resolution, mass -resolution and sensitivity. Knowledge in Life Cycle 
Analysis.   
No. 
  
 Short Name 
  
 Background 
  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 38 of 76  
  
7  TUD  Knowledge in process -relevant particle characterisation including selection and optimization of the 
measuring methods and their validation. Knowledge in international standardisation in CEN (EC -mandate) 
and ISO.   
8  UB  Knowledge in the development of chemometric tools for process understanding (modelling and control), 
notably soft-modelling Multivariate Curve Resolution (MCR) and hybrid hard- soft- modelling. Experience in 
data fusion strategies for process modeling  
9  IMAR  Knowledge in smart sensors   
10  SPECTRAL  Knowledge in the design and realisation of optical sensors based on MEMS Fabry-Perot Interferometers  
11  MEMSFAB  Knowledge in commercial manufacturing of tuneable MEMS Fabry-Pérot filters    
12  DECHEMA  Knowledge in PAT adoption in industry.   
13  GM  Knowledge in excavation, beneficiation (laser/ optical sorters, magnetic separation, sink -float), crushing & 
sizing, classification and milling of caustic calcined magnesium oxide, dead burned magnesium oxide, 
magnesium carbonate and dunite  
14  GSK  Knowledge in the critical control points for pharmaceutical processing….  
15  MEGARA  Knowledge in the critical parameters to be controlled during the manufacture of powder coating resins, rosin 
dispersions, alkyd resins, water-based acrylic dispersions, and unsaturated polyester resins.  
16  MBN  Knowledge on the granulometric requirements for the selected powder systems and relation to material 
properties needed to be monitored for the production of nanophased materials produced by high energy ball 
milling.   
A comprehensive review of “prior art”  and patents ( Section 2.1.3) has revealed that to date there is no 
relevant Background held by third parties  that is needed for implementing the research or using the 
project results. In order to ensure that the intended ProPAT R&D effort does not trespass  into the owned 
knowledge space of a third party, and to mitigate against expensive infringement claims, during Subtask 
10.1.1: Protection of the IPR, up-to-date patent reviews will be performed periodically to confirm the novelty 
of the proposed research and the freedom to exploit the results.   
Results definition, protection, ownership and access rights   
The expected results from the project are listed in Table 8 below, and will be continually assessed during 
the project (through Subtask 10.1.1: Protection of the IPR) for effective knowledge management, whereby 
novelty, patentability and protection will be assessed.    
Results shall be owned by the participant generating them.69 To avoid doubt or confusion over ownership, 
a protocol of procedures will be defined that each partner will be followed to clearly show the development 
of the generation of knowledge or results. In cases where the results are generated jointly (i.e. where the 
separate parts of some result cannot be attributed to different participa nts), it will be jointly owned, with 
the allocation and the terms of exercising this ownership of the results to be included in a Joint Ownership 
section of the ProPAT Exploitation Agreement (or Agreements) that will be drawn up as part of Subtask 
10.1.2: IPR Ownership and Sharing. However, an overriding principal will be that the  participating 
industry partners are always provided with the access that they need to the results to exploit them 
in keeping with the needs and strategy of their business. To this end, access rights to foreground for 
implementing the project will be granted on a royaltyfree basis.  Access rights for use purposes will be 
granted either royalty-free, or on fair and reasonable conditions to be agreed in the ProPAT Exploitation 
Agreement. Table 8 provides an overview of the expected scenarios of results ownership and access 
rights.   
Table 8- Expected Results ownership and access rights  
 
WP Description of the Expected Result Envisaged IPR Tool Owner(s) Partners to which access rights will be 
granted and conditions  
2  Improvements to the ISI granulometric 
sensors  
Patent or Know how 
secured through 
confidential design 
ICFO  Preferential use to IRIS for integration with 
the GCSS platform under fair and reasonable 
conditions to be agreed   
3  Improved NIR MENS designs  Patent or Know how 
secured through 
confidential design 
SPECT
RAL  
Preferential use to IRIS for integration with 
the GCSS platform under fair and reasonable 
conditions to be agreed  
4  Set of selected smart sensors and their  
integration in the hardware  
Know how secured 
through confidential 
design 
IMAR  Preferential use to IRIS for integration with 
the GCSS platform under fair and reasonable 
conditions to be agreed  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 39 of 76  
  
4  Chemometric models and multisensor 
models for the selected sensors  
Know  how URV, 
UB  
Preferential use to SPECTRAL and IRIS 
under fair and reasonable conditions to be 
agreed  
6  Chemometric models and process predictive 
models for the processes developed at pilot 
scale  
Know  how URV, 
UB  
Free user rights of the models for 
UNIVLEEDS.  
7  Chemometric models and predictive models 
to optimise process control of resin synthesis   
Know  how URV, 
UB  
Free user rights of the model for the end user 
MEGARA involved in its industrial validation    
7  Chemometric models and predictive models 
to optimise process control of pharma 
product mixing, granulation and drying   
Know  how URV, 
UB  
Free user rights of the respective model for the 
end user GSK involved in its industrial 
validation    
7  Chemometric models and predictive models 
to optimise process control of minerals 
obtained by milling   
Know  how URV, 
UB  
Free user rights of the respective model for the 
end user GM involved in its industrial 
validation    
7  Chemometric models and predictive models 
to optimise process control of 
ceramic/metals obtained by milling  
Know  how URV, 
UB  
Free user rights of the respective model for the 
end user MBN involved in its industrial 
validation   
5  Decision Support concepts,  tools  and  
integration in the user interface  
Know-how through 
software 
development 
secured by code 
IRIS, 
UB  
Preferential use to the participating end-users 
under fair and reasonable conditions to be 
agreed   
5  Global Control System PAT platform  Know how secured 
through confidential 
design 
IRIS  Preferential use to the participating end -
users under fair and reasonable conditions to 
be agreed  Free use of the case scenarios 
studied by LCA granted to the participa ting 
industry partners for marketing purposes. 
Fair and reasonable conditions for future 
LCAs.  
8  Results of the process environmental impacts 
when using ProPAT control system  
Know how ZHA
W  
6  Model process set ups for milling, 
granulation, high temperature synthesis for 
demonstrating the potential ProPAT uses   
Know how UNIVLE
EDS  
Preferential use for IRIS for further tests of 
the GCSS platform and the end users under 
fair and reasonable conditions to be agreed   
2  Calibration of the granulometric sensor using 
conventional test methods  
Know how TUD  Free user rights to ICFO and preferential use 
to IRIS for integration with the GCSS platform 
under fair and reasonable conditions to be 
agreed  
3  Calibration of the granulometric sensor using 
conventional test methods  
Know how  ZHAW  Free user rights to  SPECTRAL and 
preferential use to IRIS for integration  with 
the GCSS platform under fair and 
reasonable conditions to be agreed  
Preferential use to the participating end -
users under fair and reasonable conditions 
to be agreed   
4  Sampling device and opto-mechanical 
interface and probes for coupling ProPAT to 
the manufacturing facility  
Know how secured 
through 
confidential design   
IRIS  
In addition to defining and agreeing the terms of exercising ownership and the conditions of access rights 
to the project Results Foreground (using Table 8 as the starting point), under the leadership of the IPR 
Manager (Dr. Silvia Carrasco), the Exploitation Agreement(s) will also define such issues as whether 
access will be granted to third parties for exploitation purposes; licensing arrangements with other OEMs 
if necessary; any exploitation restrictions; etc. A first draft of the Exploitation Agreement  will be available 
by M24 and will be continually revised and edited throughout the project, and a final version will be signed 
by all partners at M48. Over the course of the project, the consortium will tap into external assistance and 
support from such s ources as the IPR-Helpdesk (http://www.ipr-helpdesk.org), Enterprise Europe 
Network (http://www.enterprise-europenetwork.ec.europa.eu/index_en.htm), among other sources in the 
partner countries. An experienced patent attorney will also be approached.    
Open access to peer-reviewed scientific publications   
All peer-reviewed scientific publications that will result from the project will be made available free of charge 
through Gold or Green Open access publishing and budget provisions have been made to fund this. First 
of all and keeping with the nonconfident ial character of background state of the art information, one or 
several review papers will be prepared during WP1.  
This may include a review of existing particle size measurements, a review of existing modelling 
approaches, a review of polymerization tra cking methods, etc. In addition, research papers are planned 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 40 of 76  
  
when dealing with non-confidential information, e.g. for the calibration of the novel sensors vs. established 
methods, set up of models processes during scaling up activities, etc.  
2.2.2. Communication activities   
Following a stakeholder analysis, the target audience of our communication activities has been defined 
as follows: SMEs and enterprises from the European process industry (and their Associations), SPIRE 
Community, sectors in close relationship to the process industries, i.e. end users (and their Associations), 
scientists and the research community, policy makers, educational stakeholders, mass media (TV, radio 
and the written press) and multipliers for addressing the general public, Tec hnology Platforms, other 
SPIRE and H2020 projects, early stage researchers.   
We have planned the communication activities (Table 9) that will be performed for promoting the project 
and its finding during the period of the grant, based on a process of anal ysing: Why – the purpose of the 
communication action; What will be communicated – the message; To whom – the audience; How – the 
method; When – the timing. Our project communication plan will link with a broader dissemination strategy 
for the SPIRE program me, to contribute to efficient coordination and dissemination of SPIRE project 
outputs across the programme to facilitate the market uptake of innovative solutions, whereby early 
awareness of key innovation themes emerging from the projects to the entire S PIRE stakeholder 
community as well as sectors in close relationship to the process industries (i.e. end users) is desirable, 
as is a communication campaign to all process industries that considers how they can adopt a synergic 
approach for understanding how energy and resource efficiency might shape profitability across operations 
and produce new sustainable growth opportunities. To this end, the planned communication activities will 
be best used to maximise the future dissemination and exploitation of the project results.  
  
Table 9- Communication Activities  
   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 41 of 76  
  
 
How 
(Method) 
Why 
(Purpose) 
To whom (Audience) What (Message) When Evaluation 
Website 
Awareness,  
Inform, 
Engage,  
Promote All External Stakeholders 
General project info., objs, 
impacts, consortium, progress, 
events, SPIRE info, feedback 
form, etc. 
Launched by M3. Ongoing 
throughout project and post-project 
Checking the usage 
logs and number of 
project 
consultations 
Flyers Awareness All External Stakeholders 
Project aims, ProPAT approach, 
expected impacts, consortium 
Available from M3, throughout the 
project No. of consultations  
Commercial  
Posters/  
Banners Awareness 
EU process industry; 
SPIRE Community; End 
users industries 
ProPAT system and Unique 
Selling  
Points, Competitive benefits and 
ROI,  
Validation and Demonstration in 
EU  
Process Industry 
Tradeshows & Exhibitions: IFPAC 
(International forum and Exhibition 
Process Analytical Technology), 
JEC composites show, K-Fair, 
Plast, PharmaExpo,  SensorsExpo, 
etc.  No of industry 
consultations 
Newsletters Awareness 
EU process industry; 
SPIRE Community; End 
users industries; Policy 
makers;  
Research community;  
SPIRE-1 projects 
Project progress and updates; 
Process  
Industry testimonials and 
interviews; Contribution to SPIRE 
Roadmap objectives, etc.  Every 6 months No. of consultations 
Press 
Releases  Awareness General public 
Public interest content about the 
impacts of the project for 
competitivess, growth, jobs, 
societal and environmental 
benefits 
At KO, and in line with public 
interest developments in the 
project, events, etc. No. of hits on web 
Project Blog 
Awareness,  
Inform, 
Engage All External Stakeholders 
Posts about non-confidential 
developments, updates, 
observations, conclusions At least one post per month 
Readership & No. 
of consultations 
Programme 
meetings  Engage 
SPIRE Community, 
SPIRE1 projects, Other 
EC/Nat. Projects,  
Thematic content in relation to 
PAT adoption, integrated 
process control, etc. At least 4 over course of project 
No. of 
engagements 
Conference  
Presentation
s 
Engage,  
Promote Research community 
Scientific and research 
methodology, results and 
conclusions in relation to 
validation work, LCA, etc. 
Analytics and Control Technology ), 
PLS  
(International Symposium on PLS 
and Related Methods), CAC-2016 
(Conference on  
Chemometrics in Analytical 
Chemistry ), EuPAT (European 
QbD & PAT Science Conference),  
ICNIRS (International Conference 
on Near  
No. of 
engagements and 
No. of hits on  
web 
Conference  
Posters 
Engage,  
Promote Research community 
Scientific and research 
methodology, results and 
conclusions in relation to 
validation work, LCA, etc. 
No. of 
engagements and 
No. of hits on  
web 
Journal 
Articles Inform Research community 
Peer reviewed articles, e.g. 
review of SoA on existing particle 
size measurements, modelling 
approaches,  polymerization 
tracking methods, etc. Research 
papers on e.g. the calibration of 
the novel sensors vs.  
established methods, set up of 
models processes during scaling 
up activities 
Critical Reviews in Analytical 
Chemistry,  
Analytica Chimica Acta, Powder 
Technology,  
Chemical Engineering Science, 
Applied  
Spectroscopy, Talanta, 
Chemometrics and  
Intelligent Laboratory Systems  No. of citations 
Demonstatio
ns,  
Knowledge  
Transfer & 
Training 
sessions 
Engage &  
Inform 
EU process industry; 
SPIRE Community; End 
users industries; Policy 
makers;  
Research community;  
SPIRE-1 projects 
PAT adoption in process 
industry, use of predictive and 
chemometric models, use of the 
ProPAT system, existing process 
control technologies, smart 
sensors 
At least 4 over course of the project 
between M28 and M48 to conincide 
with key validation and 
demonstration activities 
No. of attendees &  
No. of 
engagements 
Case studies Inform 
EU process industry; 
SPIRE Community; End 
users industries; Policy 
makers;  
SPIRE-1 projects 
The benefits of implementing the 
ProPAT system for real-time 
process monitoring and control 
4 case studies will be prepared by 
each of the end users industries 
No. of downloads 
from web & No. 
consultations 
Reports and 
other project 
documents Inform 
Available to all external 
stakeholders 
Public deliverables (from the 
deliverables list) 
Upon completion according to the 
deliverables list 
No. of downloads 
from web & No. 
consultations 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 42 of 76  
  
3. Implementation  
3.1. Work plan   
Brief presentation of the overall structure of the work plan  
The ProPAT project aims to develop robust and affordable process control technologies for improving 
standards and optimising industrial operations. To this end, over the course of the four years of this project, 
a series of sensors and analysers that can i mprove the control and efficiency of the process industry will 
be tested, optimised and integrated in a Global System Control Platform and validated in processing 
applications to demonstrate the feasibility of ProPAT as an integrated process control soluti on for future 
wide European deployment in the process industry. The R&D effort will centre on engineering design, 
software/algorithm design, data analytics and data management, process engineering and industrial 
integration and validation.   
The project ob jectives have been used as the starting point for planning the work that needs to be 
implemented within the project. All the actions that are required to meet the objectives of this research and 
innovation action, have been collectively analysed by the interdisciplinary consortium. It was agreed how 
best to distribute the workload among the various experts in keeping with their relevant fields of knowledge, 
capacity, infrastructure, resources and in the case of the industry end -users, their process activity , 
monitoring and control requirements. Importantly, to ensure the project boosts the competitiveness of the 
wider European Process industry, robust knowledge management activities, innovation related activities 
and a strong communications campaign for reaching different audiences of stakeholders are in place. This 
bottom-up planning process has greatly facilitated the task of arriving at a clear, comprehensive and 
realistic work plan, which is clearly linked to the objectives set out in Section 2.1, which the consortium 
is confident will serve as a solid platform to ensure that the project’s S&T and innovation goals are fulfilled.   
Moreover the project work plan contains five distinct activity phases that have been discussed in Section 
2.1.2: 1) Defining the ProPAT specifications; 2) Developing the ProPAT Technologies; 3) Validation and 
Demonstration; 4) Training and Education; 5) Deployment in the European SPIRE industries (a post -
project phase, but which drives a cross -cutting or horizontal series of activ ities throughout the project, 
namely ‘Gear up for Deployment’).  While it is not necessary for these to be developed sequentially (as 
can be seen from the Gantt chart), there will be significant interaction between the WP and task leaders to 
acquire any necessary knowledge and inputs between these distinct phases.   
Finally, in relation to the independencies of the different tasks, this has been given careful consideration 
during the preparation of the workplan and is illustrated in the Pert diagram of the components showing 
their interdependencies further down in this Section.   
  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 43 of 76  
  
Illustrations from the Work Packages   
From Task 5.1 Global Control System (GCS) development  
 
Figure 10-Structure of the GCS   
  
From Task 7.2 Demonstration of the ProPAT system for controlling a polymerization process (Subtask 7.2.1 
Monitoring of the process):    
Description of 2 possible resin polymerization processes selected by MEGARA (for which ProPA T will be 
validated in at least one) 
 
 
 
 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 44 of 76  
  
 
 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
637232  
Page 45 of 76  
  
 

 
 
        637232                                                                                                                                                                                        
Timing of the different work packages and their components (Gantt chart or similar)  
Page 39 of 76 

 
 
                 637232                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Graphical presentation of the components showing how they inter-relate (Pert chart or similar).  
 
Page 40 of 76   

 637232  
48 of 76  
  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
3.2. Management structures and procedures  
Organisational structure and decision-making  
The ProPAT organisational structure (Figure 11) consists of the Project Coordinator, the interface with 
the European Commission, who is supported by a Project Steering Committee. A Research Committee 
is also envisaged, as is an Innovation Committee. The roles and decision making capacity of each is 
discussed below.  The project also envisages an industrial advisory committee  with key flagship 
companies from the European Process Industry (from the SPIRE Community and SusCHEM platform), 
who will attend a number of project meetings and events and who act in an external advisory capacity to 
provide subjective advice to the consortium as required, to share knowledge and to assist in adding value 
and visibility to the P roPAT project. This is a voluntary Committee and its members will not have any 
decision-making capacity in the project.    
  
Figure 11- Overview of ProPAT Management Structure   
Project Coordinator   
The Project Coordinator is responsible for the day to day running of the project, and for ensuring that the 
work programme adheres to its schedule, fulfils its objectives, and the project meets the needs and 
expectations of all the partners. The Coordinato r will be active in steering the evolution of the project by 
closely controlling the work that has been carried out by each partner and will be responsible for ensuring 
that the project management procedures are being followed and that all deadlines and obligations are 
met. The project coordination role requires a profile that is sufficiently experienced, qualified and 
capacitated to supervise the execution of work programme and delegation of the work packages (WPs), 
to act as the communication and administrative interface with the EC, to carry out the reporting and overall 
administrative management of the project, to motivate the team and encourage proactive participation, to 
facilitate collective problem solving and the taking of timely corrective actions.   
Dr. Elodie Bugnicourt from IRIS will perform the role of Project Coordinator. In terms of her competence 
to successfully execute this role, Dr. Bugnicourt brings a wealth of project management experience from 
both private contract research and funded EC  projects. In the context of FP7, she is now bringing her 
industry knowledge and expertise to the coordination two “Research for SMEs” projects: DURAWOOD 
(Grant Agreement No. 232296); and, OPTIJECT (FP7 GA nº 262623), as well as an NMP project OliPHA 
(FP7 GA nº280604): Among others, she was also technical manager and heavily involved in the General 
Steering Committee for the “Research for SME Associations” project, WHEYLAYER (Grant Agreement 
No. 218340-2) and follow up Demonstration Activity project WHEYLAY ER2 (FP7 GA nº 315743). She is 
very familiar with all the modalities and administrative procedures involved in the management of EC 
research projects, from the negotiation process, preparing and maintaining the Consortium Agreement, 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 49 of 76  
  
monitoring work, reporting requirements, the use of tools for communication with the EC, etc. Prior to this, 
she has successfully managed R&D projects in the chemical industry, and in particular in the development 
and study of novel nanocomposites, the formulation of bio -sourced resins and of flame retardant resins. 
She has shown herself to be a motivational leader, a fair and intelligent facilitator, with a sound 
understanding not only of materials science but also of process and associated industries.  
Page  
Project Steering Committee  
To ensure that the project is implemented according to the needs and requirements of all the project 
partners, and that each  can exercise a role in the strategic management of the project, a Project 
Steering Committee (PSC) is established consisting of a key representative of each of the beneficiaries. 
This PSC will meet every 6 months and will be facilitated through the chair of the Project Coordinator. 
Through this Committee the partners will closely monitor and control the work performed, and following 
the principles of “quality, time, cost”. Each representative will assume responsibility for mobilising and 
coordinating the active and coherent participation of the other personnel from their organisation who are 
involved in the ProPAT project, and will ensure that reporting and cost statements from their organisation 
are submitted on time and correctly. In terms of decision making mechanisms, when strategic decisions 
need to be taken, such as action to solve conflicts, action to mitigate critical risks to project implementation, 
action to manage changes in the work plan, etc., it will be the responsibility of the Project Coordinator to 
seek consensus with the Project Steering Committee, whereby each beneficiary will be assigned one 
vote. Decisions will be taken by simple majority. In the event of a tie situation, the Coordinator will take 
the final decision.   
Research Committee  
The Research Committee is established take care of scientific and technical (S&T) issues. This Committee 
will consist of each of the RTD and DEMO Work Packages and Task Leaders. The S&T Committee will 
meet every 3 months under the chair of the Research Manager, Prof Frans Muller (UNIVLEEDS). He will 
be responsible for supporting the Project Coordinator in ensuring that the S&T objectives and activities of 
the project are successfully accomplished in a timely manner, taking into account the interdisciplinary 
approach and the interdependence between tasks. It is expected that the appointment of the Research 
Manager to oversee the absolute S&T matters pertaining to the work plan will increase the potential for  
early identification  of any scientific or technical risks or problems that require effective and timely 
management. In relation to decision making on S&T issues of strategic importance to the project, the 
Research Manager will alert the Project Coordinator and an emergency meeting of the Project Steering 
Committee will be called so that a decision can be arrived at.    
Innovation Committee  
The Innovation Committee consists  of a qualified representative from each beneficiary. This Committee 
assumes the important role of Innovation Management in the project. Within this context this committee 
will manage the implementation of the innovation cycle, and the feedback linkages to the research. It will 
evaluate the knowledge as it is generated in line with its market impacts. It will also ensure that the project 
results are effectively protected and exploited to the full for future industrial growth and 
competitiveness. Key strategic issues, such as IPR protection mechanisms, IPR sharing and routes to 
exploitation will be discussed extensively during meetings of this Committee. It will also ensure that the 
project Dissemination Plan and Business Plan are further planned and developed based on the draft plans 
provided in Section 2.2.2.1. The Innovation Committee will also ensure that the data management plan 
(discussed in the same Section 2.2.2.1) is seamlessly executed. Moreover, the Innovation Committee will 
decide on all matters with regard to IPR and exploitation, with each beneficiary being assigned a 
vote. Decisions will be taken by simple majority. In the event of a tie situation the Project Coordinator will 
have the final vote. The Committee will be chaired by the Innovation Manager, Mr. Alejandro Rosales from 
IRIS who will lead the partners in effective management of the innovation cycle of the project (this role is 
discussed further down in the context of Innovation Management), as well as being a driver for the 
industrial par tners in defining post -project commercial strategy. Mr. Rosales has ample expertise to 
perform this role as he has been the Chair of the Innovation Unit in IRIS for the past 2 years. He will be 
supported by a number of additional key management figures:   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 50 of 76  
  
- IPR Manager- Responsible for ensuring the project results are protected where possible and that the 
knowledge management procedures are implemented. This position will be fulfilled by  Dr. Silvia 
Carrasco (ICFO), who has vast experience in relation to knowl edge management and patent 
applications.  
- Data Manager- The Data Manager, Ms Carla Kapikian (ZHAW), will be responsible for leading the 
partners in drawing up, revising and implementing the Data Management Plan, which will provide an 
analysis of the main elements of the data management policy that will be used by the applicants with 
regard to all the datasets that will be generated by the project. She has a Master in Business 
Administration from MIT and is experienced in data management issues both from the private sector 
(banks and industry) and from the research side since2008.   
- Dissemination Manager- This position will be held by  Dr. Renata Körfer (DECHEMA), who has 
considerable expertise in communication of results to industry, the general public, policy makers, the 
research community and other stakeholders, as well as vast reach to the process industries in 
Europe. She will be responsible for leading the consortium in further planning and implementing the 
project Communication and Dissemination activities, as well as ensuring the project reaches out to 
different audiences in the most effective way, and will also ensure the confidentiality of the results is 
safeguarded until the IP is protected.  
Management Procedures   
This proposed project represents a carefully planned series of inter-related activities that will require a set 
of resources (time, money, people, materials, energy, space, provisions, communication, quality, risk, etc.) 
to meet its pre-defined objectives. Robust Management procedures are required to ensure that the project 
is successfully managed. As such, the project will be managed according to proven standard project 
management and ISO 9001 principals, and founded on sound project planning and subsequent monitoring 
and controlling of the execution of the workplan. Project Management will reply on 3 key outputs from the 
project planning process: 1) the Project Definition (Section 2.1 of this documentl); 2) the Project Workplan 
(include in Part Section 3.1); and 3) Project management procedures (which are discussed below).   
Technical Workplan Review and Update Procedure  
The technical workplan (WP1-WP8) will be reviewed by the Research Committee on a monthly basis (via 
monthly Technical Reports that will be submitted by each WP and Task lea der on the status of their 
tasks). In parallel, the schedule will be reviewed, whereby completed actions and tasks will be identified 
and registered as completed and any activities that should be completed, but are not, will be identified 
using the project management tool. This will ensure tight monthly monitoring of the technical work. The 
budget situation will be reported every quarter, whereby all partners will submit the status of their 
expenditure to the Coordinator, to enable a review of project perfo rmance against the budget to be 
performed. To this end, each quarter, after the workplan has been updated to show the current reality, 
the tool will reschedule the work to ensure the project will be completed within the original effort, cost, 
and duration. In addition, the critical path of the project will be evaluated during the quarterly meetings 
of the Research Committee, whereby the Project Milestones (Part A, Section 1.3) will be used as a 
valuable tool for determining whether or not the project is on schedule.   
Any potential adjustments to the workplan will be discussed and proposed to the Project Steering 
Committee (PSC). Risks will be flagged and managed under the Risk Management Procedure.  
Issues Management Procedure    
Issues can be surfaced through verbal or written means, but eventually an issue must be formally 
documented using an Issue Submission Form, which is then entered into the Issues Log. The Project 
Coordinator will assign technical issues to a responsible fro m the Research Committee for resolution, 
whereby the impact to the project in terms of budget, schedule, and scope will be estimated. Issues of a 
non-technical nature will be dealt with by the Project Coordinator or by the most qualified representative 
from the PSC. The resolution or course of action will be documented on the Issue Submission Form, as 
well as documented briefly on the Issues Log. If resolving an issue involves changing the scope of the 
project, the issue will be closed and the Scope Change Management procedure will be used instead to 
manage the resolution.  
Scope Management Procedure  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 51 of 76  
  
While it is considered highly unlikely that any changes will be required to the scope of the project, for a 
complete set of Management Procedures it is importa nt that scope change is included. In the unlikely 
event that a scope change is requested (only to be recommended in extraordinary circumstances and 
maybe arising through the resolution of an important issue or a high-level risk) a Scope Change Request 
form will be completed and brought before the PSC for discussion. If deemed vital, the request will be 
entered into the Scope Change Log and it will be assigned to the Research Manager for investigation. If 
the scope change involves an addition in scope that w ill not significantly impact on project cost, effort, 
and duration and the project will still be completed within the agreed upon cost, effort, and duration, the 
PSC may approve the Scope Change Request. However, if the scope change involves a shift in the  
scope of the project, the EC will be informed.  
Risk Management Procedure  
During the definition of this project, a complete assessment of project risks has been performed and a 
Risk Checklist has been documented (Table 3.2b), whereby risks have been listed, a risk level assigned 
and a mitigation strategy has been proposed. During the project implementation stage the Risk Checklist 
will be discussed and updated based on close monitoring of the evolution of the work plan (following an 
analysis the monthly technical reports, or following the quarterly budget and critical project path review). 
To this end, the Project Coordinator, by working closely with the Research Manager and the Innovation 
Manager (depending on the nature of the risk, as discussed below un der Critical Risks and Mitigation 
Measures), will ensure periodic evaluation of risks throughout the project based on current 
circumstances. Risk Management will be included on the agenda of all meetings of Research Committee, 
and as appropriate in the case of the Innovation Committee and PSC meetings. An appropriate response 
plan will be created for each risk in keeping with its level to ensure the risk is managed successfully. This 
plan will include steps to manage the risk, people assigned, completion da tes, and periodic dates to 
monitor progress. Activities associated with the risk plans will be moved to the project workplan and 
monitored accordingly.  
Conflict Management Procedures  
It is important to outline that the project ethos will centre on common  understanding and vision, 
transparency, open dialogue and active participation. Project participants will be encouraged to raise any 
issues of concern or worry during meetings, or in private with the Project Coordinator if so preferred. It is 
considered t hat such a project ethos will contribute to conflict prevention. However, robust conflict 
management will continuously monitor for conflicts, to ensure early identification of conflicts, an analysis 
of their stage and the implementation of a resolution pro cess in keeping with each stage. The conflict 
stages and corresponding resolution strategy are outlined in Table 10. The Project Coordinator assumes 
the responsibility to ensure that all conflicts are dealt with as soon as they arise in order to minimise their 
negative effect and progression to the next stage. All conflicts that cannot be resolved between the 
parties concerned will be brought before the PSC for a resolution or decision.   
Table 10 - Conflict stages and resolution strategy  
Stage No.  Conflict stage  Resolution strategy  
1  Potential for conflict exists   Open dialogue and conciliation between the parties concerned  
2  Latent conflict where a competitive 
situation could easily spill over into 
conflict  
Open dialogue and conciliation between the parties concerned  
3  Open conflict   a) Negotiation first among PSC (whereby decision-making procedures for 
PSC apply); b) Mediation next; c) Arbitration as a last resort  
4  Aftermath conflict  a) Negotiation first among PSC (whereby decision-making procedures for 
PSC apply); b) Mediation next; c) Arbitration as a last resort   
Communication Management  
It is deemed appropriate that a Communication Plan is in place that guides the overall communication 
process for the project, the core aspects of which are discussed here. Formal project meetings will be 
scheduled. Agendas for all on -site and virtual meeti ngs will be required. Discussions, decisions and 
actions will be recorded in minutes, which will be circulated to all partners, edited and agreed. The 
Coordinator will use the ‘Kick-off' (KO) meeting to establish positive working practices in the consortium 
and to set the tone for all future conduct. Following this, the Project Steering Committee (PSC) will meet 
every 6 months to review the general progress of the work and to discuss all matters that are common 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 52 of 76  
  
to all project beneficiaries. Emergency/extraordinary meetings of the PSC will be convoked in the event 
of identified risks, conflicts, problems, etc. The Innovation Committee will also meet every 6 months (after 
the PSC meetings) to discuss knowledge management issues, and plan for the exploitation a nd 
dissemination of the project results. The Research Committee will meet every 3 months (teleconferencing 
facilities may be used if considered appropriate) to enable the WP and Task leaders to review together 
the technical issues of the project. The technical progress and results of each of the active tasks will be 
presented, along with the actions required for the upcoming 3 month work period. Technical working 
groups may meet amongst themselves more regularly if required, and especially during periods of  
particularly high task activity or prior to major project milestones and deliverables. Virtual tools will be 
used in as much as possible for these extra meetings. Use of e -mail, Skype, videoconferencing tools, 
etc. among partners will be beneficial for the smooth progression of the project and to ensure sufficient 
regular communication. Emails will serve as communication records in themselves, and all conversations 
held will ensure the responsibility to report via the Project Coordinator to the consortium on all significant 
actions/conclusions and immediately should any problems arise.   
Data Management procedures  
These procedures, in keeping with the Data Management Plan (DMP) discussed in Section 2.2.2.1, will 
determine how research data will be handled during a research project, and even after the project is 
completed, describing what data will be collected, processed or generated and following what 
methodology and standards, whether and how this data will be shared and/or made open, and how it will 
be curated and preserved.   
Quality Management procedures  
Project quality monitoring will be ensured by a process of self -assessment of the project through the 
application of a Quality Management System (QMS) coherent with ISO 9001:2008. ISO 9001 defends a 
process-based approach for the development, implementation and efficiency of a QMS, whereby it is 
necessary to identify each activity (process), the required resources and inputs, specifications and results 
obtained, the responsibilities and the interaction between activities. This has all been ensured through 
the DoA. Such an approach enables continuous monitoring and control over the general process to 
assure the quality of the final product. The QMS will be implemented at the start of the project and will 
continually review the project management structure and plans, the specific quality objectives and quality 
indicators for each development stage of the project, the quality assurance and control activities (what is 
controlled, who controls, when), the details of personnel with respective responsibilities and assignments 
for each partners, the information exchange and dissemination, control of information exchange and 
reporting, and the documentation management and control including identification of critica l points and 
risks assessment.   
Appropriateness to the complexity and scale of the project  
This organisational structure and decision making committees are considered appropriate for the 
management of the ProPAT research and innovation project, in view of the size and geographic disparity 
of the consortium, as well as the research ambition and expected innovation impact of the project results. 
In short, they will ensure:   
1. effective management of the day-to-day running of the project and its resources and  appropriate 
interfacing with the EC (Project Coordinator);   
2. strategic management of the project (Project Steering Committee);   
3. sound management of the overall research and it potential risks (Research Committee);   
4. coherent and timely management of the innovation cycle of the projects towards success in 
market-oriented outputs (Innovation Committee).   
It is important that dedicated committees with key roles and responsibilities are established to ensure that 
there is dedicated and qualified management and skills-sets mobilised at the different levels, as opposed 
to a centralised, one -dimensional management approach, which would be highly unlikely to deliver the 
necessary versatility. To this end, there is an integral approach to the management of the project, ensuring 
that all participants have a stake in management (via the Project Steering Committee) to ensure that the 
project achieves its research objectives (Research Committee), as well as the effective management  of 
the knowledge and data generated, Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs), as well as the other innovation -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 53 of 76  
  
related activities required to deliver market exploitable results and to map out the route for further research 
in order to build on the foreground (via the Innovation Committee).  
Innovation management  
As a key objective of publicly -funded research is that it should lead to the exploitation of results, which 
goes one step further than the mere production and dissemination of new scientific knowledge63, effective 
management of the innovation cycle  is a vital component for ensuring success in market -oriented 
research projects.   
The ProPAT innovation cycle will be based on a continuous iterative process whereby, the research, 
which is ongoing throughout the project, will be closely linked to feedback incorporation and exploration 
of market opportunities, involving a series of feedback loops, such as incorporating feedback from 
designers, engineers and users, as well as, incorporating feedback and exploring market opportunities in 
parallel with other key steps of the innovation cycle (e.g. research, prototyping, industrial demonstration 
etc.). In addition, protecting and managing Intellectual Property Rights will be embedded in the innovation 
cycle as a continuous process. Moreover, as ProPAT is a complex development that implies trials on the 
client’s side, these trials will commence towards the middle of the innovation cycle rather than closer to 
the end to enable user feedback to play a prominent role in the innovation cycle and allows for further 
advancement of the project outputs.   
This entire processes needs to be well managed, through a robust innovation strategy, and indeed 
incorporating feedback and exploring market opportunities should start from t he very beginning of the 
innovation cycle and not long after the beginning of research activities 70. As the successful management 
of innovation requires an understanding of both the market and the technical problems, the 
multidisciplinary ProPAT team  will be mobilised under the leadership of a competent Innovation 
Manager who is capable of fomenting an integrated team approach. This role will be performed by Mr. 
Alejandro Rosales who has solid experience chaining the Innovation Unit in IRIS.   
Importantly, the ProPAT project management structure contemplates an Innovation Committee, consisting 
of a qualified member of staff from each of the participating ProPAT partners, who together will bring the 
necessary multidisciplinarity combining the most free thinke rs from the research team, the market and 
business-focussed skills sets from the technological SMEs, and the senior actors from the end-user chain 
who will bring all the inputs of early adopters of first clients. Combining all these skill sets with knowledge 
management, IPR and patent expertise, ensures that we have a very capable innovation committee in 
place. Bi-annual meetings will allow the committee to effectively manage the innovation cycle, the core 
elements of which have been embedded as tasks into the Innovation-Related Activities work package to 
facilitate their formal management and execution. Moreover, the capable leadership of Mr. Rosales, who 
is a business focussed professional, and competent in leading teams to ensure “no thinking in terms of 
silos”, and savvy enough to engage with external actors and the diverse stakeholder groups as required 
to ensure “openness for ideas from outside70” ensures that ProPAT has mobilised a solid and experienced 
approach to innovation management.   
Critical risks and mitigation measures  
Given that an inherent characteristic of research projects is technological uncertainty, which may result in 
project failure, and time and resources spent without any tangible return, these risks will be managed by 
the Research Committee under the leadership of the highly experiences and qualified Research Manager, 
Prof. Frans Muller (UNIVLEEDS). However, risks are not only technology -related, whereby they can be 
categorized as follows; market related risks, technology related ri sks, environment related risks, 
organization related risks64. Market-related risks and environment related risks will be closely analysed by 
the Innovation Committee, and organisational -related risks will be managed by the Project Coordinator 
supported by the Project Steering Committee, as part of the close monitoring of the evolution of the work 
and the mobilisation of the project resources.   
During the preparation of the work plan considerable effort was dedicated to identifying the critical risks 
that could jeopardise the future or the integrity of the project as a whole and establishing risk -mitigation 
                                                
63 Innovation. How to convert research into commercial success story? Part 3: Innovation Management for Practitioners. European 
Commission. Directorate -General for Research and Innovation, 2013. Nanosciences, Nanotechnologies, Materials and New 
Production Technologies (NMP)  
64 Kasap et. al. (2007). Risk Management in R&D Projects. Management of Engineering and Technology, Portland, US. 5-9 Aug 
2007. Print ISBN: 978-18908-4315-1  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 54 of 76  
  
measures for each (see Critical Risks Table in Part A). During the project implementation phase, a 
continual process of monitoring during the management o f this project (through the Risk Management 
procedures discussed above), will ensure that technical risks are quickly identified and brought before the 
relevant steering committee in order to discuss upon the most effective strategy for their resolution so that 
they do not jeopardise the future of the project, whereby agreement on all proposals from the Research 
Committee (in relation to technical risks) and the Innovation Committee (in relation to market - and 
environment-related risks) will be taken by the Project Steering Committee.   
3.3. Consortium as a whole   
Description of the consortium   
The ProPAT consortium is made up of 16 partners from 8 European countries (Spain, Finland, United 
Kingdom, Ireland, Greece, Germany, Italy, Switzerland) and collectively represents a highly focused and 
synergistic balance of research and industry fields, expertise, skills, resources, and European reach, to 
constitute a complete value chain of actors that together are capable of achieving the project 
objectives. Without a European approach, the critical mass of expertise required for the multidisciplinary 
research team could not be gathered. Single technique specialists cannot, by definition, resolve 
multidisciplinary and multifaceted problems such as the delivery of a  holistic approach to whole system 
optimisation.  
There is solid scientific presence (ICFO, VTT, URV, UB, UNIVLEEDS, ZHAW, TUD, IMAR), combined 
with strong industrial and commercial involvement (IRIS, SPECTRAL, DECHEMA, MEMSFAB, GM, 
MBN, GSK, MEGARA) to ensure the research and innovation work and the resulting technological outputs 
are relevant for market needs. The presence of a highly qualified and experienced market actor 
(DECHEMA) with over 5500 members, who are scientists, engineers, companies, organis ations and 
institutes completes are very high quality ProPAT consortium. Moreover, there is strong industrialisation 
capacity postproject with a clear route to market for the results, where the impacts of the ProPAT for 
increasing the competitiveness and s ustainability of the European process industry will be realised. It is 
noteworthy that 5 for the ProPAT consortium partners are SPIRE members (DECHEMA, UNIVLEEDS, 
VTT, ZHAW, IRIS).   
In order to evidence how each partner is relevant for the project and to  show the complementarity 
between the participants, the partners are clustered according to their positioning on the value chain. 
The broad role of each cluster of partners in contributing to the project objectives, and, indeed, in 
contributing to the expected impacts of the project are illustrated in Figure 12, testament to how they are 
suited and are committed to the tasks assigned to them.  
  
Figure 12- Overview of the consortium and how each contributes to ProPAT  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 55 of 76  
  
In terms of the relevance and capacity of the consortium to implement the work plan , on the one 
hand, there is sufficient research and technological background and expertise in the fields of: sensor 
development (VTT, ICFO, IMAR, SPECTRAL), PAT adoption (UB, DECHEMA, IRIS), chemometrics, data 
analytics and advanced process control (IRIS, URV, UB), chemical analytical techniques (TUD, ZWAH), 
closed loop PAT validation (UNIVLEEDS), LCA (ZWAH), chemical processing (MEGARA), mineral 
processing (GM), ceramics (MBN) and pharma (GSK). There is no overlap or conflict of interest among 
the consortium and each participating organisation has a clearly defined role in the project, which will 
mitigate the risk of conflicts arising during the project. Indeed, our consortium covering the whole value 
chain, brings a series of key strengths due to some key features of its participants: DECHEMA: founder 
of the PAT methodology; GSK: 4 th pharma company worldwide; UB: Reference in PAT. Organizer of the 
EuroPAT conference in 2014; ICFO: Research on graphene, plasmonic o ptics. Nature Publishing Index 
Top 200; IRIS: Participation as RTD and coordinator of more than 40 FP7 projects and active in offering 
high-end monitoring and control solutions to industry; SPECTRAL: innovative start -up in high end NIR -
MEMS backed by TEKES  and VTT; VTT: largest research institution in Scandinavia; UNIVLEEDS: 
participant in F3 Factory project that drew guidelines for process control topics; TUD: references for 
standards related to particle size; A core group of Suschem members who lobbied fo r the SPIRE 
programme creation.   
In short, ProPAT unites sufficient reputable actors from the scientific fields, as well as from the industry 
value chain, in order to be able to realistically implement the ambitious work plan, to protect the knowledge 
and plan for its use and communication to a wide audience of different stakeholders, so that the true 
impacts of the results can be felt by European process industries and indeed the wider downstream 
discreet manufacturing industry in Europe, as the ProPATs are up-taken.   
The industrial/commercial involvement in the project to ensure exploitation of the results  
Strong industry involvement in the consortium, backed by robust knowledge management, knowledge 
transfer and market exploitation plans, will contribute to ensuring that the ProPAT project is successful 
transitioning novel PAT analysers and the latest low cost innovations in sensor technology to the industry 
and their integration into flexible control platform for providing an integrated process control solution to the 
European process industries. It is noteworthy that this consortium is industry led, through IRIS, who have 
vast experience in leading European applied R&D projects, and in particular projects that are geared 
towards market-oriented exploitation.  
While the involvement of industry in R&D consortia increases the success rate of market -oriented 
exploitation70, vertical integration (i.e. including the whole value chain) in R&D projects is a success 
factor for market-oriented exploitation.70 To this end, ProPAT includes technological SMEs with research 
performing capacity who can contribute to technology push (the SME Sensor, instrumentation, and 
process control SMEs-IRIS, SPECTRAL, MEMSFAB), who are not only capacitated to contribute to the 
R&D effort, especially in the context of scale-up, integration and demonstration of the results during 
the project, but who can absorb the knowledge generated to protect it, in order to quickly industrialise 
the outputs post -project towards commercialisation, to serve strong industry demand that will be 
stimulated as a result of  the market pull generated by the participating process industri es (GSK, GM, 
MEGARA, MBN), who during the project will contribute end -user knowledge and experience to assist in 
mainstreaming the results of the project and in validating them in the industry. Importantly, the presence 
of large enterprises can make a diff erence in successful market oriented exploitation as long as the 
research outcomes are in line with their ‘expectations’70. ProPAT has secured the interest and involvement 
of these large enterprises at the early stages of the preparation of this bid, and t hey all understand its 
scope and have been very committed in collaborating with the rest of the partners to contribute their vast 
knowledge of the processing environment, current technologies in use, as well as communicating their 
expectations in terms of research outputs which have helped to shape this bid.   
Finally, the involvement of a non -profit making society for chemical engineering and biotechnology 
(DECHEMA) who is dedicated to transferring research results to industry , as well as providing 
training and educational programmes , is an invaluable market actor to complete the consortium by 
contributing to close the innovation gap that frequently prevents industry adoption the results and outputs 
of R&D, by facilitating the advice and training needed for  the successful implementation of the PAT 
paradigm in the European process industry.     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 56 of 76  
  
Other countries: The consortium includes a Swiss partner, the Zurich University of Applied Sciences. This 
partner has been included in the consortium due to their vast expertise in chemical analytical techniques 
as well as in LCA, which is considered essential for carrying out the WP2 and WP8 in the project. Erni 
Peter, director at the Eurosearch Head Office in Bern, Switzerland said that "In the event that Switzerland 
will be treated as a third country in calls for Horizon 2020 project proposals, funds for contributions to the 
EU framework programme will instead be paid directly to researchers in Switzerland, by the State 
Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation of Switzerland.". The budget could also accommodate 
the Swiss partner while keeping below the maximum of € 6M stipulated in the call topic in case the situation 
evolves.  
  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 57 of 76  
  
3.4. Planned use of resources   
Table 3.4b:  ‘Other direct cost’ items (travel, equipment, other goods and services, large 
research infrastructure)  
  

 637232  
58 of 76  
  
 
 
 
 
  
2/VTT  Cost (€) Justification 
Large 
research 
infrastructure 
99549 Research facility comprises of equipment located in Micronova M2 at Tietotie 3 in Espoo: 
Clean room M1; Clean room M2; SubTech lab, 155; Micropackaging lab, 1021; Metal CMP 
laboratory, 109; Chemical laboratory, 102; Optical laboratories 120 and 121. 
 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 59 of 76  
  
4. Members of the Consortium   
4.1. Participants  
Participant 
no.  
1  Name (short name)/ 
Country  
IRIS Technology Solutions SL 
Description of the legal entity   
IRIS was established in Barcelona in 2007 as an advanced engineering and R& D company, 
specialising in the field of process engineering. IRIS has expertise in the following fields of 
engineering: Production Processes (with a strong specialisation in novel technologies); Smart 
Systems; and Optical Systems, combined with a knowledge  and research capacity in food 
technology, materials science and environmental science. IRIS applies its knowledge and expertise 
to develop solutions for industry in the fields of advanced monitoring and control, surface 
activation, decontamination and biocompounds, as well as to provide contract research services to 
the food, agriculture, chemical and pharmaceutical industries, among others. The company has a 
policy of continuous investment for growth, and currently employs 48 staff based in two sites 
(Barcelona and Dublin) which are equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet 
chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 
9001:2008 certified  and also is certified under UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Mana gement Systems 
R&D&i.  
Main tasks  
IRIS will act as Project Coordinators and they have extensive expertise at this level, and in particular 
in the context of industry-driven FP7 projects, and private contacts with the industry. In addition, they 
will lead WP5, whereby, they will be responsible for the development of the Global System Control 
for successfully integrating the PAT developed during the project in the participating dairy processing 
facilities. As a forerunner to this IRIS will also lead Task 1 .5, in order to draw up an integration 
strategy in collaboration with the consortium. IRIS will lead WP5 Development of the Global Control 
System Platform. IRIS will play an active role in validating the integrated PATs in the industry (WP7). 
IRIS will also lead WP10, especially in terms of bringing their skills in IPR management, commercial 
branding, reaching industry, the market and consumers and also contribute to knowledge transfer 
and training activities in WP9.   
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
IRIS is currently developing a global process control platform for integrating PATs in the industry 
(PATBoxTM), the knowledge from which it brings as background to the project. In addition, the Smart 
Systems group at IRIS unites expertise in sensor readings, process logic and control, and modelling, 
coupled with knowledge predictive and adaptive learning capable of describing and analysing the 
given situation and taking smart actions based on the available data. The Group is currently working 
on a number of projects related to WSNs where the above mentioned is applied. With its team and 
resources, including telecom and electronics engineers, system engineering, application 
programming and web development etc. the group can carry out full system design and engineering, 
including electronic design (PCB) and assembly, firmware and software development, electrical 
harnesses and interconnections, mechanical design for enclosure and prototype integrati on. 
Moreover IRIS has optical engineers, mechanical and mechatronics engineers, specialised in 
integration work, as well as installation, validation and industrialisation of prototypes and equipment 
in  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 60 of 76  
  
food and pharma production plants. In terms of project management expertise, IRIS is a highly 
experienced coordinator of over 30 projects in FP7 to date.  
In terms of programming and advanced ITs capabilities, IRIS has a specialized staff (software and  
telecommunication engineers with programming experience) that work on the basis of the Agile 
methodology and philosophy a (scrum and kanban ) for developing complex applications that 
include hardware interfaces, SQL and No -SQL databases (MySQL, PostgresDB, Co uchbase 
among others) and advanced and user -friendly graphic user interfaces not only for computers 
(using Windows Presentation Foundation) but also for smartphones (Android, iOS)  or web-
based access (HTML 5) .  Our software engineers are skilled in a wide  variety of languages and 
operating systems as well as low-level programming (microcontrollers).  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 61 of 76  
  
Dr. Ing. ELODIE BUGNICOURT.  Masters in Material Science &  Engineering (2002), PhD in 
Polymers and Composite Materials (2005), both from National Institute of Applied Science (INSA), 
Lyon, France. Leader of the Eco -Materials business unit in IRIS since 2009. Coordinated several 
European projects in the fields of bio-based packaging materials development, process monitoring, 
surface treatment. Previous industry experience: R&D in chemical industry especially related to 
reactive polymer formulations: i) Arkema (ex. Cray Valley, 2002, Spain) in the field of polyester  
powder coating; Wacker Chemie (2002 -2005, Germany and France), Silicone division that funded 
her PhD thesis: development of nanocomposites based on an epoxy matrix and silica; iii) Ashland 
(2006-2009, located sequentially in US, Spain and France) in the C omposite Polymers division, 
focussing on bio -sourced resins, flame retardant resins, SMC resins, PU and epoxy structural 
adhesives. Led and participated in many R&D projects aimed at developing new formulations, 
understanding mechanisms and structure -properties relationships, developing new analytical 
methods and modelling (for improved quality management); as well as collaborations with academic 
labs and other players in the supply and value chain. Author of several papers in peer-reviewed and 
technical journals, and has presented her work in numerous international conferences.   
PAU PUIGDOLLERS DE BALLE. BSc in Environmental Science from the Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona. MSc in Terrestrial Ecology (Research Thesis: "Effects of biochar from fast pyroly sis on 
soil water availability and basal respiration", 2010) from the same university and MSc in Renewable 
Energy Engineering and Management from the Universitat de Barcelona. Prior to joining IRIS he 
held positions as technical sales person on Servicios N ormativos consultancy group, working with 
environmental and quality projects, and quality field inspector on waste treatment plants for 
Ingeniería IDOM International, performing quality audits and reports. He has also held different 
research positions at the CSIRO (Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization), 
in Australia and in the CREAF (Centre de recerca ecològica i aplicacions forestals) in Barcelona. He 
has also experience as environmental consultant at Eco Intelligent Growth, working with renewable 
energies, life cycle assessment, C2C certifications and green building. He has extensive project 
management expertise, whereby he has successfully managed to a positive conclusion on 4 EU 
R&D projects in the fields of advanced monitoring and decision support system development.  
MSc. ALEJANDRO ROSALES has a M. Sc. in Physics from the Universidad de La Habana (1986). 
His background comprises theoretical and technical skills in several scientific and technological 
areas: optics, lasers, high vacuum, colorimetry, UV-VIS-NIR-MIR spectroscopy, chemometrics and 
design of measurement instruments. He has extensive practical experience in programming, 
electronics and mechanical CAD design as well as R&D methodology and management. His career 
has included positions as researcher applications engineer, design engineer, business developer 
and R&D manager. In 2000s, he worked in the FTIR spectroscopy field applied to quality control in 
the agrofood (wine) industry, whereby he developed two new measurement instruments for wine 
analysis.  His career as industrial physicist has been focused in applying his wide expertise to 
provide solutions for industrial problems.  Since 2011, he has been the Technical Manager in IRIS, 
leading a staff of 20 engineers and researchers involved in R&D projects aimed at developing novel 
high-end solutions for industry. Currently, he is the Science & Technology Manager in IRIS.  
Dr. CRISTINA SERRANO is currently Project Manager in the Eco -Materials business unit in IRIS 
where she coordinates projects in the fields of sustainable packaging and surface treatment. She 
received her PhD (2011) at the University Complutense of Madrid (Spain) working at the Institute of 
Science and Technology of Polymers (2006-2011) on the development and characterization of new 
polymeric nanocomposites for self -sterilization of food packaging materials, based on the 
incorporation of non -doped and doped -TiO2. She benefited from short pre -doctoral stays in 
PLAPIQUI (Argentina, 2008) to study the rheological behaviour of thermoplastics and composites, 
and in the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research (Germany, 2011) where her studies were 
focused on obtaining nanostructured surfaces by plasma etching. After her PhD degree she worked 
as a post-Doc (2011-2013) at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Germany, on several 
R&D projects in the field of bio -inspired adhesives and stimulus sensitive polymers  involving 
synthesis and modification of polymers and polymer´s characterization. She is co-author of fourteen 
scientific articles and has presented her work in national and international conferences.  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 62 of 76  
  
JAIME PEREIRAS. Masters Degree in Mechatronics (2011) and a Bachelor’s Degree in Electronics 
(2009), both at University of Oviedo. His professional background comprises technical experience 
in the areas of automatics, electronics, mechanics and manufacturing processes, with special 
emphasis on signal analys is and control engineering. He has previous experience at developing 
special machines for assembly lines and development of applications for monitoring process control. 
His software expertise includes SolidWorks, Matlab/Simulink, LabView, OrCAD 
Cadence/PSpice/Layout, among others.  
DR. ANDRAS GEFFERTH . Ph.D. in Computer Science (2005) and M.Sc. in Computer Science 
(1998) from Budapest University of Technology and Economics. Besides computer science his 
background includes mathematical modelling and stochast ic processes. Industry experience at 
Morgan Stanley as a quantitative researcher working on pricing and risk models for various financial 
derivatives. Research fellow at the Budapest University of Technology and Economics participating 
in several R&D proje cts in the fields of video transmission, data network traffic identification, data 
network traffic modelling and analysis. Teaching and supervision of M.Sc. students, giving lectures 
and supervising laboratory work. Expertise in various programming and scr ipting languages-C++, 
Matlab, Tcsh, Awk and Python. Co-author of several peer reviewed publications.  
MIROSLAV SPAJIC.  B.Sc. in Programming, Uni. Belgrade. M.Sc. Programming, Megatrend 
University, School for Computer Sciences. Senior Programmer in IRIS since March 2009. Main fields 
of interest are Programming, DB administration, SAP, Networking and multimedia. Industry 
expertise: 1996 to 2008- Senior Programmer at “TE Nikola Tesla” Power Plant: programming; DB 
admin, creation, scripting, automatic backups a nd maintaining of database security; Networking. 
SAP (System installation and configuration, Data migration, QHQ Client, Customizing etc.) and SAP 
Training for System Administrators in EPS/ICAS. 1994 -1996- design and video editing in Studio 
MAG, MSC Studio , TV Mix Bourgas – Bulgaria and Studio Film Belgrade: non -linear audio-video 
editing, radio and TV advertisements and movie production. 2008 -2009- Snr. Prog. At Sol90Labs, 
Barcelona, developing the program “Xalok” (editorial software for newspapers) in C++, XML, XSLT, 
ASP and JS; Network and DB admin of MS SQL databases.  
IVAN PAQUICO RODRIGUEZ . Telecommunications Degree in UPC (Barcelona) and a Joint 
Degree in Multimedia Development in LUAS (Finland). His final thesis, 'Augmented Reality Chess 
and Application to Detect Chess Moves', implemented by using Computer Vision, Augmented 
Reality and Artificial Intelligence techniques, has won several awards, such as the best final thesis 
of the UPC and the best final thesis of Spain (received from Vodafone Spain and Universia 
foundation). He is an official iOS and Android Developer since 2010, creating a social network for 
iPhone called: 'BeThere' developed by iOS SDK from Apple and used Couchbase technology for 
the database. He also has experience in different programming languages such as C, C++, Objective 
C or Java, 8 bits embedded and real time syste ms. He has expertise in multimedia methodologies 
ranging from Virtual Reality programming techniques to 3D/2D modelling software such as OpenGL, 
Quest3D, Autodesk Maya, Autodesk 3DS Max or Adobe Photoshop.  
DR. TIMOTHY KEHOE. PhD in Engineering, University  College Cork, Ireland - developed an IR 
photometric measurement system for thermal diffusivity in anisotropic materials. Masters in 
Optoelectronics, Queens University Belfast. Designed an Echelle spectrometer while based at Andor 
Technology Ltd. Worked at Tyndall National Institute, Cork, and Catalan Institute of Nanotechnology, 
Barcelona, developing diffractive optical and acousto -optical metrology techniques for 
nanotechnology applications, in particular for characterision of nanoscale structures fabricat ed by 
nanoimprint lithography and directed self -assembly.  Other research activities: quantification of 
ordering in selfassembled structures by image analysis techniques and optical sensors using 
hydrogel materials.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications,  and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 63 of 76  
  
1. Development of a commercial system for real -time monitoring of moisture, CO2, temperature 
and filling level of grains in industrial silos. It comprises a network of multi-sensor probes and a 
data management subsystem. B2B project (private contract research).    
2. System for real-time on-line multipoint monitoring the olive oil extraction (centrifuge) in order to 
optimize the yield and reducing wastes. B2B project (private contract research).  
3. A platform for in -field multi-point monitoring of salinity in rice paddies in order to optimize the 
water consumption (AgriBox, in IRIS products line)    
4. A database-based system for decision support to ensure quality of ready-to-eat foods production 
(from FP7 project Startec: Decision Support Tools to ensure safe, tasty and nutritious Advanced 
Ready-To-Eat foods for healthy and vulnerable Consumers, Grant Agreement no: 289262.   
5. VIS and NIR-based on-line QC control in plastic injection process and DDS using chemometrics, 
as well as high temperature and pressure reflectranc e and transmittance probes relevant to 
ProPAT (from FP7 OPTIJECT: A novel NIR -based instrument for in -line monitoring during 
injection moulding , GA nº 262623)  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
1. OPTI-CLEAN-Effective and reliable optical system (NIR -Chemical Imaging) for cleaning 
validation in pharmaceuticals manufacture- Grant Agreement no: 285836   
2. PARTICLE-PRO-Development of a hybrid process analytical technology to characterise the 
physical and chemical properties of particles- Grant Agreement no: 312050  
3. CRYSTAL-VIS. A process analytical technology for characterising the physical properties of  
crystals. Grant Agreement no: 605814  
4. PUREFORMULA-Development of a novel control technology for ensuring high quality Powdered 
Infant Formula. Grant Agreement no: 605134  
5. COMPO-BALL- Novel on-line composting monitoring system.  Grant Agreement no.: 243625  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work  
Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, a FTIR-ATR (Interspectrum), 
2 UV-VIS  
(PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), an Extended -SWIR (StellarNet) and a NIR (Mightex) 
spectrophotometers as well as a SWIR Hyperspectral imager (Specim-Xenics). The associated staff 
are properly trained and skilled in chemometrics modelling by using a commercial suite (SOLO+MIA 
from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non -commercial chemometric tools (Matlab and Python 
toolboxes).  
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up-to-date hardware 
and tools: signal generators, wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, 
development kits for programming microcontrollers, CNC -milling m achines for electronic and 
mechanical prototyping, and CAD software [SolidWorks], among others.    
IRIS’ optical engineers work with ZEEMAX software for optimally designing of optical systems and 
to setup the designs by means of advanced optical components  and facilities (optical tables, 
windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and related “opticalware”).  
  
Participant 
no.  
2  Name (short 
name)/Country  
Institute of Photonic Sciences (ICFO)/SPAIN  
Description of the legal entity   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 64 of 76  
  
ICFO - The Institute of Photonic Sciences (www.icfo.eu) was created in 2002 by the regional 
government of Catalonia and the Technical University of Catalonia. The Institute was launched with 
the mission to become a world -leading research center in Photonic s. ICFO currently hosts more 
than 250 researchers organized in 23 research groups working in 60 state -of-the-art research 
laboratories, equipped with the latest experimental facilities and supported by a range of cutting -
edge facilities for nanofabrication, characterization, imaging and engineering. The Institute is located 
in a specially designed, 14.000 m2 -building situated in the Mediterranean Technology Park in the 
metropolitan area of Barcelona.  ICFO currently hosts 12 ICREA Research professors, 14 European 
Research Council projects and 6 Fundacio Cellex Barcelona Nest Fellows. ICFO researchers have 
already published some 1000 papers in the top topical journals and more than 30 papers by ICFO 
researchers have been published in journals of the Nature & Science groups during the last few 
years. The institute was given athe top worldwide position in the Physics category in the "Mapping 
Scientific Excellence" ranking published by the Max -Planck Society and ETH in 2013. On the 
industrial side, ICFO participates actively in the European Technological Platform Photonics21 and 
is also very proactive in fostering entrepreneurial activities and spin -off creation. The center 
participates in incubator activities and seeks to attract venture capital investment. ICFO hosts an 
active Corporate Liaison Program that aims at creating collaborations and links between industry 
and ICFO researchers. To date, ICFO has helped create 5 start-up companies.  
The Optoelectronics group at ICFO, lead by the PI, studies and develops n ew advanced materials 
and devices for the photonics industry. These include ultrathin materials, such as metals, graphene 
and phase change compounds for transparent electrode and optical switching, nano -structured 
glass surfaces for antifingerprint, antimicrobial and microfluidic applications, and low cost integrated 
optical sensors for cell, micro-organism counting, sorting, and DNA sequencing. The group aims at 
bridging the academic and industrial worlds by pursuing fundamental ideas with great potential for 
revolutionizing future photonic products. It thus works closely with local and international industrial 
organizations to make sure that the society at large benefits from its research effort in the future, 
including major industries, in Spain, Europe a nd USA, including Corning Inc., Oclaro Inc., ABB, 
Ficosa International, IBM, SEAT/Wolkswagen, BASF, Prysmian, Carl Zeiss, Alter Technology, HP 
and the European Space Agency.  
Main tasks  
ICFO will be focus on tasks 2.1 nad 2.2, i.e. the development of a new prototype of Granulometer 
for the ProPAT project (ProG) adapted to specifications defined in WP1, based on previously tested 
Image Scatterometers prototypes made at ICFO, and the integration of this ProG prototype for real-
time and in-line measurements during granulation in a real industrial environment.  
ICFO will carry out the development of four units of a beta version of the novel ProG, focussing on 
the hardware  
 
development including optics, electronics and mechanical parts, with the necessary modifications to 
each end -user requriments.  These novel sensor concept will allow to achieve a low -cost and 
compact Granulometer for in-line measurements.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project   
Among the current PI and his group’s activities listed above, the most relevant for the proposed 
project concerns the development of lens -free microscopy based optical sensors. These rely on a 
CCD and CMOS detection and can be used for different applications, ranging from scattering 
measurements to material defects, micro-organism, cell analysis and counting, and DNA detection 
and sequencing. The group and the PI has produced 1 granted patent and 3 patent applications in 
this area, all relevant and part of the background IP for the project.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 65 of 76  
  
VALERIO PRUNERI (male), the PI, is an ICREA Industrial Professor, Corning Inc. chair and group 
leader at ICFO. Prior to ICFO, from 2000 to 2006, he had worked as head of advanced research in 
industry for Avanex Corp. (Italian branch), Corning OTI and Pirelli Cables and Systems. From 1993 
to 2000 he was with the Optoelectronics Research Centre, University of Southampton. He received 
his PhD in Laser Physics/Optoelectronics from the University of Southampton and his Master 
(“Laurea”) in Nuclear Engineering “cum laude” from the Politecnico di Milano. Since 2010 he has 
spent visiting periods at Corning Inc. for more than a year. He has about 30 granted or pending 
patent families, 50 invited talks at major international conferences, and 250 refereed 
journal/conference papers. H e has served on about 40 international conference committees; in 
particular, he will be Technical co -chair of the Conference on Lasers and Electro -optics (CLEO) 
Europe 2015 and has been technical/general chair of the European Conference on Integrated Optics 
(ECIO) 2012. He is an international R&D advisor of ACREO fiber optic centre in Sweden, member 
of the advisory board of VLC Photonics, technical advisor of Medlumics SL, chair of the photonics 
panel of the National Evaluation Agency in ICT and regular con sultant for the EU commission and 
photonics industries. For his research and technology transfer effort, he received the Philip Morris 
Prize for Scientific and Technological Research, the Pirelli Research Fellowship, the IBM Faculty 
Award, the Duran Farell Prize for Technological Research and the Corning Inc. Chair.  
DAVIDE JANNER is a senior researcher in the Optoelectronics group. He received his PhD in 
Physics from the Politecnico di Milano and his Master in Physics from Università degli Studi of Milano. 
His research interests cover both theoretical and experimental aspects in optical sensors based on 
micro-nano-structured fibers, photonic crystals, surface nano -structuring and optofluidics. He 
published more than 30 papers in international peer reviewed journals and gave 5 invited talks at 
major international conferences. He is co -author of 3 issued patents. His main contributions to the 
project are on optical modelling, optical design and optical characterization.  
MARC JOFRE received the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering (Telecommunication 
engineering) from the Technical  
University of Catalonia (UPC), Barcelona, in 2008, and the PhD in Photonics from ICFO - The 
Institute of Photonic Sciences, in 2013.  He acquired experience in optical engineering and system 
measurements by working on novel transmitters for quantum communi cation. His research interest 
includes optical communication and bio - sensors. His main contributions to the project include 
optical, electronic integration and engineering, in particular design and realization of the image 
sensor system.  
PEDRO ANTONIO MARTÍNEZ CORDERO is research engineer at ICFO. He has more than 5 years 
of experience in the field of optoelectronics systems being previously head of R+D photonics 
department in a private company specialized in radio frequency and photonic devices. He has a large 
expertise in imaging systems, optical -electronic integration and image processing.  He will be 
responsible for tasks related to software and hardware at the design and development stages. He 
will apply his expertise in software development focus on holographic image processing and statistics 
algorithms for analyse and counting particles.  
DR. SILVIA CARRASCO. FEMALE. Knowledge and Technology Transfer Head (KTT), ICFO. She 
also serves as vicepresident of the Spanish mirror of the European Platform Pho tonics21 since 
February 2009 and is also a Member of the Board of SECPhO, the Southern European Cluster in 
Photonics and Optics since 2013.  Carrasco received a BSc in Physics in 1999, a PhD with highest 
honors in 2003, an MBA in 2008 and was awarded a Fulbright Fellowship. She has enjoyed research 
stays at several institutions in the USA, including the Centre for Research and Education in Optics 
and Lasers (currently College of Optics), University of Central Florida, the Photonics Center, Boston 
University, and Harvard University, Boston. In her capacity as ICFO KTT director, she has a broad 
experience in IPR management. In particular she has built at ICFO a Corporate Liaison Program that 
serves as a bridge for ICFO and all types of industries and corporati ons to achieve common goals. 
Her experience in fostering collaborative projects between ICFO and all types of corporations 
includes the establishment of worldwide relationships with photonic manufactures, photonics 
distributors, and photonic users in different sectors.  Since her arrival to ICFO in 2006 to manage the 
KTT unit, she has built a patent portfolio at ICFO of more than 50 patent families. She is also the 
founder of the “From Science to Business” Program that ICFO launched in 2008 jointly with ESADE 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 66 of 76  
  
Business School to promote the entrepreneurial spirit among young scientists. Five start -up 
companies have been incubated and launched at ICFO based on property know-how: Radiant  
Light, Signadyne, Cosingo, ProCareLight and HemoPhotonics.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets 
or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 67 of 76  
  
1. Apparatus for measuring light scattering, V. Pruneri et al., patent application EP14382043 (2014)  
2. Optically transparent support for bubble -free specimens, V. Pruneri et al., patent application 
P201331446 (2013)  
3. Compact system for optical measurements using a discretized plate, V. Pruneri et al., patent 
application ES201330270 (2013)  
4. Durable, superhydrophobic, antireflection and low haze glass surfaces using scalable metal 
dewetting nanostructuring, D. Infante, K. W. Koch, P. Mazumder, L. Tian, A. Carrilero, D. Tulli, D. 
Baker, V. Pruneri  Nano Res. 6, 429-440 (2013)  
5. Photonic crystal fiber sensor array based on modes overlapping,  G. A. Cárdenas -Sevilla, V. 
Finazzi, J. Villatoro, V. Pruneri, Opt. Express 19, 7596-7602 (2011)  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project   
1. Multi sensor technology for management of food processes (MUSE-TECH)  
2. Nano-structured optical surfaces for microelectronics, consumer electronics and biosensors 
(OPTICAL TOUCH) – La Caixa bank  
3. Micro-nano-photonic devices for energy efficiency (MINDER) – TEC 14832 – Spanish Ministry 
of innovation 4. Superolephobic and antifingerprint nano-structured transparent surfaces 
(NANOSURF) – Corning Inc.  
5. Microfluidic devices via femtosend laser writing (MINILAB) - Cellex Foundation  
Description of any significa nt infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work  
The Optoelectronics group has available three state -of-the-art laboratories, one of which fully 
dedicated to activities related to the project, i.e. lens -free microscopy for sensing in the material 
processing, biology and water industries. In addition to three own laboratories, the group can count 
on several central facilities. Particularly relevant for the projects are the nano -photonics and bio 
facilities. The Nanophotonics Fabrication Lab (NPL), which is devoted to the fabrication and 
characterization of  nanostructured photonic devices. This laboratory includes state of the art 
nanofabrication tools and techniques for a wide range of optical applications, ranging from 
biosensing to optical communications, and spanning a broad range of materials, including polymers, 
semiconductors, metals, or crystals,among others. ICFO holds a total of 215m2 of space dedicated 
to BioFacilities (within a total of approximately 500m2 dedicated to life sciences related photonics 
research). These facilities are composed of BioSafety Level 1 (BSL1) and BSL2 labs that work with 
both pathogenic and non-pathogenic material. All the biofacilities (that are composed of Wet labs, 
Cell Culture areas, Bacteria and Model Organism Labs and all the associated supporting facilities) 
are located “door to door” with ICFO’s  
Super-resolution Light Nanoscopy and Microscopy facility (SLN@ICFO). ICFO’s Biological 
Laboratories (BSL1 and BSL2) follow the European, National and Institutional regulations organized 
by the ICFO -Biosecurity Committee (IB C) and managed under an implemented Biosecurity 
Program. ICFO holds also a powerful programme on a variety of advanced and super -resolution 
light microscopy techniques and functional imaging with applications that range from single molecule 
to medical imaging. The Super-resolution Light Microscopy & Nanoscopy Lab at ICFO (SLN@ICFO) 
has as a mission to perform activities in three large pillars: user -oriented access, high quality 
comprehensive training, and research and development in the most advanced imaging techniques. 
The current equipment of SLN@BCN comprises custom -built as well as the latest commercially 
available microscopes and imaging devices. The currently available microscopy equipment at the 
core labs include a CW-STED microscope (LEICA) that has been modified to enhance its imaging 
capabilities with other nonlinear imaging techniques, a confocal microscope (NIKON E-TI) modified 
to work as a multimodal platform including several nonlinear imaging techniques., two home -made 
multiphoton microscopes (TPEF, SHG, THG, PSHG), a Raman microscope (Renishaw) and a home 
built multimodal SPIM microscope. Within this imaging facility ICFO has a library of antibodies for 
super-resolution available to the facility users.  
  
Participant 
no.  
3  Name (short 
name)/Country  
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland (VTT)/ 
Finland  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 68 of 76  
  
Description of the legal entity   
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland (www.vtt.fi) is the largest multidisciplinary contract 
research organization in Northern Europe, with approx. 3100 staff and turnover of 292 million €. VTT 
is a part of the Finnish innovation system under the domain  of the Ministry of Employment and the 
Economy, but gains a significant fraction of its income from contract research from the private sector. 
VTT is impartial non-profit expert organisation acting independently in respect of its customers. The 
objectives of VTT are to create high level scientific and techno-economic knowledge and knowhow 
and to generate technology and innovations for industry and society.  
Main tasks  
VTT’s main role in this project is to MEMS process platforms development in WP3.3 and sensor 
test rig development in  
WP3.4.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project   
VTT is well known worldwide for innovative and state-of-the-art MEMS devices. We design, model, 
simulate, fabricate and characterize silicon -based components and readout electronics, focussing 
on surface- and SOI MEMS technologies. Core competences include  also opto-electromechanical 
design, integration & execution of high complexity MEMS fabrication processes for various MOEMS 
devices, such as monolithic spectrometers and optical filter structures. We have successfully 
established commercial production pil ot line of carbon dioxide sensors based on MOEMS FPI 
platform designed for the IR range. VTT has a vast experience of working in various EU projects as 
a partner and as a coordinator.  In 2011 alone, VTT was involved in 322 EU -funded research 
projects. VTT is ranked among the leading European research and technology organisations and is 
committed to responsible collaboration for achieving the EU H2020 goals.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
DR. ANNA RISSANEN.  Female. Research Team Leader of the VTT MOEMS and BioMEMS 
Instruments team and responsible for project management of this project. She has more than ten 
years of expertise in MEMS development, including optical and electrical design of MOEMS 
structures an d process integration/development for surface micro machined Fabry -Perot 
interferometers. Her core competence is in the opto -electromechanical design, integration & 
execution of high complexity MEMS fabrication processes for optical sensors, micro-spectrometers 
and optical filter structures for MEMS hyperspectral imagers.  
MIKKO TUOHINIEMI has a M.Sc in Engineering Physics from the Aalto Univ. (formerly Helsinki 
Univ. of Technology).  
He will be responsible for the MEMS design and process integration in WP3. He worked as a MEMS 
designer 20032008 with Murata Electronics Oy (formerly VTI Technologies Oy) and has been with 
VTT in MEMS process development since then. Currently he is a senio r scientist in the team for 
MOEMS and BioMEMS Instruments.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. Antila, J., Tuohiniemi, M., Rissanen, A., Kantojärvi, U., Lahti, M., Viherkanto, K., Kaarre, M. and 
Malinen, J. 2014. MEMS - and MOEMS-Based Near-Infrared Spectrometers. Encyclopedia of 
Analytical Chemistry. 1–36.)  
2. Blomberg, Martti; Torkkeli, Altti; Lehto,  Ari; Helenelund, Christer; Viitasalo, Mauri; Electrically 
tuneable micromachined fabry -perot interferometer in gas analysis; Physica Scripta. Vol. T69 
(1997), 119 - 121  
3. Tuohiniemi, Mikko; Näsilä, Antti; Mäkynen, Jussi ; Characterization of the tuning performance of 
a micro-machined Fabry-Pérot interferometer for thermal infrared; Journal of Micromechanics 
and Microengineering. IOP Publishing. Vol. 23  (2013) No: 7, Article no. 075011  
4. Tuohiniemi, Mikko; Blomberg, Martti; Akujärvi, Altti; Antila, Jarkko; S aari, Heikki; Optical 
transmission performance of a surface -micromachined Fabry-Pérot interferometer for thermal 
infrared ; Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering. Vol. 22 (2012) No: 11, 115004  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 69 of 76  
  
5. Rissanen, Anna; Kantojärvi, Uula; Blomberg, Martti; Antila, Jarkko; Eränen, Simo; Monolithically 
integrated microspectrometer-on-chip based on tunable visible light MEMS FPI; Sensors and 
Actuators, A: Physical . Elsevier.  
Vol. 182  (2012) No: August, 130 – 135  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
1. IQFUEL: development of MEMS processing technology for NIR FPI for fuel quality sensing  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work  
VTT has two major cleanroom facilities for fabricating nanoelectronic devices and microsystems; at 
Micronova in Espoo and Micromodule Centre in Oulu. The former is an extensive wafer fab w here 
silicon and glass wafers are processed into devices, the latter concentrates on system integration. 
Main cleanrooms cover a total area of 2 600 m². The cleanroom classification ranges from Class 10 
(ISO 4) to 1000 (ISO 6). Micronova cleanrooms are def ined as a National Research Infrastructure 
by the Ministry of Education, maintained by VTT and Helsinki University of Technology.  
  
Participant 
no.  
4  Name (short 
name)/Country  
University of Leeds (UNIVLEEDS)  / UK  
Description of the legal entity   
University / Higher Education Institute. Established in 2008, the Institute of Process Research and 
Development (iPRD) of the University of Leeds offers a unique set of facilities and expertise for 
product and process development. iPRD is comprised of expe rts from the fields of chemistry and 
chemical engineering who work closely with the chemical industries to develop technologies that 
can deliver cost reductions, quality benefits, increased productivity and reduce waste and energy 
utilisation in product manufacture. The team has over fifty year’s combined experience of working in 
the fine chemical and pharmaceutical sectors and are able to offer companies focused contract -
based services for problem solving, process understanding, development of new process 
technologies, small-scale manufacture, training and consultancy. iPRD works with companies of all 
sizes, including SMEs from the region. They are also actively  
 
involved in regional and European funded projects.  
Main tasks  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 70 of 76  
  
UNIVLEEDS will contribute to WP1 supporting the definition of the specifications for the processes 
and sensors to be used in WP6 and to WP5 in supporting the specification and development of the 
control hardware, however WP6 is the main focus of UNIVLEEDS activity in ProPAT. In WP6, three 
types of processes will be implemented at an industrially relevant pilot scale: (Task 6.2) high 
temperature polymerisations, (Task 6.3) Wet and Dry milling processes and (Task 6.4) granulation 
processes. In each of these t asks the following activities will be undertaken: (i) process 
familiarisation in laboratory scale equipment, (ii) the design and construction of processing facilities 
at an appropriate pilot scale with locally designed control.  In Task 6.1, the local control system will 
be coupled to the ProPAT control system and sensors. These will be tested initially with model 
systems and subsequently with industrial materials & processes in order to collect sensor calibration 
data under realistic processing conditions This data will improve the calibration models. Full 
automation of the processing equipment will be completed by use of the updated calibration models. 
The fully automated system will be tested using model systems, and on successful completion of 
these tests, industrial processes will be run at pilot scale in “closed loop” automation mode in order 
to demonstrate (a) validity of the ProPAT developed technology and control, (b) the robustness of 
the sensor calibration at scale, (c) the stability of the sense across multiple batches and for prolonged 
running times and (d) the environmental and economical benefits of the sensors (waste/energy 
reduction, selectivity and yield increases, cycle time reductions).  
UNIVLEEDS will also contribute to WP7 (knowledge transfer) to ensure the operational learning from 
WP6 is effectively embedded in the industrial pilot studies executed in WP7.    
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project   
UNIVLEEDS has the facilities and expertise to design, construct and automate batch and continuous 
chemical and particulate equipment required for this project. Muller has 17 years of industrial 
experience in process development and scale up and manufacturing. Since arriving at the university 
in 2011, he has developed a formulation process and scaled it to 20L scale manufacturing, and 
together with Alfa Laval designed and built an automated 5L scale slurry hydrogenation rig. He also 
has significant experience in software development. Bourne’s expertise lies in the development and 
operation of fully automated, self -optimising continuous processing systems coupled to inline 
analysis. Hunter has significant research experience in the use of sensors as online and  in situ 
process control systems for suspensions of solids in liquids. Hassanpour has a wide range of 
expertise in the field of particulate processing. His interests lie in understanding the relationship 
between particle properties and bulk behaviour of pa rticles and coupling that understanding to 
particle processes like size enlargement and size reduction of particles. He is an expert in the 
application of discrete element method (DEM) using combined continuum (CFD) and DEM 
techniques and coupling this to detailed experimentation. Our expertise in continuous processing is 
particularly well suited for testing control systems and sensors for longer duration.   
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 71 of 76  
  
PROFESSOR DR. IR. FRANS MULLER PhD Cantab CEng FIChemE ( Male) holds a joint chair in 
Chemical Process Engineering in the School of Process Environmental and Material Science  
(SPEME, ranked 3rd in its subject (RAE2008)) and the School of Chemistry (ranked 8th in its subject 
(RAE2008)). He works on the interface between chemical engineering and chemistry and his 
research interests lie in the dynamics of manufacturing processes and understanding of the 
interaction between process and equipment. His work is currently supported through a £1M strategic 
investment of the University of Leeds as part of the establishment of the Institute of Process 
Research and Development (iPRD) and directly from industry (AstraZeneca (AZ), Syngenta, Alfa 
Laval and Aesica). Before joining iPRD in August 2011, he spend 17 years in industry (AstraZeneca 
(AZ), Syngenta) as a process engineering scientist working on the design and development of 
industrial processes & equipment. His group includes 4 PhD students funded by Leeds and industry 
(AZ, Syngenta).   
He was the lead investigator for AZ on a large EU consortium grant (F3 Factory, 19M€ EU funding, 
25 partners involved in continuous mobile modular manufacture, www.f3factory.com), representing 
AZ’s 5 academic partners on the consortium management team and leading the AZ project team. At 
Syngenta he developed and in 2000 subsequently commercialised a batch processing simulation 
program, known commercially as DynoChem, to a SME software company (Scale-up Systems Ltd, 
http://www.scale-up.com). Now over 450 DynoChem licences are used on ~100 sites in 23 countries 
by 13 of the top 15 pharmaceutical companies. Scale-up Systems employs 20 people in 5 countries 
and has an annual turnover of over €2M2. His research has resulted in over 26 archival journal and 
reviewed conference publications as well as 9 invited lectures and seminars.  
Dr ALI HASSANPOUR (Male) is a lecturer at the Institute of Particle Science and Engineering (IPSE) 
of University of Leeds. He is also an active member of management committee for Particle 
Technology Special Interest Group of  
IChemE and Process Engineering Formulation Design and Manufacturing focus group of Academy 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences (APS). Ali's research has mainly focused on experimental work and 
modelling in various areas of particle science and engineering. This includes (i) the characterisation 
of mechanical properties of particles and their correlation with bulk behaviour; (ii) size enlargement 
and size reduction of particles; (iii) tribo-electrification and electrostatic effects  
 
on particles (iv) modelling bulk behaviour of particles using discrete element method  (DEM) and 
particle-fluid interactions in turbulent flows using combined continuum (CFD) and DEM techniques. 
His research has resulted in over 80 archival journal and reviewed conference publications as well 
as 12 invited lectures and seminars.  
DR RICHARD BOURNE (Male) is a tenure track fellow in (SPEME) at the University of Leeds. He 
works on the interface of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering and is interested chemical 
processing, online analysis and automation. Of particular relevance to this project, R AB has 
demonstrated self-optimising flow reactors for rapid optimisation of chemical processes using inline 
gas chromatography, liquid chromatography and infrared spectroscopy. Prior to this position he 
worked at the University as Nottingham with Prof. Martyn Poliakoff, CBE, FRS and Prof. Michael W. 
George developing self -optimising continuous systems. He currently has an AstraZeneca funded 
industrial CASE award, HEIF funding and industry funding, total value ca. £100k. He has published 
23 peer-reviewed journal and conference articles.  DR TIMOTHY HUNTER (Male) is a lecturer in 
IPSE, at the University of Leeds. He has a general research interest in multiphase suspension and 
slurry processing, as well as interfacial colloidal and soft matter systems. He has c urrent active 
collaborations with P & G, Sellafield Ltd, MMI Engineering, NNL Ltd, Unilever and Nestle. Of specific 
relevance to this project is his significant research experience looking at the application of 
commercial backscatter sensors for use as onl ine and in situ process control systems, to monitor 
suspensions in tanks and pipeflow environments. Additionally, he has looked at novel applications 
of multiangle ellipsometers to measure the interfacial structures and contact angles of colloidal 
monolayers. He is currently Co-I (Co-Academic lead) on a ~£1.2M Technology Strategy Board grant 
with Sellafield Ltd and MMI Engineering, and has +25 peer reviewed journal and conference articles 
with >330 citations.   
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets 
or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 72 of 76  
  
1. Muller F.L., Gray K.A., Robinson G.E. (2011). Understanding Scale Up and Quality Risks on the 
interface between Primary and Secondary Development. Pharmaceutical Process Scale-Up.  3rd 
edition edited by M. Levin. Informa Healthcare NY, Pharmaceutical Process Scale -Up, Third 
Edition, chapter 3. Feb 2011.   
2. DynoChem (http://www.scale-up.com/) process modelling system. Muller was the inventor of this 
batch simulation program when at Syngenta AG. He oversaw the successful  licensing of 
DynoChem to scale up systems. It is now used by 3 of the top 15 pharmaceutical companies.   
3. Hassanpour, A., Kwan, C.C.  Ng, B.H., Rahmanian, N., Ding, Y.L., Antony, S.J., Jia, X.D. Ghadiri, 
M., Effect of granulation scale-up on the structure and strength of granules, Powder Technology, 
189 (2) 304-312 (2009).  
4. Hunter, T.N., Darlison, L., Peakall,  J., Biggs, S. “Using a multi -frequency acoustic backscatter 
system as an in situ high concentration dispersion monitor”, Chemical Engineering Science 80, 
409–418 (2012).  
5. R. A. Skilton, A. J. Parrott, M. W. George, M. Poliakoff and R. A. Bourne, Real -Time Feedback 
Control Using Online Attenuated Total Reflection Fourier Transform Infrared (ATR FT -IR) 
Spectroscopy for Continuous Flow Optimization and Process Knowledge, Applied Spectroscopy, 
2013, 67, 1127-1131.  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
1. F3 Factory project (EU FP7: 228867)  
2. TSB Developing the Nuclear Supply Chain (2013-16) ‘Measurement and modelling of sludge 
transfer processes’  
(Total project ~£1.18M of which University of Leeds received £440k). Project No 101433  
3. TSB / Procter & Gamble: Creating high value compact products to increase total UK's total 
supply chain reach  (TS/L00351/1)  
4. Industrially funded by Alfa Laval: Slurry Hydrogenation case studies in flow (2013)   
5. Various Company supported PhD projects: EPSRC/Johnson Matthey Industrial Case 
Award: Effect of Milling on the Catalytic Characteristics of Gamma Alumina; 
EPSRC/Astra Zeneca Industrial Case Award: Rate based design of experiments ;  
EPSRC/Astra Zeneca Industrial Case Award: Milling of Pharmaceutical Powders;  
EPSRC/Astra Zeneca Industrial  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items  of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work  
The Institute of Process Research and Development (iPRD) at the University of Leeds is jointly 
supported by the Schools of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering (SPEME) and has a process R&D 
and scale up facility designed to industrial standards. This was funded by a £4.5 M grant from 
Yorkshire Forward and the ERDF in 2008 and consists of 650m 2 lab and office space. The lab’s 
centre-piece is a state of the art, 20L and 50L reactor facility, which is ATEX compliant (i.e. safe use 
of flammable solvents), that enables industrially relevant kilo -scale manufacture, development and 
demonstration of process and technology innovation. The reactors are fitted with process analytical 
technology (PAT) capable of al l standard batch reaction operations such as charging liquids and 
solids, heating, cooling and temperature control, distilling (atmospheric and under vac), extraction 
and phase separation, crystallisation and filtration. Typically the 20L vessel is used as  reactor with 
the 50L vessel being used for work up.   
In addition to the batch processing facilities iPRD operates a number of continuous reactors: (i) a 
Alfa Laval ART reactor (120 mL single pass heat exchanger now marketed by Ehrfelt), (ii) a Coflore 
reactor (1L reaction volume in 10 stirred units in series, AM technology) and (iii) a CSTR in series 
reaction system (Parr, 100 Bar). These equipment can be  
operated under pressure, and we have successfully conducted the scale up of a range of 
chemistries, including continuous hydrogenations and high temperature chemistry (140C). In 
collaboration with Alfalaval we have designed a modular slurry hydrogenation facility which Alfa 
Laval has donated iPRD. The modular approach builds on the F3 factories concept of plug and 
produce, and we will use the existing modules to support the work in WP6.   
Our state of the art facility is operated by world class academic and support staff that at all levels 
combine relevant industrial experience with a strong research cap ability. This skill base provide us 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 73 of 76  
  
with industrial quality project management that ensures delivery of products without compromising 
safety. In terms of academic capability, iPRD has significant expertise in all aspects of process 
development: from synthesis design, via scale up and reaction engineering, crystallisation, particle 
engineering to product design and manufacture and the control associated with these processes.    
The Institute of Particle Science and Engineering (IPSE) is one of 3 major resear ch institutes in 
SPEME and works in close collaboration with iPRD through a number of joint research projects. 
Research at IPSE is predominantly focused on the measurement, modelling and processing of 
particulate solids and multiphase systems in various se ctors, e.g. pharmaceutical, food, detergent, 
agricultural products and nuclear engineering. The facilities at IPSE that are relevant to this project 
include batch granulators (medium and high) and various types of particle mills such as ball mill, 
bead mill, planetary ball mill, disk mill and air jet mill. Also numerous facilities are available at IPSE 
for characterisation of physical and mechanical properties of particles (e.g. Atomic Force 
Microscopy, Electron Microscopy, x -ray microtomography, nano -indentation, dry and wet particle 
sizers, etc.).   
  
Participant 
no.  
5  Name (short 
name)/Country  
Universitat Rovira i Virgili (URV)/Spain  
Description of the legal entity   
Universitat Rovira i Virgili (URV)  was created in 1991 as a public institution orientated to place 
knowledge at the service of society so as to contribute to the social and economic development of 
the region. The URV trains professionals under the precepts of the European harmonization, a key 
factor in order to open the doors to a professional world without frontiers, by providing 52 programs 
of study in a wide variety of knowledge areas for over 13.000 students. In 2011, URV was ranked 
the third University in Spain in terms of scientific productivity.  
The staff involved in the project belongs to the “Chemometrics, Qualimetrics and Nanosensors” 
research group, at the department of Analytical Chemistry and Organic Chemistry at the Faculty of 
Chemistry of the URV. The Faculty of Chemistry is one of the pioneering centres at the URV and, in 
recent years, it has been consolidated at all levels and is now a recognized centre for quality in 
teaching, research and knowledge transfer. According to the Shanghai ranking, URV has ranked 
among the 200 world's leading universities in the field of Chemistry.  
Main tasks  
Calculation, validation, improvement and transfer of multivariate calibration 
models. Software development in Matlab language of the above mentioned 
tasks.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
This partner has extensive knowledge in multivariate modelling such as the one required in this 
project. The two main members of the group have been teaching chemometrics at the university 
since 1994 and have directed several doctoral thesis about this subject. Their research is focussed 
in the development and application of multivariate and multiway chemometrics techniques to solve 
classification and prediction problems. Matlab subroutines for chemometric analysis developed in 
this group over the years can serve as a basis for developing some of the software required in this 
project.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
Dr. Joan Ferré (male) is Associate Professor at the Department of Analytical Chemistry and Organic 
Chemistry of the Universitat Rovira i Virgili. His main expertise is chemometrics (especially 
experimental design, multivariate classification and multivariate calibration) and Matlab 
programming. He is author of about 50 scientific papers in international journals and has supervised 
5 doctoral theses. He has participated in seven competitive Spanish research projects and three 
European projects. Knowledge-transfer to companies is carried out with regular participation in in -
company chemometrics training courses and R+D contracts.  
Dr. Ricard Boqué  (male) is Associate Professor at the Department of Analytical Chemistry and 
Organic Chemistry of the Universitat Rovira i Virgili, and has an extended experience (both research 
and teaching) in the area of analytical chemistry, and specifically in chemometrics and qualimetrics. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 74 of 76  
  
He has published about 70 scientific papers in international journals. He has participated in three 
European projects. His main research interests include qualimetrics and multivariate calibration and 
classification methods.   
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. R. Boqué and A.K. Smilde. Monitoring and diagnosing batch processes with multiway covariates 
regression models. AIChE Journal, 47 (1999) 1504-1520.  
2. Santiago Macho, Ricard Boqué, Mª Soledad Larrechi, F. Xavier Rius. Multivariate determination 
of several compositional parameters related to the content of hydrocarbon in naphta by MIR 
spectroscopy. The Analyst, 124 (1999) 1827-1831.  
3. Néstor F. Pérez, Ricard Boqué, Joan Ferré. Establishment of multivariate specifications for food 
commodities with Discriminant Partial Least Squares. Talanta, 83 (2010) 475–481.  
4. Eva Borràs, José Manuel Amigo, Frans van den Berg, Ricard Boqué, Olga Busto. Fast and 
robust discrimination of almonds (Prunus amygdalus) with respect to their bitterness by using 
near infrared and partial least squaresdiscriminant analysis. Food Chemistry, 153 (2014) 15-19.  
5. A. C. Olivieri, N. M. Faber, J. Ferré, R. Boqué, J. H. Kalivas, H. Mark. Uncertainty estimation and 
figures of merit for multivariate calibration (IUPAC Technical Report) Pure and Applied Chemistry 
78 (2006) 94-106                  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
1. Robust process analytical methods for industrial practice and their validation (SMT4-CT95-
2031).  
2. European Network for the Intercomparision of Chemometric Software and Methods (SMT4-
CT98-7521).  
3. VICIM. Virtual Institute for Chemometrics and Industrial Metrology (G7RT-CT-2001-05067).  
4. TRACE. Tracing Food Commodities in Europe (FP6-FOOD-2004-006942).  
5. Chemometric maintenance of on-line NIR analyzer technology (contract, 2001-2014). REPSOL 
refinery, Spain.  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work  
- Analytical instruments in our own laboratory, including NIR, MIR (one of them portable) and 
UV-Vis spectrophotometers, EEM spectrofluorimeter, headspace-mass spectrometer, GC-MS and 
LC-DAD.  
- Programming capabilities with Matlab software, for development of chemometric data 
analysis algorithms.  
  
Participant 
no.  
6  Name (short 
name)/Country  
Chahan YERETZIAN / Switzerland  
Description of the legal entity   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 75 of 76  
  
Zurich University of Applied Sciences in Wädenswil (ZHAW ) is one of the largest and most 
productive universities of applied sciences in Switzerland, with a strong presence both nationally 
and internationally. Among the ZHAW’s distinguishing features are interdisciplinarity and a close 
connection to everyday working practice. About 9'700 students are enrolled at the ZHAW in a total 
of 26 Bachelor’s degree programmes and 13 consecutive Master’s programmes. The university also 
offers a broad range of continuing education courses, including over 30 Master's of Advan ced 
Studies programmes. 30 institutes at the ZHAW network their resources to provide business and 
industry with customised services. Research at the ZHAW is led by three key principles:  
Life Sciences – a key field of knowledge in the 21st century:  Life Sciences are key fields of 
activity for the 21st century, demanding interdisciplinary thinking and action. In response to this 
challenge, the School of Life Sciences provides opportunities for networking – from biotechnological, 
chemical and food technology related issues to logistical, ecological and management aspects – 
and carries out complex projects using an interdisciplinary approach.   
Infrastructure and human resources:  Depending on the particular challenges of a project, 
researchers, research assista nts and students from various disciplines work together in 
interdisciplinary teams. The ZHAW’s equipment and apparatus are state -of-the-art and allow 
professional processing of application oriented research and development projects. Modern 
laboratories as well as testing and production facilities provide a solid basis for this.   
Cooperation with industry and business: At the interface between theory and practice, the 
Institutes work closely with industry and business. Expertise and infrastructure are made available 
in accordance to clients' needs.  
Main tasks  
One key responsibility of the Zurich University of Applied Sciences is to provide and a range of 
analytical technologies and competencies for determine different product compositions or 
polymerization aspects. Furthermore, it will apply it competencies on LCA on the evaluation of 
processes and products within the frame of the project.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
Their research group is specialized in the on -line, and time resolved analysis of volatile organic 
compounds at very high time resolution, mass-resolution and sensitivity.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
PROF. DR. MBA CHAHAN YERETZIAN. Received in 1991 his PhD in Chemistry from the 
University of  
Bern/Switzerland for Experimental Studies on Metallic Nano-Particles in Molecular Beams by Photo 
and Laser  
Spectroscopy. A post-doc at the University of Californ ia, Los Angeles (UCLA), from 1991 to 93 on 
Fullerenes, and an Alexander von Humboldt Junior Award for a 2 -year position at the Technical 
University of Munich, from 1993 to 95 on ZEKE spectroscopy complemented his academic 
education. In 1995 he join the Nes tlé Research Center in Lausanne, Switzerland, where he held 
various research and R&D management positions, mainly in the product categories Coffee and 
Culinary. During this period (2003-2004) he obtained a MBA degree from the University of Lausanne 
/ Switzerland.  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 76 of 76  
  
In 2007 he joined the Corporate Communication Department of Nestlé Nespresso, developing 
communication platforms on the science of coffee. Since 2008, he holds the position of head of the 
Analytical and Physical Technology Unit at the Institute of Chemistr y and Biological Chemistry 
(ICBC) of the Zurich University of Applied Sciences. His current research is focused on the science 
and technology of coffee, the development of novel on-line analytics for volatiles, the application of 
state-of-the-art chromatog raphy, and on applications of chemometry in flavour science and 
technology. In 2012 he was appointed Professor and Head of the center for Analytical and Physical 
Chemistry at the ZHAW, in Wädenswil. He has published over 80 peer reviewed papers, among 
others as first author in NATURE and SCIENCE. Prof. Yeretzian is an internationally renowned 
coffee expert. He collaborates and consults with a large number of coffee companies and initiated 
the first post-graduate degree in the “Science and Technology of Coffee”. Since 2009 he is a Board 
Member of the Swiss Section of the Specialty Coffee Associations of Europe (Swiss-SCAE).  
MSC. MATTHIAS STUCKI received his Master of Science Degree in Environmental Sciences from 
ETH Zurich in 2007 and is an expert in the field of Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). Between 2008 and 
2012 he worked as a project leader at ESU -services Ltd. where he conducted a range of LCA 
projects in the various fields such as power generation, solar energy, bioenergy, geosynthetic 
materials, biogenic  plastics, leisure activities, consumption patterns, sanitary systems etc. He 
published his findings in scientific journals such as the International Journal of LCA and submitted 
datasets to the worldwide ecoinvent database. Affiliated with the ecoinvent C entre, he started the 
Life Cycle Inventory Network in India and trained Indian engineers in conducting LCA projects. Since 
2012 he holds a position as a Research Associate at the Institute of Natural Resource Sciences of 
the Zurich University of Applied Sciences, where he is responsible for research and teaching in the 
field of LCA. Currently, he is engaged in national and international projects that analyse the 
environmental impacts of food production (including dairy), sewage treatment, and power 
generation. He is a reviewer at the Journal of Industrial Ecology, member of the editorial board of 
the ecoinvent database, and an individual verifier at the International EPD® System.  
DR. IVANA KROSLAKOVA. Female. Specialist in analytical chemistry having 10 yea rs of 
experience in mass spectrometry. In 2006 she received her PhD degree at ETH Zürich for 
fundamental studies on matrix effects occurring in inductively coupled plasma using laser ablation 
as sampling technique. Since 2007 she works at ZHAW where she ha s built-up a Matrix Assisted 
Laser Desorption Ionization - Mass Spectrometry (MALDI –MS) laboratory and established R&D 
collaborations involving application of this technology. Her main engagement is applied research.  
She has participated on various resea rch projects and possesses an expertise in analysis of wide 
spectrum of samples and materials including biological macromolecules, microorganisms’ 
identification using MALDI -MS as well as synthetic polymers. As an SNF project leader she was 
responsible for characterization of natural polymers extracted from bark of soft wood species.  
DR. SEBASTIAN OPITZ  performed his doctoral thesis at the department of Chemical Ecology, 
Bielefeld University on the analysis of secondary plant metabolites (e.g. glucosinolat es, iridoid 
glucosides and terpenoids), which have ecological functions in plant -insect interactions. He has a 
strong background and expertise in:  
• The application of different chromatographic systems like GC-MS, UHPLC-TOF MS, 
HPLCMS/MS, HPLC-DAD, radio-HPLC, ion-chromatography, HPLC-SEC, HPLC-GPC.  
• Semi-preparative chromatography, purification and identification (NMR) of metabolites.  
• Experimental design of experiments, data management, statistics and behavioural bioassays.  
He will be responsible for the all chromatographic analysis to be conducted in the frame of this 
project.  
DR. PETER LIENEMANN obtained in 1986 his PhD degree from the ETH of Zuri ch on ICP-OES. 
From 1986 to 1989 he headed the group on X-Ray spectroscopy of the Swiss Federal Laboratories 
for Materials Science and Technology (EMPA). In 1989 he became the deputy head of the analytical 
laboratories of the EMPA, where is built up the in terdisciplinary analytical laboratory on material -
science, with a focus on metallic and ceramic materials, construction material and mineral and rocks. 
In 2009 he joined the Zürich University of Applied Science to head the group on elemental analysis. 
He i s renowned expert in elemental analysis and is the authored, among others  of significant 
textbook on elemental analysis (N. Kläntschi, P. Lienemann , P. Richner und H. Vonmont, 
Elementanalytik, Instrumenteller Nachweis und Bestimmung von Elementen und dere n 
Verbindungen. SPEKTRUM ISBN 3-86025-134-1 (1996).  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 77 of 76  
  
MS CARLA KAPIKIAN. FEMALE. earned in 1988 a Bachelor of Science Degree in Mathematics 
from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and in 1993 a Master in Business 
Administration (MBA) from the H arvard Graduate School of Business Administration, Boston, 
Massachusetts. She worked in a large range of small, medium large corporations (e.g. Andersen 
Consulting as Management Consultant, Chase Manhattan Bank as Assistant Vice President (1995-
1996) and Assistant Treasurer (1993-1995), Young & Rubicam Brands as Associate Director and 
later Director (1997-2005) and at HRA Research as Director (2006 – 2008)) before moving in 2008 
to Switzerland. Today she is working as Senior Academic Research and Development Assistant at 
the Luzern University of Applied Sciences and  
Arts.   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 78 of 76  
  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. Franco BIASIOLI, Chahan YERETZIAN, Flavia GASPERI, Tilmann D. MÄRK, PTR-MS monitoring of 
VOC and BVOC in food science and technology , Trends in Analytical Chemistry (TrAC), 
30(7), 968-977 (2011)  
2. Franco BIASIOLI, Chahan YERETZIAN, J. Dewulf, H. Van LANGENHOVE,  Tilmann D. MÄRK, Direct 
injection mass spectrometry (DIMS): adding the time dimension to (B)VOC analysis , 
Trends in Analytical Chemistry (TrAC),30(7), 1003-1017 (2011).  
3. Flurin WIELAND, Alexia N. GLOESS, Marco KELLER, Andreas WETZEL, Stefan SCHENKER, Chahan 
YERETZIAN, OnLine Monitoring of Coffee Roasting by Proton -Transfer-Reaction Time-of-
Flight Mass -Spectrometry (PTRToF -MS): Towards a Real -Time Process Control for a 
Consistent Roast Profile, Analyt. Bioanalyt. Chem 402,  
2531–2543 (2012)  
4. Christian L INDINGER, Philip pe P OLLIEN, Santo A LI, Chahan Y ERETZIAN, Imre B LANK, Tilmann 
MÄRK, Unambiguous Identification of Volatile Organic Compounds by Proton -Transfer-
Reaction Mass-Spectrometry (PTR-MS) Coupled with GC-MS, Anal. Chem., 77, 4117-4124 
(2005  
5. Philippe P OLLIEN, Chris tian L INDINGER, Chahan Y ERETZIAN, Imre B LANK, Proton Transfer 
Reaction Mass Spectrometry, a Tool for On -Line Monitoring of Acrylamide Formation in 
the Headspace of Maillard Reaction Systems and Processed Food , Anal. Chem, 75(20), 
5488-5494 (2003)  
6. Jungbluth, N., Büsser, S., Frischknecht, R., Flury, K., & Stucki, M . (2012). Feasibility of 
environmental product information based on life cycle thinking and recommendations for 
Switzerland. Journal of Cleaner Production,  
28(0), 187-197  
7. Faist Emmenegger, M., Stucki, M., & Hermle, S. (2012). LCA of energetic biomass utilization: 
Actual projects and new developments, April 23, 2012, Berne, Switzerland. The International 
Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 17(9).  
8. Frischknecht, R., & Stucki, M. (2010). Scope -dependent modelling of electricity supply in life 
cycle assessments.  
The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 15(8), 806-816.  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
1. Nose-space analysis: Chahan Y ERETZIAN, Philippe P OLLIEN, Christian L INDINGER, Santo A LI, 
Individualization of Flavor Preferences: Toward a Consumer -centric and Individualized 
Aroma Science, Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety (CRFSFS), 3(24), 
1-8 (2004   
2. Monitoring and control of coffee roasting  
3. Analysis of air quality inside building and airplanes  
4. Analysis of the extraction dynamics of coffee  
5. On-line, time resolved ana lysis of formation of organic compounds during thermal treatment 
(flavour compounds, acrylamide…).   
6. Doublet G., Jungbluth N., Flury K., Stucki M. and Schori S. (2013) Life cycle assessment of 
Romanian beef and dairy products. SENSE - Harmonised Environmental Sustanainability in the 
European food and drink chain, Seventh Framework Programme: Project no. 288974. Funded 
by EC. Deliverable D 2.1  
7. Doublet G., Jungbluth N., Flury K., Stucki M. and Schori S. (2013) Life cycle assessment of 
orange juice. SENSE - Harmonised Environmental Sustanainability in the European food and 
drink chain, Seventh Framework Programme: Project no. 288974. Funded by EC. Deliverable D