2.1  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 79 of 76  
  
• 5 fully equipped state-of-the-art laboratories  
• Gas Chromatography - Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS)   
• High Performance Thin Layer Chromatography (HPTLC)  
• High Performance Size Exclusion Chromtography (HP-SEC)  
• Matrix-Assisted Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry (MALDI TOF-MS)   
• Proton-Transfer-Reaction Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry (PTR TOF-MS)   
• Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography - Mass Spectrometry (UPLC-MS)  
• Elemental Analytics (XRF, ICP OES, AAS / AES)  
• Optical Spectroscopy (FTIR, UV, Fluorescence)  
• Confocales Raman spectroscopy  
• Flow Injection Analysis (FIA)  
• Software and Databases for Life Cycle Assessment, e.g. SimaPro 8 and ecoinvent v3.0  
  
Participant 
no.  
7  Name (short 
name)/Country  
Technische Universitaet Dresden (TUD)/ Germany  
Description of the legal entity    
 
The TU Dresden is one of eleven German universities that were identified by the German 
government as an ‘excellence university’. TUD has about 36.500 students and almost 5319 
employees, 507 professors among them, and, thus, is the largest university in Sax ony, today. TU 
Dresden is strong in research, offering first -rate programmes with an overwhelming diversity, with 
close ties to culture, industry and society. As a modern full-status university with 14 departments it 
offers a wide academic range making it one of a very few in Germany. The TUD has extensive 
experience in project co-ordination and project management at national and international level.  
The Mechanical Process Engineering department of TUD is widely acknowledged for its expertise 
in particle systems characterisation. Currently, there are approximately 12 scientists working on a 
variety particle technology projects. The department has a focus on nanoparticle suspensions and 
aerosol as well as on the development of particle sensors for submicron and micrometre particles. 
It further provides technology and metrology solutions to German industry and gives strategic input 
to ISO TC 24/SC4 and to the German DIN committees. The department includes the Particle 
Technology Centre – an excellently equipped laboratory for particle system characterisation, which 
has evolved to renowned place for teaching young and experienced researchers.  
Main tasks  
TUD will lead Task 2.3 Off line calibration of the sensor vs. standard measurements (granulometric 
sensor) and contribute to the other tasks in this WP in view of their outstanding knowledge regarding 
particle size measurements. They will also contribute t o specifications in WP1, support for test at 
scale pilot scale WP6, industrial scale WP7 and then for the final comparison of ProPAT vs. existing 
quality control and recommendations for standardization (granulometric sensor) in WP8.   
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
The mission of the Particle Technology Centre in Dresden is the process -relevant Particle 
Characterization including selection and optimization of the measuring methods and their validation 
matches WP2 "Set up and calibration of the novel granulometric analyser". Experience with the 
project leadership in several work items for international standardisation in CEN (EC-mandate) and 
ISO supports the WP8 "Demonstration"  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 80 of 76  
  
MICHAEL STINTZ, PROF. DR.-ING. HABIL. (male), Head of the Research Group Mechanical 
Process Engineering,  
Institute for Process Engineering and Environmental Technology, Technische Universität Dresden. 
Education and  
Qualifications- 2005 Habilitation in the field of particle technology at the Faculty of Mechanical 
Engineering at the TU  
Dresden, thesis: "Technologically relevant characterisation of particles and particle systems"; 1985 
PhD thesis on the  
"Combination of multi -channel analysis with different signal transducers"; 1977 -1982 Study of 
Process Engineering, Technical University Dresden. Work experience - Since 2005, Head of the 
Research Group Mechanical Process Engineeri ng, Institute for Process Engineering and 
Environmental Technology; 1993 -2005: Senior associated scientist at the Chair of Mechanicla 
Process Engineering Institute for Process Engineering and Environmental Technology; 
since1985:Head of the Centre of Particle Technology (Zentrum für Partikeltechnik / Granulometrie) 
– an application oriented laboratory for the characterisation of particle systems.   
Memberships  
Since 2008-OECD Working Party on Manufactured Nanomaterials, Steering Group 8: "Exposure 
Measurement and Exposure Mitigation"  
Since 2006- ISO Technical Committee TC 229, "Nanotechnology", Liaison officer TC24/SC4  
Since 2006 - DIN Normenausschuss 062-08-17 AA "Nanotechnologien" des Normenausschusses 
Materialprüfung  
Since 1996- ISO Technical Committee TC 24, Subcommittee SC4 "Particle Characterization", (since 
2002 Convenor of WG1 "Representation of analysis data")  
Since 1996 - DIN Arbeitsausschuss 11.42.0 0  "Partikelmesstechnik" des Normenaus -schusses 
Bauwesen, (since 2001 Obmann des Arbeitsausschusses)   
Since 1992- Assigned member in the scientific comittee "Particle Sizing" of the VDI -Gesellschaft 
Verfahrenstechnik und Chemieingenieurwesen GVC, since 20 09 "Processnet" by GVC and 
DECHEMA  
Latest international Standardization Project leaderships  
ISO TC 229, "Nanotechnology", Project leader of  WG2, PG10: ISO TS 12025: 2012, 
Nanotechnologies —  
Quantification of nano-object release from powders by generation of aerosols",    
ISO TC 24, SC4 "Particle Characterization", since 2002 Convenor of WG1: ISO 26824:2012  Particle 
characterization of particulate systems – Vocabulary  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. L. Hillemann, A. Zschoppe, R. Caldow, G. Sem, A. Wiedensohler, Ultrafine particle monitor fo r 
size-resolved number concentration measurements in atmospheric aerosols. J. Aerosol Sci., 68 
(2014), 14-24. doi:10.1016/j.jaerosci.2013.10.007  
2. R. Weser, S. Wöckel, B. Wessely, U. Hempel, Particle characterisation in highly concentrated 
dispersions using  ultrasonic backscattering method. Ultrasonics, 53 (2013) 3, 706 -716. 
doi:10.1016/j.ultras.2012.10.013  
3. F. Babick, S. Gropp, U. Kätzel, M. Vorbau: Dynamic light scattering of dispersed fumed silica 
aggregates. Powder Technol., 217 (2012), 39-45. doi:10.1016/j.powtec.2011.10.064  
4. F. Babick, K. Schießl, M. Stintz, Characterization of pyrogenic powders with conventional particle 
sizing technique: I. Prediction of measured size distributions. Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 29 (2012) 
2, 104-115. doi:10.1002/ppsc.201000024  
5. O. Ruscitti, R. Franke, H. Hahn, F. Babick, T. Richter, M. Stintz, Application of Particle 
Measurement Technology in Process Intensification. Chem. Eng. Technol., 31 (2008) 2, 270 -
277. doi:10.1002/ceat.200700465  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 81 of 76  
  
1. NanoDefine, "Development of an integrated approach based on validated and standardized 
methods to support the implementation of the EC recommendation for a definition of 
nanomaterial’ – one of the three leading research partners, responsible for WP4 "Scree ning of 
particle sizing methods"  
2. NanoSTAIR, member of the IAB for support the standardization progress in the result of 
European research  
projects   
3. Nanofutures (ETP) leader of Working Group "Standardization" – coordination with industrial 
safety research and regulatory issues.  
4. The Value4Nano project has as its central aim the valorisation and elaboration of four key 
European value chains which utilise nanomaterials. Especially VC3 - Manufacturing of powders 
made of functional alloys, ceramics and intermetallics matches with this project.  
5. CoNanoMet – successfully finished European Project on Nanometrology development and 
standardization.  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work  
The Particle Technology Centre is equipped with state of the art measurement and characterisation 
facilities for particle measurement in aerosols and suspensions, like SEM with cryo -preparation, 
SMPS, FMPS, CPC, DLS, LD and LS, analytical lab centrifuges, utrasonic spectroscopy, ultrasonic 
dispersion devices, powder aerosol generators, laminar flow bench. Metrology projects range from 
workplace exposure measurement to slurry quality assurance of chemical mechanical planarisation 
of wafers.  
  
Participant 
no.  
8  Name (short 
name)/Country  
Universitat de Barcelona (UB)/ Spain  
Description of the legal entity   
The University of Barcelona (UB) was founded in 1450. Today it boasts of a student body of 63,020 
and a research staff of 5,312 members. Degrees are offered in 73 different areas of teaching with 
numerous postgraduate and doctorate programs as well as cont inuing education courses. The 
University of Barcelona (UB) is the largest of the six universities of Barcelona and of the ten in 
Catalonia. The UB is ranked the first Spanish university, and the twenty third European institution, 
in scientific quality and productivity. The UB manages in average 150 European projects per year, 
for an amount of about 8.6 million euro a year. The University of Barcelona develops all its activities 
related to the research in Europe through its European Research Projects Office, a unit in charge of 
the promotion of EC programmes, technical assistance to the elaboration of proposals and 
management of projects with participation of researchers of the UB, coordinated by the Vice -rector 
for Innovation and Transfer of Knowledge.  
The Fundació Bosch i Gimpera (FBG) is a third party of the Universitat de Barcelona (UB). This 
foundation is controlled by the UB, and is in charge of the administrative and financial management 
of the European projects in which the UB is involved. The FBG is not a subcontractor, since it belongs 
to the UB Group.  
Main tasks  
Main tasks involving the UB group will be related to provide process modelling tools (hard- and soft-
modeling) to handle the response of NIR sensors (see WP3, task 3.6), to propose d ata fusion 
strategies combining spectroscopic responses with smart sensor responses or, eventually, 
scatterometer multivariate outputs (WP4, task 4.3) and to assess in the design of a decision support 
system for the Global Control System Software, based on the combination of the different responses 
obtained from sensors and platforms and acquired during the different stages of the process (WP5, 
task 5.2).  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 82 of 76  
  
University of Barcelona is a large institution with a lot of human and material resources dedicated to 
research. As mentioned above, UB researchers are commonly involved in EU research projects, as 
leading recipients or collaborating partners, which prove their scientific qualification. Some 
outstanding instrumental facilities are also owned by the institution, such as the Centres Científics i 
Tecnològics de la UB (CCiTUB, http://www.ccit.ub.edu/EN/home.html ), which provide a wealth of 
techniques that can be used for characterization of materials and processes if required. Within the 
UB, the Chemometrics group at the department of Analytical Chemistry of the faculty of chemistry is 
well known for the development of chemometric tools for process understanding (modelling and 
control), notably soft -modelling Multivariate Curve Resolution (MCR). In this sense, stable 
collaborations with related research groups, such as chemometrics at  
IDAEA-CSIC, Spain) headed by Romà Tauler, leader in soft-modeling methodologies or Marcel 
Maeder, from the  
University of Newcastle (Australia) leader in process hard-modeling are invaluable. Process analysis 
is now one of the core research lines of a national funded research project (see list of projects below).       
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
ANNA DE JUAN CAPDEVILA.  Female. Associate professor of the Analytical Chemistry 
Department at the Universitat de Barcelona, will be the main responsible from this institution in the 
project. She is devoted to research in Chemometrics since more than 20 years. Since 2002 she is 
member of the Editorial Advisory Board of Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory systems and 
since 2006 of Analytica Chimica Acta. Recently has acted as editor of the linear soft -modeling 
section for the reference work Comprehensive Chemometrics, Elsevier (2009).  In 2004 she received 
the 4th Chemometrics Elsevier Award together with Karl Booksh. She has published around 100 
papers in international journals and books and has given more than 100 presentations in different 
international conferences, basically on multi variate curve resolution developments and related 
methods and on applications to process analysis, hyperspectral image analysis and general 
analytical applications. Recently she has an active commitment in the organization of PATrelated 
activities, such as  the European Conference of Process Analytics and Control Technologies 
(EuroPACT) and specialized schools and activities of knowledge transfer.  
The participation of a new PhD student fully devoted to develop tasks related to this project is 
envisioned.  
Minor collaborations can also be done by:   
SÍLVIA MAS GARCÍA , post -doctoral researcher since 2013, has experience in environmental 
process modelling (data fusion coupling different techniques and experiments) and has collaborated 
with foreign research inst itutions, like CEMAGREF (Montpellier, France) adapting hybrid 
methodologies for process modelling monitored by NIR.  
SARA PIQUERAS SOLSONA is ending a PhD project on hyperspectral image analysis and has 
done research stages at the laboratory of Raman and IR spectroscopies in Lille (France) and at the 
Institute of Photonic Sciences (Jena, Germany). She has been working on handling image data sets 
coming from different platforms.     
The collaboration of expert external researchers oriented to process analysis, such as PROF. 
MARCEL MAEDER, from the University of Newcastle (Australia), a worldwide recognized leader on 
hard-modelling process analysis, is also considered to enhance the value of the project.   
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. Jaumot J, Igne B, Anderson CA, Drennen JK, De Juan A. Blending process modeling and control 
by multivariate curve resolution. Talanta, (2013) 117: 492-504.  
2. A. de Juan, M. Maeder, S.C. Rutan and R. Tauler. Multivariate Curve Resolution (MCR) chapters 
in the reference work ‘Comprehensive chemometrics’ (eds. S. Brown, R. Tauler, B. Walczak), 
Elsevier (2009), pp. pp 249-260,325344,473-506.  
3. A. de Juan, M. Maeder, M. Martínez, R. Tauler. Combining hard- and soft-modeling to solve 
kinetic problems. Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems, 54 (2000) 123-141.   
4. Plenary lecture in 5th Pan -European QbD & PAT Science conference (EuPAT 2012, Ghent, 
Belgium):  de Juan, A.; Jaumot, J.; Mas, S.; Piqueras, S.; Dupon chel, L; Igne, B; Anderson, C.; 
Tauler, R. ‘Chemometric tools for process understanding’. Similar invited talks in process analysis 
conferences, such as EuroPACT 2008, APACT 2009.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 83 of 76  
  
5. Web page with free downloadable soft-modelling tools (MCR): www.mcrals.info, shared with the 
group at IDAEACSIC (Barcelona, Spain).   
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
1. Coordinator of project: ‘Development and application of chemometric tools for process and 
hyperspectral image analysis’ (Spanish grant: CTQ2012-38616) 2013-2015.  
2. Chair of the organizing committee of the 3 rd European Conference on Process Analytics and 
Control Technologies (EuroPACT 2014) held in Barcelona, 6-9 may 2014.  
3. Coordinator of the recognized research group: Development and transfer of multivariate 
resolution chemometric methodologies’ (Catalan grant: SGR2009 0045). 2009-2013. Web page: 
www.chemometricsbcn.info   
4. Coordinator of the thematic network of Chemometrics, formed by 21 Spanish chemometric 
groups. (Spanish grants: CTQ2010-09864-E, CTQ2007-28940-E/BQU). 2008-present.    
5. Organizer of the school devoted to PAT knowledge transfer in Spain ‘ Herramientas 
quimiométricas para PAT’ chemometric tools for PAT) celebrated in Barcelona, 10-12 July 2012.   
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work  
Although performing measurements is not the main task of the UB partner, we want to mention again 
the facilities of the Centres Científics i Tecnològics de la UB (CCiTUB, 
http://www.ccit.ub.edu/EN/home.html ), which could eventually be used to perform complementary 
measurements of physicochemical nature required by the project.  
  
Participant 
no.  
9  Name (short 
name)/Country  
Institute of Technology Tralee (ITT)/Ireland  
 
Description of the legal entity   
The IMaR (Intelligent Mechatronics and RFID) Technology Gateway is part of the Institute of 
Technology Tralee in Ireland.  
IT Tralee is a university level institution with a range of programmes from craft to postgraduate level. 
ITT has over 3,500 full-time and part-time students and 250 staff. Established in 1977, the Institute 
has operated autonomously since 1993.  It provides education and training, facilitates industrial 
research and consultancy, and is a major engine of economic and social development in the region. 
The majority of the research conducted at the Institute is collaborative and focused on delivering 
innovative solutions to our industrial partners to promote cost competitiveness. The prioritised 
research themes at the IT, Tralee build upon the Institute’s established and emerging strengths and 
directly align with national research priority areas and the Innovation Union flagship initiatives of the 
Europe 2020 strategy for a smart, sustainable and inclusive economy. Embedded at the heart of the 
Institutes is the IMaR research Center, which will perform the key requirements of the ProPAT 
initiative while also receiving administration support centrally from the institute.   
Main tasks  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 84 of 76  
  
IMAR will lead WP4 whereby their main tasks will include the further development of sensors from 
commercial sources being strategically conditioned and tailored to provide affordable monitoring 
capability and enhanced product monitoring additional to the novel sensors. Sensors functionality of 
strategic importance include,  
- MicroElectroMechanical systems (MEMS)-based components;   
- Smart sensors that have intelligent readout electronics and the microsensor 
in a single chip;  -  Zero power ‘flow tracker’ sensors.   
These sensors will provide an essential source of real time knowledge underpinning the attributes 
of the product. IMaR will also undertake the integration of each single sensor on a common, 
multifunctional thus meeting the requirement of a standardi sed output consistent for the use in the 
ProPAT platform.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
IMaR provides an open access point to industry for the provision of applied research and technical 
expertise and aims to be industries partner of choice for innovative applied research using 
technologies including Radio Frequency Identification (RFID), auto ID, Sensors, Mechatronics and 
Industrial automation. IMaR tailors custom solutions to increase productivity and cost efficiency 
across a broad range of manufacturing industries including automotive, telecommunications, 
pharmaceutical, production/manufact uring, aeronautical, environmental and agri -business. IMaR 
exploits the use of smart Mechatronics via sensor integration, precision instrumentation and 
automation conditioning to enhance process automation, reduce lead times and ultimately deliver 
significant manufacturing cost reductions across industry partners.   
The IMaR Technology Gateway is currently involved in a range of collaborative research projects 
with a variety of industrial partners in the fields of mechatronics, sensor development and RFID, 
including the co-ordination of a research grant of €1.6 million to work with partners across Europe 
in the development of next generation agricultural equipment. This project is supported by the 
European Union through the 7th Framework Programme (FP7) “Research for the benefit of SME’s”.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
DR. JOSEPH WALSH is the Head of School of STEM in the IT Tralee and a Director of the IMaR 
Technology Gateway at the IT, Tralee. Dr. Walsh has a Ph.D in Electronic Engineering from the 
University of Limerick and an M.Sc (Eng) in Bio-engineering jointly from Trinity Collage Dublin (TCD), 
University College Dublin (UCD) and the University of Limerick (UL). He has worked on national and 
international projects in both industry and research institutes. His research experience encompasses 
the field of mechatronics including dair y technology, next generation auto -ID systems, intelligent 
senor systems, robotics, automated milk quality analysis, bio -instrumentation and microelectronic 
circuit test technology. Dr. Walsh is a corporate member of the Institute of Physics (CEng CPhys 
MinstP), the Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine (CSci IPEM) the Institution of 
Engineering and Technology (MIET), the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineering (MIEEE) 
and the Institution of Engineers of Ireland (MIEI). He was been awa rded the titles of Chartered 
Engineer and Chartered Physicist from the Institute of Physics and Chartered Scientist from the 
Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine  
DR. PAT DOODY is an experienced Researcher and Lecturer in the School of Science and 
Computing in the Institute of  
Technology Tralee (ITT). Pat is the Co-founder and Executive Director of the Centre for Innovation 
in Distributed Systems (CIDS) at ITT. Pat was also Co-Founder and Co-Leader of the Wireless and 
Mobility Research Group at the ITT.His research interests inc lude AutoID technologies, wireless 
technologies, intelligent knowledge discovery, data mining, and application of artificial intelligence 
based neural network algorithms, quality of voice systems and energy initiatives. In partnership with 
ALTOBRIDGE Ltd. (www.altobridge .com), a network communications start-up located in the Kerry 
Technology Park, Pat was the principal investigator for this project to develop an integrated end-to-
end RFID tag to back office architecture. Pat obtained his bachelor degree in mathematics from the 
University of Limerick, Ireland in 1991 and PhD in mathematics focusing on artificial intelligence and 
neural networks from the University Of Limerick,  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 85 of 76  
  
Ireland.  
DR. ULTAN MC CARTHY received his Ph.D. degree in Biosystems Engineeri ng from University 
College Dublin, Ireland in 2010. He worked at the RFID Center for Applied Research at the University 
of South Florida (USF). His areas of interest include Smart Supply Chain Management dynamics and 
security enhancement via RFID technology. He is also involved in the development of improvement 
strategies to enhance competitiveness across industries via the integration of Intelligent Mechatronics 
and data management techniques. He also works on the development of smart decision support 
systems adding value to the Supply Network and in the development of technological Return -on-
Investment (ROI) models. Experience to date has spanned across a number of industries including 
food, pharmaceutical, automotive, defense and aviation.  
MR. ANDREW SHIELDS is Strand Leader - RFID, Internet of Things & Sensors at the IMaR 
Technology Gateway in the Institute of Technology Tralee, Co Kerry, Ireland. Andrew has worked on 
numerous applied project with Industry over the past seven years. Including projects which conducted 
research into the area of RFID, public mobile platforms such as GSM /GPRS, Distributed Sensor 
Based Systems and Data Mining. He completed his Masters of Science degree at the Institute of 
Technology Tralee in 2007. He obtained his First Cl ass Honours Bachelor degree in software 
development in 2002, also from the Institute of Technology Tralee. Andrew is currently undertaking a 
PhD. programme in ITT in the area of Artificial Intelligence with a particular focus on Reality Mining.  
DR. DANIEL RIORDAN is Strand Leader - Mechatronic at the IMaR Technology Gateway at IT 
Tralee. Dr. Riordan has a Bachelor of Electronic Engineering from Dublin City University (2005), a 
Masters of Computer Science from IT Tralee (2008) and a Ph.D. in the area of Auto-ID Systems within 
CIMSS (2012) under an Irish Research Council (IRCSET) scholarship. Dr. Riordan has worked within 
the CIMSS / IMaR group since 2008. His research experience includes, artificial intelligence, 
computer modelling systems, sensor systems, b io-instrumentation, electro -magnetic interference 
analysis, digital signal processing and hardware and embedded electronics. He is a member of the 
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineering (MIEEE).  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets 
or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. Abdulkarim A., Elsibaei A., Jackson B., Riordan D., Rice J. (2012) “The use of sound analysis to 
guide femoral reaming in uncemented Total Hip Arthroplasty: A New Concept” Journal of Atlantic 
Orthopaedic, November 2012. *Winner of 1st medal prize in the Sy lvester O'Halloran National 
surgical meeting  
2. "Investigation of Bone Resonance during Femoral Reaming in Hip Replacement Surgery", 
O‟Donoghue, P., Jackson, B., Riordan, D.,Walsh, J., Abdulkarim, A., Asibaei, A., Rice, J. 7th 
International Conference on Sensing Technology (ICST 2013) December 5th, 2013 *Runner -Up 
Best Paper in HealthCare Sector*   
3. Doody P, Shields A. 2012. Mining network relationships in the internet of things. Proceedings of 
the 2012 international workshop on Self -aware internet of things (Self-IoT '12). ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, 7-12.  
4. Shields A, Datta S, 2008. Can We Apply Principles From Social Networking To Healthcare 
Informatics For Intelligent Data Analytics? MIT Libraries DSpace   
5. WSEM2, Doody P, Shields A, 2008. RFID, Sensors, GPS, GSM: Abundance of Data yet Starved 
for Knowledge?, CIDS Inaugural Symposium, Tralee, Kerry, Ireland.  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
1. Development of an On-Line Milk Quality Analysis System in a Dairy Milking Plant (PI)  
2. Development of Environmental sensors for the Agricultural Industry (Sub Contract)  
3. CyberBar© Smartfone delivered anti-tamper food traceability system based on direct on-food 
Data Matrix (DM) printing and chain integrity sensors (Sub Contract)  
4. BOSCA© Smart Networked Sensing Systems in Agriculture (Poultry Industry Focus) (Sub 
Contract)  
5. "Chirpmetrics  -  Monitoring  the  health  and  welfare  of  broiler 
 chickens  using  smart  
vocalisation analysis techniques". (Co-Applicant)  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 86 of 76  
  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work  
IMaR is currently co -ordinator of a 7th Framework Programme (FP7) “Research for the benefit of 
SME’s” (€1.6 million) to work with partners across Europe in the development of next generation 
agricultural equipment. Currently the team consist 21 research staff (12 full time, 9 post graduate), 2 
research directors and 8 technical academic staff across 2 strands. Equipment of relevance to 
ProPAT include but are not limited to the following;  
• 1 fully serviced Electronics lab (including development and demonstration areas)  
• 1 fully serviced Auto ID and Software lab (including development and demonstration areas)  
• Irelands only open device laboratory  
• Intelligent sensors & remote monitoring System Development  
• Advanced System test and evaluation  
• Horiba Jobin Spectrometer “linear Array Spectrometer VS 140”  
  HaMAMATSU SWNIR Spectrometer  
  Autolab Potentostat Galvanostat  
  Melles Griot “Laser Light Neon Laser”  
  
Participant 
no.  
10  Name (short 
name)/Country  
Spectral Engines Oy (SPECTRAL) /  Finland  
Description of the legal entity   
Spectral Engines Oy is a new start-up limited company in the field of novel optical sensors. Spectral 
Engines Oy is a spin -off from VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland (www.vtt.fi) which is the 
largest multidisciplinary contract research organization in Northern Europe. The motto of Spectral 
Engines is to take “spectrometer performance to sensor price point” by creating miniaturized, 
industry-grade spectral sensors utilizing VTT’s novel MEMS technology. We aim to change the way 
industries perform their  material parameter control and automation by introducing new 
multiparameter, high -performance and reliable miniaturized sensors to replace old non -specific 
sensors and expensive spectrometers. Spectral Engines employs 4 people but aims to double the 
amount in a year. The founders have vast experience in working in large, international research 
projects. Working internationally is everyday business to Spectral Engines as our customers and 
partners are largely international. Spectral Engines was a semi-finalist in the SPIE Startup Challenge 
in 2014 and has been selected in the Top 25 companies in the Nordic Cleantech Open 2014.  
Main tasks  
SPECTRAL’s main role in this project is the development of the MEMS-based spectral sensors.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
SPECTRAL’s core technical competence is in the design and realization of optical sensors based 
on MEMS Fabry -Perot Interferometers. SPECTRAL’s expertise is to match the end -user 
requirements all the way to MEMS fabrication specifications in order to meet cost and performance 
targets. We design the sensor concept, identify critical parameters by modelling, environmental tests 
and vast experience and use our knowledge in electronics design, embedded software, thermal 
design and spectroscopy to realize high-performance sensors. SPECTRAL’s customers are mostly 
in the field of process industry with a goal to save material, save energy and improve quality – all of 
which can be achieved through novel spectral sensor technology. SPECTRAL’s rank within the Top 
25 in the Nordic Cleantech Open 2014 (out of 107 applicants) supports our role in bringing 
sustainability into process industries.   
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 87 of 76  
  
Jarkko Antila is the Chief Executive Officer at Spectral Engines. He received his M.Sc. in electrical 
engineering from Helsinki University of Technology in 2003. He has 15 years of experience on optical 
measurement technologies, sensors and MEMS. Previously he has worked as a Team Leader and 
Senior Scientist at VTT. He has gained industrial expertise in sensor development, heading an R&D 
team at Inficon during 2006 -2009. Mr. Antila’s technical core competence is in interferometric 
sensors and miniaturised spectrometers based on Fabry-Perot interferometers with 5 patents and 6 
patent applications in the field. Mr. Antila has a proven track record in leading and having major roles 
in several co-operational research projects.  
Janne Suhonen  is the Chief Commercial Officer at Spectral Engines. He received his MSc in 
Electrical engineering from the University of Oulu, Finland in 1995 and eMBA 2006. He started at 
VTT 1995. In his research career, Janne Suhonen has focused on the studies and development of 
optical analysers and measurements based on Near Infrared (NIR) and Raman spectroscopy. He 
has wide -ranging experience of optical measurement technologies in the different industrial 
applications covering the industrial fields of Pulp&paper, st eel and pharmaceuticals industries. He 
has worked as Technology Manager, deputy Research manager and Key Account Manager roles at 
VTT.  
Uula Kantojärvi is the Chief Technology Officer at Spectral Engines. He received his M.Sc.(tech.) 
from Helsinki Universi ty of Technology in 2006. Mr. Kantojärvi has worked at VTT Technical 
Research Centre of Finland for 10 years and he has specialized in system design, simulation and 
characterization of optical spectroscopic instruments. He has worked as researcher, senior scientist 
and team leader of 15 experts. He has prepared and lead projects related to optical instruments, 
MEMS and absolute calibration systems.  
Jussi Mäkynen is a Senior R&D Engineer at Spectral Engines. He received the M.Sc. (Tech.) in 
electrical engineering from the Helsinki University of Technology in 2009. He has joined the research 
staff at optical sensors team at VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland in 2007. His core 
competence is in electronics design and embedded system development. He has 6 years of 
experience designing optical measurement devices and control electronics for FabryPerot 
interferometers, working as part of an international research.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. Product: Ultra-Compact IR Spectral Sensor with a USB2.0 interface 
(www.spectralengines.com)  
2. Antila, J., Tuohiniemi, M., Rissanen, A., Kantojärvi, U., Lahti, M., Viherkanto, K., Kaarre, M. and 
Malinen, J. 2014.  
MEMS- and MOEMS-Based Near-Infrared Spectrometers. Encyclopedia of Analytical 
Chemistry. 1–36.)  
3. Mannila, Rami; Tuohiniemi, Mikko; Mäkynen, Jussi; Näkki, Ismo; Antila, Jarkko; Hydrocarbon 
gas detection with microelectromechanical Fabry -Perot interferometer; Next -Generation 
Spectroscopic Technologies VI, 29 - 30 April  
2013, Baltimore, MD, United States; Proceedings of SPIE. SPIE. Vol.  8726 (2013), Article 
number 872608  
4. Antila, Jarkko; Rissanen, Anna; Mannila, Rami; Mäkynen, Jussi; Näkki, Ismo; Tuohiniemi, Mikko; 
Miniaturized MOEMS spectrometer technology for gas sensing; International Conference on 
Optical MEMS and Nanophotonics 2013, 18 - 22 August 2013, Kanazawa, Japan; Conference 
proceedings. IEEE  (2013), 59 - 60  
5. Jussi H. Mäkynen ; Mikko Tuohiniemi ; Antti Näsilä ; Rami Mannila and Jarkko E. Antila;  " MEMS 
Fabry-Perot interferometer-based spectrometer demonstrator for 7.5 μm to 9.5 μm wavelength 
range ", Proc. SPIE 8977, MOEMS and Miniaturized Systems XIII, 89770U (March 7, 2014);  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 88 of 76  
  
1. IQFUEL - Integrated sensor for determining the Quality of FUEL (Euripides EUR 07-408)  
2. Imospe - Integrated adjustable MOems-SPEctrometer Platforms (Tekes 40423/09)  
3. FABRY - Spectroscopic sensor devices based on novel FABRY-Perot interferometers (Tekes 
40244/11)  
4. VIAMOS - Vertically Integrated Array-type Mirau-based OCT System for early diagnostics of 
skin cancer (FP7-ICT2007-2, Grant No. 318542)  
5. Spectral Engines - Commercialization of Fabry-Perot Interferometer technology as spectral 
engines and solutions (Tekes 40031/13)  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work  
SPECTRAL will invest in testing facilities, including wafer-level characterization tool, climate chamber 
and multichannel wavelength calibrator. The equipment is placed in conventional surroundings, i.e. 
no clean rooms are required or used.  
  
Participant 
no.  
11  Name (short 
name)/Country  
VTT Memsfab Ltd (Memsfab) / Finland  
Description of the legal entity   
Contract manufacturing of micro- and nanoelectronic materials and devices.  
Main tasks  
Manufacturing of two lots of tuneable MEMS Fabry-Pérot filters    
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
Perfect match, VTT Memsfab Ltd is one of the three tuneable MEMS Fabry-Pérot filter 
manufacturers in the world  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
Martti Blomberg (male) obtained his licentiate's degree in Electrical Engineering in 1991 at Helsinki 
University of Technology. He has worked for 30 years in silicon technology, and more than 20 years 
in MEMS device design and manufacturing. He is currently the CTO of VTT Memsfab Ltd. His recent 
activities include process and device development and commercial manufacturing of various MEMS 
and MOEMS devices such as electrically tuneable surface micromechanical Fabry–Perot filters and 
thermopile detectors. He has written about 50 publications in the field and is an inventor in a number 
of patents, including several key patents in MEMS Fabry-Perot technology.  
List of up to 5 relev ant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. Micro-machined Fabry -Pérot interferometer for thermal infrared, IEEE SENSORS 2013 
Conference, 4 - 6 November 2013, Baltimore, Maryland, United States  
2. Monolithically integrated microspectrometer -on-chip based on tunable visible light MEMS FPI, 
Sensors and Actuators, A: Physical. Elsevier. Vol. 182  (2012) No: August, 130 - 135  
3. MOEMS miniature spectrometers using tuneable Fabry -Perot interferometers, Journal of 
Micro/Nanolithography, MEMS, and MOEMS. SPIE. Vol. 11 (2012) No: 2, 023003-1-6  
4. Electrically tunable surface micromachined Fabry-Perot interferometer for visible light, Sensors 
and Actuators A: Physical. Elsevier. Vol. 162 (2010), 184-188  
5. Electrically tuneable micromachined Fabry-Perot interferometer in gas analysis, Physica Scripta. 
Vol. T69 (1997), 119 - 121  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
1. Spectroscopic sensor devices based on novel Fabry-Perot interferometers, FABRY, 2011 - 
2014  
2. Micro-Optical MEMS, micro-mirrors and pico-projectors, Lab for MEMS II (ENIAC project), pilot 
line development for MOEMS manufacturing, accepted, to be started in 2014   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 89 of 76  
  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work  
Micronova cleanroom with all necessary manufacturing tools are fully available  
  
Participant 
no.  
12  Name (short 
name)/Country  
VTT Memsfab Ltd (Memsfab) / Finland  
Description of the legal entity   
DECHEMA - Society for Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology e.V., is an interdisciplinary 
scientific society with more than 5,500 personal and institutional members (including about 500 
SMEs), whose activities cover wide areas relevant to the process industries. DECHEMA is dedicated 
to the support of R&D progress and implementation in various fields of chemical engineering, 
including reaction engineering, catalysis, materials, process efficiency and environmental protection. 
DECHEMA is board member of the European Technology Platform Sustainable Chemistry 
(SusChem) and hosts several secretariats of organisations in this field: European Federation of 
Chemical Engineering (EFCE) and its international equivalent (WCEC), the European Federation on 
Corrosion (EF C) and the German Catalysis Society (GECATS). DECHEMA is organiser of the 
International Exhibition -Congress on Chemical Engineering, Environmental Protection and 
Biotechnology (ACHEMA) and of around 50 conferences with over 10.000 participants per year, and 
offers more than 20 training courses on different topics. Co-ordination and support of DECHEMA’s 
activities is carried out by about 190 employees.  
DECHEMA hosts more than 50 websites including project websites and secure collaborative 
workspaces for information exchange and knowledge management of project consortia.  
Main tasks  
DECHEMA will lead the tasks related to standards: 1.4 Survey of standard quality control approach, 
as well as task 8.1 Comparison vs. existing quality control and recommendations for standardisation.   
They will also lead the training activities organising several workshops for their members (WP9) and 
act as dissemination manager (WP10).  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
Research coordination and management; strong network in chemical engineering and process 
industries; high expertise in linking industry and R& D; strong skills in international communication, 
dissemination and exploitation  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
DR. RENATA KÖRFER is head of standardization department at DECHEMA and has 15 years of 
professional experience working in science and research management. Her background includes 
extensive knowledge of assessment and use of innovative process and methods in the field of 
process engineering especially in Food and Chemical industry. She has more than 8 years’ 
experience in coordinating and participating in various EU projects (FP6/FP7) as well as EC Project 
Technical Advisor (PTA), proposal evaluator and project reviewer. She is also an executive secretary 
of technical committees DIN 055, CEN 332 and ISO 48 and a Member of the Managing Board, 
Working Committee DECHEMA/GDCh ‘Process analytical technologies (PAT)’.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. Member of PPP SPIRE  
2. Secretary of SusChem  
3. Member of the Managing Board, task force DECHEMA/GDCh ‘Process analytical 
technologies (PAT)’  
4. Executive secretary of technical committees DIN 055, CEN 332 and ISO 48  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
1. EU project coordination and management of NanoBioPharmaceutics, Next -GTL, Synflow, 
CO2NET, E4Water, ChemWater, M4CO2, R3Water  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 90 of 76  
  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work  
-  
  
Participant 
no.  
13  Name (short 
name)/Country  
Grecian Magnesite (GM)/Greece  
Description of the legal entity   
Grecian Magnesite is a privately owned modern company established in 1959 possessing a 
substantial know how in mining, processing and marketing of industrial minerals. One of its mission 
is to exploit and process mineral raw materials supplying quality pro ducts to a broad spectrum of 
industries. It ranks among the top magnesia producers and exporters in the world being no. 1 
exporter of CCM in the EU, with a staff around 320 people and turnover 45 million €. The company´s 
major deposits are located in Chalkidiki. The total production capacity for calcined products (caustic 
magnesia, dead-burned magnesia) is close to 200 000 mt a year whereas 95% output is exported. 
The annual production capacity of the monolithic refractories exceed 60 000 mt of basic monolithics. 
The company´s sales value to all EU countries exceeds 80% of its turnover.  
Main tasks  
GM will participate in WPs 1, 2,6 and 7. GM will evaluate/validate the performance of the sensor and 
its contribution to the milling capability/quality etc. GM will be responsible for making the necessary 
modifications to its milling facility in  
order to accomodate the new technology (sensor).   
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
Grecian Magnesite, is a major player in magnesia industry: the company produces and 
commercializes caustic magnesia (MgO), dead -burned magnesia, raw magnesite and basic 
monolithic refractories covering a broad spectrum of applications (ceramics, fertilizer s, welding 
fluxes, metallurgical uses, rubber, construction, abrasives, glass industry, chemicals, fillers, pulp 
and paper industry, pigments, anticorrosion, printing inks, steel industry).   
Grecian Magnesite is a modern company possessing a substantial know-how in mining, processing 
and marketing of industrial minerals. Grecian Magnesite is ISO 9001 certified and they have state 
of the art flowsheet ensuring exceptional quality and unique consistency of all their products. Their 
decades of experience in p rocessing and milling of industrial minerals will be an essential 
contribution to the project’s targets.   
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
THEOFILOS ZAMPETAKIS: (male) R&D Center Manager working with Grecian Magnesite for 20 
years. He is a Chemical Engineer, holding a Ph.D. in Materials Science. He has a 25 year experience 
in industrial research and has participated in more than 10 EC funded projects.    
KOSTAS DAGGILAS : ( male) Yerakini Mine Quality Control Manager working with Grecian 
Magnesite for more than 20 years. He is a chemist with a long experience in the evaluation of 
magnesite ores.  
POLYKARPOS PAPAGEORGIOU: (male) Production Manager of Grecian Magnesite’s Yeraki ni 
mine. He is a Mining Engineer with long experience (over 20 years) in extraction, beneficiation, 
burning and final processing of magnesite ores.   
PAVLOS VAGIONAS : (male) Mechanical Engineer and New Projects Manager working with 
Grecian Magnesite for over 20 years. He has a long experience in mechanical equipment related to 
beneficiation and final processing of industrial minerals.    
SPYROS GALAZOULAS: (male) Metallurgist working with Grecian Magnesite for 8 years and is 
responsible for the final treatm ent of the products (CCM & magnesite). Experience in mineral 
processing (magnetic separation, screening processing, milling and beneficiation circuit).    
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 91 of 76  
  
1. Caustic calcined magnesite (CCM) sized (crushing, sieving) in various granulometries (relevant 
materials ActivMag, NOR-R, 88C, 83C etc)   
2. Magnesium carbonate in granular and powder form (relevant materials are KERMA, R3 etc.)  
3. Dead burned magnesite (DBM) sized in specific grain sizes (relevant materials are TANMA, 
MAGCAST etc.)  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
1. Caustic calcined magnesium oxide processing (e.g. magnetic separation, sieving, milling)  
2. Magnesite ore beneficiation using photo-optic and laser sorters  
3. Calcination of magnesium carbonate at high temperatures  
4. Magnesium carbonate sizing (grinding, sieving, milling)  
5. Dead burned magnesite processing: grinding, sieving, milling  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work  
Optical and laser sorters, crushers, magnetic separators, sieves.  
The milling installation includes an Esser -Neumann pendular mill for the milling of CCM and 
magnesium carbonate as well as dynamic classifiers and air bag filters.   
  
Participant 
no.  
14  Name (short 
name)/Country  
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) /UK  
Description of the legal entity   
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) is a British multinational pharmaceutical, biologics, vaccines and consumer 
healthcare company headquartered  in Brentford, London. It is the world's fourth -largest 
pharmaceutical company as measured by 2009 drug sales. The company was established in 2000 
by the merger of  Glaxo Wellcome plc (formed from the acquisi tion of Wellcome plc by Glaxo plc) 
and SmithKline Beecham plc (formed from the merger of Beecham plc and SmithKline Beckman 
Corporation, which in turn was formed by combining the Smith Kline French and Beckman 
companies).  
GSK has a portfolio of products for major disease areas such as asthma, cancer, virus control, 
infections, mental health, diabetes and digestive conditions. It also has a large consumer healthcare 
division that produces oral healthcare and nutritional products, drinks and over -the-counter 
medicines. Stevenage, i.e. the company’s main API site, will be involved in the project.   
Main tasks  
Definition (selection) of typical real industrial production processes which could be clearly improved 
by and be compatible with the described sensors platform.  
Provide practical hints and advices to the RTDs in order to develop an application -oriented PAT 
platform, as well as relevant samples along the process for offline calibration.  
Provision of the facilities for installing and validating the developed PAT platform, contribution to its 
validation.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
GSK is an end-user in the project and is expected to benefit from the installation of the PAT platform 
in its current production process leading to significant cost savings due to minimisation of drying 
times by detecting on each batch the drying end point, increase in productivity due to better control 
of the industrial processes as well as reduce the off -spec product quantities and ensuring high 
standards of final product quality. The main assets of ProPAT vs. existing systems available on the 
market or already present at GSK are the use of lower cost sensors with good accuracy combining 
chemical and physical information. The detection of particle size is important for product quality but 
also for operative questions, e.g. to avoid clogging filters in case  of big agglomerates in the spray 
drying system. Finally a system like ProPAT would also allow reducing the time to market by 
assisting in new product development and allow the production facilities to be more flexible.    
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 92 of 76  
  
NIGEL RICHARDSON (male), Director of future analytical technologies  
LUISA FREITAS DOS SANTOS (female), Global Head Analytical Sciences, Product Development 
- PTS R&D  
DR. THEODORA KOURTI (female), Senior Technical Director, Pharma Launch & Global Supply  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
GSK produces pharma products of very different types for which ProPAT may be relevant to 
improve process/quality.  
In addition GSK reports the following publications related with PAT:  
• JA Calderon De Anda (PhD student), XZ Wang*, X Lai, KJ Roberts,  KH Jen nings 
(GlaxoSmithKline-GSK), MJ Wilkinson (GSK), D Watson (Malvern Instruments Ltd - MIL), D 
Roberts (MIL), (2005) “Real-time product morphology monitoring in crystallisation using on-
line imaging”, AIChE Journal, 51(5), 1406-1065.  
• JA Calderon De Anda, XZ Wang, X Lai, KJ Roberts,  KH Jennings (GlaxoSmithKline-GSK), 
MJ Wilkinson (GSK), D Watson (Malvern Instruments Ltd - MIL), D Roberts (MIL), (2004), 
Real-time product morphology monitoring in crystallisation using on -line imaging. AIChE 
Journal  
• JA Caldero n De Anda, XZ Wang, KJ Roberts, (2004), Multi -scale segmentation image 
analysis for the inprocess monitoring of particle shape with batch crystallisers. Chemical 
Engineering Science.  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
Among number of them, GSK reports the following relevant projects in terms of work with PAT mainly 
in terms of particle size monitoring and drying process control, in collaboration with UNIVLEEDS in 
several instances:  
1. Project on Particle Breakage in Dryers (2006-2010): case award with UNIV LEEDS 
sponsored by the EPSRC and GSK. The project utilised DEM simulations to estimate 
stresses occurring in agitated dryers. Attrition occurring in a shear cell was analysed 
experimentally and coupled with the DEM simulations to give a prediction of attrition in 
agitated dryers.  
2. On-line Imaging and Image Analysis for Shape Measurement and Control of Pharmaceutical 
Crystals Grown from Solution (2001-2005), sponsors: CONACYT, EPSRC, Malvern 
Instruments Ltd and GlaxoSmithKline  
3. Control and Scale-up of Batch Crystallisation Processes for Organic Speciality Chemical 
Products (2000-2005), EPSRC, AEA Technology, AstraZeneca, Bede Scientific Instruments, 
BNFL, Clairet, GlaxoSmithKline, HEL Ltd, Malvern Instruments, Pfizer, Syngenta  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work  
The GSK New Product introduction site uses all typical formulation processes like granulation, 
tabletting, blending, etc. Facilities of different scales are available for installing ProPAT system as 
well as range of analytical techniques for performing reference quality controls.  
  
Participant 
no.  
15  Name (short 
name)/Country  
Megara Resins S.A (MEGARA) / GREECE  
Description of the legal entity   
Megara Resins S.A. is a diversified manufacturer and supplier of raw materials for industrial and 
architectural coatings as well as rosin based and other synthetic resins for the paint, adhesive, paper 
and construction industry. For over 40 years, Fanis Me gara Resins S.A. has been a pioneer in 
creating innovative technologies to help coatings formulators meet their customers' most demanding 
applications. Today, the company remains firmly committed to the pillars of innovation and new 
technologies and is wid ely regarded as being the most innovative Greek supplier to the coatings 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 93 of 76  
  
industry through its continued investment in R&D, technical support and new product development. 
Megara Resins  
offers its customers advanced and diverse products and technologies for surfaces with an emphasis 
on environmentally friendly products such as powder coating resins, rosin dispersions, alkyd resins, 
water-based acrylic dispersions, and unsaturated polyeste r resins. The company is committed to 
working with its customers to continuously developing environmentally advanced solutions and is 
dedicated to open communication concerning the safe handling, distribution, use and disposal of 
the products it makes.  
Main tasks  
Definition (selection) of two typical real industrial production processes (Polyester resin for powder 
coatings and Alkyl Succinic Anhydride) which could be clearly improved by PAT (Process Advanced 
Technologies) and be compatible with the described sensors platform.  
Provide practical hints and advices to the RTDs in order to develop an application -oriented PAT 
platform, as well as relevant samples along the process for offline calibration.  
Provision of the facilities for installing and validating the developed PAT platform, contribution to its 
validation  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
Megara Resins S.A. is an end-user in the project and is expected to benefit from the installation of 
the PAT platform in its current production process leading to significant cost savings due to 
minimisation of reaction times, increase in productivity due to better control of the industrial 
processes as well as reduction of the off -spec product quantities and ensuring high standards of 
final product quality.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
Nikos Agiasofitis (male) holds a degree in Chemistry from the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki 
and is Production Manager of the polyester resins for powder coatings Business Unit of Megara 
Resins S.A. since 2013. He has long industrial experience of more than 14 years during which he 
has provided leadership, coaching, mentoring and training while supervising and coordinating 
activities of +50 employees. Currently he is responsible for overseeing the entire manufacturing 
process of the polyester resins facility and makin g sure that production lines are running smoothly 
and efficiently. He works closely with supervisors and maintenance staff to plan work, set targets 
and make sure the finished products meet quality standards. Nikos is expert in the unit operations 
of the polyester resins facility.  
Poppy Krassa (female) has a BSc degree in Chemistry awarded from Ioannina University in 1999 
and a MSc degree in Catalysis and Environmental Protection awarded by the Hellenic Open 
University in 2007. Poppy joined Megara Resins i n 2013 and was appointed as Research Project 
Manager. She strives to develop research capacity and capability and is committed to embedding 
research into core Megara business. She has more than 14 years of research and management 
experience in EC-funded collaborative research projects with extensive knowledge of polymers for 
paints, coatings, structural materials and adhesives, in particular alkyd resins, unsaturated and 
saturated polyester resins and aqueous dispersions. During her past experience she has managed 
numerous funded and in-house research projects related to polymer synthesis and characterization 
which led to the development of new innovative products.    
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
MEGARA produces resins of very different types for which ProPAT may be relevant to improve 
process/quality  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 94 of 76  
  
Megara has been only lately involved in 4 European and 1 national projects, all closely related to 
improving their products and concern either the optimisation of the production process, the 
development of alternative environmentally friendlier products, o r substitution with bio -based 
alternatives to increase their sustainability.  
The most relevant one concerns the “New weather -stable low gloss powder coatings based on 
bifunctional acrylic solid resins and nanoadditives” which is an IAPP project (Grant agreement no.: 
324410), 4-year project which started in November 2013 and is coordinated by Megara. The project 
deals with acrylic resin and cover one application in common (powder coatings).  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major it ems of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work  
Megara Resins S.A. is equipped with manufacturing facilities comprising industrial scale reactors 
with capacities ranging from 2.000 kg to 10.000kg capable of production of a wide range of solvent-
based and water -based emulsions, polyester resins and other  synthetic resins such as rosin 
dispersions, alkyd resins, acrylic resins etc. used in the manufacturing of paints and coatings. A pilot 
- scale reactor is also available with 200 kg production capacity.   
  
Participant 
no.  
16  Name (short 
name)/Country  
MBN Nanomaterialia S.p.A.(MBN)/ITALY  
Description of the legal entity   
MBN Nanomaterialia S.p.A. (Italy) (http://www.mbn.it/) was established in 1994 with core business 
being concentrated in the development of mechanochemical reactors for the production of 
nanophased materials produced by high energy ball milling. With an ind ustrial production capacity 
of 150 ton/range, MBN’s mission is to bring nanotechnology from research environment to everyday 
life products offering to the market innovative nanomaterials adaptable to conventional and  
new powder metallurgy and deposition processes. The industrial production is focused on  
environmental friendly (Co free) alloys for diamond grinding tools and high performance thermal 
spraying powders (Ti, WC-Co, MMC’s). All materials produced by MBN represent the direct outcome 
of scientific and technological research initiatives performed at National and European level in 
collaboration with Universities, Research Institutes and Industries. MBN is also working in the 
development of innovative material solutions in many application fields such as nanostructured metal 
and polymeric powders for high resolution additive manufacturing, polymer based alloys for textile 
and consumer goods and advanced Mg and Ni based alloys for hydrogen storage.  
Main tasks  
- Development of powders with proper size distribution based on metals or ceramic through 
High Energy Ball Milling  
- Suppling of nanostructured micro particles of metals or ceramic produced by mechano-
chemical technology  
- Morphological characterization of metal powders, particles size distribution, by SEM 
analisys, DLS, BET and XRD analysis  
- Validation of the particle size analyzer in industrial environment for in line/at line monitoring 
of dry particles or particles in solution  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
They are a qualified and experienced end-user partner for the project.   
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 95 of 76  
  
PROF. ING. PAOLO MATTEAZZI . (Male) Pro fessor of Metallurgy at mechanical engineering of 
University of Udine, he founded the company MBN in 1994. With a consolidated and well proved 
experience in promoting, coordinating and managing research projects at National and European 
level, Prof. Matteazzi is also Chairman of European Technology  
Platform on Nano-Micromanufacturing (MINAM) and acting Chair of NANOfutures ETIP (European 
Technology Innovation  Platfform) He is author of more than 200 scientific papers in materials 
science, more than 140 in the field of powder technology and nanophased materials.   
DR. IVAN LORENZON. (Male) Graduated in chemistry at Venice University, he worked as product 
quality responsible and as reference solving person in a water treatment laboratory. In 2008 he 
joined MBN as responsible of materials research and product developer especially as regards the 
development of new hybrid organic -inorganic composites in the frame of National and European 
project initiatives.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or produc ts, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. MBN currently produce 50tons per year of nanostructured materials  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
1. NANODEFINE project- 604347- "Development of an integrated approach based on validated 
and standardized methods to support the implementation of the EC recommendation for a 
definition of nanomaterial"  
2. NANODETECTOR project - 280478 - " Ultrasensitive plasmonic detection of single 
nanoparticles"  
3. NANOFORART project - 282816 - "Nano-materials for the conservation and preservation of 
movable and immovable artworks"  
4. COOLCOVERING project - EeB.NMP.2010-1- Development of novel and cost-effective range 
of nanotech improved coatings to substantially improve NIR (Near Infrared Reflective) 
properties of the building envelope  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, 
relevant to the proposed work  
MBN has developed its own High Energy Ball Milling equipment at different scale for the industrial 
production of NanoMaterials, Nanostructured Materials, Composite, Solid and Liquid dispersions.   
MBN has all the equipment needed for secure handling nano -structured powder, facilities for re -
agglomeration by spray drying, facilities for powder classification in liquid and in controlled 
atmosphere, as well as equipment for suspension homogenization by ultracavitation.  
MBN utilize standard equipment for physi cal and morphological characterization of the material 
produced: specific surface area measurements (BET), average crystal size (XRD), average particle 
size distribution (Laser Diffraction), elemental analysis (EDS, LECO), imaging (SEM), optical 
properties (UV-Vis-NIR spectrometer), thermal properties (TGDTA).  
 
4.2. Third parties involved in the project 
Participant no. 8- Universitat de Barcelona (UB)/ Spain  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted)  
N  
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted   
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties  N  
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and 
justify the foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party  
  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
637232  
Page 96 of 76  
  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  
Y  
Fundació Bosch i Gimpera (FBG) is a third party of Universitat de Barcelona (UB). FBG was created 
and is controlled by UB, and has an authorisation to administer International funds on behalf of UB. 
According to the “Annotated General Grant Agreement”, FBG falls under the specific case “Foundations, 
spin-off companies, etc., created in order to handle the administrative/financial tasks of the beneficiary”, 
and it is in charge of the administrative and financial management of European projects at the UB. FBG 
does not perform scientific/technical work in the project.  
 
Participant no. 10- Spectral Engines Oy (SPECTRAL) / Finland  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted)  
Y  
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted  
Spectral Engines will subcontract the following tasks for the realisation of test rigs: 
 MEMS-detector packaging (this is outsourced).  
 Electronic fabrication  
 Optomechanics design and fabrication  
 Thermal design and simulations 
These tasks have been valued at €42,500.    
The justification for this subcontracting is that Spectral Engines does not have all the necessary in-
house expertise, design software or installations (clean rooms) in order to perform this work.     
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties  N  
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and 
justify the foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  
N  
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
  
 
 
 
 637232  
 
 
   
 
 637232  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
5. Ethics and Security   
5.1. Ethics  
In keeping with the required Ethics Appraisal Procedure, an Ethics Self -assessment was performed with the completion of the 
Ethical Issues Table. It can be concluded that this project does not involve any ethics issues.   
However, in relation to potential safety issues derived from sampling along the process, which can at times be hazardous, e.g. 
when handling hot resins, unreacted monomers, powdery particles, etc.), any environmental harm that could be caused by the 
research will be minimised at all times by the implementation of necessary measures that will be taken to mitigate the risks. The 
Coordinator will work closely with the consortium in order to ensure that appropriate health and safety procedures conforming to 
relevant local/national guidelines/legislation are followed for staff involved in the project.   
It is fitting to first of all mention that every partner related to chemical activities in the consortium already follows str ict rules 
according to the local legislations as well as more global re gulations such as REACH both for the synthesis of the compounds 
and their handling, and that the project will of course respect the pre-established precautions. When needed the Environmental, 
Hygiene and Safety responsible of each location could also be involved in assessing that the practice followed is adequate. The 
different RTDs partners involved in the WP2 and 3 will also respect strictly the Material Safety Data Sheets in terms of how to 
use the respective products in a safe manner after receiving, if  necessary, additional training from the producer. Although 
sampling handling is expected to be required for the calibration of the new techniques, it is in fact similar to what is currently done 
for the off line controls of the same products already manuf actured in each site. On the long term, when implemented as a 
substitute of the current off line analysis, a clear improvement of the safety of the environment and lowering of worker’s exposure 
will be derived from ProPAT.  
In relation to the validation and demonstration work that will be performed during the project, a statement is provided by each of 
the process industries.   
Megara Resins S.A (MEGARA) will demonstrate the ProPAT system for controlling the polymerisation process in at least one of 
the following: ASA resins production and UPR production, whereby in relation to the precautions for safe handling of polyester 
resins and ASA (alkenyl succinic anhydride) produced at Megara Resins:  
• Saturated polyesters for powder coatings are condensation polymers formed by the reaction of polyhydric alcohols and 
saturated dibasic acids. The final product is an odourless, solid (flakes) material which contains zero VOCs (100% 
solvent-free), is chemically stable and does not require a hazard warning label in accordance with GHS criteria.  
• ASA (alkenyl succinic anhydride) is an amber -brown viscous liquid at room temperature which is produced from the 
reaction of isomerized olefins and maleic anhydride. It is used as a sizing agent in the alkaline production of paper. The 
final product is classified as Xi (Irritant), R43 (May cause sensitisation by skin contact) due to its maximum concentration 
of 0.3% maleic anhydride.  
All employees involved in the handling of powder coating resins and ASA and specifically dur ing the sampling process wear 
special protective equipment such as heat insulating gloves, safety glasses, appropriate respiratory protection and personal 
protective clothing to prevent contact during mechanical processing and/or hot melt conditions.  
Megara Resins S.A. has been certified according to the international environmental standard EN ISO 14001:2004 for its 
Environmental Management System & Services. Moreover, the company, acknowledging the importance of maintaining and 
improving environmental quality, has implemented a range of measures and actions in its Environmental Management System 
(EMS) that assure the continual improvement of its environmental performance. The necessary infrastructure for the monitoring 
of environmental aspects has been installed, and the relevant environmental audit procedures are followed.  
Concerning the Grecian Magnesite  (GMs) contribution to the project, which is related to the milling of magnesium oxide 
(Magnesia), the following is stated:  
1) Magnesium oxide is not classified as hazardous material.  
2) GM’s production plants operate under Environmental Permits which regulates according to the Greek legislation the 
dust emission and the safety and health conditions in the working areas.  
Concerning MBN Nanomaterialia S.p.A. (MBN), they will perform demonstration and validation work of the ProPAT system in a 
ceramic/metal milling process for ceramic-metallic blends production, whereby they state that:  
Page 75 of 76  
  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
 637232  
 
1) The ceramic and the metallic part of a cermet contribute differently to the toxicity of the material, in the typical 
case of Tungsten Carbide plus Cobalt as a binder (WCCo) the toxic effects are caused by the small percentage of cobalt 
within the material. WCCo is classified as probably carcinogenic and can cause a lung disease known as "Hard metal 
disease" in exposed workers. Humans and the environment mainly get in contact with tungsten carbide-cobalt particles 
only when it is in its powdered form during handling or during the grinding of workpieces since it is very stable as a bulk 
piece or as a coating. In general, the human body as well as the environment are only exposed to very small amounts 
of tungsten carbide-cobalt particles, therefore only a very low risk has been associated with this material.   
2) Users are safe when handling finished workpieces containing tungsten carbide -cobalt nanoparticles since there is no 
particle release from these products. Modern factories producing this material, as MBN, are obliged by the national and 
European law to have filter facilities installed to prevent an environmental release of these materials. This is 
accomplished also by MBN nanomaterialia, by using the required personal protection and all waste products are 
collected and disposed of as hazardous waste.  
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) will demonstrate the ProPAT system in a pharma mixing and granulation process. The exact formulation 
manufactured in the process where ProPAT will be validated is not selected yet, and will be defined in WP1 whereby safety 
aspects can be included as one of the criteria. While most excipients are safe, some concentrated active principles (APIs) must 
be handled with due precautions. Nevertheless the risks associated with such sampling of mixed powders and granulates, as 
well as the characterization of the upcoming substances, are already carried out with required precautions in the factory by trained 
analysts. As ProPAT will be mainly introduced in a step where the different compounds are already mixed and APIs are present 
at a relatively low concentrations, the associated risk is even further mitigated. Such samples are not typically dusty but in any 
case, the required Personal Protective Equipment will be used.
5.2 Security72  
Please indicate if your project will involve:  
• activities or results raising security issues: (NO)  
• 'EU-classified information' as background or results: (/NO)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72   Article 37.1 of Model Grant Agreement.  Before disclosing results of activities raising security issues to a third 
party (including affiliated entities), a beneficiary must inform the coordinator — which must request written approval from 
the Commission/Agency; Article 37. Activities related to ‘classified deliverables’  must comply with the ‘security 
requirements’ until they are declassified; Action tasks related to classified deliverables may not be subcontracted without 
prior explicit written approval from the Commission/Agency.; The beneficiar ies must inform the coordinator — which must 
immediately inform the Commission/Agency — of any changes in the security context and — if necessary —request for Annex 
1 to be amended (see Article 55)   
 Page 76 of 76