2.1 RECLAIM’S PATHWAY TOWARDS IMPACT  
 
ECLAIM is fully aligned with addressing the challenges associated with embracing transformational ideas to 
develop world-class smart technologies and increase the use of Robotics in Eu rope. The proposed work addresses 
complementary aspects of the HORIZON -CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09 call, and implements specific 
steps that greatly facilitate the wider adoption of robots on issues related to the EU Green Deal and the circular 
economy. In particular, it implements high-tech, eco-friendly, portable robotic Material Recovery Facilities that will 
be utilized for the decentralized recovery of recyclable materials. Accordingly, RECLAIM will strongly contribute 
to all three expected Innovatio n Actions impacts mentioned in the HORIZON -CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-
01-09 call topic, as described below. 
Innovative AI, data and robotics solutions for resource optimisation and minimisation of waste in any type of sector 
(…), reduction of energy consum ption and greenhouse gas emissions including exploitation of all data and 
information sources contributing to optimising applications for a greener planet. This includes among others 
contribution to enterprises’ sustainability programs in the context of th eir CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility) 
strategies to reduce their ecological footprint, cutting costs and contributing to social welfare at the same time. 
RECLAIM integrates state of the art AI, data and robotic solutions for the development of the fir st prMRF which 
will accomplish material recovery in distant, geographically isolated areas not sufficiently covered by current 
waste management models. In other words, it focuses on materials that, without the prMRF, are significantly less 
likely to be rec overed. In full support to the Green Deal , enhanced material recovery will lead to a  significant 
reduction in GHG emissions, since recycling of the sorted waste is enabled and thus emissions associated with the 
use of virgin materials are avoided.  While the existing MRFs are usually energy -consuming, the proposed prMRF 
will be equipped with solar panels that will cover a substantial proportion of its power needs with renewable energy 
and hence reduce the environmental footprint of the prMRF. At the same time, the on-site processing of waste will 
lead to a reduction in transportation emissions and costs . Moreover, RECLAIM provides the opportunity to 
private organizations and SMEs to get involved in corporate social responsibility activities  related to waste 
management research. RECLAIM participants have recognized the opportunity offered by the project to engage in 
research activities that support the circular economy model. Through their participation in RECLAIM, they 
undertake significant resource costs to implement the project objectives for the benefit of the environment and 
society. Future exploitation of the proposed technological solution is expected to contribute to corporate 
sustainability beyond RECLAIM. Companies could buy or rent and deploy the por table facility on-site, in their 
own scale and in full connection with their circular transition objectives and their contribution to the social welfare.  
Optimised AI, data and robotics (including modular and adaptive solutions) to maximise contribution t o the Green 
Deal in various applications such as environmental and waste management, including for instance waste clean -up 
(e.g. plastic collection, sorting), or in the circular economy value chain. 
The development of the prMRF assumes the optimization and integration of state-of-the-art AI-powered computer 
vision with low-cost, maximum productivity robot-teams, for the recovery and sorting of recyclable materials. The 
project adopts a highly modular approach based on the use of multiple Robotic Recycling Worker (RoReWo) units 
to compose a team that undertakes material recovery. The number of RoReWos in the team may vary depending on 
the volume of waste and the number of material fractions that  must be recovered. RoReWos will be equipped with 
different grippers for different types of materials to improve recovery speed and reliability. RECLAIM will develop 
technology that allows the change of the gripers attached on each RoReWo unit, thus providing a flexible and 
adaptive solution for material recovery. Adap tivity is planned both at a unit -level and at a team -level and will be 
driven by real-time waste data analytics. Overall, the proposed approach aspires to be the solution with the highest 
“pick per invested euro” rate , to date, thus providing a new boost t o the Green Deal and its objectives. prMRFs 
can be directly used in the real world for the recovery and sorting of multiple materials (not only plastic), in order 
to effectively implement the first nodes of the circular economy value chain. RoReWo -Team performance will be 
tested in two different demonstrators, handling different types of waste.  
Advanced physical intelligence and physical performance of robotics solutions in diverse harsh environments serving 
the Green Deal. 
The prMRFs developed in RECLAIM will take advantage of newly developed grippers that incorporate physically 
intelligent gripping to pick materials from the waste streams. Both demonstrations of the prMRF will show the 
physical performance of the RoReWo team, which will work long hours every day in harsh conditions, to recover 
and sort multiple recyclables. Accordingly, RECLAIM supports the key elements of the EU’s environmental policy 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 21 of 45 
 
which aim at managing waste in an environmentally sound manner and making use of the secondary materials they 
contain. The proposed work brings forward a new decentralized model of material recovery which practically 
contributes to the EU Green Deal goal 33 “no person and no place left behind  from environment friendly activities” 
and at the same time, promotes a new economic model around recycling and creates new opportunities for innovation, 
investment and jobs, in full agreement with the EU Green Deal 34. Additionally, the Recycling Data-Game that will 
be developed in RECLAIM will promote public awareness on recycling and will actively engage citizens of different 
ages, sexes and educational backgrounds in Green Deal activities. 
2.1.1 Contribution to the wider Horizon Europe impacts 
RECLAIM contributes to the four Key Strategic Orientations 35 for research and innovation in Horizon Europe, as 
described below. 
Promoting an open strategic autonomy by leading the development of key digital, enabling and emerging 
technologies, sectors and value chains to accelerate and steer the digital and green transitions through human -
centred technologies and innovations 
Recent environmental challenges have highlighted the importance of digitalisation across several sectors in life. The 
current proposal introduces innovative technologies and solutions on waste management and material recovery, that 
make Europe more resilient and independent is strategic sectors of modern life. RECLAIM contributes to the open 
strategy of Europe and its global leadership in digital and emerging enabling technologies by promoting the 
widespread adoption of robotics in facing crucial environmental and social problems.  It contributes new ideas and 
technological solutions that not only work tirelessly to address people needs but additionally accelerate digital and 
green transitions accomplishing the decoupling of resource use and emissions such as greenhouse gases (GHG) and 
pollutants from socio-economic development and growth. This goes hand in hand with the development and uptake 
of new technologies promoting and reinforcing the participation of citizens in the green and digital transformation of 
industrial ecosystems, providing services for the benefit of the environment, the economy and the society.  
Restoring Europe’s ecosystems and biodiversity, and managing sustainably natural resources to ensure food security 
and a clean and healthy environment 
As human activities create pressure on natural resources that go far beyond sustainable levels, they affect ecosystems 
which in turn affect in a negative way all forms of life on earth. The European Union has the ambition to protect and 
preserve ecosystems, and manage natural resources, thereby ensuring the security of life . RECLAIM will advance 
knowledge, build capacities and provide innovative technologies and solutions for waste management, which support 
the state  and functioning of ecosystems, to ensure a clean and healthy environment for all, and a sustainable 
management of natural resources that contributes to climate neutrality and adaptation. The transition to distributed, 
sustainable, low ecological footprint , solutions for material recovery will accelerate by enhancing governance, 
improving the volume of materials that is captured versus lost and developing new circular economy chains starting 
from distant or isolated areas in need of local, small scale mater ial recovery plans. This will bolster the role of the 
European Union in the ecological transition as a solution provider for the benefit of all. 
Making Europe the first digitally enabled circular, climate -neutral and sustainable economy through the 
transformation of its mobility, energy, construction and production systems 
The European Union has the ambition to substantially reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 and to become 
climate neutral by 2050 , turning into a more sustainable climate -neutral, circular and competitive economy. This 
requires unprecedented changes in our lifestyle and the substitution of the traditional linear economy model in which 
products are consumed or used once and then discarded, with the circular economy model of production and  
consumption in which materials are reused and return back into the production cycle as much as possible. RECLAIM 
contributes in making EU economy climate -neutral, zero polluting, energy -efficient and globally competitive, 
through implementing breakthrough  solutions and new business models on secondary material management. The 
distributed waste management concept promoted in RECLAIM will significantly contribute to improving the energy 
efficiency and decreasing the carbon footprint of waste management activ ities. Fostering a digitalized circular 
economy, contributes to sustainably supplying climate neutral materials, thus positioning Europe as an international 
technological and industrial leader in green transition.  
                                                     
33 https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal_en 
34 https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal/delivering-european-green-deal_en 
35 https://eeas.europa.eu/sites/default/files/horizon_europe_strategic_plan_2021-2024.pdf 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 22 of 45 
 
Creating a more resilient, inclusive and  democratic European society, prepared and responsive to threats and 
disasters, addressing inequalities and providing high -quality health care, and empowering all citizens to act in the 
green and digital transitions.  
Social cohesion and inclusiveness together with the health, well-being, rights and security of its citizens are central 
aims of the EU Green Deal policies and programmes. As the EU is facing challenges related to, among others, the 
protection of nature, while at the same time the COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated that existing systems are very 
fragile and can be easily affected by unforeseen factors putting under strain the well -being of citizens and 
communities, it is necessary to develop solutions that make the modern way of life more robust  to external 
disturbances. The current proposal introduces new technologies on waste management and material recovery that 
contribute in keeping waste treatment and material recovery  services running, being significantly less affected by 
unexpected challenges such as the ongoing pandemic or personnel shortages. Additionally, RECLAIM, through the 
RDG games, provides innovative approaches to connect citizens with emerging social and environmental needs, thus 
improving societal adaptation and integration in the green and digital transition.  
2.1.2 Exploitable Assets  
All innovation pillars considered in the project will deliver significant advancements in technologies for material 
recovery. These are identified as exploitable project assets that RECLAIM will produce as results upon completion.    
The following table (Table 2. 1),  summarizes these assets highlighting the key involved partners, their expected 
maturity level by the end of the project and the foreseen time needed for full maturity. 
Table 2.1 The RECLAIM exploitable results 
Asset Type Partners Maturity 
Reached 
Time to 
maturity 
#1: prMRF 
The integrated portable robotic Material Recovery Facility that 
effectively recovers valuable materials from waste streams. 
HW & 
SW 
FORTH, 
IRIS, KUL, 
RBNS  
2 years 
#2: Material recognition module for RGB-monitoring 
A component for the identification, localization and 
categorization of materials based on RGB images. 
SW 
FORTH, 
RBNS, 
IRIS  
1 year 
#3: Material recognition module for Hyperspectral-
monitoring 
A component for the identification, localization and 
categorization of materials based on hyperspectral imaging. 
SW IRIS, 
FORTH  
1 year 
#4: Multi-material Gripper 
Newly developed grippers that can robustly grip/release 
materials of multiple different types 
HW & 
SW KUL 
 
1 year 
#5: RoReWo Units & Team 
Low cost robotic units specifically designed and optimized for 
material recovery tasks  
HW & 
SW 
RBNS, 
KUL, 
FORTH  
1 year 
#6: Recycling Data-Game 
A mixed, data collection & gaming module, to actively involve 
citizens in helping develop state of the art recycling technology 
SW UoM 
 
1 year 
#7: Quick Annotation Tool 
A tool that simplifies and speeds up the annotation of RGB and 
hyperspectral images. 
SW RBNS 
 
1 year 
#8: RGB waste imaging dataset 
A dataset of RGB waste images, annotated with respect to the 
presence of materials of multiple and different types.  
DATA RBNS, 
FORTH  
0 year 
#9: Hyperspectral waste imaging dataset 
A dataset of hyperspectral waste images, annotated with respect 
to the presence of materials of multiple and different types. 
DATA IRIS, 
FORTH  
0 year 
 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 23 of 45 
 
2.1.3 Business Case – Target Markets  
A recent study36 on the use of AI in the private sector of Western Europe has revealed that AI has great potential to 
drive transformational changes to businesses and generate significant benefits by optimizing companies’ internal 
operations. The same is also true for the Robotics sector as summarized to the World Robotics Report 37 2020, 
estimating 11% annual increase in industrial robot sales prior to the Covid -19 pandemic, with increased long-term 
perspectives. In view of these figures, RECLAIM addresses well organized target markets with high expectations 
for the coming years.  
Robotic waste sorting. RoReWos have the potential to 
be the new trend in the area of robotic material recovery. 
They are low -volume, low -cost, modular, high 
performance robots with interchangeable grippers able 
to recover a wide variety of materials from waste streams 
and deposit them to material -specific bins. The use of 
RoReWos is expected to signif icantly increase cost -
efficiency and productivity in material recovery 
facilities. 
Scale: In the period 2021 to 2026, the global robotic 
waste sorting system market is expected to grow at a 
Compound Annual Growth Rate ( CAGR)38 of 19.5%.  
Currently, North A merica is the key player in this 
market, with more than 80 robots to be employed in 
sorting residential and commercial recyclable waste in 
the U.S. and Canada. Sorting robots can be useful in 
multiple industries; however, the recycling industry constitutes the largest segment39 (52.1% in 2016). 
Significance: Optimization of state -of-the-art robotic solutions will lead to an increased pick per invested euro 
index, and, particularly, more than 30% compared to current RoReWos. Additionally, the new robots will occupy 
20% lower volume in comparison to the currently available solution and their picking speed can be twice as fast 
as humanly possible. The modular, flexible and efficient solution proposed is expected to have high potential 
market penetration and revenue generation.  
Modular Robotic Systems.  RoReWo Teams adopt an 
inherently modular and scalable architecture that is 
particularly appropriate for robotic task s assuming the 
selection of objects transferred with belts. Due to the 
ability of RoReWo Teams t o easily change the ir 
configuration according to the manufacturer’s need or 
separation line requirements, their popularity is expected 
to increase in coming years.  
Scale: According to a market research report 40, the global 
modular robotics market is expec ted to reach USD 10.76 
billion by 2023 from USD 4.7 billion in 2018. The regional 
assessment of the global Modular Robotics market 
includes a broad evaluation of top markets such as North 
America, Europe, Rest of the World (RoW) and Asia-
Pacific (APAC) and it is shown that Modular Robotics 
market is expected to expand at a CAGR of 14%. 
Significance: RECLAIM will implement technologies that facilitate the automated configuration of the team 
members and the composite RoReWo team after analyzing the characteri stics of the input stream. Additionally , 
the combinatorial planning and control of the team will be explored to achieve effective use of shared resources 
and optimal team performance. 
                                                     
36 https://pulse.microsoft.com/en/transform-en/na/fa1-articial-intelligence-report-at-a-glance/ 
37 https://ifr.org/img/worldrobotics/Executive_Summary_WR_2020_Industrial_Robots_1.pdf 
38 https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/robotic-waste-sorting-system-market 
39 https://www.goldsteinresearch.com/report/global-waste-sorting-robots-market 
40 https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/industry-reports/modular-robotics-market-100760 
Figure 2.1. Recycling falilities where robots are deployed. 
Figure 2.2. Modular robotics market by region (2023). 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 24 of 45 
 
Improved AI system for material 
identification, localization and 
categorization. A combination of 
hyperspectral imaging, computer vision 
and CNN technolog ies will deliver the 
advanced AI-ILC system that will guide 
the RoReWos in the sorting process.  
Scale: The global hyperspectral imaging 
systems market is growing from 
10.66B€ in 2020 at a CAGR41 of 19.3%. 
One of the many applications of 
hyperspectral imaging is machine vision 
and optical sorting. In addition, the 
computer vision market holds around 
9.37B€ in 2019, growing with a CAGR of 7.8% 
Significance: RECLAIM will improve existing technologies, aiming to achieve a waste recognition system that 
can separately recognize more than 90% of the treatable recyclables from the mixed-waste stream and store hyper-
spectral/RGB images in a rwDB. More than 90% of the low confidence a nd misclassified waste images will also 
be stored in the database in order to enable the periodic retraining of the AI -ILC and lead to successful treatment 
of ~50% of the previously miscategorized recyclables.  
Development and demonstration of 
portable r obotic MRF . Currently, 
digital and robotic solutions are being 
examined by large MRFs, where a 
limited number of high -cost robots will 
be incorporated. Most MRFs, however, 
still rely on manual sorting. RECLAIM 
will deliver the first high -tech portable 
robotic MRF that can be used by waste 
management companies, demolition 
companies, local authorities and 
contractors.  
Scale: The global waste sorting 
equipment waste market is estimated to 
amount to around 631.42M€ in 2019, with Europe’s share being around 269.09M€. For the period 2019 to 2027, 
the global market will be growing with a CAGR of 12.4% due to the enforcement of environmental policies and 
automation advancements42. 
Significance: RECLAIM’s prMRF can be installed anywhere and will be fully operational in less than two days. 
Modifications in the digital systems and adjustments in the robotic teams in order to handle different waste 
materials can be performed within 30 minutes. The prMRF can be working continuously for over than 8hours daily 
with high performance rates, initially exceeding 80% of waste recovery. Recovery rates will be improved through 
the retraining of the AI system, resulting in high accuracy sorting equipment, necessary for the prevention of waste 
contamination. As a result, RECLAIM’s prMRFs are expected to recover a healthy return on investment due to 
the economical price point set for entry-level users and become the first ‘static type plant’ that can be rented and 
moved. Therefore, high revenues are expected from the commercialization of the developed technology.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
41 https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/hyperspectral-imaging-market-246979343.html 
42 https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/waste-sorting-equipment-market-102861 
Figure 2.3. N. America hyperspectral impaging systems market size. 
Figure 2.4. Eyrope waste sorting equipment market size. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 25 of 45 
 
Strategic autonomy and competitiveness of European industries. RECLAIM’s prMRF allow the decentralized 
processing and recovery of waste, with high recovery ra tes and accuracy that will result in waste contamination 
prevention and allow the recycling of European waste in multiple locations within EU borders as well as  the 
utilization of modular teams of robots that can process a variety of different waste types.  
Scale: The European Union and the U.S. used to sell 95% and 70% of the plastics collected for recycling to China, 
respectively43. Aiming to reduce its GHG emissions, which remain higher than any other country, China introduced 
in 2018, stricter regulation measures regarding the allowable contamination levels for a number of wastes, resulting 
in a reduction of 99% of recovered plastic shipments heading to Chinese facilities 44. As a result, the EU, North 
America, and other regions have to explore alternative ways of locally recovering their waste.  
Significance: Europe has to take into consideration the variety and multidisciplinary of its members, adopting a 
more flexible, smaller scale, portable solution, such as the prMRF, that will address waste processing and recovery 
in an eco-friendly and smart way. Decentralized processing means high recovery rates of the fresh waste that has 
not been compressed, significantly reducing the contamination levels. Within this frame, new, compact, low-cost, 
low-volume robot ic teams will provide an alternative to large scale, high -cost robots used in the U.S. market. 
Therefore, Europe’s competitiveness within the global market will be increased and autonomous waste 
management will be achieved. 
2.1.4 Requirements, potential barriers and mitigation measures 
The successful exploitation of RECLAIM results will be determined by the requirements and potential barriers 
discussed in the following. We also identify the implemented strategy for the mitigation of barriers:  
1. Lack of alternatives in strategic policies to support decentralized waste management. 
In Europe, political measures and policies at local, national and European level determine the framework and 
regulations of waste management processes. Following China’s recent restrictions, there is an increasing need for 
local material recovery, far beyond the metropolitan centers. European and national leaders have to explore 
alternatives.  
RECLAIM will reach out to waste management companies, public bodies, local authority contractors and policy-
makers in order to disseminate the project’s results and highlight the new, decentralized material recovery 
opportunities that will be implemented. Accordingly, the proposed work will facilitate European waste 
management autonomy and will signif icantly contribute in protecting the European ecosystems ensuring a clean 
and healthy environment for all.  
2. Achieving industry acceptance. 
A typical risk for Innovation Action projects regards the unsuccessful connection of scientific results to industrial 
and societal needs (i.e. technological advancements do not provide long-term solutions to real-world problems). 
RECLAIM aims to address this barrier by working from day one on real world problems and implementing key 
technological advancements on site, therefore yielding results that are directly evaluated in real and demanding 
conditions. Through the organization of training seminars, the advantages of the developed solutions will be 
explained to interested stakeholders. Additionally, the proposed work considers activities to enforce the 
sustainability of the prMRF technology and ensure its long term use after the end of the project (Task 5.4). In 
agreement to the HORIZON -CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09 call, RECLAIM adopts a concrete 
problem-solving app roach, which sets the market upscale of the developed solution as a key objective. The 
proposed work is designed in a completely applied and industry driven framework, and the consortium aims at 
innovative products with high industrial value and great potential for post-project commercialization. 
3. Cost competitiveness of the proposed solution. 
Currently, MRFs are either large-scale facilities near large cities, equipped with costly robots, or small scale mobile 
units relying extensively on manual sorting. Compared to the high-cost large scale MRFs, prMRF is an extremely 
cost competitive solution. Small scale, manual MRFs on the other hand might be cheaper in terms of facility, 
equipment and maintenance cost, but they have much lower efficiency and higher operating costs.  
RECLAIM follows a particularly low cost approach by adopting the use of RoReWos that achieve a particularly 
high “picks per invested euro” ratio. Concerning the supplementary R -Eq to be installed in prMRF, it will be 
selected after thorough market search for identifying low -cost solutions that reduce the initial burden. Overall, 
prMRF is expected to be a promising investment in the long run. In addition, in the way to its market introduction, 
alternative business models may be chosen, such as renting the facility for a specific period. 
                                                     
43 https://eandt.theiet.org/content/articles/2021/09/ai-driven-robotics-key-to-recycling-s-challenges/ 
44 https://resource-recycling.com/recycling/2019/01/29/china-plastic-imports-down-99-percent-paper-down-a-third/ 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 26 of 45 
 
4. Public acceptance and engagement. 
Waste facilities are usually not welcomed by the local communities, due to odors, noise and traffic issues that 
might be associated with them. What is more, AI and robotics might also be examined with skepticism regarding 
ethical issues that might arise and the potential threat to employment.  
RECLAIM will organize activities to engage the local communities and properly explain the technologies and the 
operational conditions, a ddressing questions and uncertainties. In addition, it will be made clear that the 
digitalization and automation of processes and facilities do not exclude the experienced workers, who will provide 
their knowledge and know-how to the entire process, but it will shift their duties towards the handling and control 
of the machines and other management tasks. Most importantly, RECLAIM’s proposed waste management 
decentralization will offer additional job creation at local levels, bringing back jobs that have currently been outside 
Europe. Finally, the public’s engagement through the RDG is a key objective to this project and it will be addressed 
responsibly, ensuring that all groups (based on age, gender, etc.) will be encouraged to participate.