1.3 METHODOLOGY 
RECLAIM aspires to develop a compact, portable, automated and intelligent material recovery facility, the prMRF 
(Fig.1.2), which increases the scope of material recovery by covering areas with loca lly high waste treatment needs 
and enabling material recovery from waste streams that are not adequately treated by existing municipal s ystems. 
The project will deliver a technologically and scientifically sound solution and demonstrate its application in difficult 
real environments with high demands in terms of waste treatment and material recovery  (see Box 2 summarizing 
project scenarios). Complementary to the above, RECLAIM develops a new gaming infrastructure that increases 
social sensitivity on recycling and promotes the active participation of citizens in the research activities of the project.  
Overall, the proposed work is structured in three phases (Figure 1.4) that foresee implementation and release of three 
incrementally enhanced versions of the targeted technology. The first is the Machinery Integration phase [M1-M9] 
that will capitalize on available technology and the extensive e xpertise of the consortium in applied waste 
management solutions, to quickly implement the infrastructure and assemble the mechanical equipment that is 
necessary for the operation of the prMRF. This phase will additionally focus on the early integration of  existing 
hardware and software robotic technology in order to promptly reveal/mitigate conflicts in the waste processing 
chain. Moreover, it will enable data collection to accelerate the training of the necessary AI modules and facilitate 
the design of environmental games targeting recycling and particular material recovery. 
This rapidly created complete prMRF prototype will provide the basis for the second Lean Research and 
Development27 phase28 [M10-M30] that aims at implementing, testing in the field and continuously improving 
solutions for the AI-ILC and RoReWo-Team modules considering the local characteristics of each deployment site. 
A lean implementation that follows a test-fast/improve-fast approach for the immediate reveal and relief of problems 
in the field, is particularly appropriate for creating a prMRF that is functional and highly productive in real conditions. 
Moreover, the second phase will consider the use of real world data for RDG implementation to facilitate data 
collection by citizens. 
 
Figure 1.4. Schematic representation of the RECLAIM development plan. 
The last, Wrap-Up and Consolidation phase [M31-M36] focuses on the continuous and uninterrupted operation of 
the deployed prMRF with small -scale optimizations on the combined operation  of the mechanical and computing 
modules. This is the main result of the project that will be presented to the public complemented by the RDG 
environmental games to increase public sensitivity on recycling and support prMRF sustainability. The final prMRF 
is considered as the Minimum Viable Product (MVP) of the project that will be demonstrated to selected audiences 
such as the scientific community, stakeholders interested in waste management and potential investors for 
considering its commercial exploitation. Further to prMRF, the exploitation and potential commercialization of other 
project assets (RoReWos, AI-ILC, RDG) will be actively considered in the third phase of the project.  
The following sections summarize the work to be done in the three developm ent phases of RECLAIM, focusing 
separately on the four innovation pillars of the project. 
1.3.1 Machinery Integration  
The first phase focuses on the direct exploitation of the technology available to partners FORTH, KUL, IRIS, RBNS 
and the waste management/mate rial recovery expertise available to H RRC, ION, AIMPLAS to develop an early 
version of the targeted prMRF, which will provide a solid basis for experimentation, thereby facilitating successful 
execution of the overall project work plan. 
                                                     
27 Kalinowski, M. et al. (2020) Lean R&D: An Agile Research and Development Approach for Digital Transformation. Int. Conf. 
Product-Focused Software Process Improvement 
28 Due to the significant expertise of the consortium on all background technologies, a “lean” development approach is followed 
in RECLAIM to emphasize focused, field-specific customizations. 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 12 of 45 
 
PIL-1: Advanced AI for material identification, localization and categorization (AI-ILC)  
The first phase of the project will consider the purchase/installation of visual monitoring equipment and the use of 
available solutions contributed by project partners to enable the collection of recyclable material imaging data, using 
RGB and hyperspectral cameras. The data collected will be used to immediately start the training of Neural Networks 
for the AI-ILC modules, even in the first phase of the project.  Data collection will be facilitated by the use of a quick 
annotation tool developed by RBNS, which will allow users with a single click on an image 29, to select the entire 
pixel area of the appearing object. The tool will be significantly improved in RECLAIM in terms of usabilit y, 
accuracy and the ability to process hyperspectral data. 
PIL-2: New, modular, low-cost, high performance, multi-robot/multi-gripper recyclable recovery  
During the first months of the project, a targeted design and implementation of the RoReWo unit will be carried out. 
The RoReWo assumes a simplified architecture to achieve a significant reduction in hardware costs by trading off 
small reductions in robot efficiency and productivity. The RoReWo consists of a single axis closed loop motion 
control Cartesian robot that can be installed above any  size conveyor belt transporting the waste, with its motion 
direction perpendicular to the movement of the belt. This allows the robot carriage to run along the entire width of 
the belt. A low-cost piston is mounted on the moving carriage of the robot, which moves vertically in relation to the 
conveyor belt (i.e. up/down), with the use of compressed air. The piston moves towards the belt in order to reach and 
grab a recyclable object and then away from the belt to pick  and transfer the object to the material collection bins 
installed in the left and right side of the RoReWo. Attached to the piston is one of the different available end-effectors 
that grabs and holds the objects when transported to the collection bin. The  synchronization of the moving robot 
carriage, the piston and the grabber is achieved using Newtonian mechanisms that combine the prediction of the 
location of objects on the belt to position the robot at the right time above the object to be sorted, and t hen timely 
activate the motion of the piston and the grabber.  A particularly low cost RoReWo prototype has been already 
evaluated in relevant waste treatment conditions30. 
The RoReWo described above is of particularly low cost (approx. 4K €) and achieves ~ 45 picks per minute, when 
the commonly used Delta robots (approx. cost 25K €) achieve ~60 picks per minute. As a result, by using a 4 -
RoReWo Team working cooperatively for recyclable material recovery, we can triple the performance of the 
composite system and still have a lower implementation cost in relation to the Delta robot. Moreover, as shown in 
Figure 1.5, various grippers are already available by RBNS and KUL, which can be used as end -effectors of the 
different RoReWos in the team. The synthesis  of a multi-robot/multi-gripper team is a significant advantage of the 
proposed modular RECLAIM approach. In contrast to the use of a single high-cost robot that carries only one end-
effector, this approach expands the scope of the composite system and inc reases the utility and performance of the 
RoReWo Team for material recovery applications. 
Figure 1.5. A variety of different grippers that can be used in each RoReWo  
      
Long diameter suction 
cup for deformed 
packages 
Short diameter suction 
cup for small plastic 
films 
Fingered gripper for 
mid-volume and 
heavy objects 
Pinned gripper for 
woods and soft heavy 
objects 
Magnetic gripper for 
ferrous metals 
 
PIL-3: Portable robotic Material Recovery Facility 
For the rapid progress of the first phase there is already a cost plan for the Recycling Equipment (R-Eq) that will be 
installed in the RECLAIM deployments. During the first months of the project, the R -Eq features will be specified 
in detail, so that the machinery can be selected and purchased. At th e same time, prMRF deployment sites will be 
examined in order to carry out preparatory actions necessary for prMRF operation. 
Regarding prMRF deployment for material recovery from post-consumer waste, HRRC has already analyzed the 
population fluctuations of the Greek islands during a full year period and how these changes affect the amount of 
recyclables that should be recovered by the prMRF. Based on this analysis, it has already determined that the most 
suitable island for the installation of prMRF is Kef alonia with a second (alternative) option, the island of Lefkada. 
                                                     
29 Video link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HALgk1kb6Xk  
30 Video link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ztffZwWAc44  

HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 13 of 45 
 
Both of these islands face a problem in their waste management all year round, with the problem becoming very 
intense during the summer months. Thus , the double-shift operation of the prMRF during the tourist season and 
single-shift in the off-season months is expected to cover a significant part of the island's waste management needs. 
ION is the local authority responsible for the management of waste in both Kefalonia and Lefkada, being particularly 
interested to not only host the prMRF throughout the project offering the necessary infrastructure for its operation , 
but also consider the use of additional prMRFs to address the material recovery needs in other Ionian islands. 
PIL-4: Educational environmental gaming for social awareness and data collection  
The design of environmental games will proceed in parallel with the above described activities. The main focus will 
be on RDG and the collection of recycling data, specifying in detail operational scenarios (see Box 2). Additionally, 
we will consider the potential implementation of fun games to complement pure RDG, (e.g. a virtual recycling worker 
game, quiz questions on the reduction of CO2 emissions in relation to material recycling, familiar ization with the 
recycling processes followed in European countries, etc.). UoM in collaboration with the consortium partners ISWA 
and AXIA that lead the communication exploitation and innovation activities, will examine new ideas and proposals 
to select games that better promote the results of the project to the public.  
Box 3. Indicative RDG scenario.  The users are shown real waste images captured by camera s installed in the 
prMRF and asked to complete one of many reviewing tasks to receive virtual prizes for their contribution in 
recycling research. Reviewing tasks may regard the annotation of materials appearing on images, the assessment 
of the outcomes of the currently best trained AI -ILC module (false positives/false negatives), the assessment of 
AI-ILC inferred masks, the correction of AI-ILC inferred masks to be re-used for training, etc. All inputs provided 
by individual anonymous users will be assessed by several other users to verify quality before they are included in 
the training dataset (experienc ed recycling staff will have the overall inspection of the gamified data -collection 
process). The improved dataset will be used for retraining the AI-ILC module which will afterwards be considered 
the new current AI-ILC to drive the game (i.e. produce new images for the users). 
1.3.2 Lean Research & Development  
The second phase includes the main part of developments and technological advancements considered in each 
innovation pillar, through repeated test-improvement cycles. During this phase, the second use-case scenario of the 
project will be considered (see Box 2). In particular, ION will initially bring citizen separated materials to the prMRF 
for testing and guided development/refinement of the software and hardware components. Subsequently, we will 
consider transferring the prMRF to Corfu to directly process the citizen separated waste. It is expected that making 
known the presence and the operation of the prMRF in Corfu will strengthen the interest of citizens to the circular 
economy and will strengthen their recycling activities.   
PIL-1: Advanced AI for material identification, localization and categorization (AI-ILC) 
To increase the efficiency of the AI -ILC module, two complementary means of waste imaging will be used. These 
regards (i) an ordinary RGB gl obal-shutter camera to collect material information in the visual domain and (ii) a 
hyperspectral camera in the infrared domain (e.g. 1000 -2000 nm) to collect spectral information of materials in 
wavelengths not visible to humans. The information captured from these two modalities will effectively complement 
each other to increase effectiveness and accuracy in material recovery applications. In particular, the visible light 
camera is important for the segmentation of materials in the case that two or more objects of the same material type 
are adjacent and thus not separable with hyperspectral imaging. Οn the other hand, the use of a hyperspectral camera 
offer significant possibilities in relation to material recognition and determination of objects consistency. In other 
words, using only information from the visual domain it is hard to identify the difference between objects with similar 
appearance but different material type (e .g. plastic films), while at the same time RGB computer vision may often 
face difficulties due to dirt or shape deformations. Ac cordingly, during the actual prMRF operation, both cameras 
will be simultaneously active, providing complementary information for the detection and categorization of materials. 
In parallel to the above described joined visible and infrared imaging, RECLAIM will explore simpler cost-effective 
solutions solutions relying only on RGB imaging. This will exploit prior experience of FORTH and RBNS in urban 
environments (particularly in Crete and Cyprus) which has shown that satisfactory material recognition and 
categorization can be achieved by using RGB only imaging. This is expected to be appropriate for the second scenario 
considered in RECLAIM (see Box 2), implying that the manufacturing costs for the entire prMRF could be 
significantly lower in the case of negative separation applications. 
In this phase of the project there will be extensive collection of both hyperspectral and RGB data, which will be used 
to train newly developed CNN solutions that combine RGB and/or hyperspectral information for the identifi cation, 
categorization and localization of recyclables. Early annotation of collected data will be accomplished with the help 
of a new, quick annotation tool for recyclables, used by experienced recycling workers to collect, in a short time, a 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 14 of 45 
 
large volume of data. Further annotation of collected data will be achieved with the participation of citizens using 
the RDG, as summarized below.  
The collected data will be used to implement and evaluate different approaches to the optimal implementation of the 
AI-ILC. Research endeavors will consider (among others) the use of separate CNNs dedicated to the different 
material types vs multi -class CNNs categorizing multiple types of material, and will consider how AI -ILC 
performance is affected by other features of p rMRF function (spatial distribution of materials, belt speed, frame 
processing rate, etc.). The repeating industrial experimentation and testing is described by the multiple 
“implementation & testing” spins shown in Figure 1.4.  
To incrementally improve the operation of the AI-ILC, RGB and hyperspectral data recordings will be developed for 
items whose categorization has low confidence. The data of the poorly categorized objects, will be fed to the RDG 
for citizen-powered annotation and then included in the set of training data to repeatedly increase the performance of 
AI-ILC inferencing. 
PIL-2: New, modular, low-cost, high performance, multi-robot/multi-gripper recyclable recovery  
A key issue for prMRF operation is the efficiency of the robotic system used for the recovery and physical sorting of 
recyclables. Since the treatment of recyclables does not assume fine manipulations, the grippers to be considered in 
RECLAIM will all rely on pneumatic technology (small / big suction cups, pinned gripper, parallel  gripper) and 
power supply (magnetic gripper, fingered gripper) so that they ease RoReWo re -configuration on the fly, according 
to the dynamic requirements of each deployment (e.g. seasonality). The industrial research that will be carried out in 
the second phase concerns the selection of the appropriate vacuum grip system (Venturi vs blower), the determination 
of suction cup according to the size and the deformations of materials, the comparison of the different grip options 
for each type of material, and the operational requirements of the system (number of materials/bins, relative 
proportions of materials in the waste stream, etc.). The motion control of RoReWos will consider the characteristics 
of the R -Eq installed in the prMRF (e.g. width/speed of the c onveyor belt), as well as the characteristics of the 
different grippers (e.g. acceleration in relation to safe object transport).  
An important part of second phase work will focus on RoReWos teamwork and the coordination of member actions 
to ensure that a ll RoReWos can move simultaneously without conflicts/restrictions, can efficiently share common 
resources (compressed air supply, vacuum supply). The selection of materials to be recovered will base on economic 
(secondary material price 31) and environmental  (carbon footprint 32) criteria, which will be further combined with 
waste analytics to set-up the best team-configuration for the given mix of recyclables.  
PIL-3: Portable robotic Material Recovery Facility 
This part of the prMRF study will be carried out entirely in the field with the aim of customizing and optimizing its 
operation according to the individual needs of the use case scenarios considered in the project. The optimization will 
consider in combination the preparation of waste from the mechanical R -Eq accomplishing the placement of 
incomings in a single layer on the conveyor belt, the identification, categorization and localization of recyclables by 
the AI-ILC unit, their physical separation into different bins from the RoReWos team and finally the ball ing of the 
recovered materials before they are promoted in the secondary market. Besides mechanical adaptations, a major part 
of the PIL -3 work will focus on waste analytics to reveal the synthesis of incoming objects which will be further 
associated with the RoReWo Team configuration, the recovery actions performed for each material type and the 
number of items that have been actually recovered. The multifaceted consideration of the operation of prMRF units 
will provide significant know -how on the configur ation of the composite system according to the specific 
requirements of each deployment site.  
PIL-4: Realistic environmental gaming for social awareness and data collection  
RDG development efforts will focus on producing games that are intuitive and simple to use, and that can be deployed 
on many platforms and devices, focusing on web -based solutions. This will leverage state -of-the-art work on data 
games combining them to create a recycling data-game pipeline for re-using and improving real-world data through 
human annotations. To implement RDG, established game engines will be exploited (e.g. Unity 3D), as they are 
powerful and deployable across a broad range of platforms. This part of work will additionally consider the formatting 
of the collected data to be directly exploitable by deep learning algorithms, and means to provide feedback to users 
acknowledging their contribution in RECLAIM scientific work. During this phase , the RDG will reach the 
community to support data collection and gain feedback wit h respect to its effectiveness, usability and user -
friendliness. 
                                                     
31 https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Recycling_-_secondary_material_price_indicator 
32 https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/03/5_Waste-1.pdf 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 15 of 45 
 
1.3.3 Wrap Up & Consolidation   
Τhis phase includes consolidating all the technical developments and data collected in the first 30 months of the 
project. The goal is to prepare exploitation plans for the market penetration of the individual project assets after 
considering stakeholders’ feedback and the technical results and achievements of project developments. The 
assessment of project developments will proceed based on the measurable KPIs alread y specified in RECLAIM 
objectives. It is noted that during this phase, the third use case scenario (see Box 2) will be examined,  which  
emphasizes the portability of the prMRF and its ability to reach areas with increased waste production in order to 
directly process and recover fresh, uncompressed, high quality materials. 
PIL-1: Advanced AI for material identification, localization and categorization (AI-ILC) 
In the last phase of the project, the final evaluation of the AI -ILC module will take place. Perfo rmance evaluation 
will consider the typical Mean Average Precision (MAP), Mean Average Recall (MAR) and F1 -score that consider 
the relationship between false positive and false negative categorizations. Moreover, a comparison will be made 
between the two different approaches followed to implement the AI-ILC (rgb+hyperspectral vs rgb-only) in order to 
draw conclusions about the suitability of each approach in the different project scenarios and also reveal good 
practices for their use in material recovery an d other applications beyond RECLAIM. In order to maximize the 
technological footprint of the project, the utilization of AI-ILC will be examined in applications that concern not only 
waste management but also the visual recognition and categorization of other products.  
PIL-2: New, modular, low-cost, high performance, multi-robot/multi-gripper recyclable recovery 
RoReWo evaluation will focus on the efficiency of the proposed solution in managing waste streams with multiple 
and varying characteristics. In ad dition to assessing the usability and robustness of RoReWo highly simplified 
architecture, it is important to evaluate the suitability and efficiency of the various grippers against the physical 
characteristics of each waste type (size, shape, deformation, etc.). RoReWo Teams that combine multiple robots and 
multiple grippers in a unified complex system, will be evaluated with emphasis on the balance between scope 
expansion (i.e. manage more waste types) and total number of picks offered by RoReWos, to maxi mize the value 
and ecological impact of recovered materials. The evaluation will focus not only on RoReWo productivity but also 
on the investment required to install a team in waste treatment environments compared to other available solutions, 
in order to draw up a business plan for its commercialization. RoReWos are expected to be by far the solution with 
the best pick per invested euro rate. New application areas will also be sought where RoReWos can act as new, highly 
cost-effective solutions managing items on conveyor belts (e.g. quality control in pharmaceutical/grocery industry).  
PIL-3: Portable robotic Material Recovery Facility 
The prMRF evaluation will focus on the chain operation of all installed subsystems to ensure their efficient and 
synchronized operation. Through small -scale refinements, the operation of each unit will be optimized so as to 
facilitate the operation of the next in line, and jointly compose a highly productive system that can recover multiple 
and different materials from the waste streams. Among others, the third phase of the project will reveal the portability 
of the prMRF to explore and demonstrate local, close to source robotic material recovery and sorting. In this context, 
prMRF will be deployed in the port of Kefalonia to directly process the waste of arriving ferries. ION will additionally 
consider other options for prMRF deployments in high visibility areas across the Ionian Islands. Overall, at least 15 
days of live demos open to the public will be implemented in the last months of the project. Following this approach, 
RECLAIM will exploit the popularity of Ionian Islands as attractive touristic destinations, to demonstrate to the 
citizens and the visitors of the islands how EU research funding contributes to the solutions  of daily problems and 
material recovery in particular, for the benefit of the environment, the society and the economy. 
RECLAIM will undertake concrete activities that will pave the way for the commercial exploitation of the prMRF, 
which provides a timely solution to the strong global need for distributed material recovery. To this end, the needs 
and times required for the transfer and the installation of the prMRF in the application field will be studied and 
reported. Particular emphasis will be placed on the ease of use of the system by users who are not experts in artificial 
intelligence and robotics. Good practices will be reported regarding the configuration of the overall system and the 
combined operation of different grippers in order to make the prM RF directly useful in a broad range of material 
recovery applications. It is noted that the RECLAIM end-user participants (ION, HRRC) have already expressed 
their strong interest in distributed material recovery systems (in Greece there are dozens of islan ds that are in need 
of a prMRF) and would be among the first potential buyers of new prMRFs when they are placed on the market.  
PIL-4: Educational environmental gaming for social awareness and data collection 
The evaluation of RDG will consider the user f riendliness/usability of the gaming environment, the engagement of 
users (repeating RDG use) and the accomplishment of its main purpose that is the collection of extensive recycling 
data via human contributions. To this end, questionnaires, interview and p lay-aloud sessions will be used to assess 
user satisfaction. Moreover, an action recording infrastructure will enable analytics on user behavior, which will 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 16 of 45 
 
subsequently guide RDG refinements with respect to performance and usability so that users can easi ly provide 
recycling annotation data. At this final stage , it is important to ensure that the newly provided data are smoothly 
verified (e.g. through user voting) and pipelined into the confirmed datasets used for deep learning. This will facilitate 
the long-term sustainability of the deployed prMRF, but will also provide significant background contributions for 
future works adopting the citizen-science approach for the collection of scientific data.