2.2 MEASURES TO MAXIMIZE IMPACT  
The RECLAIM partners have already planned a credible path to maximize the impact of project actions. This plan 
is comprised of five primary and interdependent elements, namely: (i) specification of target groups, (ii) 
dissemination activities, (ii) communication channels and activities, (iii) exploitation strategy for market penetration, 
(iv) intellectual property and regulatory assessment.  
Before describing in detail the individual elements, it is noted that both dissemination and communication activities 
will be led by ISWA, the largest waste management network worldwide, with the mission to promote and develop 
sustainable and professional waste management and catalyse the transition to a circular economy. ISWA has already 
established an e xtensive network of different stakeholders in the waste management sector  that will be actively 
informed about RECLAIM, its activities and results. Along this line, the project will be regularly presented in 
the annual ISWA World Congress which is the industry’s leading solid waste management event. Exploiting direct 
access to the focused, global waste management and circular economy community, RECLAIM will assure maximum 
impact for the proposed work and high potential to promptly include prMRF in the mater ial recovery technologies 
used globally. 
It is noted that, during the last phase of the project (Wrap up & Consolidation phase), the consortium will consider 
the transfer and live demonstration of the prMRF in the ISWA World Congress  and/or other high -visibility 
exhibitions in the circular economy domain. This unique demonstration opportunity will be  possible due to the 
portability and quick installation of the prMRF that permi ts the implementation of demonstration tours to increase 
project visibility and spark the interest of stakeholders and investors to prMRF and the relevant project technologies. 
Exploitation activities will be led by AXIA, which has long experience in designing strategies and implementing 
activities that overcome the barriers for the ma rket uptake of research results. Before the end of the project, AXIA 
will organize a major event to present RECLAIM results to stakeholders and demonstrate prMRF to investors and 
potential customers. 
2.2.1 Target audience 
The RECLAIM partners have identified dif ferent communities with an expected high interest in the targeted 
innovations. These are summarized in Table 2.2. 
Table 2.2 RECLAIM Target Audience 
Target Audience Sector Description 
Industry End users in sectors of interest:  
▪ Robotic waste sorting system manufacturers such as Machinex Industries, AMP Robotics 
Corporation, ZenRobotics , and w aste sorting equipment manufacturers such as 
STEINERT GmbH, TOMRA, REDWAVE, Buhler Group  
▪ Recycling Industry (both mechanical and chemical recycling)  
▪ Waste management companies, demolition companies  
▪ Local authorities and contractors  
▪ Hyperspectral imaging systems developers such as Specim, Spectral Imaging Ltd.  
▪ Computer vision companies such as Basler, Baumer Optronic  
▪ Secondary end users  (plastics, paper, m etal and minerals industry, but also w ood  and 
food waste industry  
▪ Gaming industry 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 27 of 45 
 
European 
associations 
EXPRA (Extended Producer Responsibility Alliance), PRO -EUROPE (Packaging Recovery 
Organization Europe), EPDA (European Plastics Distributors Association), Plas tics Europe 
(Association of plastics manufacturers), EPRO  (European Association of Plastics Recycling 
and Recovery Organisation ), PRE ( Plastics Recyclers Europe) , Zero Waste Europe,  EGBA 
(European Gaming and Betting Association) 
Scientific 
Community  
Academics & researchers, Universities, research institutions, students, living labs 
Developers professionals, open source, hobbyists in the area of AI, robotics, and gaming 
EU projects and 
Digital 
Innovation Hubs 
Funded projects from the CSA HORIZON -CL4-2021-HUMAN-01-02, partnerships from 
Horizon Europe Clusters 4 and 6, collaboration with the AI -on-Demand platform, the EU 
Digital Industrial Platform for Robotics, the BigData Europe and similar follow up projects 
General Public Citizens, communities facilita ting the demonstrators, communities with the potential to 
facilitate prMRF operation, environmental NGOs, students  
Policy-makers, 
Public Bodies 
Standardization and certification bodies, national Governments, environmental ministries, 
municipalities and local regional authorities, authorization bodies, EC parliament  
Innovation 
Communities 
Investors, start -ups, e ntities in charge of funding research programs, funding schemes, 
financial stakeholders 
2.2.2 Dissemination Activities 
The dissemination plan  aims to inform EU stakeholders and the largest possible audience about the project’s 
results and enable the future market penetration of the solutions proposed. The dissemination activities, starting after 
the first project results are obtained, will promote the project’s outcomes to identified target groups (see Table 2.2), 
through complementary means, enabling their use, uptake and further evolution/application in various fields. Under 
this scope, all RECLAIM partners will closely cooperate, using all the successfully tested practices in line with the 
EC Guidelines and Communication Strategies of the European regulation, and taking advantage of their established 
networks to raise global awareness on the obtained results. More specifically, RECLAIM will actively disseminate 
project results to the targeted communities by implementing activities aligned with the needs of the various 
constituencies that will benefit from project outcomes. Dissemination actions addressing important communities 
include the following: 
Table 2.3 Dissemination actions. 
Tool description and scope Target Audience 
Open access of data, computational models, 
scientific publications 
Scientific community, Developers 
On-site demonstrators General Public, Industry, Policy-makers  
Communication with networks and associations  European Associations, Academia & Research 
Presentation of Results in Scientific Conferences Academia & Research 
University courses, trainings, thesis  Academia & Research 
New and ongoing projects of partners Academia & Research 
Training Programs General Public, Academia & Research 
Results presentation in Exhibitions and fairs General Public, Academia & Research, Policy -makers, 
Public Bodies, Innovation Communities 
Networking with EU funded activities EU projects and Dig ital Innovation Hubs , Academia & 
Research, Innovation Communities 
Dissemination activities in RECLAIM will be constantly monitored to evaluate the effects of the implemented 
activities and plan future efforts. The following table provides a list of Dissem ination Key Performance Indicators 
(D-KPIs), setting a baseline for verifying that key project dissemination objectives have been met. 
Table 2.4 Dissemination KPIs 
KPI Description Threshold 
Training of non -specialist partners staff on 
robotic, AI, hypersp ectral imaging, data 
analytics and scientific gaming technologies 
At least 2 training s of non-specialist RECLAIM partners staff 
and professionals on waste management (including reference to 
trustworthy and ethical AI) 
Open online educational events on state of the 
art robotic, AI, hyperspectral imaging, data 
analytics and scientific gaming technologies  
At least 2 online webinars open to the public on recent technology 
developments, their benefits /restrictions and potential 
applications (including reference to trustworthy and ethical AI)  
Recycling Data-Game users At least 2000 unique registered users 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 28 of 45 
 
Open dataset of annotated RGB waste images At least 50.000 images of waste annotated with respect to the 
presence of recyclable materials 
Open dataset of a nnotated Hyperspectral 
waste images 
At least 30.000 hyperspectral images of waste annotated with 
respect to the presence of recyclable materials 
Open access model for recyclable material 
recognition based on RGB imaging 
At least one DL-trained CNN model on material recognition based 
on RGB imaging 
Open access model for recyclable material 
recognition based on hyperspectral imaging 
At least one DL-trained CNN model on material recognition based 
on hyperspectral imaging 
Open access papers At least 5 intern ational high -quality, peer -reviewed 
journal/conference publications 
Special Issues  At least 1 special issue in a high-impact international journal 
Networking with EU-funded projects Seek networking and joint activity organization with at least 4 EU 
funded projects 
Staff exchanges At least 3 weekly visits/staff exchange between RECLAIM 
partners (Covid-19 pandemic permitting) 
Participation in events Participation in at least 8 major physical or virtual events 
(conferences and fairs) with presentations, booths 
RECLAIM partners will carefully select publication venues based on their scientific excellence and impact 
privileging, with a preference to open access publishing. An indicative, non-restrictive list of high impact venues to 
be targeted for publication by the project consortium are: 
▪ Robotics and AI: IEEE Intern. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE International Conference 
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 
International Conference on Pattern Recognition , RSS, ICRK SPR, Parallel, RA -L, T-RO, RAM, Annual 
International Conference on AI and Data Science, ROBOMECH Journal, Engineering Applications of 
Artificial Intelligence, Frontiers in Robotics and AI, Autonomous Robots, AI & Bi g Data Expo Europe, 
EmTech Europe, Annual International Conference on AI and Data Science. 
▪ Waste Management: ISWA World Congress, World Conf. on Waste Management (WCWM), Intern. Conf. 
on Science, Technology, Engineering & Management (ICSTEM), Intern. Conf on Environment and Life 
Science (EUCELS), Sustainable Waste Management Conference (AIChE), Waste Recycling and 
Management (ICWRM), Journal of Waste Resources and Recycling, Open Waste Management Journal. 
▪ Circular Economy: Circular Economy and Sustainabilit y, International Conference on Circular Economy 
and Sustainability, Journal of Shipping and Trade, International Conference on Circularity in the Built 
Environment, European Recycling Conference, Annual event WCEF2021. 
2.2.3 Communication Channels and Project Activities 
The RECLAIM communication plan will include strategic and targeted measures for promoting the project itself 
(including its results/accomplishments) to multiple audiences, the media and the wider public. Planned activities will 
raise awareness about the project but also the wider topics of recycling and the circular economy and how these are 
supported by RECLAIM technologies, namely robotics, AI, RGB/hyperspectral imaging, data analytics and 
scientific gaming. 
Key goals of the communication activities are to demonstrate how EU funding contributes to tackling environmental, 
societal and economic challenges in relation to waste management, recycling  and transition to a circular economy. 
Particular emphasis will be provided in revealing how RECLAIM and the development of prMRF in particular 
support material recovery and the circular economy in the current Covid-19 pandemic. 
RECLAIM has already specified a communication toolbox to support and assure the effectiveness of communication 
activities, which are listed below: 
• Visual identity and brand of the RECLAIM project (e.g. attractive, easily identifiable project logo)  
• Project website, blog, newsletters 
• Regularly prepared informative material, both multimedia (videos, presentations, digital flyers) and 
printable (banners, posters, flyers)  
• Use of social media to communicate project achievements (create campaigns for targeted audiences)   
• Participation in industry events (e.g. ISWA World Congress, IFAT) 
• Presentations to local, national and international media (TV broadcasts, radio, newspapers) 
• Participation to European and International events demonstrating scientific and technological developments 
to the public (e.g. European Researchers Night, European Research and Innovation Days, etc.) 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 29 of 45 
 
Communication activ ities in RECLAIM will be constantly monitored and evaluated against the list of 
Communication Key Performance Indicators (C-KPIs) summarized in Table 2.5. 
Table 2.5 Communication KPIs 
Communication Channel Threshold 
Project website (D&C): General information 
about the project, objectives, consortium, 
news, progress and publications 
▪ Annually updated project flyer 
▪ 20 visits per day after year 2 
▪ 3,500+ downloads of reports and dissemination material 
Social Media (Twitter, FB, LinkedIn): Raise 
awareness of general public, attract 
stakeholders and potential industrial partners 
▪ 1000+ followers in each platform  
▪ 5 posts/platform every month 
▪ 20+ re-tweets per month 
▪ 2+ targeted campaigns annually to promote prMRF and RDG  
Videos 
▪ project dedicated YouTube channel after month 3 
▪ 2 videos uploaded in YouTube and website annually 
▪ 500+ views per video  
Articles (in magazines/newspapers) 
▪ 6 articles in 6 different countries on the use of AI and robotics 
for material recovery in the Covid-19 era, in the first year 
▪ 6 articl es in 6 different countries on the use of RDG for 
scientific data collection in the second year  
e-Newsletters (D): Project progress and 
updates, upcoming events and publications 
▪ 3+ newsletters annually 
▪ 4,000+ recipients after year 2 
Press releases (C): Awareness of impacts for 
techno-economic, societal, environmental 
benefits 
▪ 2 press releases  annually, communicating relevant 
achievements in TV, magazines 
Printed material (leaflets, flyer, brochures, 
posters) (D&C): Distribution in conferences, 
fairs, B2B, presenting aims, expected impact. 
▪ 6 printed concepts 
▪ Distribution of 1,500 leaflets in events 
Partners’ websites (D&C): Dedicated section 
for the project in all partners’ pages 
▪ A total of 20 visits/month in the dedicated section 
European and International events ▪ 2 participations of the project participants annually 
▪ 2 presentations and/or video demonstrations annually  
Open Live Demo ▪ 15+ days of live prMRF demo in public spaces 
Within the frame summarized in the last two sections , ISWA, supported by a ll partners, will deliver a Plan for 
Dissemination and Communication (D7.1), developed in M6. This plan will be annually updated. 
2.2.4 Exploitation Activities 
Exploitation activities have a more practical scope, including actions for utilizing the project results in activities other 
than those envisaged by RECLAIM. These regard using, advancing and marketing the product and assets of the 
project, creating and providing a log-term services, or include project outcomes to steer EU and national policies and 
refine regulations on material recovery . The exploitation plan of RECLAIM is centered on the open -source 
distribution of project results to accelerate developments on smart, automated material recovery. Project partners will 
ensure that technologies will be readily accessible to the communities of interest, enabling them to use and potentially 
benefit from the project’s results. 
It is expected that the RECLAIM partners will actively exploit the achievements and results of the project by their 
own efforts. Relevant activities include: 
• Extend the capabilities of the prMRF, the RoReWos, the AI-ILC, the RDG with additional features to support 
additional types of production processes and allow their use in new applications. 
• Conduct further research to address new desirable features identified in the final stages of the project. 
• Exploit RECLAIM technologies in ongoing or new national and EU projects with related research activities 
and technology developments. 
• Utilise existing technology transfer programmes to make project tech nologies available to industrial actors 
in Europe. 
• Register project results to European initiatives to maximize visibility and potential interest of interested 
stakeholders and investors (e.g. Horizon Results Booster, Horizon Results Platform, Horizon Impact Awards, 
EU Web awards, Enterprise Europe Network, European Cluster Collaboration Platform, Innovation Radar) 
• Evaluation of the ability of RECLAIM technologies to support additional types of production scenarios and 
configurations beyond those addressed within the project. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 30 of 45 
 
• Create synergies and transfer knowledge from/to relevant projects and technology networks such as the 
AI4EU: European AI On -Demand Platform, EU Digital Industrial Platform for Robotics, the Munich 
Innovation Hub for Applied AI, Digital Innovation Hub in Artificial Intelligence & Robotics for Sustainable 
Development Goals 
The exploitation strategy will pave the way for the market uptake of the project outcomes comprising hardware 
modules, namely RoReWos and the prMRF enhancing their potential for post-project commercialization. In order to 
transfer them into real innovation - a new economic activity that creates jobs and wealth- the project participants will 
present the implemented fully operational prototype to investors, waste management  enterprises and other 
stakeholder with a focused interest and economic activities related to the circular economy. Moreover, to support the 
market up take of RoReWos and the prMRF,  RECLAIM will contact innovation incubators (e.g. European BIC 
Network) providing established channels for technology commercialization and other clustering services. The 
software results of the project will be made available as open source, for re -use and potential advancement by 
researchers and developers.  
A detailed exploitation plan will be created regarding the key innovation results of the project, as well as partners’ 
individual pathways, leading to the maximization of the project’s impact. Key Results (KR) of RECLAIM are 
presented in Table 2.6 , along with a categorization  of their type, IP owner ship and exploitation route. Four main 
categories of KR type are identified: (i) new HW&SW products, (ii) SW processes, (iii) prototypes, (iv) data. These 
innovative and exploitable results will result from the work conducted by eac h partner and will be further updated 
during the project implementation. 
Table 2.6 RECLAIM Key Results (KR) 
Key Result Type IP Owner Exploitation route 
KR1: Development of high -performance  
AI-ILC  SW Process IRIS, FORTH Open Source, collaborative 
research 
KR2: Optimization of low-volume, low-cost, 
high performance RoReWos 
HW&SW 
Product  
RBNS, KUL  Patenting, collaborative 
research or licensing 
KR3: Development of eco-friendly,  
high-tech prMRFs 
HW&SW 
Product 
FORTH, IRIS 
RBNS, KUL 
Patenting, collaborative 
research or licensing 
KR4: Development of recycling data games  SW Process UoM Open Source 
KR5: Demonstration of prMRF in three 
different use cases Prototype ION, HRRC Sustainable operation beyond 
RECLAIM 
KR6: Annotated dataset of RGB and 
hyperspectral waste images Data RBNS, IRIS, 
FORTH 
Open Source, benchmarking 
Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that  the exploitation strategy will include a general plan for each partner’s 
foreseen exploitation route. Within this frame, the benefits from the involvement of partners in the project and their 
contribution to RECLAIM’s impact are highlighted. The above-mentioned exploitation strategy will be included in 
the Plan for the Innovation and Exploitation Activities (D7.2), originally submitted at M6 and updated twice at M18 
and M36.  
2.2.5 Management of Intellectual Property 
The Consortium Agreement (CA) will be signed by the EC and the consortium, setting the legal basis for the 
management of IPR, ownerships, access to key knowledge and research data. The background I PR of each partner 
will be identified and clearly defined in the CA, and remain the property of the originator partner. A well -defined 
IPR strategy will allow handling aspects related to ownership, development, exploitation and confidentiality of IP 
arising from the project’s results. Particularly, the IPR generated within the project will be the property of the partner 
responsible for its development. In the case of joint invention, partners collaborating for the achievement of the 
project’s objectives wil l have  joint ownership of results, defined and protected in a bilateral agreement. All 
background knowledge necessary for the implementation of the project will be available to the relevant partners. 
Whenever background IP is needed for the post -project exploitation, the owner will choose whether royalty -free 
access will be granted, or a license fee will be charged, under fair and reasonable terms. The IPR strategy will ensure 
the protection of IP during the exploitation of the key results. Originally defin ed in the CA and Grant Agreement 
(GA), IPR strategy will be updated by AXIA in the  Plan for the Innovation and Exploitation Activities (D7.2). 
Additionally, AXIA will conduct a patent mapping analysis in order to ensure infringement is avoided and to identify 
the patent potential of the project.  
 
 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 31 of 45