1.1  OBJECTIVES & AMBITION  
Improved recycling policies and the increasing interest in the concept of circular economy for sustainable use of raw 
materials are key elements of modern and efficient waste management across the EU. Regardless of how waste 
collection and recycling is implemented in different EU countries, collected waste needs to be processed either to 
remove unwanted or hazardous objects from the main material (negative separation of objects) or, to sort the reusable 
materials from the partially mixed waste collected (positive separation). Sorting these waste streams is today still 
often performed mainly manually, which is a mind -numbing task. Further, workers are  typically exposed to  
hazardous conditions with adverse health effects, e.g. pulmonary, gastrointestinal and musculoskeletal problems1. 
Recent technological developments2 have facilitated the modernization of large scale indu strial Material Recovery 
Facilities (MRFs), which can be crucially supported by smart and automated waste treatment equipment. This 
approach is now adopted by several MRFs that are typically installed near urban areas to carry out municipal waste 
treatment. Despite the high productivity of these industrial solutions, transportation of waste to these large plants is 
costly and makes material recovery more difficult due to the compression of waste during transport. Moreover, there 
are still several cases where waste treatment needs are not efficiently catered for by the existing model. These include 
natural disasters, occasional high volume waste, rural or distant areas 3 4 and transport hubs 5. To meet the recycling 
needs of such cases, a new market trend has recently emerged, focused on implementing light, flexible and portable 
waste management units that can be quickly deployed in the areas in need, to undertake waste management and 
particularly the recovery of valuable recyclable waste6 7 8. Despite the strong demand for these systems, to date they 
lack the integration of smart, high-tech solutions that could significantly enhance their productivity. As a result, waste 
sorting in these niche sectors is still today powered by manual sorting. 
Therefore, the RECLAIM proposal aims  to exploit mature and well -tested AI -driven 
robotic waste management technology that will be improved and embedded in a state of 
the art “portable, robotic MRF” (prMRF) that will be capable of significantly enhancing 
local-scale material recovery activities providing them with industrial-level efficiency. 
Noticeably, the EU is progressively increasing its targets for the recycling of municipal waste (summarized in Box 1), 
in order to feed economically valuable waste materials back into th e European economy and to protect not only the 
environment, but also human health. To achieve these ambitious but achievable goals, the use of advanced robotic 
sorting systems that accelerate material recovery should be realized beyond the current, urban-centered focus points, 
to target today's untreated, or ineffectively treated waste. It is, therefore, necessary to develop a powerful 
decentralized approach to the management of waste, which will enable the on -site, close -to-source recovery of 
recyclables. Interestingly, in an attempt to overcome environmental challenges, the European  Green Deal aims to 
implement actions ensuring (i) no net emissions of greenhouse gases by 2050, (ii) economic growth decoupled from 
resource use, (iii) no person and no place left behind 9. The prMRF, besides supporting the first two points, provides 
a new, viable solution that will act as a catalyst to ensure the third, that no person and no location will be left behind. 
RECLAIM envisions the development of low cost, portable, easy to install and increased productivity prMRF, which 
(soon after the project end) will enable the construction of high-tech distributed waste treatment prMRF -fleets that 
will allow to achieve full material recovery anywhere , even in the most remote areas . Accordingly, prMRF is 
                                                     
1 Poulsen OM et al. Sorting and recycling of domestic waste. Review of occupational health problems and their possible causes. 
Sci Total Environ. May 1995 168(1):33-56. 
2 Wilts H, Garcia BR, Garlito RG, Gómez LS, Prieto EG. Artificial Intelligence in the Sorting of Municipal Waste as an Enabler 
of the Circular Economy. Resources. 2021; 10(4):28. 
3 Oliveira V, Sousa V, Vaz JM, Dias-Ferreira C. (2018) Model for the separate collection of packaging waste in Portuguese low-
performing recycling regions. J Environmental Management 13-24. 
4 Demonstrating resource efficiency through innovative, integrated waste recycling schemes for remote areas, LIFE14 
ENV/GR/000722, http://www.pavethewayste.eu/en/ 
5 Argüello, G. (2020) Environmentally sound Management of Ship Wastes: challenges and opportunities for European ports. J. 
Shipping & Trade. 5, 12. 
6 https://blog.kiverco.com/kiverco-introduces-unique-modular-recycling-plant  
7 https://wrtltd.co.uk/mobile-picking-station/  
8 https://ecoballa.com/?p=127&lang=en  
9 https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal_en  

HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 2 of 45 
 
expected to have a key role in developing a global, leakage -free circular economy model benefiting businesses, the 
society, and the environment. 
Box 1. The Waste Framework10, Landfill11 and Packaging Waste12 Directives were amended in 2018 to include, 
inter alia, new targets and measures, which will move the EU to the circular economy model: 
o targets to increase preparing for reuse and recycling of municipal waste to at least 55% of municipal 
waste by 2025, 60% by 2030 and 65% by 2035; 
o targets to increase recycling of packaging waste to at least 65% by 31 December 2025 and 70% by 31 
December 2030; 
o a target to reduce landfill to a maximum of 10% of generated municipal waste by 2035; 
o a ban on landfilling of waste suitable for recycling effective from 2030; 
o mandatory separate collection of bio-waste by 31 December 2023 and of textiles and hazardous waste 
from households by 1st of January 2025; 
o minimum requirements for all extended producer responsibility schemes; 
o simplified and improved definitions and harmonized calculation methods for recycling rates 
throughout the EU. 
The success of these targets and measures will be key to the medium - to long-term prospects for achieving an 
innovative circular economy in which nothing is wasted, by 2050. 
 
Project Innovation Pillars  
To achieve its goal, RECLAIM undertakes concrete steps to 
create new solutions and support innovation in four 
technology pillars that crucially facilitate the recovery of 
valuable materials and is expected to shape next genera tion 
waste management. The innovation pillars elaborated in 
RECLAIM are depicted in Figure 1.1, and include:  
PIL-1: Advanced AI for material identification, 
localization and categorization  (AI-ILC) - exploit and 
improve existing AI technologies to develop  effective 
solutions combining visual and hyperspectral information to 
accomplish high -performance recyclable waste 
identification, localization and categorization, applicable in 
real and harsh environments to support material recovery.  
PIL-2: Modular, l ow-cost, high performance, multi -
robot/multi-gripper recyclable recovery  - RECLAIM 
promotes a new modular architecture for robotic recyclable 
recovery based on high productivity Robotic Recycling 
Workers (RoReWos)  equipped with different grippers specializing in different material types. The use of RoReWo 
Teams installed in the prMRF is expected to double the “picks per invested euro” rate for the composite system. 
PIL-3: Portable robotic Material Recovery Facility (prMRF) - the combined placement of established recycling 
processing mechanical equipment and the AI-powered robotic sorters in a container box that can be easily transported 
to points of interest, is ready for operation within few hours, is capable of efficient recovery of recyclable materials 
with a minimal number of recycling workers, is functional and sustainable for several years after the project end. 
PIL-4: Environmental gaming for social awareness and data collection -   increase social awareness to recycling 
via a novel Recycling Data-Game (RDG) that highlights the related challenges and encourages citizens to participate 
in project activities through a citizen science approach for providing data to AI-ILC training. Orthogonal to the above, 
RDG will provide the means to communicate the general principles of AI and Data Science to the public.   
                                                     
10 Directive (EU) 2018/851 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 amending Directive 2008/98/EC on 
waste (OJ L 150, 14.06.2018, p. 109-140). 
11 Directive (EU) 2018/850 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 amending Directive 1999/31/EC on 
the landfill of waste (OJ L 150, 14.06.2018, p. 100-108). 
12 Directive (EU) 2018/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 amending Directive 94/62/EC on 
packaging and packaging waste (OJ L 150, 14.06.2018, p. 141-154). 
 
Figure 1.1. The four pillars supporting the RECLAIM 
project and their interactions. 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 3 of 45 
 
Focused Deployments for Multifaceted System Assessment  
The proposed work envisions deploying a prMRF at multiple pilot sites to assess its performance under real and 
particularly demanding conditions, recovering materials from post-consumer waste. In particular, the prMRF will be 
deployed in the group of Ionian islands, Greece, that provide the opportunity to assess its performance in multiple 
and complementary use-case scenarios. The Ionian group consist of seven main islands being very popular touristic 
destinations. All islands face major difficulties in waste management especially during the summer period. Still, the 
relatively limited size of such islands and the high seasonal characteristics of waste production 13 do not favor the 
investment on a full -size MRF. To date, the waste generated by residents and visitors is typically compacted and 
packaged to be transported to the mainland for material recovery. The residue of this waste treatment has to either 
return to the islands for landfilling or stay in the mainland for landfilling with particularly high costs14.  In addition 
to the increased logistics expenses, especially in the case of roundtrip transfer (island-mainland-island), the quality 
of recy clable materials transferred to the mainland for processing decreases due to the temporary storage and 
compression. This causes increased material contamination/entanglement, resulting in significantly lower recycling 
rates and purities. As a result, a large percentage of valuable recyclables ends up in landfills instead of being recycled.  
Similar to this particular case in Greece, the use of prMRF for the direct treatment of fresh, uncompressed, high -
quality waste and the recovery/sorting of recyclables in a decentralized manner is of outmost importance for all rural 
areas. RECLAIM provides the only strategy to drastically increase the recovery rates for valuable materials by 
sorting at the source and to divide the logistics costs in half by avoiding back and forth transport.  
The landscape of the Ionian islands group provides the unique opportunity to asses both the underlying technologies 
and business case for the prMRF.  The RECLAIM partner ION has the responsibility of waste management in all 
the Ionian islands and will provide valuable support to explore how prMRF can be used to tackle the individual needs 
of different islands. In particular, ION has specified three scenarios of particularly high interest for the Ionian islands 
group but also for a broad range of areas in Europe facing similar challenges. The material recovery use case scenarios 
that will be explored in RECLAIM are summarized in Box 2. 
 
Box 2. The material recovery scenarios to be explored in RECLAIM.  
Scenario-1: Material recovery from mixed recyclables streams. The main recycling approach followed in Greece 
regards the use of bins where citizens collect mixed post -consumer municipal recyclables which are then separated 
in material recovery facilities. As mentioned above, especially for Ionian Islands this process has low efficiency, and 
entails high logistics expenses and high recoverable materials loss. RECLAIM will assess prMRF operation in the 
treatment of mixed recyclable waste streams, performing positive separation of multiple mat erial types. This is 
the most challenging scenario due to the high material complexity to be investigated in RECLAIM and will be 
addressed during the whole duration of the project. 
Scenario-2: Cleaning of citizen separated, material-specific streams. In a major part of Corfu (part of the Ionian 
islands group) the citizen -powered separation of recyclables is promoted, which assumes the use of multiple, 
material-dedicated bins for recyclable collection (this is the recycling approach also adopted by many North European 
countries).  The collected materials need to be further processed to increase their purity and thus their value in the 
secondary market. RECLAIM will assess prMRF operation in the treatment of material-specific streams, performing 
negative separation to remove unwanted objects. This scenario will be explored during the months M13-M36, in 
parallel with Scenario -1, providing the opportunity to make prMRF appropriate for both positive and negative 
material selection. By comparing scenario 1 and 2 the advantages and disadvantages of separation by citizens will be 
evaluated, as separation by citizens also results in higher local collection costs for the separate waste streams. 
Scenario-3: Immediate close to source material recovery. The inherent portable nature of the prMRF enables its 
installation close to areas with high productivity of waste, such as transportation hubs (e.g. ports, airports), festivals, 
sport events, exhibitions, etc. Unfortunately, so far, the fresh, high-quality waste produced in such areas is collected 
with garbage trucks to be integrated with ordinary municipality waste. RECLAIM will exploit the portability of 
the prMRF to explore the option of local, close to source robotic material recovery/sorting, and contrast its efficiency 
in relation to the current practice. This scenario will be explored in the last 6 months of the project, by installing the 
prMRF at a central location that will also serve as an open and live demonstrator to EU citizens (inhabitants and 
tourists), local authorities, governments, circular economy stakeholders and potential investors. 
                                                     
13 N. Rogge, S. De Jaeger, C. Lavigne, (2017) Waste Performance of NUTS 2 -regions in the EU: A Conditional  Directional 
Distance Benefit-of-the-Doubt Model, Ecological Economics, 139, 2017. 
14 Fischer-Kowalski, M. Löw, M. Noll, D. Petridis, P. Skoulikidis, N., (2020) Samothraki in Transition: A Report on a Real -
World Lab to Promote the Sustainability of a Greek Island. Sustainability 2020. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 4 of 45 
 
Ethical Issues 
Ethics principles will be taken into consideration and applied in order to guarantee that the activity of RECLAIM in 
the field of AI and Gaming will not negatively affect the social pact or incorporate any techniques that could be used 
sinisterly in the future. Therefore, a list of ethical principles will be established by partners IRIS, RBNS and UoM. 
Ethics will be applied to ensure compliance with EU regulations and GDPR . Furthermore, a risk assessment and a 
data protection strategy will be defined and implemented throughout the entire duration of the project. FORTH, the 
coordinator, will be actively evaluating the process in order to ensure protection of rights and safety according to the 
ethical principles laid down in the Montreal Declaration for a Responsible Development of Artificial Intelligence. 
1.1.1 OBJECTIVES 
To realize RECLAIM’s aspirations and implement its outcomes, the proposed work is organized around six 
objectives described below. For each objective, we provide a short description of challenges, prior enablers and 
expected outputs. Outputs will be evaluated with a specific set of KPI (Key Performance Indicator) metrics. 
Objective 1. Design and implement an eco-friendly prMRF (PIL-3) 
Challenge. The implementation of prMRF assumes that mechanical  Recycling Equipment 15 (R-Eq) such as 
trommels, flipl-flop separators, ballistic separators etc., is installed for solid waste pre -treatment and is operated 
in a way that guarantees eco-friendly operation and efficient cooperation throughout the waste treatment chain.  
Enablers. This objective will be addressed in WP2: Application Requirements and system specification and WP5: 
prMRF implementation, demonstration & assessment, by combining: 
E-1-1: Environmentally friendly energy sources (e.g. solar panels) 
E-1-2: Commercial small-scale equipment typically used for the treatment of solid waste 
E-1-3: Available compact industrial research setup providing know-how on prMRF implementation 
Output. Fully equipped prMRF installed in a container incorporating the R -Eq machinery, the AI -ILC and the 
robotic module, to accomplish fast and efficient recovery/sorting of recyclable materials. 
KPI-1-O1: Eco-friendly sources of energy provide >30% of the prMRF’s power needs. 
KPI-1-O2: prMRF is continuously operating for >8 hours daily. 
KPI-1-O3: The R-Eq pre-processes waste ensuring that > 90% of it is accessible to the AI-ILC module.  
KPI-1-O4: The R-Eq provides enough feed for the robotic module to operate with <5% idle time. 
 
Objective 2. Improve robotic recyclable recovery systems (PIL-2) 
Challenge. For the robotic system to work within the prMRF, a change in the robotic technology commonly used 
to recover materials is required. The robotic solution should be low volume, modular, multi-functional and have a 
high pick per invested euro index.  
Enablers. This objective will be addressed in WP4: RoReWo-Team for material recovery  and WP5: prMRF 
implementation, demonstration & assessment, by combining: 
E-2-1: Robotic Recycling Workers (RoReWos), already successfully tested. 
E-2-2: Multiple available and under development grippers to be used in each RoReWo. 
E-2-3: Optimized RoReWo-Teams with a multi-robot/multi-gripper configuration  
Output. RECLAIM develops an effective, modular robotic system based on multiple low-cost Robotic Recycling 
Workers (RoReWos), each exhibiting different material recovery skills. A team of cooperating RoReWos 
integrated in the prMRF to recover materials of different types. 
KPI-2-O1: The RoReWos Team combines ≥3 different grippers to recover multiple material types.  
KPI-2-O2: The RoReWos Team can treat >90% of the waste fed to the prMRF.  
KPI-2-O3: Installation volume <80% in comparison to the 2021 robotic waste sorter state of the art. 
KPI-2-O4: Pick per invested euro index >30% in comparison to the 2021 robotic waste sorter state of the art. 
 
Objective 3. Advance and exploit state of the art AI technologies to effectively tackle the identification, 
categorization and localization of recyclable waste. (PIL-1) 
Challenge. State of the art hyperspectral imaging together with RGB -based computer vision and Convolutional 
Neural Networks (CNN) technology coupled to implement an efficient AI module for recyclable Identification, 
Categorization and Localization (AI-ILC). 
                                                     
15 The Evolution of Mixed Waste Processing Facilities - Technology and Equipment Guide (2016) The American Chemistry 
Council, prepared by Gershman, Brickner & Bratton, Inc. 
 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 5 of 45 
 
Enablers. This objective will be addressed in WP3: Recyclable waste detection and categorization  and WP5: 
prMRF implementation, demonstration & assessment, by combining: 
E-3-1: Onsite human-driven fast data collection. 
E-3-2: Misclassified object visual storage (to be used for re-training). 
E-3-3: Hyperspectral extension and training of state of the art instance segmentation CNNs.  
Output. A high -performance recyclable recognition module that can accurately guide the RoR eWo Team in 
sorting recyclables. The automation of the data collection procedure, the powerful model training, and the periodic 
improvement (re-training) of the model will critically support the long-term sustainability of the prMRF.  
KPI-3-O1: A recyclable waste-Data Base (rwDB) with annotated hyperspectral and RGB images.  
KPI-3-O2: Each of the hyperspectral imaging and the RGB -based waste recognition module s can individually 
recognize >85% of the treatable recyclables from the mixed waste stream. 
KPI-3-O3: In combination, the hyperspectral and the RGB -based waste recognition module s recognize >95% of 
the treatable recyclables from the mixed waste stream. 
KPI-3-O4: The low confidence/misclassified waste stored in the rwDB is correctly annotated by >50%, before 
each cycle of AI-ILC retraining. 
KPI-3-O5: The AI-ILC module processes waste streams at >5 fps (provide sufficient data to the RoReWo Team).  
 
Objective 4. Deploy prMRF to realize the recovery and sorting of recyclables in targeted areas (PILs-1,2,3) 
Challenge. Showcase the ability of prMRF to easily deploy and operate longitudinal recyclable material recovery 
processes in demanding real environments. Showcase and validate the ability of prMRF to adapt to waste streams 
with changing characteristics. 
Enablers. This objective will be addressed in WP5: prMRF implementation, demonstration & assessment , by 
combining: 
E1: Direct development of the prMRF based on the technology already available to project partners, to facilitate 
prompt real-world assessment of project developments (early prMRF deployment ready on M9). 
E2: Ready-to-use prMRF to facilitate fast deployment. 
E3: Analytics on the performance of the individual prMRF modules and informative evaluation metrics to adjust 
prMRF configuration on the fly.  
Output. Demonstration and validation of the prMRF in multiple use -case scenarios with diverse operational 
requirements. Demonstration of efficient cooperation of R-Eq units with the intelligent waste treatment modules, 
accurate recognition of recyclable waste, effective waste recovery/sorting by the RoReWos Team, parameterized 
performance of the composite system.  
KPI-4-O1: Pre-deployment prMRF configuration after considering waste distribution per area, use case and season 
and online configuration adjustment.  
KPI-4-O2: Fast deployment of the prMRF, which can be fully functional in ≤2 days.  
KPI-4-O3: The prMRF configuration can be modified in <30 minutes for each possible adjustment.  
KPI-4-O4: The prMRF is capable of recovering >80% of the serviceable recyclable waste. 
KPI-4-O5: Incrementally advanced prMRF performance based on the periodic AI-ILC re-training, to successfully 
treat >50% of the previously miscategorized recyclables. 
 
Objective 5. Increase social sensitivity and engage citizens in material recovery research (PIL-4) 
Challenge. Combine gamification and social computing technology with data collection procedures and the rwDB 
to develop a Recycling Data-Game (RDG) that promotes awareness, increases social sensitivity and facilitates the 
participation of citizens in data collection for prMRF implementation. 
Enablers. This objective will be addressed in WP6: Recycling Data-Games, by combining:  
E1: Gamification of recyclable sorting activities in MRFs 
E2: Citizen-science approach for participatory data collection through the RDG 
E3: Available techniques for procedural content generation, user modelling recommender systems 
Output. Demonstrate the use of newly developed games that exploit rwDB data to implement easy -to-use 
recycling data -games, which operate as data collection hubs and enjoyable in formation diffusion cores about 
recycling.  
KPI-5-O1: Use >2000 images and >20 recyclable sorting videos from the rwDB to develop the RDG  
KPI-5-O3: The games will penetrate to >500 unique users  
KPI-5-O4: The willingness to recycle will increase for >90% of the game users. 
 
Objective 6. Maximize project Innovation impact (PIL-5) 
Challenge. Shape the future of global recycling activities and ensure sustainable value for RECLAIM 
investments. Attract the interest of stakeholders and promote the project to academic peers, industry, policymakers 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 6 of 45 
 
and the society as a whole. Exploit acquired knowledge beyond the project and pave the way for the 
commercialization of RECLAIM innovations. 
Enablers. This objective will be addressed in WP7: Project impact maximization, as follows: 
E1- The SMEs participating in the RECLAIM will link their business-related networks with the project. 
E2 - Academic participants keen on market-oriented research with a focused interest in creating innovation. 
E3 - Capitalize on established global communication channels that will guarantee a major transformative impact 
on global recycling strategies.  
E4 - Multiple, concrete, well defined innovative assets with high market potential targeted by RECLAIM. 
E5 - Active collaboration with EU/national projects, existing and upcoming Horizon Europe Clusters and synergies 
with the European Partnership on AI, Data and Robotics 
Output. Increased project impact, tangible dissemination activities, exploited project results, enhanced 
commercialization potential of project assets. 
KPI-O6-1: prMRF sustainability plan to assure operation for ≥ 5 years after the end of the project. 
KPI-O6-2: Targeted business models for (i) the prMRF, (ii) the RoReWos, (iii) the AI -ILC to justify their 
commercialization potential. 
KPI-O6-3: Seek and establish collaboration with ≥3 projects from the CSA HORIZON -CL4-2021-HUMAN-01-
02 and Horizon Europe Clusters 4 and 6.  
 - Tables 2.4 & 2.5 provide additional lists of dissemination/communication criteria and KPIs  
1.1.2 Research and innovation maturity, advancements to the state of the art 
The main result of the project will be a fully functional prMRF demonstrating material recovery in three different 
use case scenarios (see Box 2), to be validated at TRL 7. The prMRF will be demonstrated in demanding operational 
environments where it will function daily for many hours, achieving the recovery of multiple materials, from varying 
waste streams. Additionally, the project will create novel recycling data games (RDG) to engage the wider public 
and interested stakeholders in project research activities, which will be validated at TRL 7. Following the above, the 
project introduces novel scientific insights and technological solutions that are described below , organized into the 
project’s four innovation pillars. For each pillar, we provide concrete statements on the advancement to the state of 
the art and a separate table showing the Technology Readiness Levels (TRL) of relevant, already available enabling 
components, as well as their envisioned TRL advancement at the end of RECLAIM.  
PIL-1: Advanced AI for material identification, localization and categorization 
Machine vision and image processing have experienced tremendous growth within the Industry 4.0 concept. On one 
hand, hardware advancem ents provide new opportunities for the identification of materials and localization of 
objects. On the other hand, algorithms powered by deep learning can effectively categorize materials and objects by 
taking into consideration and blending several complementary characteristics. 
In terms of waste processing and material recovery, spectroscopy techniques are widely implemented in order to 
determine the consistency of objects. Images of the object in combination with chemometric models can be used for 
real-time identification and quantification of its composition 16, with high classification accuracy even for complex 
plastics. Complementary to hyperspectral cameras, in real world applications such as recyclable material sorting in 
the wild, the visual appearance of objects should be considered to separate adjacent or overlapping objects with same 
consistency. Interestingly, state of the art Deep Learning (DL) approaches have been recently used to successfully 
classify objects into predetermined material categories17. RECLAIM will implement a mixed approach that combines 
waste imaging in both the visual and infrared domain, to achieve high accuracy material identification, localization 
and categorization in real, particularly challenging conditions. Complementary to the mixed monitoring approach, 
RECLAIM will consider the performance of the individual monitoring systems, focusing particularly on the use of 
ordinary RGB cameras of much lower cost (in comparison to hyperspectral imaging). It is expected that RGB 
monitoring can be sufficient for the operation of prMRF in the second use case scenario (see Box 2), which assumes 
the detection of foreign bodies in a single-material stream, and their negative separation, i.e. the removal of foreign 
bodies. Moreover, to enhance the sustainability of project developments, RECLAIM will study methods that exploit 
human-provided visual and hyperspectral input to accomplish stable, incremental advancement of the AI -powered 
material identification, localization and categorization module. 
                                                     
16 Araujo-Andrade, C.; Bugnicourt, E.; Philippet, L.; Ro driguez-Turienzo, L.; Nettleton, D.; Hoffmann, L.; Schlummer, M. 
Review on the photonic techniques suitable for automatic monitoring of the composition of multi -materials wastes in view of 
their posterior recycling. Waste Management & Research. 2021;39(5):631-651.  
17 M. Koskinopoulou, F. Raptopoulos, G. Papadopoulos, N. Mavrakis, M. Maniadakis, Robotic Waste Sorting Technology: 
Toward a Vision -Based Categorization System for the Industrial Robotic Separation of Recyclable Waste. IEEE Robotics 
Autom. Mag 2021; 28(2): 50-60. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 7 of 45 
 
Advancements to the state of the art 
• Explore the limits of RGB- and hyperspectral-imaging in real-world material recovery tasks. 
• Develop new DL methods combining RGB - and hyperspectral- imaging to accomplish superior 
performance on material identification, localization and categorization. 
• Develop automated methods that exploit RDG data (see PIL -4, below) for the repeating advancement of 
DL-powered computer vision modules. 
The targeted advancements will be supported by partner-contributed assets that will be elaborated and improved 
further in terms of the Technology Readiness Level (TRL), as summarized in the following table. 
Table 1.1.2a Asset description and advancement table with respect to PIL 1. 
Partner - Asset description and advancement TRL: From → To 
FORTH - Deep Learning powered material recognition. Fully functional Mask -RCNN and 
Yolact++ models are available for real -time material identification, localization and 
categorization on waste flows. The models will be trained with new waste images  to support 
real-world prMRF operation. 
TRL7  → TRL7 
(WP3, WP5) 
IRIS - Hyperspectral imaging for material identification/categorization. A Hyperspectral 
imaging sensor has been developed, capable of identifying and categoriz ing materials 
depending on the ir chemical consistency and shape. Models will be developed to address 
difficult real-world conditions and used as a reference for the further processing of data.  
TRL6  → TRL7 
(WP3, WP5) 
 
RBNS - Quick annotation tool. It allows users to select the entire p ixel area of the objects 
appearing in complex industrial images, with a single click. The tool will be extended to enable 
the annotation of hyperspectral images. 
TRL6  → TRL7 
(WP2, WP6) 
AIMPLAS - Separation of Plastics. There methods available targeting the sorting of complex 
plastics (WEEE, automotive & marine littering). The method will be expanded to address food-
packaging plastics that can be sorted and sold separately in the secondary market. 
TRL6 →TRL7 
(WP5) 
PIL-2, New, modular, low-cost, high performance, multi-robot/multi-gripper recyclable recovery  
In recent years, many robots have been used in commercial and research applications aimed at recovering and sorting 
recyclable materials. The implemented systems are based on general purpose robotic te chnology -most frequently 
Delta robots, but also robot arms and multi -axes gantry robots. These approaches offer features not necessarily 
important for post-consumer waste treatment (e.g. handling of heavy objects), which results in a significant and 
unjustified increase in the cost of the composite solution. On the contrary, it is more efficient and sustainable to focus 
on developing low-cost robots specialized in material recovery applications, which will be very productive, but also 
very robust and durab le to operate in wet, dusty/dirty and highly congested waste management environments. 
Moreover, instead of using a single high -cost robotic unit with a single end -effector which restricts the application 
of the system in handling a limited number of material types, a distributed solution can be implemented, with multiple 
low-cost robots featuring different skills, each undertaking a different role in waste recovery and sorting tasks. This 
is the approach adopted in RECLAIM which aims to develop a new modula r, low-cost, high performance robotic 
solution for recyclable material recovery and sorting.  
Advancements to the state of the art 
• Implement modular robotic systems for recyclable recovery based on low cost Robotic Recyclable 
Workers (RoReWos), equipped with grippers specialized to different material types.  
• Implement RoReWo Teams accomplishing positive and negative material separation. 
• Significantly increase the “picks per invested euro” rate for the composite robotic system. 
The targeted advancements wil l be supported by available HW/SW assets that will be further evolved in terms of 
their Technology Readiness Level, as summarized in the following table. 
Table 1.1b Asset description and advancement table with respect to PIL 2. 
Partner - Asset description and advancement TRL: From → To 
FORTH - Material recovery optimization. An approach is available to select the next material 
to pick, based on proximity, ecological and economic criteria. This approach will scale up to 
select multiple materials for all RoReWos in a Team. 
TRL6  → TRL7 
(WP4, WP5) 
RBNS - RoReWo units. Fully functional RoReWo units equipped with vacuum grippers have 
been implemented and assessed in an industrially relevant material recovery environment. 
RoReWos will be expanded with new grippe rs and will be evaluated in real operational 
environments. 
TRL5 → TRL7 
(WP4, WP5) 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 8 of 45 
 
RBNS - Parametrized pick and place programming. A framework that facilitates pick and 
place programming by non -experts. The framework will be advanced to store reproducible 
parameterized behaviors for RoReWo-gripper pairs.   
TRL5 → TRL7 
(WP4, WP5) 
KUL - Grasping mechanisms. Collaborative algorithms for joint grasping and load balancing 
have been implemented. These algorithms will be customized to support the design and 
implementation of new grippers for robotic sorting of objects/waste with unknown content.   
TRL4 → TRL7 
(WP4, WP5) 
PIL-3, Portable robotic Material Recovery Facility (prMRF) 
Portable material recovery and sorting facilities are used by waste management compani es, demolition companies 
and local authorities/local authority contractors that have an active role in the circular economy value chain. They 
cover waste processing needs at places where installation of stationary waste sorting stations is 
impossible/impractical. Portable material recovery facilities are compact, easy to transfer and install recovery 
stations, which still rely on manual sorting. The increased workforce required for the operation of the facilities, which 
assumes humans to be transported to remote workplaces, trained in the recovery and sorting of materials, and finally 
work in difficult and unhealthy conditions with their efficiency constantly decreasing during a shift, reduces the 
productivity of the stations and limits their widespread use despite the increased market needs. The proposed work 
draws on the extensive experience of RECLAIM partners in intelligent automated waste treatment based on AI, 
computational vision, hyperspectral imaging, and robotic sorting, to build the first high-tech portable robotic material 
recovery facility that accomplishes increased productivity with a minimal need of people working in unhealthy 
conditions. A concept image of the proposed prMRF is shown in Figure 1.2.  
  
Figure 1.2. Concept image of the prMRF  showing an outside and inside view. In the inside view, from right to 
left, there is a flip -flop screen to remove small and wet materials, a belt to transfer waste, 4 low -cost RoReWos 
installed above the conveyor belt to pick multiple materials which are then temporally stored in bins with different 
colours and at the end, a press for compacting the recovered materials. 
Advancements to the state of the art 
● Implement the prMRF, the first portable fully equipped robotic material recovery facility to be asses sed in 
real and challenging operational environments.  
● Exploit performance analytics to enable informed, on the fly prMRF configuration adaptations that address 
changing characteristics of the processed waste streams. 
The accomplishment of the advancements summarized 
above will be  supported by the experience gained 
during the development of a compact, prMRF-like 
industrial research setup  in Heraklion, Crete, Greece , 
which host s two cooperating ABB IRB -360 Delta 
robots that undertake material recovery. This compact 
setup has significantly  facilitated data collection, 
experimentation and the   assessment of robots and 
grippers in  material rec overy in highly realistic and 
demanding industrial environments. Th e expertise 
gained from the implementation of this research setup 
will significantly boost the proposed work and the 
implementation of the prMRF in particular. 
 
 
Figure 1.3.  The compact industrial research setup developed by 
FORTH, operating at a waste processing plant in Heraklion, Cre te, 
Greece. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 9 of 45 
 
Table 1.1c Asset description and advancement table with respect to PIL 3. 
Partner - Asset description and advancement TRL: From → To 
FORTH - Compact industrial research setup. A compact, fully equipped industrial research 
setup has been developed in Heraklion, Greece, directly linked with the local waste processing 
plant. The construction of this setup provides significant experience and know -how for the 
design and implementation of the prMRF. 
 
TRL7 → TRL7 
(WP2, WP6) 
AIMPLAS – Waste collection. AIMPLAS has a broad experience in certification of recycled 
materials following European eco -labels and certifications of post -consumption waste. This 
method will be adapted for the collection and logistics of waste in scattered residential areas. 
TRL7 →TRL8 
(WP6) 
 
PIL-4: Educational environmental gaming for social awareness and training  
Gamification has gathered substantial academic and commercial interest in recent years for its ability to mobilize 
users in solving problems and in increasing their engagement. Playful interactions, themes inspired from games, and 
reward structures (gamification) have been extensively used in "serious games" for educational purposes18 for citizen 
reflection19 and for promoting a more ecologically -minded behavior 20. Gamification principles have been applied 
extensively to motivate users/players to contribute their annotations and data in human computation games, in which 
player interaction is used to generate data or solve problem s21. These games are not only built around increasing 
awareness, but directly capitalize on the desire of non -experts in contributing (small or larger parts) to address 
scientific challenges, a trend known as citizen science 22,23. Data games is another resear ch strand focused on 
generating new games (or variations of games) from data, thus providing original gameplay experiences every time24. 
A core ambition of PIL-4 regards the development of Recycling Data Games (RDG) that pair human computation 
and data game s in a way that real -world data is shown to users, who through their annotations contribute new 
knowledge models to the algorithms that select new content to show and that devise new challenges for users. Besides 
contributing ever-fresh knowledge and human computation to the challenges of recycling automation tasks, the above 
described closed-loop interaction can be particularly engaging for users of diverse age, gender, and background and 
may provide a framework to explain and teach users the basic principles of Data Science and AI. 
Advancements to the state of the art 
• Implement playful, intuitive interface paradigms for improving social awareness regarding recycling using 
good practices of gamification beyond extrinsic rewards. 
• Implement playful, intuitive interface paradigms for human computation tasks which can lead to expanded 
and improved training data for use in PIL-1. 
• Realize the first RDG instance that contributes to an iterative cycle of re -use, from real-world data to user 
annotations to improved baselines and better real-world data to show back to users. 
The aforementioned advancements will be supported by well tested gamification methods which will be further 
advanced in terms of their Technology Readiness Level, as summarized in Table 1.1d. 
Table 1.1d Asset description and advancement table with respect to PIL 4. 
Partner - Asset description and advancement TRL: From → To 
UoM - DATA Agent25. Data game algorithms that consider the (re)use of real -world data to 
instantiate generated games. The algorithms will be used beyond entertainment (i.e. social 
awareness, human computation) and will be expanded to cover the recycling component using 
multi-player data to inform/ improve the data selection/reuse processes. 
TRL4  → TRL6 
(WP6) 
                                                     
18 A. Domínguez, J. Saenz -de-Navarrete, L. Marcos, L. Fernández -Sanz, C. Pagés, J ..Martínez-Herráiz. "Gamifying learning 
experiences: Practical implications and outcomes". Computers & Education, 2013. 
19 K. Kontiza, A. Liapis and C.E. Jones: "Reliving the Experience of Visiting a Gallery: Methods for Evaluating Informal 
Learning in Games for Cultural Heritage" in Proc. FDG 2020. 
20  R. Khoshkangini, G. Valetto, A. Marconi. "Generating personalized challenges to enhance the persuasive power of 
gamification" in Proc. of the Personalization in Persuasive Technology Workshop, 2017. 
21 K. Siu and M.O. Riedl. 2016. Reward Systems in Human Computation Games. in Proc. CHI PLAY 2016. 
22  Deterding, S., D. Dixon, R. Khaled, and L. Nacke (2011). From game desi gn elements to gamefulness: Defining 
“gamification”. In Proceedings of the 15th International Academic MindTrek Conference. 
23 L. Ceccaroni, J. Piera. "Analyzing the Role of Citizen Science in Modern Research". IGI Global, 2016. 
24 G. Barros, M. Green, A. Li apis, J. Togelius: "Data -driven Design: A Case for Maximalist Game Design," in Proceedings of 
the International Conference of Computational Creativity, 2018. 
25 Michael Cerny Green, Gabriella A. B. Barros, Antonios Liapis and Julian Togelius: "DATA Agent," in Proceedings of the 
13th Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games, 2018.  
 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 10 of 45 
 
UoM - Iconoscope game26. This playful, online interface allows users to create novel drawings 
based on textual prompts, and also allows users to annotate others’ drawings. The game will be 
transferred to the needs of material recognition allowing users to add data/annotations to 
existing datasets. 
TRL4 → TRL6 
(WP6) 
RBNS - Quick-annotation tool. It allows users to select the entire pixel area of objects appearing 
in complex industrial images, with a single click. The tool will be gamified to develop a 
recycling data game that will engage the wider public in citizen science activities. 
TRL5  → TRL7 
(WP2, WP6)