1.4 OTHER KEY ASPECTS OF THE PROPOSED WORK 
In addition to the prMRF development discussed above, a number of complementary activities are envisaged which 
address the requirements of the HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09 call, as summarized below. 
Training Programs. RECLAIM will organize training programs focu sed on state -of-the-art waste management 
technologies (WP1, Task1.5). Besides being open to the public, these programs will be mainly designed for partners 
ION, HRRC, AIMPLAS, AXIA, ISWA that are staffed with waste management experts who need to know more 
about the differences of RGB and hyperspectral imaging, the power and the limitations of AI and Deep Learning, the 
available mechanical/ robotic systems involved in the automated treatment of waste, etc.  
Open Science Practices . The RECLAIM partners fully support the Open Science practices in the sharing of 
knowledge, data and tools as early as possible in the project’s lifetime. To this end, RECLAIM includes the 
implementation of the following actions:  
o Use of open research infrastructures for knowledge an d data sharing, such as the European Open Science 
Cloud (EOSC) that provides seamless access, FAIR (Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability and 
Reusability) management, and reliable reuse of research data and all other digital objects produced along the 
research life cycle (e.g. methods, software and publications).  
o Early and open sharing of research data and results, through preprints, or informal publications in the 
project’s website and public repositories. 
o Direct and open sharing of research data collected by citizens with the help of recycling data-games through 
public repositories. 
o Open access to research results and reports, either by publishing them with full open access in established, 
highly popular peer-reviewed scientific publications, or by rapidly sharing them at no cost, through focused 
publications in the Open Research Europe Publishing Platform (OREPP).  
o Data Management Planning following the “as open as possible as closed as necessary” principle, which will 
ensure data and results are deposit in trusted repositories, they are physically or digitally accessible, they are 
licensed for public free use (e.g. under “CC BY”), with potential exceptions clearly specified.  
Further to these general directions, RECLAIM already includes concrete ac tions that promote Open Science. In 
particular, to increase the quality, efficiency and impact of research and innovation activities, and accelerate 
responsiveness to societal challenges related to recycling, the RGB and hyperspectral waste imaging data wi ll be 
made publicly available to create multiplicative effects in EU research focused on digital waste processing and 
particularly the automated identification and categorization of recyclables. The data will be supplemented with 
benchmarks so that develop ers can compare the performance of the ir newly developed algorithms. The relevant 
repositories will be elaborated in the Data Management Plan deliverable , D1.1. Moreover, to boost societal 
engagement in research and innovation and increase the trust of soc iety in science , the citizen-annotated data via 
recycling data games will be made directly and openly available to their creators and the wider public for exploitation 
and re-use.  The above actions are in full agreement with the Horizon Europe Key Impact Pathways that address open 
science practices, namely the ‘Fostering diffusion of knowledge and open science’ pathway focused on scientific 
impact, and the ‘Strengthening the uptake of R&I in society’ pathway focused on societal impact. 
Management of data a nd other research outputs.  The preparation of a Data Management Plan (DMP) and will 
ensure that research datasets will be managed in line with the FAIR principles (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, 
Reusable). The DMP will follow the “as open as possible  as closed as necessary” principle, which will ensure data 
and results are deposited in trusted repositories, are digitally (if necessary physically) accessible, and are licensed for 
public free use (e.g. under “CC BY”) with potential exceptions clearly specified. 
Types of data/research output: the project will collect, manage, and generate the following types of datasets: (i) waste 
imaging data with the use of RGB / hyperspectral cameras and annotations on these data gathered via recycling data 
games, (ii) the recycling data games and statistics on the use of these games , (iii) AI/Deep Learning models 
accomplishing the identification, localization and categorization of targeted recyclable materials appearing on these 
images, (iv) outputs regarding the perfor mance of these models to be used as benchmarks for future research , (v) 
operational scenarios and performance statistics of the RoReWo Team and the complete equipment of the material 
recovery chain installed in the prMRF, (vi) videos of training programs on the use of digital and smart technologies 
for material recovery and citizen engagement. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 17 of 45 
 
Findability: the above dataset s will be published as open data in relevant open repositories where a dedicated 
project space will be established, e .g. European Open S cience Cloud (EOSC) and OpenAIRE’s Zenodo. The 
datasets will be published following the FAIR Digital Object Framework. The project will use globally resolvable 
persistent identifiers that enable metadata indexing, such as Handles/DOIs for the FAIR indexing  of data objects 
and the specification of data access and management policies associated with them. 
Accessibility: The datasets will be made available on well -recognized repositories (e.g. EOSC, OpenAIRE’s 
Zenodo) that ensure reliable access to research d ata relevant digital objects. Further to the above, recycling data-
games will be freely accessible and usable through focused gaming networks and repositories (e .g. OS Game 
Clones, GitHub). Other physical project developments will be easily and freely acce ssible by interested 
stakeholders and the wider public. 
Interoperability: To ensure the interoperability of published datasets, the project will design structure and publish 
the data using digital data models based on standards and ontologies (e .g. Industrial Ontologies Foundry). The 
project will also consider the introduction of new data types, in communication with Data Type Registries (e.g. 
Cordra, ePIC). 
Reusability: The datasets will be made available for public access and reuse under Creative Commons Attribution
4.0 International Public License (CC BY 4.0) or a license with similar access permissions. 
Curation and storage/preservation costs:  The project aims to utilize zero -cost data repositories (EOSC, 
OpenAIRE’s Zenodo. Moreover, the project coordinator has access to infrastructures that allow the hosting of data 
and the immediate, fast access to it. In any case, the project coordinator will bear all ongoing costs to dataset 
curation operations. 
Dissemination/Communication. All partners will actively disseminate the expected/accomplished project results to 
the relevant stakeholders and target audience (see section 2.2.1). Additionally, with the support of all partners, ISWA 
will exploit the already established global communication channels to highlight , from project day -one, the ne w 
opportunities provided by prMRF for highly effective, distributed material recovery. 
Relation to the `do no significant harm' principle (Article 17 of Regulation (EU) No 2020/852) . The proposed 
work provides a clear and direct support to the fourth and f ifth objectives of the EU Taxonomy Regulation, in 
particularly the "Transition to a circular economy" and the "Pollution prevention and control". Moreover, it provides 
an indirect support to the other four objectives of the same regulation without being against or h arming any of the 
objectives by any means. Accordingly, RECLAIM fosters environmentally sustainable activities that contribute to 
the EU’s environmental objectives, promotes sustainable investments and ultimately supports the implementation of 
the European Green Deal. 
Gender Issues. Project planning and activities are compliant with Council Resolution 1999/C 201/01 which states 
that “the gender mainstreaming of research policy is not limited to promotion of women as research workers but 
should also ensure that research meets the needs of all citizens and when necessary contributes to the understanding 
of gender-relevant issues”. The main research stream of RECLAIM focuses on material recovery with the minimum 
possible human intervention and therefore, it does not address research or technology topics related to human gender. 
In particular, upon successful completion of the project, all people regardless of gender, will be equally treated by 
the developed prMRF. On the other side, the recycling data-game work plan assumes active participation of users for 
testing and refinement. Besides the fact that the envisioned games do not assume any kind of functional differentiation 
between the sexes, RECLAIM will carefully and equally promote the game into men and women , considering the 
recruitment of a gender balanced mix of users, to provide unbiased guidance for planned developments.   
Moreover, the consortium will balance the gender distribution of the research and technical staff involved in the 
project by following non-discriminating hiring practices and trying to address the EC goal of 40% participation of 
women at all levels, in implementing and managing EU-funded programmes. 
Multidisciplinarity. RECLAIM ties together complementary technologies to promote and support the goals of the 
EU Green Deal. To accomplish its objectives, the proposal adopts a multidisciplinary approach combining expertise 
from different fields such as Data science, AI, robotics, mechanical engineering, optics, scientific gaming, 
environmental science, industrial management, innovation management, governmental authorities, citizen science to 
develop novel still feasible and directly applicable solutions on material recovery and to increase social awareness 
on recycling and the circular economy. The RECLAIM interdisciplinary approach is summarized in Table 1.3.  
 
 
 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 18 of 45 
 
Table 1.3 Overview of the multidisciplinary approach adopted in RECLAIM  
Discipline Elements Involved in RECLAIM Objective Relevant Partner 
Data Science Data Collection & Annotation, Data Analytics Obj.3, 5 IRIS, FORTH, RBNS, 
KUL 
Artificial 
Intelligence 
Computer Vision, Convolutional Neural 
Networks, ML/DL technology  
Obj.3,4  FORTH, IRIS, KUL 
Robotics Real Time Control, Task level Programming, 
RoReWo Units, RoReWo Teams 
Obj.2, 4 RBNS, FORTH, KUL 
Mechanical 
Engineering 
Pneumatic & Electric Grippers, Vacuum 
Technologies, Waste Pre/Post Processing  
Obj.2, 4 KUL, AIMPLAS, HER 
Optics Hyperspectral Imaging, Computer Vision Obj.3, 4 IRIS, FORTH 
Scientific 
Gaming 
Human Computation Games, Data Games, 
Citizen Science 
Obj.5 UoM 
Environmental 
science 
Waste management, Waste economics, Material 
Recovery Automation, Logistics 
Obj.1, 4 AIMPLAS, HER, RBNS, 
ISWA 
Innovation 
Management 
Research Result Commercialization, Exploitation 
Plan, Circular Economy Business Model 
Obj.6 AXIA 
Industrial 
Management 
Waste Processing Chain, Operational Predictive 
Analytics 
Obj.1, 4 ION, HER, AIMPLAS,  
Governmental 
Authorities 
Solid Municipal Waste Treatment, System 
Sustainability, Citizen Engagement 
Obj.1, 5, 6 ION, ISWA 
Readily available contributions from previous projects. The participants in the RECLAIM consortium bring into 
the project significant expertise from their past and ongoing projects. Several already available and successful 
outcomes from relevant nati onal/international research and innovation activities will be exploited and further 
advanced to realize the objectives of RECLAIM. The following Table contains a list of indicative relevant projects, 
while further information is provided in the individual partner profile. 
Table 1.4 European projects relevant to RECLAIM 
InterRecycle (Interreg) http://interrecycle.eu  FORTH 
InterRecycle develops RoReWo Teams for material recovery deployed in two industrial MRFs, in Cyprus and 
Greece.  RECLAIM will exploit the know-how on the RoReWo technology, the RGB image based computer vision 
for material identification, localization and categorization, the use of multiple grippers.  
FELICE (H2020) https://www.felice-project.eu FORTH 
FELICE aims at increasing the agility of manufacturing production lines with the use of robots. RECLAIM will 
capitalize on operational analytics methods to link the characteristics of incoming waste streams with the 
optimization of the RoReWo Team configuration.  
ANASA (GSRT) https://anasasorter.com/ FORTH, RBNS 
ANASA has implemented delta-robot technology for material recovery driven by computer vision and hyperspectral 
imaging, which is applied with paired robots into Chania and Heraklion MRFs. RECLAIM will exploit the expertise 
on robot control, computer vision and hyperspectral imaging, vacuum gripping. 
AUSOM (H2020) https://www.ausomproject.eu/ KU Leuven  
AUSOM develops a robust cost effective robotic sorter based on deep learning, computer vision and laser induced 
breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) for sorting shredded scrap metal. RECLAIM will exploit the AI categorization 
and robotic gripper technologies to accomplish advanced material recovery. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 19 of 45 
 
ACROGRIP https://acrogrip.be/ KU Leuven 
The ACROGRIP has examined developed and tested robotic grippers for different application domains. The  latter 
resulted in a wide variety (50+) of both commercial and in house developed robotic grippers which are available to 
be tested/used in the RECLAIM project. 
ENVISAGE (H2020) http://www.envisage-h2020.eu/ UoM 
ENVISAGE implemented and tested a d ata-driven approach to design, adapt, revise and evolve virtual labs. 
Technologies and best practices for gamifying and monitoring virtual labs will be exploited to effectively design 
gamified applications for social awareness and human computation in RECLAIM. 
AI4MEDIA (H2020) https://www.ai4media.eu/ UoM 
AI4Media creates a centre of excellence and a wide network of researchers across Europe, with a focus on delivering 
core AI advances to serve the key sector of Me dia. RECLAIM will exploit the open -sourced AI algorithms 
developed under AI4Media for computer vision, data monitoring and co-creation. 
ROSSINI (H2020) https://www.rossini-project.com/ IRIS  
IRIS has devel oped and implemented cognition layers for the identification and tracking of different objects in 
manufacturing environments, while human and robots are collaborating in the same area. In RECLAIM, the object 
recognition experience gained from ROSSINI will be used for material identification in the wild. 
MULTICYCLE (H2020) http://multicycle-project.eu/ IRIS, AIMPLAS, AXIA, ISWA 
MULTICYCLE develops and advanced and sustainable recycling processes and value chain s for plastic -based 
multimaterials. RECLAIM will capitalize the lessons learned on hyperspectral monitoring of multimaterial 
packaging and complex composites from the automotive sector (IRIS), the pre- and post-processing technologies in 
recycled materials treatment (AIMPLAS), business cases development (AXIA) and proper dissemination (ISWA) 
to be applied in the context of this proposal. 
DECOAT (H2020) http://decoat.eu/project/ IRIS, AIMPLAS 
A continuous recycling  pilot plant demonstrates the novel DECOAT principle that allows upgrading existing  
mechanical recycling by adding tools for sorting by and activation of the trigger. RECLAIM will learn of advanced 
monitoring system deployment for textiles and painted plastic parts recycling (IRIS and AIMPLAS). 
SOLREC2 (H2020) https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/101003532 AIMPLAS 
Development and implementation of ground-breaking strategies for improving the sorting, separation and recycling 
of pharma blister packs and laminate consumer packaging waste consisting of multiple layers of polymers and 
aluminum. RECLAIM will learn of advanced sorting system deployment for identification and separation of plastic 
packages containing aluminum. 
  
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 20 of 45 
 
2 IMPACT