4. Personal Data Page
Does this activity involve processing of personal data? Yes No
Does this activity involve further processing of previously collected personal data (including 
use of preexisting data sets or sources, merging existing data sets)?
Yes No
Is it planned to export personal data from the EU to non-EU countries? Specify the type of 
personal data and countries involved
Yes No
Is it planned to import personal data from non-EU countries into the EU or from a non-EU 
country to another non-EU country? Specify the type of personal data and countries involved
Yes No
Does this activity involve the processing of personal data related to criminal convictions or 
offences?
Yes No
5. Animals Page
Does this activity involve animals? Yes No
6. Non-EU Countries Page
Will some of the activities be carried out in non-EU countries? Yes No
In case non-UE countries are involved, do the activities undertaken in these countries raise 
potential ethics issues? Yes No
Administrative forms
Page 84 of 87
Proposal ID 101070524
Acronym RECLAIM
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210928 Last saved 21/10/2021 19:06
It is planned to use local resources (e.g. animal and/or human tissue samples, genetic material, 
live animals, human remains, materials of historical value, endangered fauna or flora samples,
etc.)? 
Yes No
Is it planned to import any material (other than data) from non-EU countries into the EU or 
from a non-EU country to another non-EU country? For data imports, see section 4. Yes No
Is it planned to export any material (other than data) from the EU to non-EU countries? For 
data exports, see section 4. Yes No
Does this activity involve low and/or lower middle income countries, (if yes, detail the benefit-
sharing actions planned in the self-assessment) Yes No
Could the situation in the country put the individuals taking part in the activity at risk? Yes No
7. Environment, Health and Safety Page
Does this activity involve the use of substances or processes that may cause harm to the 
environment, to animals or plants.(during the implementation of the activity or further to the 
use of the results, as a possible impact) ?
Yes No
Does this activity deal with endangered fauna and/or flora / protected areas? Yes No
Does this activity involve the use of substances or processes that may cause harm to humans, 
including  those performing the activity.(during the implementation of the activity or further 
to the use of the results, as a possible impact) ?
Yes No
8. Artificial Intelligence Page
Does this activity involve the development, deployment and/or use of Artificial Intelligence? (if 
yes, detail in the self-assessment whether that could raise ethical concerns related to human 
rights and values and detail how this will be addressed).
Yes No 6, 35
9. Other Ethics Issues Page
Are there any other ethics issues that should be taken into consideration? Yes No
I confirm that I have taken into account all ethics issues above and that, if any ethics issues apply, I will complete the 
ethics self-assessment as described in the guidelines How to Complete your Ethics Self-Assessment
Administrative forms
Page 85 of 87
Proposal ID 101070524
Acronym RECLAIM
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210928 Last saved 21/10/2021 19:06
Ethics Self-Assessment
Ethical dimension of the objectives, methodology and likely impact
Human Participants 
The innovations to be developed in the project regard the recovery of recyclable materials from waste streams. As such it will not 
process sensitive or any other kind of human-related data (ie. only waste-related data are of interest to the project).  
To proceed with the development of AI methods, human participants (volunteers) will be asked to annotate waste images via a 
newly developed Recycling Data Game (RDG).  
Individuals will be recruited from the public with the support of consortium partners that will advertise the citizen-science approach 
adopted in RECLAIM. No restrictions are foreseen for the participation of citizens. 
The data that the users will provide regard only the annotation of waste images. 
 
Artificial Intelligence 
The project considers the development of AI methods to facilitate the identification, localization and categorization of recyclable 
materials. Human participants to be involved in the annotation of waste images will be informed  that the data they provide are 
going to be used for training and improving AI-driven robotic systems for material recovery.  
All AI technologies considered In the project focus on efficient material recovery and not in the processing of any kind of personal or 
personally identifiable data. 
Remaining characters 3716
Compliance with ethical principles and relevant legislations
To participate in the project, volunteers will provide the minimum possible information. The Recycling Data Game will assume only a 
simple registration of the users, without collecting or storing any kind of personal information. The participants will be anonymized 
and not known to each other. 
 
While the data collection procedures and regulations are well understood by the consortium, and we believe there is no conflict with 
the EU ethical principles and relevant legislations, the partners will nonetheless appoint an Ethics Advisor during the operation of the 
project to provide oversight and guidance specifically related to aspects associated to data collection for AI purposes.  
Remaining characters 4312
Administrative forms
Page 86 of 87
Proposal ID 101070524
Acronym RECLAIM
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210928 Last saved 21/10/2021 19:06
Security issues table
1. EU Classified Information (EUCI)2 Page
Does this activity involve information and/or materials requiring protection against 
unauthorised disclosure (EUCI)? Yes No
Does this activity involve non-EU countries? Yes No
2. Misuse Page
Does this activity have the potential for misuse of results? Yes No
3. Other Security Issues Page
Does this activity involve information and/or materials subject to national security restrictions? 
If yes, please specify: (Maximum number of characters allowed: 1000)
Yes No
Are there any other security issues that should be taken into consideration? 
If yes, please specify: (Maximum number of characters allowed: 1000)
Yes No
2According to the Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444 of 13 March 2015 on the security rules for protecting EU classified information, “European Union 
classified information (EUCI) means any information or material designated by an EU security classification, the unauthorised disclosure of which could cause varying 
degrees of prejudice to the interests of the European Union or of one or more of the Member States”. 
3Classified background information is information that is already classified by a country and/or international organisation and/or the EU and is going to be used by the 
project. In this case, the project must have in advance the authorisation from the originator of the classified information, which is the entity (EU institution, EU Member 
State, third state or international organisation) under whose authority the classified information has been generated. 
4EU classified foreground information is information (documents/deliverables/materials) planned to be generated by the project and that needs to be protected from 
unauthorised disclosure. The originator of the EUCI generated by the project is the European Commission.
Administrative forms
Page 87 of 87
Proposal ID 101070524
Acronym RECLAIM
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210928 Last saved 21/10/2021 19:06
5 - Other questions
Two-stage calls
The full stage-2 proposal must be consistent with the short outline proposal submitted the to stage 1 - in particular with respect to the 
proposal characteristics addressing the concepts of excellence and impact
Are there substantial differences compared to the stage-1 proposal? Yes No
Essential information to be provided for proposals including clinical Trials / studies / investigations
Clinical study means, for the purpose of this document, any systematic prospective or retrospective collection and analysis of health data obtained 
from individual patients or healthy persons in order to address scientific questions related to the understanding, prevention, diagnosis, monitoring or 
treatment of a disease, mental illness, or physical condition. It includes but it is not limited to clinical studies as defined by Regulation 536/2014 (on 
medicinal products), clinical investigation and clinical evaluation as defined by Regulation 2017/745  (on medical devices), performance study and 
performance evaluation as defined by Regulation 2017/746 (on in vitro diagnostic medical devices).
Are clinical studies / trials / investigations included in the work plan of this project? Yes No
 
 
Horizon Europe Programme 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09:                                                     
AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) 
Technical description (Part B) 
 
Title: AI-powered Robotic Material Recovery in a Box 
Acronym: RECLAIM 
 
 
 
 
 
List of participants 
 
Part. 
No.  
Short Name 
of Participant 
Participant Organization name Country 
1 FORTH Foundation for Research and Technology Hellas EL 
2 UoM University of Malta MT 
3 KUL Katholieke Universiteit Leuven BE 
4 HERCCO Hellenic Recovery Recycling Corporation EL 
5 IRIS Iris Technology Solutions, Sociedad Limitada SP 
6 RBNS ROBENSO PC EL 
7 AIMPLAS AIMPLAS - Technological Institute of Plastics SP 
8 AXIA Axia Innovation UG DE 
9 ISWA International Solid Waste Association  NL 
10 ION Periferiakos Foreas Diaxirisis Stereon Apovliton Ionion Nison 
Anonimi Eteria Ton Ota 
EL 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 1 of 45 
 
1. EXCELLENCE