1.2 RELATION TO WORK PROGRAMME 
The table below provides an overview of the HORIZON -CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and 
Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) scope and how it is addressed in the proposed work. 
Table 1.2 Relation of RECLAIM to HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics 
for the Green Deal (IA). 
Call text “... integrate and optimise AI, data and robotics solutions ... to demonstrate ... in actual or highly 
realistic operating environments, how they directly contribute to the Green Deal.[...]” 
RECLAIM generates new AI-driven computer vision models trained with real data, and a distributed multi -robot 
multi-gripper system for material recovery. The developed technology will be demonstrated in two real waste 
treatment use-cases to undertake material recovery and thus explicitly contribute to the Green Deal.   
Objective 3, 4 – WP 3, 4, 5 
Call text “... supported by industry or service relevant KPIs,.. and demonstrating scalability, and deployment 
potential. 
RECLAIM is supported by measurable service releva nt KPIs (see Objectives). The development of multiple use 
cases with distinct characteristics  demonstrates the scalability and proves the deployment potential of the developed 
technology. Objective 3, 4 - WP 5 
Call text “The environmental impacts of the proposed solutions should also be taken into account…” 
RECLAIM develops an eco-friendly prMRF that can be dynamically (re)configured based on environmental 
and economic criteria. The environmental impact of prMRF will be explicitly assessed and maximized.  
Objective 1 - WP 2, 5 
Call text “... focus... on real -world scenarios, which can benefit in short to mid -term from the technology 
and solutions and demonstrate substantial impact on the Green Deal..” 
RECLAIM introduces a new effective solution for material recovery in sectors with currently inefficient waste 
treatment thus accomplishing substantial positive impact on the Green Deal. It demonstrates the application of 
the developed technology in real world, difficult and highly demanding material recovery scenarios.  
Objective 1, 5 - WP 2, 5 
Call text “while taking into account the maturity of the technologies to solve the problems at hand” 
The project exploits available, well tested technologies that are further improved and integrated into a new 
high-tech solution for decentralized, close to source material recovery. Objective 3 - WP 3, 6 
Call text “Deep involvement of all relevant stakeholders..” 
The RECLAIM consortium involves a wide range of different stakeholders (Universities, RTOs, SMEs, 
NGOs, Local Authorities) who are particularly interested in the results of the project and are fully committed 
to its success. Objective 6 - WP 1, 7 
Call text “Special attention will be given to including users of diverse age, gender and background.” 
The implementation of reality-inspired environmental games and particularly the RDG provides an effective 
mechanism for involving users of diverse age, gender and background in the research activities of the project. 
Objective 5 - WP 1, 6 
Call text “incorporate training programs for non-expert users of AI, data and robotics systems... including 
the basics concepts of Trustworthy and ethical AI.” 
RECLAIM incorporates training sessions for the staff of the end-user participants to inform users who are not 
experts in ΑΙ, robotics and data management about the possibilities offered by new technologies, which are 
secured and framed by trustworthy and ethical ΑΙ. Objective 1 - WP 1 
                                                     
26 A. Liapis: "Mixed-initiative Creative Drawing with webIconoscope,"  In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference 
on Computational Intelligence in Music, Sound, Art and Design (EvoMusArt), vol. 10198, LNCS. Springer, 2017. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 11 of 45