3.2 CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE 
The consortium is comprised of a balanced blend of academic & research organizations ( FORTH, KUL, UoM, 
AIMPLAS), a new start -up in the area of AI -driven robotic material recovery (RBNS), an SMEs with significant 
experience in optics (IRIS), an innovation consultancy service provider (AXIA) a local governmental authority on 
waste management (ION), a major national material recovery provider (H RRC) and the leading g lobal association 
on recycling and the circular economy (ISWA). The partners provide complementary expertise to facilitate the project 
meet its objectives as depicted in Table 1.3. 
 
3.2.1 Partner roles in the project & contributing expertise 
FORTH will undertake the coordination of the project (WP1), and will exploit its long experience in computer 
vision, ML/DL and state -of-the-art robotic material recovery to lead R&D activities regarding prMRF 
development. It will be involved in data collection, material recog nition and material recovery. FORTH will lead 
WP5, ensuring that enabling technologies are effectively integrated and prMRF is successfully demonstrated. 
UoM is very experienced in scientific AI-driven tools for game design and development. UoM will lead WP6 and 
will undertake the implementation of user-friendly Recycling Data-Games, which will engage non-expert citizens 
in project activities and particularly the collection of annotated material-imaging data. 
KUL is specialized in industrial robotic systems with a focused expertise on gripping mechanisms. KUL will lead 
WP4 and will investigate multi -material grippers and how they can be optimally attached to effective RoReWo 
Teams undertaking material recovery. 
HRRC has extensive expertise in industrial material recovery. It will undertake a major part of  prMRF 
implementation costs and will contribute in the synthesis, implementation and on-site assessment of the prMRF. 
HRRC is keen in using multiple prMRFs in material recovery activities in many Greek islands beyond the Ionians. 
IRIS is the WP3 leader and contributes in the project expertise in computer vision, hyperspectral imaging, ML/DL 
for material recognition and the use of non-visual sensors for the control of manufacturing processes.  
RBNS is a new start up specialized in material recovery robotics. It brings to the project the already developed and 
assessed RoReWo units and expertise in robotic deployments for material data collection in the wild. 
AIMPLAS provides significant expertise in plastics recovery and the circular economy. It will contribute in prMRF 
requirements and equipment specification, prioritizing the recovery of different plastics, and optimizing system 
performance for the different use case scenarios. 
AXIA brings expertise in innovation management and will lead WP7. AXIA will un dertake activities to exploit 
the RECLAIM products by revealing their value in the context of the Circular Economy and paving the way for 
their potential commercialization. 
ISWA provides an extensive waste management network of experts and associations th at spans the globe. ISWA 
will disseminate RECLAIM technological advances worldwide, revealing their positive impact on waste 
management and the transition to a circular economy. 
ION is the local authority responsible for waste management in Ionian Islands, Greece. ION will host the prMRF 
undertaking material recovery from post-consumer waste providing all facilities necessary for experimentation in 
the context of the three use case scenarios considered in the project. 
 
 

 
 
 
Letter of Support for the RECLAIM Project Proposal 
I would like to express my support for the RECLAIM project proposal, coordinated by 
FORTH, in response to the EU call HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: 
AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA). 
The work proposed in RECLAIM aims at knowledge and technology advancements 
through data collection and monitoring done by the public. The development of the 
Recycling Data-Game in particular, provides a nice example of how scientific gaming 
can be used to facilitate community-powered research, support the solution of modern 
environmental problems and stimulate innovation. 
The AI and Robotics work proposed in RECLAIM is nicely coupled with state-of-the-art 
research and applications in Game Artificial Intelligence, and manages to directly and 
effectively exploit the results of collective work to empower the portable robotic Material 
Recovery Facilities, making them more efficient and flexible to adapt to the needs of the 
individual deployment sites. 
Following the above, I believe that the work proposed in RECLAIM is important, well 
focused and particularly promising, focusing on the implementation of complementary 
systems that will operate in the wild to facilitate the solution of modern societal 
problems. 
For these reasons and more, I am pleased to offer my support to the RECLAIM proposal 
as a member of the Advisory board. 
Sincerely,
 
 
 
Julian Togelius
Associate Professor, New York University 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
370 Jay Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 
United States of America 
Editor-in-Chief, IEEE Transactions on Games 
e-mail: julian@togelius.com 
Personal web page: http://julian.togelius.com

 
 
International Solid Waste Association ∙ Stationsplein 45 A4.004, 3013 
AK Rotterdam, The Netherlands 
t +31 (0)10 808 3990 ∙ m iswa@iswa.org ∙ w iswa.org 
Chambers of Commerce (KvK) 74279807 ∙ VAT NL859835832B01 
 
 
 
 
 
To: RECLAIM proposal Coordinator 
Re: Letter of Support to the RECLAIM project proposal 
 
I would like to express my support for the RECLAIM project proposal, 
coordinated by FORTH, in response to the EU call HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-
EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA). 
Clearly, the recent advances in robotics and AI provide new opportunities for 
the digital transformation of the waste management sector.  
RECLAIM proposes important and innovative work in this direction. In 
particular, the investigation and development of portable robotic Material 
Recovery Facilities, has the potential to significantly support material recovery 
in distant areas with poor recycling activities. 
Additionally, the implementation of Recycling Data-Games that promotes the 
engagement of users in recycling research, will help accelerate innovation 
through public participation. 
Following the above, I believe that the research proposed in RECLAIM is both 
timely and particularly promising, focusing on the implementation of complete 
and real-world applicable solution that will effectively support recycling. 
For this reason, I am pleased to offer my support to the RECLAIM proposal as a 
member of the Advisory board. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Marcelo Rosso, Member of the ISWA Board  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18/10/2021, Buenos Aires, Argentina  
This proposal version was submitted by Michail MANIADAKIS on 21/10/2021 16:46:57 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public -private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Funding & Tenders Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integr ity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can b e verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Funding & Tenders 
Portal.  
(https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/support/faq)