3.1 WORK PLAN - WORK PACKAGES, DELIVERABLES 
AND MILESTONES 
3.1.1 Components and interdependencies  
The work planned in RECLAIM will be 
articulated in 7 work packages. The work 
breakdown into work packages is based  on 
gathering related work, to ensure synergistic 
cohesion between related tasks and maximise the 
efficiency of the R&D work. Figure 3.1 provides 
a graphical representation of the interactions 
among work packages which are further discussed 
below.  
Project Planning - Timeline and Effort 
Distribution. The project duration will be 36 
months. As already discussed in Section 1.2, the 
project development will be based on early 
prototyping, followed by iterative 
“implementation and real -world testing” spins 
that will ensure we build the right tools the right 
way, and finally the system assessment, 
consolidation and asset exploitation. This is 
reflected to the work package structure 
summarized below. An overview of how the different parts of the planned work span over time is shown in the Gantt 
chart (Figure 3.2).  
It is reminded here that the first use case scenario “Material recovery from  mixed recyclables streams ” will be 
addressed during t he whole du ration of the project, the second scenario “Cleaning of citizen separated, material -
specific streams” will be considered in the second and third project years, while the third scenario “Immediate, close 
to source material recovery” will be addressed in the last semester of the project (see Box 2). 
 
 
Figure 3.2. The RECLAIM Gantt Chart 
 
Additionally, a summary of effort distribution in the work packages is provided bellow, in Table 3.1a. 
 
 
Figure 3.1. The interaction of work packages in RECLAIM. 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 33 of 45 
 
Table 3.1a. List of RECLAIM Work Packages (WPs). 
WP 
No 
 
WP Title 
Lead 
Part. 
No 
Lead 
Particip. 
Person 
Months 
Start 
Month 
End 
month 
WP1 Project management 1 FORTH 30 M1 M36 
WP2 Application requirements and system specification 7 AIMPLAS 40 M1 M6 
WP3 Recyclable waste detection and categorization 5 IRIS 73 M1 M30 
WP4 RoReWo-Team for material recovery 3 KUL 71 M1 M30 
WP5 prMRF implementation, demonstration & assessment 1 FORTH 99 M1 M36 
WP6 Recycling Data-Games 2 UoM 51 M1 M36 
WP7 Project impact maximization 8 AXIA 80 M1 M36 
Total person months 444  
 
The work included in each work package is summarized in the Tables bellow. 
Table 3.1b. RECLAIM work package description. 
WP Number 1 WP Leader FORTH Start Month 1 End Month 36 
WP Title Project Management 
Participant Νο 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Participant Name FORTH UoM KUL HRRC IRIS  RBNS AIMPLAS AXIA ISWA  ION 
PMs/Participant 9 2 2 4 3 2 2 2 2 4 
Objectives 
The first WP will monitor and coordinate project activities with the following objectives:  
• Implement and maintain an effective management infrastructure for monitoring and controlling progress. 
• Manage resources to achieve the overall project objectives and implement quality management procedures. 
• Coordinate and communicate with the European Commission on the status of the project, including 
financial reports and all documentation necessary to meet the contractual obligation of the project. 
• Oversee and coordinate implementation risks and ethical and privacy issues related to RECLAIM. 
• Organization of training activities for the consortium partners and the general public.  
Description of Work 
T1.1 Scientific, technical and administrative management [M1-M36] FORTH, All 
This task is dedicated to ensuring collaboration between partners and high quality of all project outpu ts. It includes: 
(a) coordinating the joint efforts of the consortium to ensure smooth progress of the work plan and the fulfillment of 
the consortium’s contractual obligations, (b) providing the necessary liaisons between the consortium and the EU, 
and (c) monitoring the progress of the project according to the project schedule and all related resource usage, and 
budget allocations, (d) ensuring the on -time completion of the project objectives, milestones, and deliverables. 
Project coordination meetings an d technical meetings will be organized regularly. At least two technical meetings 
are foreseen every year to review and agree on project developments. Extensive use of teleconferencing facilities will 
be adopted in all cases where physical meetings are hard to realize, such as the current COVID-19 pandemic crisis. 
To ensure smooth and successful implementation of the project, distinct managerial roles have been identified and 
assigned to participants with significant experience in European projects. The Pro ject Coordinator (Dr. Michail 
Maniadakis - FORTH) will be responsible for overseeing the entire project, (administrative, technical, and scientific 
coordination). The Exploitation Manager (Dr. Ioanna Deligkiozi -AXIA) will co-ordinate the exploitation activities 
of the project. The Ethics & Privacy Manager (Ioannis Kakogiannos - IRIS) will oversee data protection strategy on 
data collection, storage and processing procedures, to ensure compliance with GDPR requirements.  
T1.2 Quality assurance and risks management [M1-M36] AIMPLAS, All 
This task aims at periodically comparing the performance of the prMRF with the KPI metrics described in Section 1 
Obj 1, 4, to assure that the project objectives are fully accomplished. Risks will be linked to s pecific parts o f the 
project as, for instance, tasks, deliverables or milestones, in order to make it easier to monitor them. This will help 
potential problems to be identified early and addressed promptly and effectively without the risk increasing and 
shifting to the next stages of the project. Foreseen risks regarding the management and technical WPs are discussed 
in Section 3.1.3. Moreover, RECLAIM considers the use of an External Advisory Board (EAB) that will be actively 
involved in the strategic steering of the project’s innovation endeavors. Three high profile experts in areas relevant 
to RECLAIM have committed their active support to the project with Letters of Intent, provided in the Appendix. 
T1.3 Ethical and privacy issues on data collection [M1-M36] IRIS, All 
This task is responsible for ensuring that any ethical or privacy concerns occurring during the implementation and 
evaluation of technical developments that involve user data (mainly from playing RDG) are addressed appropriately, 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 34 of 45 
 
with full respect to EU regulat ions. This task that spans the whole duration of the project will oversee (1) the 
compliance of RECLAIM data collection and usage to user privacy regulations (2) the preservation of the 
confidentially of personal data (3) the achievement of a high -level security regarding potential risks (mainly from 
using the RDG).  
T1.4 Open data and benchmarking [M1-M36] IRIS, RBNS, FORTH 
This task aims to benchmark technology results achieved in the project in order to provide a testbed for comparing 
and assessing future works targ eting the recognition of recyclable materials in difficult real -world conditions. The 
consortium aims to make the collected data and the developed AI models that accomplish the identification, 
localization and categorization of targeted recyclable material s, available for open use. It is expected that the data 
and benchmark created in RECLAIM will be established as the standard for future works to compete, in relation to 
well-specified performance indicators. To support benchmarking activities RECLAIM will seek collaboration with 
the EU DataBench project. 
T1.5 Open training on digital waste management [M7-M12] [M31-M36] ION 
RECLAIM will organize training programs that present the latest developments in AI, Robotics, Data exploitation, 
Hyperspectral imaging and socially sensitive gaming, how they can support circular economy, and how Trustworthy 
AI can support B2B interactions and joined innovation endeavors. The training programs will invite renowned 
experts from the CSA projects funded under the call Human -Centered and Ethical Development of Digital and 
Industrial Technologies (Horizon -CL4-2021-Human-01-02) that focus on the adoption of AI technologies in the 
public and private domain. The training programs will be open to the public but designed with a focus  on the ION, 
HRRC, AIMPLAS, AXIA, ISWA staff who are non -experts in these topics but would like to know how they can 
exploit state-of-the-art technologies. RECLAIM will incorporate two different training programs, one in the first six 
months of the project  to make people aware of what they can expect from RECLAIM and one at the end of the 
project, to discuss recent advancements of and future opportunities from smart digitization. 
Deliverables 
D1.1: Data management plan and ethics/privacy manual [IRIS; M6, M36; (T1.3, T1.4)] Report documenting the 
consortium’s data management plan in compliance with the EC “Guidelines on Data Management in Horizon 
Europe” and ethics/privacy manual to be consulted over all project stages to ensure privacy and security of data and 
subjects. 
D1.2: 1st Periodic Project Report [FORTH; M18; (T1.1, T1.2, T1.5)] Report on technical progress, dissemination 
and resource usage and cost claims for the first contractual reporting period. 
D1.3: Final Project Report  [FORTH; M36; (T1.1, T1.2,  T1.5)] Report on technical progress, dissemination and 
resource usage and cost claims for the final contractual reporting period. 
 
WP Number 2 WP Leader AIMPLAS Start Month 1 End Month 6 
WP Title Application Requirements and System Specification 
Participant Νο 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Participant Name FORTH UoM KUL HRRC IRIS  RBNS AIMPLAS AXIA ISWA  ION 
PMs/Participant 5 4 4 5 3 4 6 2 2 5 
Objectives 
The main purpose of this WP is to prepare the ground for the development and innovation WPs, through the: 
• Definition of the prMRF requirements for processing waste on all use case scenarios. 
• Specification of the characteristics of the prMRF units comprising the material recovery chain. 
• Definition of the RDG operation, connectivity and usability requirements. 
• Specification of the RDG data collection procedures and user interface. 
Description of Work 
T2.1 Requirement analysis for prMRF and Recycling Data Games [M1-M4] HRRC, All 
Analysis of the waste streams in each deployment site to determine the seasonal characteristics and the daily volume 
of the waste flows, the variance of waste, the percentages of each material type, the deformation of waste during 
transport to the sorting site, and the frequency that new unknown materials may appear. Specify the operational 
requirements and priorities in each site, to design sustainable solutions with maximum social impact after taking into 
account the environmental burden of existing practices. 
T2.2 prMRF & Recycling Data Games specification and design [M3-M6] AIMPLAS, All  
Design of the prMRF to be developed in the Ionian islands , considering the individual characteristics and 
requirements of the three application scenarios assuming intensified waste processing (T2.1). Consider alternative 
methods for the pre- and post-post processing of the waste streams and definition of mechanical processes to ensure 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 35 of 45 
 
that the requirements for robotic material sorting are met and efficient cooperation along the processing chain is 
accomplished. As part of this task the prMRF equipment will be specified and purchased.  
Moreover, this task involves the specification and design of playful activities that increase social awareness regarding 
recycling and solicit data annotation from citizens. The design efforts will involve all partners through a nu mber of 
project-wide workshops in order to collect requirements and discuss affordances of how games can assist other 
objectives and tasks in RECLAIM. In addition, we will solicit end-users’ feedback in terms of interaction paradigms 
and preferences through dedicated focus groups with gaming enthusiasts and citizen scientists. Therefore, the design 
process will follow a user-centered and participatory design approach, including all relevant stakeholders.  
Deliverables 
D2.1: prMRF and RDG requirements and sy stems specification [AIMPLAS; M6; (T2.1, T2.2)] Report on the 
operational requirements of the prMRF and the RDG, and their specified (targeted) characteristics. 
 
WP Number 3 WP Leader IRIS Start Month 1 End Month 30 
WP Title Recyclable Waste Detection and Categorization 
Participant Νο 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Participant Name FORTH UoM KUL HRRC IRIS  RBNS AIMPLAS AXIA ISWA  ION 
PMs/Participant 13 9 4 4 27 6 5   5 
 
Objectives 
This WP will develop perception mechanisms which will process flows of RGB and/or Hyperspectral images to 
recognize recyclable materials. Its objectives are: 
• Exploit state of the art Deep Learning (DL) methods that address the instance segmentation problem 
• Create DL modules for material identification, localization, categorization on RGB & hyperspectral images 
• Design and implement methods for the systematic advancement of the DL modules. 
• Implement sensors network to monitor full-prMRF performance  
Description of Work 
T3.1 RGB-imaging for waste detection and categorization [M1-M18] FORTH, IRIS,RBNS 
Exploit the extensive image data collected in T6.1 for the development of a RGB -based visual recognition system 
for recyclable materials, using modern AI and machine learning techniques. Comparison and optimization of 
alternative CNN solutions in identifying, categorizing and localizing recyclable materials in waste stream, in real and 
difficult environments. The inference results of the model will guide the actions of the RoReWo Team in simplified 
operational scenarios (see for example scenario 2, Box 2 ) and will provide the basis for implementing the quick 
annotation tool to be used for the annotation of collected data. In particular, early CNN models will be employed as 
part of the annotation tool engine, which will allow the collection/annotation of new data. Then, the collected data 
will be used to improve CNN models, which will enable better annotation and so on.  
T3.2 Hyperspectral imaging for waste detection and categorization [M1-M18] IRIS, FORTH, 
The task considers the implementation of a prototype based on optical and spectroscopic techniques to correctly 
detect and categorize materials. In particular, NIR/SWIR-HSI and XRF systems will be designed and assembled on 
a conveyor test bench. Different configuration modes will be tested such as absorption, diff use reflectance, 
interactance and transflectance. The selected core devices will be acquired using commercial components that have 
been optimized to identify the main target materials in terms of spectral and dimensional resolution, lighting system, 
scanned size, speed, etc. Samples of all recyclable materials materials of interest will be collected and supplied 
together with their offline composition characterization results. Using these reference samples, IRIS will develop 
hybrid models based on chemometr ic and machine learning principles to provide compositional information about 
the materials. Different frame rates of the cameras, conveyor speed, camera-conveyor distances and collection times 
will be tested to maximize the accuracy of the distinction between different materials. 
T3.3 Repeating AI-ILC advancement & Deep Learning quality assurance [M13-M30] RBNS, FORTH, IRIS  
Τo ensure the viability of prMRF, a process of gradual expansion of the material identification capabilities is 
necessary, so that the visual system can recognize materials that have not been processed so far (e.g. new commercial 
products). To this end, this task will develop procedures that facilitate the collection of data and the training of CNN 
models by non-AI and robotics users. The process will be based on the tool already developed by RBNS for the fast 
annotation of waste images. The tool will be extended in terms of handling hyperspectral data and improved in terms 
of usability and interfacing to the CNN training. In parallel to the above FORTH will design, implement and test 
quality assurance methods for DL outputs that examine the automatically derived behavior after training (i.e. without 
logical design by engineers). The method will provide a means to compare past/new candidate so lutions to assure 
satisfactory performance. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 36 of 45 
 
T3.4 Smart Monitoring and Operational Predictive Analytics [M19-M30] IRIS, HRCC, AIPLAS, FORH 
The data to be acquired by the systems developed during the previous tasks provide significant information about 
how much waste is created and processed in a determined period of time, what kind of plastic is used the most etc. 
The current task aims to ensure long-term, high quality performance for prMRF. It will leverage the extensive volume 
of data processed every day to perform joint oper ational analytics on waste streams and prMRF performance to 
actively and informatively reconfigure prMRF to maximize productivity and facilitate predictive maintenance (e.g. 
suction cups will soon need replacement). To this end, a data acquisition platform  will be developed. All the data 
gathered will be cleared, visualised  and then combined and analyzed to return valuable insights regarding the 
production while providing predictions for future incoming waste streams in the short and long term.  
Deliverables 
D3.1: Material recognition based on RGB and Hyperspectral imaging  [IRIS; M18; (T3.1, T3.2)] Report on DL 
methods for recyclable material recognition applied on RGB and Hyperspectral images. 
D3.2: prMRF operation monitoring and repeating advancement  [FORTH; M30; (T3.3, T3.4)] Report on smart 
sensors and processes to assure long -term high quality prMRF performance for both RGB and Hyperspectral 
imaging. 
 
WP Number 4 WP Leader KUL Start Month 1 End Month 30 
WP Title RoReWo-Team for Material Recovery 
Participant Νο 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Participant Name FORTH UoM KUL HRRC IRIS  RBNS AIMPLAS AXIA ISWA  ION 
PMs/Participant 14 2 20 5 2 18 5   5 
Objectives 
The WP considers the implementation of the modular robotic system to undertake the physical separation and sorting 
of recovered materials. The planned work is driven by the following objectives:  
• Assess market-available and newly developed gripping mechanisms in picking recyclables of different type 
• Implement and test in the filed fully functional RoReWo units amenable to mount several grippers 
• Adopt a multi-robot/multi-gripper approach to compose RoReWo-Teams that recover multiple materials 
Description of Work 
T4.1 Implementation of complementary gripping mechanisms [M1-M18] KUL, FORTH 
The nature of wa ste sorting tasks is significantly different compared to most grasping tasks in industry and 
agriculture, as the grasp can be destructive, placing accuracy is unimportant and variation is significant in both 
geometry and material properties. Novel gripping solutions will be investigated, prototyped and tested in the direction 
of combined gripping mechanisms, such as the use of both vacuum (or high flow lifting) and finger gripping for 
picking, and use of blowing for fast release.  
T4.2 RoReWo implementation and control [M1-M18] RBNS, FORTH 
Implementation of low-cost cartesian robot-based RoReWo units, which use closed loop motion control in a single 
axis to achieve precise movements across the width of the conveyor belt that carries the waste, and use of a v ertical 
motion piston to approach and pick materials (see operational prototype). This task will also explore how RoReWo 
behavior should be adjusted according to the operation of the grippers (see T4.1), so that together they efficiently 
recover recyclable materials. The required adjustments will be encoded in parameterized ready to use behaviors, 
which are expected to significantly facilitate the synthesis of RoReWo -Teams and their integration to prMRF 
operation. 
T4.3 Configuration of the multi-robot/multi-gripper RoReWo-Team [M7-M30] KUL, RBNS, FORTH  
This task will improve flexibility and sorting efficiency of the prMRF by facilitating a quick and easy customization 
to respond to changes in the material supply and waste characteristics. For this purpose, different methods to 
characterize the geometry of the waste stream based on the images of the computer vision system will be explored 
and the suitability of different grippers considering these characteristics will be mapped. Considering that multiple 
robots will cooperate for sorting, we will investigate methods to define the optimal combination of grippers to be 
used. To obtain the required data and to validate these methods a looping system will be implemented to measure the 
rates of successful gripping for different RoReWo configurations, as well as the influence of other systems settings, 
such as the conveyor belt speed. 
Deliverables 
D4.1: Gripping mechanisms and RoReWo units for material recovery [KUL; M18; (T4.1, T4.2)] Report on the 
implementation of material grippers, RoReWo units and their combination. 
D4.2: Multi -robot/multi-gripper RoReWo -Team configuration  [RBNS; M30; (T4.3)] Report on the dynamic 
configuration of RoReWo-Teams according to the type of materials to be recovered. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 37 of 45 
 
WP Number 5 WP Leader FORTH Start Month 1 End Month 36 
WP Title prMRF implementation, demonstration and assessment 
Participant Νο 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Participant Name FORTH UoM KUL HRRC IRIS  RBNS AIMPLAS AXIA ISWA  ION 
PMs/Participant 17 2 15 9 10 15 15 2 2 12 
Objectives 
This WP aims at the implementation of the complete prMRF through the integration of all relevant enabling 
technologies. The objectives of the WP are: 
• Implementation of the complete waste processing chain for smart and automated material recovery. 
• Provision of a complete and fully functional prMRF for validation in challenging real world conditions 
• Exploitation of feedback gained by verification tests to fine-tune the modules and the system. 
• Definition of maintenance strategy for sustainable prMRF operation beyond RECLAIM. 
Description of Work 
T5.1 Early prMRF development and on-site deployment [M1-M9] FORTH, ION, ALL  
Early installation of purchased mechanical equipment (T2.2) and integration of the software and robotic technology 
already available to RECLAIM partners to develop two semi-functional prMRF prototypes powered by hybrid eco-
friendly technology (e.g. solar panels). The prMRF will enable extensive image and hyperspectral data collection in 
particularly realistic conditions in both deployment sites (T6 .1). This early version of the prMRF will complete by 
the end of the first project phase (section 1.3) providing an end-to-end implementation of the waste treatment chain.  
T5.2 prMRF iterative implementation-testing-optimization [M10-M30] FORTH, IRIS, KUL, RBNS  
The prMRF implemented in T5.1 will operate as industrial experimental platforms that enable the direct integration 
and testing of the newly developed AI-ILC (WP3) and RoReWo-Team technologies (WP4) with real waste streams. 
The incremental integration of the gradual ly advanced AI -ILC and RoReWo -Team in the prMRF and their direct 
evaluation in material recovery in real conditions, will reveal potential risks and will guide informed iterative 
optimizations to improve the robustness of the integrated system. By the end of this task a fully functional prMRF 
will be developed, properly customized in terms of AI -ILC training and RoReWo -Team configuration, to meet the 
needs of each application scenario. 
T5.3 Optimization of RoReWos Team performance [M13-M36] KUL, RBNS, HRRC, AIMPLAS 
Implement ef ficient collaborative behaviors for multi -robot/multi-gripper RoReWos Teams. This includes the 
distribution of roles and tasks among the available RoReWos and the management of shared resources (e.g. use of 
timed valves in common vacuum supply) in a way that maximizes global efficiency and balances the work and wear 
of the different grippers and robots. Compare alternative approaches for creating highly efficient collaborative work 
plans (spatial waste characteristics, waste location, proximity to collection bin, RoReWos/grippers ordering, common 
RoReWos roles, commercial value of recovered materials).  
T5.4 On-site prMRF assessment and long-term sustainability [M13-M36] FORTH, IRIS, KUL, RBNS, HRRC  
The implemented prMRF will be evaluated on material recovery according to the KPIs described in section 1.1. This 
latest version of the prMRF, is considered the Minimum Viable Product (MVP) of the project, featured with highly 
desirable characteristics, such as easy portability, fast installation, readily operation and eco-effectiveness regarding 
waste management for material recovery. The current task will demonstrate both the expandable capacity of the AI-
ILC to recognize new materials of interest and the modularity of the RoReWo-Team, as well as the informed, waste 
stream driven on-the-fly reconfigurability of the individual RoReWos. This task will also demonstrate the ease of 
use of prMRF by non-robotics experts, in order to promote it as a stand-alone solution capable of covering the need 
for remote material recovery. 
Deliverables 
D5.1: Early prMRF development based on available enabling technologies [FORTH; M9; (T5.1)] Report on the 
development of a first prMRF prototype to set the ground for subsequent implementation steps. 
D5.2: Preliminary assessment of prMRF performance [FORTH; M18; (T5.2, T5.3, T5.4)] Report on the repeating 
implementation-testing spins targeting the optimization of the prMRF. 
D5.3: Final assessment of prMRF and sustainability plan  [KUL; M36; (T5.2, T5.3, T5.4)] Report on the final 
assessment of prMRF performance on each deployment site and plan for sustainable prMRF use beyond RECLAIM. 
 
 
 
 
 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 38 of 45 
 
WP Number 6 Lead beneficiary UoM Start Month 1 End Month 36 
WP Title Recycling Data-Game 
Participant Νο 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Participant Name FORTH UoM KUL HRRC IRIS  RBNS AIMPLAS AXIA ISWA  ION 
PMs/Participant 4 23  3 4 6 2 2 2 5 
           
Objectives 
WP6 considers the implementation of a gamified approach for user participation in recycling data collection, in order 
to facilitate the training of DL models. The planned work is driven by the following objectives.  
• Collect and exploit real waste RGB and Hyperspectral imaging for the development of the RDG. 
• Pipeline deep learning and gaming algorithms to create repeatedly new gaming experiences for users. 
• Implement an RDG that is easy to use and engaging for citizens of diverse age, gender, and background. 
 
Description of Work 
T6.1 On site, waste data collection [M1-M18] RBNS, UoM, IRIS, HRRC 
The early development of the targeted prMRF (T5.1), will allow the direct visual and hyperspe ctral examination of 
waste streams under the same conditions as the final operation of the prMRF after considering constant and efficient 
lighting on the waste. Open source versioning tools (e.g. DVC) will be used to efficiently organize the data captured 
along iterative data collection procedures, to assure quality results. It is planned that data collection will be carried 
out periodically every 2 months for at least a whole year to meet the expected seasonal characteristics in the 
appearance of waste (e .g. raindrops in winter, dust in summer). The tool developed in T3.3 will be used by 
experienced workers to quickly annotate the collected data to be used for RDG development and train the early 
versions of the AI-ILC module. 
T6.2 Algorithms and pipelines for recycling data-games [M3-M30] UoM, ION 
This task will create a recycling data -game pipeline for re -using and improving real -world data through human 
annotations. In this novel paradigm which advances research in game generation (an indicative scenario is provided 
in Box 3). This will leverage already available machine learning techniques for user modelling, procedural content 
generation and recommender systems. The algorithmic advances will be integrated into intuitive and simple to use 
games that can be depl oyed on many platforms and devices, focusing on web -based solutions. Established game 
engines such as Unity 3D will be used for development, as they are powerful and can deploy to a broad range of 
platforms such as windows, android, web, etc. To ensure that RDG evaluation in T6.3 is carried out to best effect, a 
series of usage analytics will be implemented so that they can be collected online while the users play. 
T6.3 Deployment and evaluation of environmental games [M13-M36] UoM, ION, ISWA 
This task will validate t he RDG, through a series of dedicated pilots with focus groups as well as in -the-wild 
experiments carried out online. This will allow (a) targeted and specific feedback regarding the incremental 
advancement of AI-ILC, and rising recycling awareness (through focus groups) and (b) test RDG usability and data 
collection potential at scale (through in-the-wild experiments) and the exploitation of gathered data by other project 
developments (T3.3). Focus groups studies will use a combination of quantified metric s collected during 
playthroughs and qualitative feedback through semi -structured interviews before and after the playthrough. In -the-
wild experiments will deploy the games online to engage a large set of users through broad -scale dissemination 
campaigns. Evaluation in these large-scale experiments will focus on quantified game analytics collected within the 
game, and will also explore how the user annotations have impacted AI -ILC performance and the circulating user -
RDG interaction.   
Deliverables 
D6.1: Waste Data for material recognition and Recycling Data Game [UoM; M9, M18; (T6.1)] Report on the 
on-site data collection procedures. Data available for internal and public use. 
D6.2: Algorithms and pipelines for Recycling Data Games [UoM; M9, M18, M30; (T6.2) ] Report on the 
implementation of the RDG and its interaction with other project activities.  
D6.3: Assessment of the Recycling Data Game [UoM; M18, M36; (T6.3)] Report on the assessment of the RDG, 
plan for its supportive role on prMRF use beyond RECLAIM.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 39 of 45 
 
WP Number 7 WP Leader AXIA Start Month 1 End Month 36 
WP Title Project impact maximization 
Participant Νο 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Participant Name FORTH UoM KUL HRRC IRIS  RBNS AIMPLAS AXIA ISWA  ION 
PMs/Participant 6 6 5 4 4 6 5 28 12 4 
Objectives 
This WP will develop RECLAIM outreach activities with the following objectives:  
• Develop a plan for and implement dissemination and communication activities, including target groups and 
channels, to facilitate the outreach of project results. 
• Develop a plan for and implement innovation and exploitation activities, demonstrating the potential 
business opportunities of RECLAIM results.  
• Develop an IPR strategy, including actions to preserve the IPR generated within the project. 
• Carry out networking/clustering activities with other relevant projects and DIHs  
• Provide performance metrics and results to benchmark RECLAIM solutions 
Description of Work 
T7.1 Dissemination and communication activities [M1-M36] ISWA, All 
This task will monitor the progress of the d issemination and communication strategy summarized in Section 2. 
Communication activities will start from the very beginning of the project and will continue with concrete actions 
(images, posts, blogs, articles, presentation, videos etc.) until the end of RECLAIM. In addition to the broader picture 
of the project, the obtained results in all four innovation pillars, will have their own dissemination and communication 
identity. Noticeably, ISWA has well established contacts with multiple recycling organizat ions and enterprises all 
over the world, which will help promote the idea of prMRF-powered distributed material recovery and will help the 
project achieve substantial global impact. 
T7.2 Liaising with other projects and DIHs [M13-M36] AXIA, FORTH, All 
This task will focus on establishing and coordinating links with projects and initiatives in AI, Data and Robotics in 
Horizon Europe and other programmes (e.g. Networks of excellence centres, DIHs, pilots, data platforms), in view 
of sharing knowledge, developing synergies, and coordinating efforts (e.g. organization of joint events). It is expected 
that many initiatives will express their interest in both the AI-powered robotic material recovery and the RDG, as 
tangible examples to promote public awareness and addressing acceptability and trustworthiness of AI. RECLAIM 
will highlight the value generated by the combination of AI, data and robotics in the GreenDeal and the circular 
economy in particular, to showcase the contribution of state-of-the-art technologies to social welfare and 
sustainability. Within this frame, particular efforts will be made in order to establish and refine 
standardization protocols among the relevant projects. Besides the general public, RECLAIM will target the 
business community, with a particular focus on SMEs and governmental authorities to foster vast deployment of 
prMRF for distributed, decentralized material recovery and additionally the broader domain of smart high-tech 
solutions. 
T7.3 Innovation assets exploitation and commercialization [M13-M36] AXIA, ISWA, ALL 
The exploitation plan will be presented in M6 and updated throughout the project implementation, to guide the efforts 
of the consortium in demonstrating the potential of RECLAIM solutions to meet market needs. The business plan 
report that will be prepared to highlight the business opportunities for the Key Results Owners, will include: (i) the 
identification of the exploitation routes that partners want to pursuit, (ii) the identification of market segments, (iii) 
a competition analysis, (iv) a patent mapping analysis, using PatSnap platform, (v) a risk analysis and (vi) a financial 
analysis. The exploitation activities will take into consideration the need to raise awareness of potential investors and 
reach out to interested stakeholders, policy-makers and public bodies. In addition, a strategy for the protection of IPR 
and knowledge management will be established. All IPR principles will be managed from an early stage, through the 
Consortium Agreement (CA) and the Grant Agreement (GA), where o wnership, access rights, publications, 
confidentiality and liability will be examined. However, a concrete IPR strategy will clarify the ownership of the 
results and identify the most promising exploitation routes that will secure the collaboration among partners.  
Deliverables 
D7.1: Plan for the dissemination and communication activities [ISWA; M6, M18, M36; (T7.1)] Report on the 
implemented and planned dissemination and communication activities to ensure a substantial impact both at the EU 
level and international level. 
D7.2: Plan for the innovation and exploitation activities [AXIA; M6, M18, M36; (T7.2, T7.3)] Report on the 
implemented and planned innovation and exploitation activities including Open Data and Benchmarking, IPR 
management and patent mapping analysis. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 40 of 45 
 
Table 3.1c. List of RECLAIM Deliverables in order of delivery dates. 
Del. Del. Name WP  Lead Type Level Month 
D1.1 Data management plan and ethics/privacy manual WP1 IRIS DMP + 
ETHICS  
PU M6, Μ36 
D2.1 prMRF and RDG requirements and systems 
specification 
WP2 AIMPLAS R EU-R Μ6 
D5.1 Early prMRF development based on available enabling 
technologies 
WP5 FORTH R+DEM PU M9 
D6.1 Waste Data for material recognition and Recycling Data 
Game 
WP6 RBNS R+ 
DATA 
PU M9, M18 
D1.2 1st Periodic Project Report WP1 FORTH R PU M18 
D3.1 Material recognition based on RGB and Hyperspectral 
imaging 
WP3 IRIS  R+O PU M18 
D4.1 Gripping mechanisms and RoReWo units for material 
recovery 
WP4 KUL R+DEM PU M18 
D5.2 Preliminary assessment of prMRF performance WP5 FORTH R+DEM PU M18 
D6.2 Algorithms and pipelines for Recycling Data Games WP6 UoM R  PU M9, M18, 
M30 
D7.1 Plan for the innovation and exploitation activities WP7 ISWA R+ DEC SEN M6, M18, 
M36 
D3.2 prMRF operation monitoring and repeating advancement WP3 FORTH R+O PU M30 
D4.2 Multi-robot/multi-gripper RoReWo-Team configuration WP4 RBNS R+DEM PU M30 
D5.3 Final assessment of prMRF and sustainability plan WP5 KUL R+DEM PU M36 
D6.3 Assessment of the Recycling Data Game WP6 UoM R+DEM PU M18, M36 
D7.2 Plan for the innovation and exploitation activities WP7 AXIA R+ DEC EU-R M6, M18, 
M36 
D1.3 Final Project Report WP1 FORTH R PU M36 
3.1.2 Milestones 
There are five major milestones in RECLAIM, listed in Table 3.1d.  These work as checkpoints in order to verify 
that research and development is progressing in the right direction. 
 
Table 3.1d List of RECLAIM Milestones. 
No Milestone Related 
WP(s) 
Due 
Date 
Means of 
verification 
MS1 Consortium and project start up : Partner responsibilities 
specified, repository procedures establishe d, project e -presence 
& website, dissemination commenced, prMRF & RDG 
requirement analysis and specifications complete. 
WP1, WP2 
ALL WPs 
M6 D1.1, D2.1 
MS2 Early integration of available technologies  - RECLAIM 
Phase I complete:  Semi-functional prMRF implem entations, 
data management plan and ethics/privacy manual available 
WP5, WP6 M9 D5.1, D6.1 
MS3 Key computer-vision and robotic components available and 
tested in the wild.  AI-ILC complete, RoReWos and grippers 
complete, prMRF & RDG implementation in good progress, 
data publicly available, preliminary innovation exploitation. 
WP1-WP7 
 
M18 D1.2, D3.1, 
D4.1, D5.2, 
D6.2, D7.1 
MS4 Early integration of available technologies  - RECLAIM 
Phase II complete: Smart production monitoring complete, 
RoReWo Team complete , prMRF & RDG complete and ready 
for final assessment.  
WP3, WP4 M30 D3.2, D4.2 
MS5 RECLAIM Sustainability and asset Exploitation. prMRF and 
RDG refined and assessed, open access pilot demonstrations 
finalized, sustainability plan, project assets ready fo r 
exploitation and commercialization. Project End. 
WP1, WP5 
WP6, WP7 
M36 D5.3, D6.3, 
D7.2, D1.3 
 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 41 of 45 
 
3.1.3 Project risks 
An initial list of identified risks is presented in Table 3.1e; more detailed assessment of risks will regularly be carried 
out during the execution of the project. As a general prevention measure, the consortium will closely monitor the 
progress of the project in order to detect and react early to any problems that may occur. 
 
 
Table 3.1e. Identified RECLAIM project risks and mitigation measures. 
Risk Description 
(Likelihood/Severity) 
WP(s) 
involved Risk-mitigation measures 
Technical Risks 
The development of prMRF 
faces limitations in the 
formation of the production 
chain (L:low/S:med) 
WP5 FORTH is experienced in implementing compact recycling units (see 
Figure 1.3 ). The parallel development of two slightly different 
versions of prMRF will facilitate the exchange of know -how and 
good practices to ensure the efficient performance of the mechanical 
R-Eq across the production chain. 
The operation o f prMRF 
requires equipment that could 
not have been foreseen at 
proposal submission 
WP5, 
WP3, 
WP4 
This is rather unlikely due to the experience of FORTH in 
implementing similar compact robotic material recovery units. The 
end-user ION is fully committed to the project and will provide any 
minor equipment that might be needed, undertaking the expenses. 
The AI -ICL module 
underperforms in terms of 
accuracy (Lamed/S:med) 
WP3, 
WP5 
Mitigation will try to find a trade -off between performance and 
complexity. Instead of targeting the categorization of many material 
types the problem will be simplified, targeting the recovery of less 
types to increase accuracy rates. 
Newly developed grippers do 
not improve picking skills 
(L:med/S:low) 
WP4, 
WP5 
RECLAIM has already av ailable many material specific grippers 
that perform successfully in material picking. New grippers will focus 
on universality (i.e. be applicable in many materials). If this is not 
possible, the available classic grippers will be used to showcase 
successful prMRF performance. 
RoReWos underperform in 
material picking due to single 
axis motion. (L:high/S:low) 
WP4, 
WP5 
This is a known issue that appears due to the simplified very-low-cost 
RoReWo architecture. This issue is mitigated by slightly slowing -
down the conveyor belt to significantly increase RoReWo picking 
success. 
Material flow is too high and 
the RoReWos -Team can 
recover only a part of it 
(L:High/S:med) 
WP5 Due to the modularity of the RoReWo Team this issue can be easily 
mitigated by adding more RoReWos in the operating Team. 
To assess that, we will gather all (eight) RoReWos in a single prMRF 
to assess the performance of the extended RoReWo Team. 
Delays in the developm ent of 
individual tools. The complete 
solution is not sufficiently 
tested and complete 
(L:Low/S:med) 
WP3, 
WP4, 
WP5, 
WP6 
RECLAIM aims at implementing a functional prMRF very early in 
the project. Interim versions of the tools will be integrated 
continuously so that it does not hinder the development of other parts 
and even if the final version of a tool is not yet ready, a tested version 
can still be included in the solution. 
Not many citizens engage with 
the use of the RDG 
(L:Low/S:low) 
WP6, 
WP3 
RDG will be assessed and refined to ensure user friendliness and 
usability. The RDG will be actively promoted in social media to gain 
popularity. All participant organizations will encourage their 
employees to use the game. UoM, KUL, FORTH has direct access to 
a large pool of students who are potential users of the RDG  
The RDG does not cont ribute 
as expected in the collection of 
annotated data (L:med/S:low) 
WP6, 
WP3 
A major part of data collection is planned very early in RECLAIM.  
AIMPLAS, HRRC and ION staff will annotate this data to enable AI-
ILC training and satisfactory performance. If necessary, additional 
resources will be allocated to data collection & annotation. 
Nevertheless, citizen data will help in the optimization of the AI-ILC, 
but prMRF can be effective even without them.   
Management Risks 
Communication problems may 
cause delays in the delivery of 
results (L:low/S:med) 
WP1-7 Kick-off meeting will be held to establish personal contacts. Regular 
monthly communication between WPs  will be established . To do 
Handbook for the day -to-day management of the project  will be set 
up. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 42 of 45 
 
Lack of resources for a partner 
(L:low/S:high) 
WP1-7 The issue will be mitigated either by rearranging resources among the 
partners, or re -planning work distribution to support the partner in 
need of resources. 
Personnel changes may impact 
the quality  of t he outcomes  
(L:low/S:high) 
WP1-7 Multiple staff members from each partner are involved in R&D 
disciplines, ensuring smooth transition for the newly hired staff. 
Additional support will be provided by partners working in closely 
related areas. 
COVID-19 Pan demic 
(L:med/S:high) 
WP1-7 Consortium partners will utilize online services to launch the project 
and collaborate in project tasks. prMRF implementation will proceed 
in slower steps with all partners contributing their parts one after the 
other for integration in the main platform. 
We don’t foresee any negative impact of Covid-19 to RDG activities. 
 
3.1.4 Summary of effort and costs 
A summary of the overall effort is provided in Table 3.1f. The table presents the distribution of person months over 
the duration of the project for each WP and for each Participant. 
Table 3.1f. Summary of RECLAIM staff effort. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1.5 Subcontracting costs  
None of the partners in the consortium intend to use subcontracting to carry out project tasks. 
3.1.6 Purchase costs  
RECLAIM regards the construction of complete prMRF unit, which assumes increased costs in terms of purchasing 
and integrating the recycling equipment used for waste pre- and post- processing, the waste monitoring units and the 
RoReWo team, into a container box. Additionally, travel costs are occasionally high due to frequent travels of the 
technical partners to the on -site implementation, testing and deployment sites.  Accordingly, for some partners, the 
budget of “Other Costs” is exceeding the 15% of the personnel costs. For these partners, Table 3.1g provides details 
on how the relevant “Other Costs” have been determined.  
Table 3.1g. Other direct cost’ items (travel, equipment, other services, infrastructure). 
1 FORTH Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and subsistence 45,000 Multiple long travels for on-site prMRF implementation, deployment, 
assessment + participation to project meeting, technical meetings and 
conferences + travel of the External Advisory Board 
Equipment 40,000 PC + Hyperspectral camera + lighting 
Other goods/works/services 15,000 Open Access Fees + Consumables + Audit 
Total 100,000  
 WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 Total PMs  
1 FORTH 9 5 13 14 17 4 6 68 
2 UoM 2 4 9 2 2 23 6 48 
3 KUL 2 4 4 20 15  5 50 
4 HRRC 2 5 4 5 9 3 4 32 
5 IRIS 3 3 27 2 10 4 4 53 
6 RBNS 2 4 6 18 15 6 6 57 
7 AIMPLAS 2 6 5 5 15 2 5 40 
8 AXIA 2 2   2 2 28 36 
9 ISWA 2 2    2 16 20 
10 ION 4 5 5 5 12 5 4 40 
Total PMs 30 40 73 71 99 51 80 444 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 43 of 45 
 
 
4 HRRC Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and subsistence 12,000 Travel costs for on-site prMRF implementation and testing + 
participation to project meetings, technical meetings, dissemination 
events 
Equipment 130,000 Container box + Mechanical r ecycling equipment to be integrated 
with the prMRF (e.g. trommel, flip-flop sorter, conveyor belts, waste 
press) 
Other goods/works/services   
Total 142,000  
 
 
 
5 IRIS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and subsistence 18,000 Travel costs for project meetings, technical meetings , dissemination 
events 
Equipment   
Other goods/works/services 88,000 Materials and consumables for building the prototype real -time 
monitoring solution: camera, electromechanical parts, electronics, PC, 
software licensing etc. + consumables +  Open access fees  + 
dissemination events services 
Total 106,000  
 
 
 
6 RBNS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and subsistence 30,000 Multiple long travels for on-site prMRF implementation, deployment, 
assessment + participation to project meeting, technical meetings and 
conferences  
Equipment 40,000 Robotic equipment used for implementing the RoReWo Team . For 
each RoReWo includes linear positioning unit + motor drive system + 
gripper. For the whole team includes PC + air blower + valves  
Other goods/works/services 20,000 Robotic and other consumables , which includes mainly: p iping for 
pneumatic gripping, screws, suction cups, I/O communication hubs, 
wiring, sensors (vacuum, temperature, power consumption) and more. 
Total 90,000  
 
 
 
9 ISWA Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and subsistence 20,000 Travel costs to disseminate RECLAIM achievements + participation 
to project meetings and conferences 
Equipment 0  
Other goods/works/services 12,000 Services for organizing demo s in major international  events + 
dissemination material 
Total 32,000  
 
 
 
10 ION Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and subsistence 20,000 Travel costs for project meetings + technical meetings + participation 
to live prMRF demos 
Equipment 15,000 Supporting e quipment to facilitate  prMRF deployment  and 
assessment in three different use case scenarios 
Other goods/works/services 35,000 Consumables + prMRF setup services + services for waste collection 
& transport to testing sites + se rvices for prMRF transport to demo 
sites and conferences 
Total 70,000  
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-09: AI, data and Robotics for the Green Deal (IA) [RECLAIM]                                 Page 44 of 45