2.1 Expected Impacts  
EC has presented a roadmap to support the transition to a knowledge -based post-petroleum economy in EU by establishing 
sustainable and competitive bio-based industries and value chains117. The Bioeconomy Strategy and its Action Plan pave the way 
to a more innovative, resource-efficient and competitive EU society, while generating new incomes and ensuring job creation and 
accelerate progress towards the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)118.  
In this context, the BBI’s SIRA aims to push, among other things, the development of new biotech processes and biomaterials 
helping decoupling economic growth from resource depletion and environmental impact. Nowadays, plastics are used in 
various sectors w ith a demand of 50 Mtons per year; plasticulture accounts for 4% (greenhouse 31%, mulch 45% and silage 
24%); while packaging makes up for 40% of this use, of which food packaging accounts for around 90%. In both sectors, the EoL 
treatment of plastics is un derperforming. According to PlasticsEurope119, in 2018, 31% of plastic waste was recycled in Europe 
but landfill and incineration are still dominant treatments for plastic post -consumer waste. The recently adopted EC’s plastics 
strategy aims at decoupling plastics production from virgin materials, reducing their leakage into the environment, improving the 
economics and uptake of recycling to support the transition from a linear to a circular economy model. 
RECOVER is a high impact project for the improvemen t of the bioeconomy in Europe. Thus, it is hinged on delivering 
biotechnological tools applying microorganisms, enzymes, earthworms and insects to degrade conventional non -
recyclable plastic packaging and agricultural films waste streams but also result in  new feedstocks (chitin/chitosan -
based plastics and coatings and new fertilizers) for the primary sector and bio -based food industries. In this way, the 
circular economy concept is realized, providing added EoL for plastics which are currently landfilled or incinerated, or more often 
                                                             
113 Yang, Jun; Yang, Yu; Wu, Weimin. Biodegradation of petroleum-based plastics. U.S. Patent Application No 14/440,045, 3 Sept. 2015. 
US20150247018A1 
114 Boisart, Cédric; Maille, Emmanuel. Method for recycling plastic products. U.S. Patent Application No 14/443,524, 15 Oct. 2015 WO2014079844A1 
115 Maille, Emmanuel. Process of recycling mixed pet plastic articles. U.S. Patent Application No 15/310,458, 27 Apr. 2017. WO2015173265A1 
116 Abe, Keietsu, et al. Method of degrading plastic and process for producing useful substance using the same. U.S. Patent Application No 10/532,423, 18 
May 2006. US20060106120A1 
117 COM(2012) 60 final. The Commission Communication of 13 February 2012 entitled "Innovating for Sustainable Growth: A Bioeconomy for Europe". 
118 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs 
119 Plastics – the Facts 2018. An analysis of European plastics production, demand and waste data 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 23  
left on the soil. This impact will be achieved by performing research work with the objective of making this concept commercially 
viable in practice, analyzing the potentially successful exploitation pathways and assessing and managing any related risks.  
Importantly, RECOVER will contribute to the achievement of the SDGs as discussed below in each relevant impact point 
and visualized in the Fig. 2.1. As further shown in this figure, RECOVER significantly contributes to the KPIs  set out in the 
overall BBI-JU roadmap and more specifically to the expected impacts in the topic BBI-2019-SO2-R3 Apply microorganisms 
and/or enzymes to resolve end-of-life issues of plastics, as described below: 
     
Figure 2.1: RECOVER contributions to SDGs and BBI JU KPIs 
 
EXPECTED IMPACTS LINKED TO BBI JU KPIS: 
▪ contribute to KPI 1 – create at least one new cross-sector interconnection in the bio-based economy; 
The RECOVER proposal builds upon the BBI goal of achieving the full potential of the bio-based industries, which requires swift 
and concerted action of today's dispersed stakeholders across various sectors, disciplines and Member States.  
In RECOVER, conne cting different partners, such as researchers, technology developers and producers, through 
clustering and networking is key to developing new value chains and supporting the emergence of affordable EoL 
solutions for plastics, which also constitutes a strong contribution to the SDG 17 “Partnerships for the Goals”. The active 
involvement of all key players along the value chains (including additional sectorial associations in the Advisory Board) will allow 
us to create long -lasting links with related cluster s, necessary to fill a clear gap in the marketplace for sustainable plastics and 
EoL thereof. With RECOVER we will establish 1 new circular- cross-sector connection and further intensify 2 connections, among 
waste management and biotechnologies, and among the bioplastics, packaging/agriculture and agri -food sectors as explained 
below. 
RECOVER will create an unprecedented systematic, cross-border and cross-sectorial, circular connection between all actors for 
the considered end of life management of non-biodegradable AWP. The new cross-sector interconnection is realised bonding the 
biotechnology providers, namely the suppliers of enzymes (for the plastics degradation, represented in our consortium by ASA)  
and insects (for the plastics decomposition, represented by NUTRINSECT) with users (post consumers AWP: IDELUX, ASAJA, 
SAV and post-industrial AWP: NATURPLAS, FEMTO) and converters (OWS RF for composting & biogas plant design, IDELUX 
for MSW management) of conventional fossil-based plastics. Following such approach RECOVER will not only allow to achieving 
high levels of biodegradation of AWP - both from fields or landfills - but also achieving its valorisation through insect by-products 
- such as high value chitin-chitosan-based formulations from the conversion of AWP. These last- will result in bio-fertilizers, new 
active mulching films and agriculture products (pots, sticks, yarns) for the primary sector as well as in active packagin g for food 
industries. 
The magnitude of RECOVER new cross-sector interconnection will be multiplied by ASAJA as top member of COPA and SAV, 
whose presence in the consortium favours the generation of positive spill over effects among its affiliates leading to push-pull 
effects for the new RECOVER symbiotic bioprocesses. 
Relying on the transition from linear to circular value chains, we close the loop making farmers and food producers that generates 
AWP, become producer of biobased, biodegradable active ingredients for bioplastics (chitin/chitosan) as well as end users of new 
fertilizer formulations and mulching films, pots etc. with enhanced properties by AWP biodegradation by products. This way we  
will create new upstream links with producers of unavoidable AWP opening up unprecedented business opportunities for farmers 
that conventionally are positioned at the end of such value chain. This opportunity reinforces the genuine urgent need of the  
farmers to find a viable way to handle plastic pollution in soil for their sector to be sustainable on the long term. Indeed, RECOVER 
will create new incomes for agri -food sectors not yet involved in waste management to actually tap into the opportunity of 
converting their waste into value (more details in the paragraph related to impacts associated to the creation of new incomes). As 
such, the current waste challenge turns into an enabler for innovation allowing a significant decrease in the environmental impact 
of the agri-food sectors and of the value chains of the RECOVER solutions. We will have the agri-food sectors playing a strategic 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 24  
polyvalent end user role within our bio -based value chain. While, as seen, they act as material supplier  along the new value 
chains, they need to be supplied with agricultural films as well as fertilizers (both as insects by products, as chitin/chitosan based 
formulations). Incontrovertibly, this magnifies the strength of the new links and the resonance of our solutions in the new circular 
bio-based value chains. RECOVER will further intensify 2 emerging cross-sectorial interconnections in bio-based economy 
cluster: 
•   We will reinforce the bond that the bioplastics sector has with the packaging sector (which is by far the largest consumer 
of biodegradable and bio-based plastics, expected to grow at a CAGR of 17% to 2024120) by providing new demonstrators in 
food applications, possible thanks to RECOVER solutions’ unique EoL tailored to their needs. This new link is for example 
illustrated at the level of our Large packaging converter, FEMTO, and food packer MANOR.  
•    We will intensify the interconnection that the bioplastics sector has with the agriculture sector  (which is expected to 
grow at a CAGR of 5.8% to 2024 121) by providing new demonstrators in agriculture films, pots, sticks, e tc. applications. This 
new bond is realized through the Agricultural Film Supplier NATURPLAS and FEMTO producer of plastic items by injection 
moulding. The participation in RECOVER will ensure NATURPLAS to drive the development towards actual market needs 
and new legislative constraints.   
As seen, the sectors embraced by RECOVER are of outmost significance in terms of need for new EoL with over 43% of plastic 
used for packaging and for agriculture, but the new cross-sectorial interdependencies created, considered also when building our 
AB, can contribute to the outmost exploitation of our results, also in other target sectors where plastics have difficult EoL  (e.g. 
consumer goods, tableware, textiles, sanitary items, etc).. 
 
▪ contribute to KPI 2 – set the basis for at least one new bio-based value chain; 
The RECOVER consortium mobilizes the necessary partners and sectorial approach to contribute to the achievement of the KPI 
2 aimed at delivering “10 new bio -based value chains by 2020”. The development of a  suite of novel biotech tools for the AWP 
biodegradation that respond to the demand for affordable and sustainable EoL solutions for plastics, requires liaising a crit ical 
mass of actors that are able to generate value working in a synergistic collaboration.  
As such, RECOVER consortium leverages partners at every stage of the supply and value chain, as well as additional 
stakeholders in the AB.  
In RECOVER, we create 3 new stable and effective value chains not only by new players interconnections at the upstream of 
the chain (to link standard plastics with insects - microorganisms and enzymes providers) but also remodeling existing value 
chains that will substitute their petrol -derived products with our bio-based solutions (biofertilizers, agricultural bio-films and food 
packaging), as illustrated in Fig. 2.2. 
 
Fig. 2.2 RECOVER value chains 
 
RECOVER is uniting expertise in biotechnology, plastic processing technology, biodegradability, LCA, engineering, as well as 
industry actors at different levels of the value chain, capable of steering the research in tune with their market knowledge and 
requirements. To reach the project impact of the delivery of bio -technology solutions for plastics EoL requirements tha t are 
currently not satisfied and that represent a very huge challenge for the environment, joint actions will be needed at different levels 
of the value chain, e.g. between farmers/municipalities, insects producers, material producers, final item designer  and waste 
managing body so the biodegradation is actual. The in and ex situ biodegradation models will be a common tool used at these 
different levels facilitating this collaboration. 
The value chain approach will also guarantee that access to selected knowledge occurs among the partners to reach a 
                                                             
120 The Future of Bioplastics for Packaging to 2024. Smithers Pira 
121 Agricultural Films Market - Europe Market Shares, Trends and Forecasts (2017 - 2022). Mordor Intelligence 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 25  
seamless exploitation.  The RECOVER actors will work towards similar goals and a proportion of Large end users in the 
consortium or AB, who will test and validate the new solutions in the selected target demonstr ator applications, are included as 
early adopters at the end of the value chain to stimulate the demand. This will particularly benefit SMEs (IRIS, ASA, 
NUTRINSECT,  ENTO, NATURPLAS ) as it will provide them with new up - and down -stream partners. Cooperatio n among 
RECOVER members will be particularly important in the post -project phase, as results of the project are pre -competitive and 
additional investment will be required before RECOVER is ready for commercialization. As addressed through specific tasks in  
WP7, setting the basis for a robust value chain will be key to generate real value on the market. Building on the experience of 
strong players in the composting/bioremediation sectors will play a massive role in designing promising solutions for plastic  
degradation and shaping their successful market entry phase. As such, we are confident that our developments, meeting true 
market demand, can convert into a sustainable value chain. 
 
▪ contribute to KPI 8 – validate at least one new and improved processing technology reflecting the ‘TRL gain’ since the 
start of the project. 
As discussed in TRL table 1.4, we will follow a scale up 
approach of the different technologies involved in the project 
(generally from TRL 2 -3 now to TRL 4 -5 at project end). In 
terms of the most relevant processing technologies for the 
biobased industries for which we will provide advances that 
pave the way towards future industrial replication, we would 
like to stress 3 cases: 
1- The ex situ composting of the AWP: it relies on SoA at 
TRL3 mainly and will be incrementally brought to TRL5. In 
that aim, tests will be made in test tubes and small vessels 
(up to 1L, TRL 4) in WP2 and 3 and then upscaled to reactors 
of 50 L at OWS RF and IDELUX (fig 2.3). 
2-For the first time AWP-degrading enzymes and 
microorganisms will be produced in quantities suitable for 
the treatment of plastics. Indeed, the production of these 
enzymes and microorganisms will be upscaled from shake 
flasks up to 200 L fermentation volume thanks to the 
participation of ASA (fig. 2.3). The in silico studies will greatly 
support this work. 
3-the extraction of chitosan from chitin will be brought from 
TRL 2 to TRL4 when referring to the combined use eBeam 
irradiation and green solvents for that purpose. This 
approach is aimed to facilitate the solubility and suitability of 
chitin towards the application of less harmful and/or bio -
degradable solvents either directly through eBeam treatment 
or by eBeam mediated coupling of moieties. eBeam 
treatment of raw material with low doses (20 and 25  kGy) 
accelerates downstream steps (deproteinization, 
demineralization, and deacetylation) during conventional 
chemical extraction that aim, ASU will extract in vessels of 
increasing sizes (up to 2L) in WP5  (using the same eBeam 
equipment along the upscale  of the eBeam assisted 
extraction, fig. 2.3). This is a highly innovative process that 
is much more sustainable and safer that the current ones 
employing alkaline solvents and promise s to attract a lot of 
interest from the biotech industry. 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS: 
▪ decrease the amount of non-biodegradable polymers sent to disposal or even discharged to the environment; 
RECOVER will provide novel biotechnological solutions applying microorganisms, enzymes and insects to degrade conventional 
plastic packaging and agricultural films wastes.  
Agro-plastics 
As seen in the Ambition part, “A. State of the art and advances in the field of plastic controlled waste management and treatment 
technologies”, the majority of the AWP in Europe consists of LDPE (low density polyethylene), EVA (ethylene-vinyl acetate) and 
copolymers for mulching films; Spun -bonded non-woven PP (polypropylene) fabric, LDPE and EVA for direct covers; LLDPE, 
 (1) 
 (2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) 
 
Fig. 2.3: Equipment for the 3 mentioned processes 
showing increased scales potentially used along the 
project where applicable (resp. process (1) at OWS RF, 
process (a) at ASA and process (3) at ASU) 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 26  
LDPE, EVA and PVC (polyvinylchloride) for low tunnel films; everyone of them for greenho uses and PE (polystyrene) and PP 
(polypropylene) for fertilizers sacks.  
The EU agriculture and horticulture industries generate 1.200 tons of plastic waste per year, around 9% of which is recycled, 12% 
incinerated, and 79% was accumulated in agro -fields (buried), landfills or the natural environment 122. If current production and 
waste management trends continue, projecting current global waste management trends to 2050, 12,000 Mtons will be discarded 
or buried in the natural environment and 12,000 Mtons incinerated producing high levels of CO2 emissions123. In addition, because 
of the durability of the polymers involved, substantial quantities of discarded end -of-life plastics are accumulating as debris in 
landfills and in natural habitats worldwide. The agricultural grounds covered by greenhouse for protecting cultivation account for 
1,300,000 ha globally. Of the 80 Ktons of mulch films marketed per year in EU, only 5% are biodegradable. Agricultural plasti c 
wastes constitute an environmental and economic  problem, because they may cause severe and diffuse damages to the 
landscape, the environment, the agricultural soil, the air (in case of incineration) and to the shallow and deep water if they are not 
properly managed. Plastics that are used for agricultu re is typically buried, abandoned along rivers, or in rural areas or burnt in 
open air often on farm property or uncontrolled sites. Plastic films generate about 80% of the agricultural plastic waste. For these 
applications, the plastic waste collection and recycling are difficult or even impossible due to the extreme amount of soil and crop 
fractions therein. The contamination by soil, sand, and organic material of plastic agro-textile materials can reach up to 60-80 % 
of the total amount in terms of weigh t, making the mechanical recycling economically unviable. This unavoidable plastic 
accumulation is soil has led to a demand for soil biodegradability of plastics impossible to collect and recycle. 
Non-recyclable packaging 
Packaging may contain high traces of food and other residues that complicate a standard recycling requiring cleaning and separation 
pre-treatments prior to reprocessing. The complex nature of the plastic waste streams in terms of polymer composition and the 
presence of multilayer films and other flexible fractions difficult to handle aggravates the issue. Several technical, waste stream 
handling and cost efficiency problems do not allow the wider expansion of recycling.  
In RECOVER, the optimised biodegradation process will be performed eit her ex-situ in composting reactors and insect rearing 
chambers (preferred route for non-recyclable plastics from municipal solid waste or for agricultural films that can be collected easily) 
or in-situ in the case of bioremediating soil pollution, by e.g. mulching films, further to contributing to the long-term removal of non-
biodegradable polymers from the environment. 
Both, enzymes and microorganisms have been reported as successful in biodegradation of LDPE, HDPE and PS among others 
fossil plastics. Likewise, the insects used in the process explained above are reported as highly trained for the ingestion, digestion 
and conversion of AWP. Therefore, AWP biodegradation by successful communities of enzymes and microorganisms will produce 
sub-products that insects will take advantage of as food. Taking into account the life cycles of the insects used in this procedure, we 
will be able to tune them to ingest AWP, digest it and turn it into chitin, we can also plan in which period of their life cycle they have 
a better performance. In this way and taking into account the reported results we can achieve the expected level of biodegradation 
and even much higher. One of the most disruptive contributions will be the use and enhancement of a natural capacity (in the larval 
stage) of several of the insects used: Larvae can significantly accelerate degradation by altering the structure and abundance of their 
associated bacterial community. This quality associated with biodegradation under common environmental conditions will allow us 
achieving the expected levels of biodegradation, even in conditions economically sustainable. 
As seen in contribution to KPI 1, in RECOVER we contemplate the valorisation of the process by-products to develop bio-enhanced 
mulches with a clear link to the criteria of the upcoming European standard for the biodegradation (through RECOVER process) of 
plastic mulch films in soil. Once the use of agricultural films ends, no removal from the field for disposal transporting the m to 
incineration ovens (PE or PP based) or industrial composting facilities (PLA) will be required providing vermicompost to be applied 
on the soil. This can reduce the agricultural plastic waste accumulation and gain no toxic effects for soil and crops. So the controlled 
biodegradation in soil is considered as a sustainable solution for agro-films and indeed a very high impact innovation as opposed to 
landfilling or above described uncontrolled disposal approaches leading often to littering. 
Thus, the RECOVER bioremediation solution as the deriving bio-based and biodegradable plastics will bring enormous 
advantages in avoiding the generation and dispersion of microplastics in our fields through i) the soil bioremediation, ii) 
ex-situ valorisation and iii) the insurance that comp ost from currently collected organic fraction often polluted by 
microplastics is clean. As an additional output of the bio-remediation process, we envisage the development of biofertilizers, that, 
instead of contaminating the ground, they will fertilize it  for future crops. As such, RECOVER is a concrete contribution to the 
achievement of the SDGs and specifically to “SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote 
sustainable agriculture”; and “SDG 15: Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage 
forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss”. 
Biobased biodegradable chitin/chitosan packaging and compounds will favour the market penetration of bio-based plastic for specific 
applications.  
                                                             
122 Briassoulis, D., Babou, E., Hiskakis, M., Scarascia, G., Picuno, P., Guarde, D., Dejean, C., 2013. Review, mapping and analysis of the agricultural 
plastic waste generation and consolidation in Europe. Waste Management & Research, 31(12): 1262-1278 
123 R. Geyer, J. R. Jambeck, K. L. Law, Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made. Sci. Adv. 3, e1700782 (2017). 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 27  
Considering the RECOVER target applications the proposed AWP and plastic packaging waste valorising affects 23% (half of the 
packaging being the flexible and/or multilayer fractions and all agri-films) of all the plastic produced yearly (65Mtons in EU in 
2017)124. RECOVER proposed organic recycling solutions could, in a long-term scenario, tap upon all these agri films 
and in the range of 50% of the currently not-recyclable packaging in MSW (in  view of other emerging solutions for  
recycling complex fraction, we consider here a limited part, e.g. when very fouled or not well pre -sorted). Whereas only 
the 31% of the plastics plastic are currently recycled in EU , RECOVER could potentially increase by ca. 12% the plastic 
recycling in EU (7,8Mtons of AWP, which will no longer be landfilled neither incinerated, but rather valorised). 
 
▪ in case the focus is on the removal of non-biodegradable polymers from the environment, contribute to ‘close the loop’ 
and thus reduce environmental impacts associated with nonbiodegradable polymers discarded in the environment; 
The vast majority of monomers used to make 
plastics, such as ethylene and propylene, are 
derived from fossil hydrocarbons . None of 
the commonly used plastics are 
biodegradable. As a result, they 
accumulate, rather than decompose in 
landfills or the natural environment. The 
only way to permanently eliminate plastic 
waste is by destructive thermal treatment, 
such as combustion or pyrolysis . Thus, 
near-permanent contamination of the 
natural environment with plastic waste is a 
growing concern. The largest groups in total 
non-fiber plastics production are PE (36%), 
PP (21%), followed by PET, PUR, and PS 
(<10% each).  
Fig. 2.4 Cumulative plastic waste generation and disposal (in M tons)125 
 
RECOVER is hinged on the removal of fossil-based plastics used in agricultural and packaging sectors and specifically on 
PE, PET, PP, PS, EVA, and laminates which are non-biodegradable and currently have a very low recycling rate (due to difficult 
recyclability in view of their fouling and /or complex structures). In RECOVER, we provide value added EoL solutions for plastics 
which are currently landfilled or incinerated (with a cost), or left on the soil, applying microorganisms, enzymes and insects to degrade 
conventional plastic packaging and agricultural films waste. Microplastic contamination on land is estimated to be between 4 to 32 
times higher than in the oceans. In addition to inadequate EoL treatment of plastic waste, plastics reaches our soils through increasing 
use for agricultural purposes. Yearly inputs of microplastics in European farmlands are estimated to be 63,000-43,000 tons.  
All in all, RECOVER proposes two alternatives for removing the amount of non-biodegradable plastics from the environment: i) the 
in situ bioremediation of the agricultural plastics left on the soil applying vermicompost based on a tuned combination of insects, 
enzymes and microorganisms (such an approach could also in the long term be adjusted as contingency for accidental littering in 
highly contaminated areas); ii) microplastics removal from compost, a critical problem for the current organic waste management 
companies, due to the presence of non-biodegradable plastic contaminants non properly sorted in the supposedly organic fraction 
collected from e.g. MSW. As such, RECOVER will strongly contribute to the achievement of the “SDG 3: Ensure healthy lives 
and promote well-being for all at all ages”, by avoiding air, water and soil pollution with hazardous fossil-based plastics and 
indirectly to “SDGG 11: Make cities inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable” in the case of AWP from MSW. 
Such ways of removing plastic let RECOVER to implement circular bioeconomy principles as AWP will be converted into biofertilizers 
from insect manure and chitin extraction residues improved by the incorporation of PMC, fortified worms and insects/larvae that will 
have biopesticide, biofertilization and biostimulation effects, thus closing the loop within the agricultural sector. In addition, the project 
will deliver chitin/chitosan extracted from the vectorized insects after their use which can in turn be a new source of bioplastics used 
both in agriculture (packaging, sticks, pots), and food packaging (rigid containers, films) contributing to establish a circular economy 
paradigm in our target sectors. Therefore, RECOVER will be a key enabler for implementing the Circular Economy Package (CEP). 
Specifically, RECOVER contribute to the implementation directive on the packaging and packaging waste, which sets new legally 
binding targets and fixed deadlines for waste recycling and the reduction of landfilling. Indeed, the package includes a common EU 
target for recycling 65% of packaging waste by 2025, and 70% by 2030; in this context, the plastic sector has a separate target 50% 
by 2025 and 55% by 2030. This represents a significant increase from the current target imposed by the P ackaging Directive 
94/62/EC, which set a 22.5% recycling target. 
Savings in transport will be also considered since the very beginning of the project by logistic studies, for plastic waste collection. In 
                                                             
124 Plastics – the Facts 2018. An analysis of European plastics production, demand and waste data. Plastics Europe (2018) 
125 Geyer, R., Jambeck, J.R., Law, K.L. (2017):Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made. Sci. Adv. 2017;3 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 28  
that sense, RECOVER provides affordable and sustainable solutions to contribute to the achievement of the ““SDG 13: Take urgent 
action to combat climate change and its impact. 
▪ enlarge the range of feedstock able to be effectively and sustainably processed through biocatalytic systems. 
Current biotechnological processes use biomass as main feedstock, thus the use of synthetic plastics is a significant 
change of paradigm. Building on recent literature showing this possibility, in RECOVER we develop novel biocatalytic systems 
(microbial communities, novel enzymes and mixtures/symbionts of them with insects and earthworms) that will enlarge the range of 
feedstock processed for the production of chitin-based bioplastics and fertilizers covering multiple types of synthetic plastics (e.g. 
PET, PS, LDPE etc.) in AWP streams. We contribute with several specific and innovative communities of microorganisms, novel 
enzymes, insects and earthworms with improved and novel AWP degrading capabilities whose biocatalytic performance for 
processing these challenging streams will be optimised in pilot reactors. The LCA results will be considered to support the most 
sustainable process to be upscaled. 
The biotechnology-based solutions provided by RECOVER constitute an alternative approach in mitigating the challenges associated 
to plastic waste management and simultaneously provide novel pathways for the synthesis of biopolymers and new potential routes 
for the effective degradation of synthetic plastics. The environmental and ecological benefits of the biologically mediated degradation 
(i.e., mineralization) of plastics are meritorious on their own. In addition, the biotechnology-based strategies propos ed in 
RECOVER also contribute to further enhance biodegradation mechanisms in obtaining added value products. Hence, plastic 
waste provide a new valuable resource that might contribute for the entry of plastic litter into a circular economy model126. As such, 
plastics will also be converted by biological processes where carbon will be returned to nature in a safe and sustainable way, e.g. by 
compost and biofertilizers.  
As said, present bioproduction processes are primarily based on sugars or sugar-containing materials including organic wastes or 
lignocellulosic materials. From technological point of view they suffer at least from two major problems: 1) limited supply of sugar-
based substrates for large-scale bioproduction and 2) high costs of available substrates (accounting for up to 50% of the total costs 
in many cases) and up - and downstream processing (nearly the other half of the total cost) 127. In addition, in some cases, food 
competing feedstocks are used. Bio-based materials produced from biomass instead of fossil resources addresses GHG emissions 
reductions, central to the mitigation of climate change. But this requires more biomass, which can impinge on food security, and can 
interfere in many of the ways highlighted above. The interferences can partly be ameliorated by the use of synthetic plastic (as non-
avoidable waste occurring at many levels in our society) for biotransformations as proposed here. With the help of improvements to 
plastic-degrading enzyme versatility, RECOVER would allow enzyme technologies entering into biorefinery models and green 
chemistry. The biopolymer indirectly generated from synthetic plastic degradation could then be used to make more biodegradable 
plastics, which would represent a completely biological recycling of plastics in a circular economy128. The integration of biocatalytic 
systems (hydrolytic enzymes, microbial, insects and earthworms) would result in a custom biocatalytic system platform that is capable 
of converting synthetic plastic into biodegradable counterparts in a single step.  
In addition to the use of synthetic plastic as a new feedstock for bioplastic production, the use of insect larvae and 
earthworms to upcycle feedstock resources currently lost, not efficiently used in the food chain or acting as a protein-rich 
feed ingredient for the livestock and aquaculture sectors is envisaged. The use of AWP residual streams as a feeding substrate 
for insect larvae result into environmental benefits (lower GHG emissions and especially lower land use) compared to conventional 
protein-rich insect feed ingredients with a high environmental impact. Thus values between 2.8 and 31.2 kg CO2-e and between 0.06 
and 14.5 m2 per kg of protein larvae fed on municipal waste and beet-pulp, respectively129 The use of organic resources can, for 
example, result in a competition with food, feed, fuel, and fertiliser production for natural resources. Using residual streams with a 
limited application is therefore recommended to avoid this competition. This competition can also be red uced by using residual 
streams as efficiently as possible, for example, using the remaining material as fertiliser. 
RECOVER, by converting non -degradable plastics into biodegradable plastics and fertiliser, offer a new feedstock and 
unconventional route for the production of bioplastics from synthetic plastics. Since sustainable consumption and production aims at 
“doing more and better with less”, RECOVER provides solutions to contribute to the achievement of the “SDG 12: Ensure 
sustainable consumption and production patterns. 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS: 
▪ lay the basis to the further exploitation at higher scales of microorganisms and/or enzymes to convert currently 
challenging streams; 
In RECOVER, the proposed biotech solutions rely on symbiotic bioprocesses between  high powered microorganisms 
through microbiotic systems vectored by several insect species.  Indeed, one of the main innovations is the combination 
                                                             
126 EuropeanCommission. (2018a). Factsheets on the strategy for plastics in a circular economy. Retrieved from 
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/factsheets-european-strategy-plastics-circular-economy_en 
127 Zeng, A. P. (2019). New bioproduction systems for chemicals and fuels: Needs and new development. Biotechnology advances 37: 508-518. 
128 Narancic, T., & O'Connor, K. E. (2018). Plastic waste as a global challenge: are biodegradable plastics the answer to the plastic waste problem?. 
Microbiology, 165(2), 129-137. 
129 R. Salomone, G. Saija, G. Mondello, A. Giannetto, S. Fasulo, D. Savastano Environmental impact of food waste bioconversion by insects: application of 
Life Cycle Assessment to process using Hermetia illucens J. Clean. Prod., 140 (2017), pp. 890-905 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 29  
of endogenous and exogenous microorganisms and their inoculation on insects for achieving higher levels of 
biodegradation and direct conversion (at the same time) of AWP in insect product such as chitin -chitosan, which is 
recognized as high value as bioplastics raw material and other interesting industrial applications). 
RECOVER will select microbial communities , novel synthetic enzymes, earthworms and insects for AWP biodegradation. Test 
will be performed in TRL5 scale in WP4. Furthermore, the participation of the biotech companies ASA and NUTRINSECT will act 
as a key enabler for ensuring that the production of tailored enzymes and insects for the degradation of AWP is already performed 
in sufficient scale in the project and the full scale production is viable. Further entities in our AB will also support those aspects. 
The LCA and LCC analysis, and the setting of a logistic approach as well as TEA will help in a planning of a viable future roll out 
of the project results and will strengthen RECOVER business plan. SMEs and Large industries in RECOVER are ready to invest 
with their in-kind contribution to the project and with future investments since they are convinced of the high exploitation potential 
of RECOVER outcomes, with significant revenues on their market as detailed in following paragraph.  
The exploitation of such scales of microorganisms and enzymes will be ensured by the establishment of the 3 new value chains, 
as seen in contribution to KPI 2. From a biotechnological perspective, symbiotic microorganisms constitute promising and mostly 
untapped sources for potential applications in medicine, bioremediation, industrial processes, and agriculture.  
▪ increase income and business opportunities for stakeholders and actors (including primary producers) in the bio -
based sectors, in particular in the waste management sector. 
In RECOVER, new business opportunit ies - and consequent new revenue streams - will be opened for all the actors along the 
value chain (visualized in the Fig. 2.2). At the upstream of the RECOVER value chains, the suppliers of enzymes, microorganisms 
and insects will have the possibility to expand their activities in the bioremediation market. A new report from BCC Research, 
“Bioremediation: Global Markets and Technologies to 2023,” estimates that by 2023, the market will reach $186.3 billion, up from 
$91 billion in 2018, indicating a CAGR of 15.4%. In situ bioremediation is expected to see the largest market growth compared to 
ex situ bioremediation. From 2018 to 2023, in situ and ex situ bioremediation are expected to grow at CAGRs of 15.0% and 
16.7%, respectively. 
As a secondary route, the insects produced may be applied in the sector of biological pest control. The global market of biological 
control agents (invertebrates and microorganisms) was approximately US$ 1.7 billion in 2015, with a CAGR 15%.  
Currently the agricultural sector is relying on the yields and prices of their main products for their subsistence. However, there is 
a large potential for diversification of their businesses by valori sing AWP, which would allow farmers address new business 
opportunities. The biotechnologies set up in RECOVER will not only provide solutions for the degradation of plastics but 
also opportunities for AWP valori sation offering farmers new outputs from their business by having access to new 
processing to be able to commercialize new products. As seen, agricultural plastic waste streams are a huge environmental 
and economic burden for farmers. For example, in case mulching films, it is estimated that, depending on the thickness, as much 
as 68% of the mulching film is not removed from the field as removal is time-consuming (about 16 hours per hectare) and disposal 
expensive (up to € 300 per hectare)130. 
 
Table 2.1: Expected values from resulting downstream products 
Ex situ biodegradation output Downstream 
products 
Market 
price (€/kg) 
Expected income for  
farmers/agri-cooperative (€) 
Chitin from insects/earthworms Biofertilizers 5-30131 258.600132 
Chitin/chitosan to be added in food  packaging and agriculture 
products (mulch, pots etc) or as anti -microbial, anti pests 
coatings 
Bioplastics 5-6 387.900133 
 
World production of main nutrients (nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium) currently stands at 190 million tons, of which just over 110 
million of nitrogen, 45 of phosphorus and 35 of potassium. 
The global biofertilizers market was valued at USD 1,326.6 million in 2018 and is expected to grow at a CAGR of 13.4% during 2019-
2025 period134 The demand of biofertilizers has been stimulated by augmenting practice for organic farming, high requirement for 
soil organic matter and favourable regulatory structure in Europe. For example, in Italy the legislative decree 33 of 22 January 2018 
definitively closed the door to synthetic chemical pesticides135 since by 2 May 2020 it is estimated that up to 95% of agrochemicals, 
including biological pesticides, currently on free sale, will be outlawed. The European Union is continuously encouraging the use of 
biofertilizers by advising the farmers to optimize the application of chemical fertilizers, or replace them partly or complet ely with 
biofertilizers that are eco-friendly and also result in better economic return, given that biofertilizers are cost-effective. The chemical 
industry knows that it must quickly alert its R&D departments to develop new products that do not require registration and satisfy 
consumer demands that will be (and in part already are) products based on natural substances, including those derived from foods 
                                                             
130 https://docs.european-bioplastics.org/publications/OWS_Expert_statement_mulching_films.pdf  
131 Acién et al (2012) Production cost of a real microalgae production plant and strategies to reduce it. Biotechnol Adv 30:1344–1353. 
132 Assumptions: 30tons sold on Year 1 and and annual linear increase of 5%.  
133 Assumptions: 15tons sold on Year 1 and and annual linear increase of 5%. 
134 Biofertilizers Market. Global Analysis by Trends, Size, Share, Business Strategies, and Key Developments: 2019-2025. Adroit Market Research 
135 https://agricommerciogardencenter.edagricole.it/agrofarmaci/agrofarmaci-biologici-scelta-obbligata/; 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 30  
(such as chitin, chitosan, garlic or rapeseed oil) and commonly used for various uses, in any case not classifiable as chemical, toxic 
or harmful 'environment. In this contest RECOVER vermicompost, and biofertilizer based on RECOVER by-products (biomasses, 
chitin/chitosan) can cover a wide and important market share in innovative and sustainable biofertilizer.  
The global chitosan market size was valued at USD 5.71 billion in 2018 and is anticipated to expand at a CAGR of 20.8% from 2019 
to 2025 due to growing product application scope in water treatment, healthcare, biotechnology, animal food, agriculture, food and 
beverage. Currently, the majority of available chitin in the world comes from shrimp shells waste, which accounts for 150 billion tons 
annually around the world136. Chitosan in agriculture is used to coat seeds for conservation during storage, for fertilizer releasing 
systems, pesticide formulation, thus the potential to enter this market through the RECOVER added-value fertilizers is very high.  
Chitosan has been proven to control numerous pre and postharvest diseases on various horticultural commodities. It has been 
reported that both soil and foliar plant pathogens fungal, bacterial and viral may be controlled by chitosan application. For some 
horticultural and ornamental commodities, chitosan increased harvested yield. As a nontoxic biodegradable material and elicitor, 
chitosan has the potential to become a new class of plant protectant, assisting towards the goal of sustainable agriculture. 
Over the last decade, there has been an increasing interest by the food industry in the development of novel bio-based active films 
as food packaging materials, not only due to their natural origin, but also because they can enhance food safety and quality during 
storage. Chitosan is one of the most promising candidates thanks to the combination of its excellent film -forming properties and 
antimicrobial activities. Active chitosan-based films have been used to preserve various food products, especially fruits, fresh 
produce, and meat. As a functional biopolymer, chitosan has many intrinsic nutritional values and health -promoting bioactivities 
against many chronic dise ases. Due to its broad -spectrum antimicrobial activities, chitosan has been widely studied as a food 
preservative to improve food quality and extend the shelf life of perishable food products. Furthermore, chitosan has been approved 
as a food additive as in Korea and Japan since 1995 and 1983, respectively.  
For the bioplastics, a recent market analysis forecasts the global bioplastic market to grow at a CAGR close to 20% over the period 
2018-2024137, certainly benefitting to RECOVER related downstream products. 70% of bioplastics currently produced are used in 
packaging and 5% in agriculture and horticulture. 
RECOVER, by applying these technologies and approaches, will be producing a major positive impact on the primary sector which 
is responsible for nearly €200 billion on the EU economy138. To release this potential to the market, based on European market data 
relating to AWP, as well as data on the current and future potential of the bioeconomy, the project will identify new business models.  
In case of agricultural films that can be easily collected, in RECOVER the ex-situ composting reactor will be set up. As described in 
the Section 2.2, the total investment for running the RECOVER solutions is assumed to be almost €200.000. While large agricultural 
companies can afford significant capital and operational expenditure, traditional Micro and SMEs cannot. To increase their 
competitiveness, we aim to establish for novel collaborative business models based on sharing facilities, where farmers cooperating 
with other actors along the value chain, that result in increased flexibility and innovation capacity and new incomes for the primary 
producers. Thus, RECOVER will give impetus to innovative business models where such AWP valorisation can be offered as a 
service by agricultural cooperatives resulting in a creation of ‘clusters of value’ able to efficiently biodegrade AWP and solve the 
problem of plastic waste in their local fields. For this purpose, while shaping value chain in Task 7.2 Roadmap for the set-up of 
RECOVER value chains and new cross-sector interconnections in the bio-based economy, agri cooperatives members of COPA 
through ASAJA will be surveyed. In RECOVER, by products biocompounds from AWP valorisation offer a major source of renewably-
sourced chemicals and bioplastics offering an enormous business opportunity, especially for fertilizers, packaging and agricultural 
materials which require biodegradability, and are key for a prosperous and competitive Europe. In case of bioremediation, i.e. in-situ 
biodegradation no new incomes will be generated for farmers, except for the cost savings for AWP disposal, which, as seen, worth 
about €300 per hectare. 
To biodegrade conventional plastic packaging from MSW we consider that waste managers can use or replicate their composting 
reactors to degrade AWP and/or have already sufficient investment capacity to incur the costs for additional RECOVER composting 
reactor. As such they can act as first actor to bring in short the solution to commercial scale and they can also play a strategic role in 
the transition towards the creation of the agricultural value chains. Indeed, while treating plastics waste they can also open their 
facilities for bio-degrading locally collected agricultural films and AWP, thus providing feasible and sustainable short-term solutions 
for farmers, considering even that the transport of AWP must be kept as short as possible to reduce impact and costs. For companies 
commercialising currently non-recyclable AWP, the ability to recover them w ill result is reduce fees in terms of landfilling and 
incineration (in the range of 200€ per ton), once again boosting the shift to a new EoL model supported by the whole value chain. 
RECOVER, through its action contributes to the achievement of the “SDG 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and 
sustainable industrialization and foster innovation”, to the extent that it makes the considered sectors more sustainable, enabling 
the development of new, sustainable integrated business models, base d on circular solutions, working towards the end goal of 
becoming fossil carbon‐free and achieving zero waste, also in the primary sector. Further, it contributes to the “SDG 12:  Ensure 
sustainable consumption and production patterns”. 
                                                             
136 Production of Chitin and Chitosan from Shrimp Shells, A.A.Khan (Atif), H.Shibata (Hiro), M.T.A.P.Kresnowati (Penia), S.L.Tai (Tai), Conceptual Process 
Design, Process Systems Engineering, DelftChemTech - Faculty of Applied Sciences Delft University of Technology,2001 
137 Bioplastics Market by Type and Application: Global Opportunity Analysis and Industry Forecast, 2018-2024. Allied Market Research 
138 Rural areas and the primary sector in the EU. https://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/sites/agriculture/files/statistics/facts-figures/eu-rural-areas-primary-
sector.pdf   
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 31  
SOCIAL IMPACTS: 
▪ create new job opportunities in the bio-based sector, particularly rural and/or urban areas. 
The EU-28 bioeconomy employed 18 million people and generated €2.3 trillion of 
turnover or €620 million of value added in 2015. In other words, this sector 
employed 8.2% of the EU-28 labour force and generated 4.2% of the EU-28 GDP. 
Agriculture and the manufacture of food & beverages accounted for about two 
thirds of the value added and turnover of the bioeconomy and three quarters of 
bioeconomy employment (Fig. 2.5139). These sectors generated €174 billion and 
€233 billion of value added respectively in 2015. Agriculture, being a low labo ur 
productive sector, employs 51% of bioeconomy workers but generates only 28% 
of the bioeconomy value added. The role agriculture p lays in rural areas and as 
an economic and social buffer is not to be underestimated.  
In RECOVER, new jobs will be created both in rural areas as well as in urban 
areas, at all stage of the RECOVER value chains. 
As seen above, from the upstream of the RECOVER value chains, new enzymes 
manufacturers and insects growers will increase their production as they will 
extend their business to the AWP degradation. For this purpose, they will require increasing job by 3.26% (valorisation activities 
in agri-wastes would create even much more jobs in rural areas). 
In addition, the set -up of new incomes for farmers and farmers’ cooperatives will help create jobs in rural areas, where land 
abandonment and jobs loss would have taken place. Indeed, as the RECOVER ex situ biodegradation will result in market valuable 
chitin/chitosan products, new revenue streams will derive for primary producers and expectedly new employment for them.  
As set in the BBI roadmap, our proposal is expected to contribute to new skilled jobs in the biotech space: engineers, chemists, 
biologists, business experts, etc. as well as unskilled and semi-skilled jobs in product processing and related functions will be needed 
to operate the biodegradation plants. 
Importantly, as the ex situ biodegradation solutions are proposed for existent landfills and other municipal waste management  
organizations, new incomes will be ensured for them which will be generated by the chitin/chitosan feedstocks to be converted, as 
seen in bioplastics used in improved mulching films and active packaging, as well as in new fertilizers thus, contributing to the creation 
of new job in urban areas.  
All in all, based on a new job being created for every €200k of turnover, combining it with the expected revenue streams, outlined in 
Section 2.2, RECOVER is projected to create at least 3 new jobs for each farm organization/ agr i-cooperative (as a transition 
scenario) and 7 for each MSW management organization in 5 year. In EU there are 220.000 agri-cooperatives140 and 400.000 MSW 
landfills141. Estimating to reach a market penetration of 0.1% (totalling 220 agri-cooperatives and 400 MSW) in a 5-year period post 
project, i.e. horizon 2030, RECOVER will generate 660 new jobs in rural areas and 2.800 in urban areas (further linked to the 
expected revenues discussed in section 2.2142). 
Estimates about how partners respectively expect to grow their business and create jobs with the new RECOVER solutions are given 
in section 2.2.  
As part of action fo r job creation in the bio -economy sectors, we also work toward the job retention. As such, core skills and 
competencies will be assured along the value chain through the knowledge transfer, upskilling and training sessions that will take 
occur in RECOVER (Subtask 7.4.4 Knowledge transfer & Upskilling). This has to be seen as part of RECOVER contribution over the 
“SDG4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all set the target”. 
In addition, indirect measures will positively stimulate job creation and retention, resulting from the new business opportunities that 
will be created for all the actors along the 3 value chains in RECOVER as well as from the increased innovation capacity of t he 
organisations.  
As was discussed above, RECOVER will ensure that agriculture and urban waste management are brought into the innovation cycle 
in order to benefit from technological advancements and new knowledge. Thus, the coupling of AWP degradation with the resource 
production of biodegradable plastic is a net generator of decent jobs, and that it is also a vital strategy for our current an d future 
generations. This move is expect to encourage municipal investment in AWP biodegrading plants and collection services, while also 
creating local jobs. 
As such, RECOVER takes concrete actions to realize the “SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic 
growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all”. 
 
Other social and environmental impact 
A key contribution that RECOVER will make to environmental and societal impacts is that of decoupling agriculture and industry 
                                                             
139 Ronzon et al. (2017). "Research Brief: Estimating jobs and wealth in the Bioeconomy". European Commission -Joint Research Centre. 
140 https://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/sites/agriculture/files/agri-markets-task-force/contributions/concrete/copacogecaagricooperatives_en_.pdf 
141 https://eurelco.org/infographic/ 
142 Based on a new job being created for every additional ˜€210k of turnover 
Figure 2.5: Employment in Bio-economy 
 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 32  
growth and competitiveness from environmental impact. The economic development aspirations of our private industry sector 
are entirely compatible with reducing the impacts of AWP on the environment.  
As seen, plastic waste accumulation in soil is not only detrimental to the environment (irreversible soil contamination, degradation of 
soil quality, pollution of rivers and groundwater) but also for human health (heavy metals, dioxins and furans released during plastic 
burning are associated with endocrine disruption, heart disease, cognitive and motor disabilities, and human carcinogen)143. 
In RECOVER, our efforts will contribute to consumer access to healthier soils and possibly seas and therefore food that contains 
less harmful substances leaking from plastics or microplastic fragments. 
In terms of environmental impacts associated with non-biodegradable polymers discarded in the environment, the RECOVER AWP-
management could potentially avoid around 80% of CO2 emissions caused by common incineration of plastic mixes, when 
referred to the CO2eq factor of emissions reported for the used microorganisms and macro-organisms in biodegradation (which could 
be neutralised by coupling it with a culture of microalgae as suggested by ALGAEENERGY in our AB). 
This estimation derives from the reduction of the incineration ratio of AWP (12% of agri-plastics waste) and taking the average of low 
density polyethylene as the pattern of agri food plastics mixes. Counting on the CO2eq production in incineration of polyethylene we 
could in an approximation obtain that AWP incineration produces 1,868 millions of CO2 oil equivalent yearly (Institute for Energy 
Diversification and Saving (IDAE) data). This approximate will be much refined in the project LCA. AWP incineration is a partial 
combustion, and in itself generates a specific human and environmental mutagenic hazard (but not considerable for CO2 calculation).  
In terms of environmental footprint of EoL phase, according to the EC DG ENVI "Plastic waste in the environment"144 study from 
2011, plastic film recycling could potentially save 0.74 kg CO2 eq./kg recycled plastic in comparison to landfill (>50%). In RECOVER, 
we expect to reduce CO2 footprint by at least 50% (although uncontrolled waste management is not accounted for in LCA, and 
would in reality further contribute to an overall reduced environmental impact. 
In terms of secondary raw materials from our valorisation process, bio-based plastics such as chitosan derivatives have the unique 
potential over conventional plastics for reducing GHG emissions or even being carbon neutral (1 metric ton of bioplastic generates 
between 0.8 and 3.2 fewer metric tons of CO2 as compared to 1 metric ton of petroleum-based plastics)145,146.  
Savings in transport will be also considered since the very beginning of the project by logistic studies, for plastic waste collection.  
A beneficial CO2 balance will be also achieved in RECOVER due to earthworms and insect growth 
Positive impacts will derive also from the use of bio compounds, such as chitin and chitosan as fertilizer and pesticides. In deed, 
biofertilizers will replace conventional chemical ones, reducing the environmental and health load associated to the use of chemicals 
in agriculture. In addition, chitin and chitosan compounds used in RECOVER for the active food packaging films allows longer shelf 
life of perishable food and result in less waste of food products, considering that the production of some perishable food such as 
meat has a high environmental load. The demand for our consumer products, RECOVER packaging, is expected to be driven by 
green- and health- conscious consumers concerned about the environment147. Furthermore, societal benefits will be assessed by 
the ASAJA that will give the alignment of RECOVER to the consumers’ needs and perceptions and will contribute raising awareness 
about economic, societal and environmental challenges. 
 
Contribution to improving the innovation capacity and the integration of new knowledge 
Addressing our societal and environmental challenges, e.g. the end-of-life issues of plastics and the sub-optimal EoL compatibility 
of conventional plastic materials with existing waste management scenarios, is recognized to be a major catalyst for increasing our 
innovation capacity, and for the integration of new knowledge generated as a result of research into our practical societal a nd 
industrial contexts. This represents a unique opportunity for Europe to kick-start a world leading competitive circular bioeconomy with 
significant economic, environmental and societal benefits. The EC also unlocks tremendous potential for the development of 
innovative new materials and products derived from bio-based sources. In such context, the project will provide new knowledge on 
potential applications for biofertilizers, agricultural plastic application and food packaging. To increase the innovation capacity of the 
industry, our approach is to capitalise on a valuable opportunity for i) the EU farmers and municipalities, ii) packaging and fertilizers 
industries to respectively have access to i) novel sustainable, green and affordable solutions for biodegrading AWPs both ex and in 
situ and ii)continuous supply of biocompounds derived from chitin and chitosan for biocoatings and bioplastics as well as biofertilizers. 
The use of advanced approaches like online monitoring and process modeling in WP4, borrowed from advanced factories and 
industry 4.0 paradigms, will also enable farmers and waste manager to gain cutting edge knowledge in terms of their process. 
While the generation of new knowledge is positive, it is in its industrial use that innovation capacity is increased, and imp act is 
realised. As such, to allow generating truly market replicable innovation, the RECOVER consortium unites the industry value chain 
necessary for market success, and the project has integrated several cross -cutting activities such as environmental, regulatory, 
safety and economic assessments, and finally business planning activities to maximize the post-project exploitation of the results. 
The project gives trans-sectorial industry and transdisciplinary research and technology players an opportunity to collaborate and 
                                                             
143 D. Briassoulis et al, Review, mapping and analysis of the agricultural plastic waste generation and consolidation in Europe, Waste Management & 
Research, 2013, Vol 31, Issue 12, pp. 1262 – 1278 
144 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/studies/pdf/plastics.pdf 
145 Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Bioplastics and Bioelastomers 
146ww.mckinsey.com/business-functions/sustainability-and-resource-productivity/our-insights/the-new-plastics-economy-rethinking-the-future-of-plastics 
147 About 80% of European consumers want to buy products with a minimal impact on the environment (Eurobarometer survey, EC, 2013). 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 33  
share all required technical knowledge and market expertise. Effective knowledge transfer from the RTDs (UNIPI, UAL, BRUNEL, 
UMH and ASU) to the participating enterprises, especially SMEs often lacking own R&D capacities, laying down the basis for 
supporting the industry partners to carry forward the results post-project, is fundamental to increasing the likelihood of market uptake. 
To this end, a dedicated task, T7.4.4 has been included in the work plan to ensure seamless knowledge transfer occurs.  
 
Barriers/obstacles/framework conditions that may determine whether/to what extent expected impacts will be achieved 
RECOVER is a very ambitious RIA set on achieving measurable results within a midterm implementation period and focused on 
creating a considerable legacy that will enlarge its impact beyond the project’s duration. Below are described main barriers and 
obstacles that could hinder the expected impacts: 
Economical barriers 
The investment needed for transitioning towards the RECOVER plastics biodegradation solutions (CAPEX discussed in section 
2.2) could be a barrier for market uptake but we estimate it will be effectively counterbalanced by the gain for avoiding incineration 
and landfilling taxes (e.g. 200€/Ton) and collection fees, that currently represents an economic burden for these non-sustainable 
EoL options.  
Agricultural mulching films 
Even with a new approach for soil remediation, it would be valuable for our solutions to meet not only  the EN 13655 Plastics - 
Thermoplastic mulch films recoverable after use, for use in agriculture and horticulture: this is for conventional plastics that have 
to be recovered after use (chitin/chitosan presence will not represent an issue for incineration or for recycling due to the chemical 
structure and low amount that will be added in the films), but in the future target meeting the newly accepted standard EN 17033 
Plastics – Biodegradable mulch films for use in agriculture and horticulture – Requirements and test methods (2016), for mulch 
film that can be incorporated into the soil due to their property of biodegradation, thus  requires a 90% biodegradation and 
additionally some limitations on heavy metals and evaluation of toxicity. 
Current PE mulching films have proven their efficiency for crop protection, but are not biodegradable in the environment, resulting 
often in undesired litter. Biodegradable mulch film can be a solution for the litter issue, but need to be very well develope d to 
ensure that desired barrier properties are kept during use considering that each crop has different growth profiles and different 
environmental conditions. Therefore the effect of biodegradable plastic mulch in crop production with regards to microclimate  
modification, soil physical, chemical and bio-logical properties, soil moisture, weed control, soil nutrients, and pest and disease 
management needs to be carefully considered, making (apart from the higher cost) a market introduction more difficult compared 
to conventional mulching films. The chitin coating might help to improve barrier properties and expand the portfolio of crops, 
allowing the use for crops with slow growth. 
Biofertilizers  
Biofertilizers are not included in the legislation at a European level yet. In a close future, they are supposed to be regulated jointly 
with fertilizers by the European Union 148. At the moment, we count with a European proposal Regulation 2016/0084 is to 
incentivize large scale production in the EU from domestic organics or secondary raw materials in line with the circular economy 
model, by transforming waste into nutrients for crops149. According to the proposal, the lack of harmonization in organic fertilizers 
prevents European companies an easy access to other State Members’ markets. In comparison with inorganic fertilizers, where 
processes are already defined and harmonized, biofertilizers find important difficulties to extend its market in the EU. As a  
consequence, the sector cannot develop in countries with abundant manure to produce organic fertilizers but small expanses of 
crop, thus low demand. Non -defined and tough national legislations jointly with an obsolete European Regulation even for 
inorganic fertilizers from primary raw -materials (which render it impossible to keep up wit h the innovative cycle of the fertilizers 
sector), undermine the biofertilizers and biostimulants industries. In order to update the current Regulation and promote fertilizers 
based on second raw materials, in accordance with circular economy, the European  Commission has provided a regulatory 
framework radically easing access to the internal markets for such fertilizers and addressing environmental concerns arising from 
contamination by EC-fertilizers of soil, inland waters, sea waters and food. For each of  the fertilizing products and component 
materials, the proposal introduces specific harmonized requirements regarding quality (minimum nutrient/organic matter content), 
safety (maximum limits for heavy metal, organic contaminants, microbial contaminants an d for impurities) and labe lling. The 
proposal defines recovery rules for bio-waste transformed into compost as well as the use of CE marking for fertilizing products. 
Chitosan coating for food contact 
Our biobased active packaging materials fall within the scope of the Framework Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004, which provides 
the harmonized legal framework by setting out general principles and safety requirements for all kinds of food contact materi als 
(FCM). As non-plastic FCM, chitosan is not yet covered by the harmonized legal framework. However, as it is regarded as active 
compound, the Regulation (EC) No 450/2009 is regarded as applicable. Moreover, Chitosan of animal origin must be in 
                                                             
148 Bourguignon, D. 2017. Briefing EU Legislation in Progress: CE marked fertilising products. Members’ Research Service 1 December 2017, Fourth 
edition. European Parliamentary Research Service. 
149 European Commission (2016). Proposal for a Regulation Laying Down Rules on the Making Available on the Market of Ce Marked Fertilising Products 
and Amending Regulations Technical Report EC 1069/2009 and EC1107/2009. Brussels: European Commission. 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 34  
compliance with Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 and Regulation (EU) No 142/2011. Regulation (EC) No 450/200 sets out rules 
on the composition of the active FCMs by establishing a positive list of substances approved for use in the manufacture of plastic 
FCMs (‘Union list’). Compliance with regulatory demands is essential for putting new packaging materials on the market. 
Also a possible reluctance may arise for the source of the chitosan, which derives from insects. However, in that regard it should 
again be noted that insect sub -products are already used in food produ ction such as shellac in confectionery industry or Red 
Food Colouring additives. Moreover, chitosan from crustacean is already applied in dietary supplements. 
Other possible barriers may arise in the case of in situ biodegradation from the farmers’ fear to  have the insects contaminating 
their surrounding fields. During our communication campaign, awareness raising efforts towards the message that this 
bioremediation solution will be run under strict control and with no contamination of adjacent agricultural crops. We will consider 
these aspects in WP7 regarding the social acceptance of our solutions. 
 
Additional investments 
In terms of further contributions to maximizing the impact of this BBI action, significant in-kind contributions are planned to reflect 
the industrial context of the action and will definitely contribute to increasing the impact and reaching the project objectives. The 
consortium covers in kind 23% (1.3M€) of the overall project budget. This co -funding, comprising the full budget of the la rge 
companies as well as a minimum of 10% for all others partners, is justified by the genuine conviction of the partners that they will 
on the long term obtain a return on their investment when the RECOVER solutions reach the market. Members of the AB who  
will make also significant in -kind contribution (in providing samples, assessment, advice, etc.). In addition, some partners also 
provide additional investments towards the BBI-JU’s objectives (table 2.2, total >25M€). 
 
Table 2.2: Summary and cost of the additional investments (note: no financial transfer between partners are made) 
No Partner  Activity  Contribution to the BBI JU objectives  Estimated 
private 
investment 
(M€)  
Estimated 
value public 
investment 
(M€) 
Other 
EU 
funding 
received 
4 BRUNEL  A new Department of Chemical 
Engineering established in 
2019, and is investing in new 
facilities and staff in 
bioprocessing and industry -
focussed biotechnology, 
including enzymes. 
KPI1, KPI2  - 0,5 NA 
6 ASU Innovation Campus – Model 
Factory and Laboratory for 
sustainable food production and 
food packaging 
KPI1, KPI2 (polymer processing), KPI6 (food 
packaging) 
2  1 NA 
12 IDELUX Investment in 2 new CHP 
engines of 885 kWe, the 
rehabilitation of the biowaste 
reception hall, a new pre-treated 
biowaste extraction conveyer 
belt, a new crusher feed hopper 
Rentec, and a new mixer axis of 
a pump (PA01) 
Sustainable biowaste treatment and energy 
production through biogas and cogeneration 
1.45 
0.74 
0.8  
0.6  
0.135  
respectivel
y 
NA NA 
14 ENTO Investment in equi pment for 
Plant Production of Black 
Soldier Fly (Digestion capacity 
of 3000 tons of vegetable 
residues from industry and from 
commerce) 
Vegetables from commerce “managed” in the 
plant as a residue or as source of carbon and 
enter the digestion. This must be tested out of 
plant and we need to have a test lab in INIAV 
(Portuguese National Institute for Veterinary 
and Agriculture Investigation).  
18 NA NA