1.2 Relation to the BBI-JU Annual Work Plan 
The Recover proposal, addressing the topic BBI -2019-SO2-R3, Apply 
microorganisms and/or enzymes to resolve end -of-life issues of plastics, will 
contribute significantly to the KPIs set out in the Strategic Innovation and Research 
Agenda (SIRA) 6 and is fully aligned with the BBI roadmap as will be further 
discussed in section 2. Our overriding goal aligns with most of its strategic 
orientations (SO) (fig. 1.2): SO1) The possibility to biodegrade plastic used in 
agriculture will make the crops growing more sustainable and significantly reduce 
the impact of land use and agriculture practices for biomass production; SO2) the 
core of our activities will deal with the setup of an efficient bio-technological (using 
enzymes, microorganisms optionally vectorised into insects) multistep process to 
convert fossil plastics into new valuable products ; SO3) such as fertilizers, 
bioplastics and edible coatings materials which will be validated by relevant 
industry end users to reach SO 4. Beside s creating socio -economic value, the 
project will also help the EU in implementing better waste management strategies 
as well as reducing the major societal challenge reflected in the European Plastics strategy. We further cover the following cross 
cutting KETs: industrial biotechnology is at its core, advanced materials and manufacturing systems (converting waste into new 
bio-based feedstocks such as chitin/chitosan with support from advanced tools such as online monitoring and modeling). As part 
of our multidisciplinary approach, socio-economic science and humanities will also be considered where r elevant, e.g. through 
the performing of a social-LCA, studying economics, sustainability as well as ethics aspects but also including marketing, policy 
making, training and upskilling in WP6-8 and also by getting public feedback from the dissemination and communication activities. 
The detailed relation of the proposal to the specific challenges and scope addressed by the topic are outlined in Table 1.1 below: 
 
Table 1.1: How Recover relates to the scope and challenges of the BBI 2019.SO2.R3 topic 
Topic text How Recover addresses these challenges/scope 
Include tailored 
microorganisms and/ or 
enzymes for co-digestion or 
co-fermentation of different 
feedstock, provided that the 
developed solutions result in 
sufficient yields in terms of: (i) 
breaking down the feedstock; 
and/ or (ii) conversion into 
valuable products. 
Recover uses previously independently tested enzymes, microorganisms and insects that have shown the 
potential to degrade plastics (see details in section 1.4). The core proposal innovation lies on  their novel 
combination aimed at maximizing the yield of the decomposition (insects) and degradation (microorganisms 
and enzymes). This will be achieved through the vectorisation of the later within the insects among other 
combined approaches to be tested. Earthworms are also incorporated in the compost as a synergistic agent 
to reach the ambitious proposal goal.  The composting will be optimised possibly in presence of other 
biodegradable feedstocks (WP4). Furthermore, once our biodegradation agents will h ave finished their 
lifetime, the shell of the insects will be used to extract chitin, in turn converting a complementary fraction of 
the compost into new biobased materials available for further processing.  
                                                             
6 Strategic Innovation and Research Agenda (SIRA) BIO-BASED INDUSTRIES for Development & Growth in Europe – May 2017 
 
Fig 1.2: the 4 SO in the BBI SIRA 2017 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 6  
To biodegrade/ decompose 
waste streams containing non-
biodegradable polymers […] 
where standard EoL/ eco-
design principles cannot be 
applied. May even be applied 
to all sorts of residual streams 
without any preliminary 
separation or sorting 
operations. 
Recover focuses on fossil-based plastics used in agricultural and packaging sectors. Those mainly include 
PE, PET, PP, PS, EVA, etc . as well as laminates thereof among which at least 5 representative materials 
will be selected in WP1. Those are generally not bio-based, no intrinsically biodegradab le and currently 
have a very low recycling rate (due to difficult recyclability in view of their fouling and /or complex structures). 
Our biotechnological degradation and valorisation process will be tuned to match the requirements of each 
of the selected materials employing or combining several approaches.  
We will first establish our process on separated plastics (sorted, and verifying the absence of contaminants 
that could affect the process) such as agricultural films which composition is generally known at the source 
as well as on selected food packaging. Based on the results, in WP6, we will also provide recommendations, 
how the case of comprising several materials can be approached (eg. combining several enzymes). 
Cascade processing will also be discussed for that purpose. On the long term, possibly performing further 
development for fractions not covered in this project, especially in case of actual MSW streams having very 
complex composition, it could be possible to apply a similar process without pr e-sorting even of the MSW 
or for agri-waste of mixed organic and plastic types. 
Apply the circular economy 
concept to plastics. Avoid 
plastic littering land and sea 
and reduce plastic waste 
diverted to landfill or 
incineration.  
Finding value added EoL for plastics which are currently landfilled or incinerated (with a cost), or even far 
too often left on the soil, can act as the actual incentive towards the adoption of processes like Recover 
and significantly curb the current alarming figures. The potential revenues generated along the value chain, 
further discussed in section 2.2, support the way towards circular economy. This can help converting AWP 
to a feedstock with a value but also generate different products that can have th eir own markets. All is all, 
this will allow meeting the growing society’s and users’ demands to improve the EoL options to avoid 
landfilling and support manufacturers, who are responsible for the suitability of the materials they 
commercialise, to comply with relevant waste legislations.  
During the project implementation, benchmarking will be done vs. current EoL (often limited to landfilling or 
incineration) including economic as well as environmental sustainability studies of the delivered processes. 
Remove non-biodegradable 
polymers from the 
environment.  
Besides the plastics entering waste management systems that will be treated in novel industrial composting 
processes, our solutions will also be suitable for reducing the amount of non -biodegradable plastics 
reaching the environment in 2 ways: i) the in situ bioremediation of the agricultural plastics left on the soil 
will be extensively studied in field trials applying vermicompost based on a tuned combination of insects, 
enzymes and microorganisms (such an approach could also in the long term be adjusted as  contingency 
for accidental littering in highly contaminated areas); ii) microplastics removal from compost, a critical 
problem for the current organic waste management companies, due to the presence of non-biodegradable 
plastic contaminants not properly sorted in the supposedly organic fraction collected from e.g. MSW.  
Result in new feedstock for 
the bio-based industry.  
In contrast we will convert non biobased AWP into a valuable feedstock for the BBI, and we will generate a 
number of semi-finished and finished value-added bio-enabled products to be commercialised across and 
beyond our value chain of actors such as tailored: 
-enzymes 
-microorganisms 
-insects & earthworms 
-vermicompost 
-fertilizers from by products of our process 
-chitin and chitosan from  by products from our process with demonstrated potential to be used as new 
bioplastic packaging and to enhance mulching films and agriculture materials (pots, tips, etc). . 
The TRL at the end of the 
project should be 4-5 for the 
bio-based value chain in 
question. Clearly state the 
starting and end TRLs of the 
key or technologies 
The start, progress and end TRL of each technical component is justified in table 1.4. After characterizing 
the select AWP, we will work subsequently at lab (WP2) and pilot scale (WP3-5 covering the relevant steps 
along our value chain) obtaining significant amounts of biotechnological material for an industrially relevant 
validation of the new process. Different techno-economical aspects of scalability will be considered in WP6 
to give recommendations for successful transfer of the different steps of our process to a sustainable 
industrial scale, so the results TRL is further matured to reach the market . 
Industry participation in the 
project would be considered 
as an added value because it 
can play a supportive role to 
demonstrate the potential for 
integrating the developed 
concepts and technologies 
into current industrial 
landscapes or existing plants 
so they can be deployed more 
quickly and scaled up to apply 
industry-wide. 
The whole circular bio -based value chain is covered by Recover partners. All WPs involve industrial 
partners, e.g. in the supply of AWP based on the initial industrial requirements defined in WP1, in the supply 
of enzymes and insects in WP2, in the upscaling of the biotechnological solutions for degrading plastics in 
WP3, in the scale up of both in situ and ex situ degradation trials , in the conversion/validation of the final 
value added product in WP5, as well as in the final sustainability and feasibility assessments (WP6). The 
consortium has a strong industry component including the participation of 7 SMEs, 3 Large enterprises and 
many more associated via membership in the participating industry association. It is noteworthy that 2 
partners are associated BIC members and therefore committed to making the BBI roadmap successful. We 
cover the agricultural, food,  plastics, fertilizer, biotech, etc. sectors. This dense ecosystem will allow 
researchers and early adopters alike to cooperate, understand the specific market demands, and set the 
basis for the long-term success of the new value chains. They will also drive the knowledge transfer across 
all involved sectors and the upscaling of the results obtained by the RTDs with a view to the smooth post -
project replication.   
Our consortium, optimally constituted as a preliminary seed for the future value chain, involv es a number 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 7  
of partners that are linked to end of life management and would be key in routing the core project results to 
the market: OWS  RF (composting & biogas plant design), IDELUX (MSW management) a nd FEMTO 
(production of materials from recycled materi als and RECOVER by -products). Furthermore, the solution 
can allow new actors such as farmers associated to ASAJA not yet involved in waste management to tap 
into the opportunity of converting their waste into value. 
Proposals should address all 
requirements for RIA as 
shown in Table 3 in the 
Introduction of the Annual 
Work plan 2019 
We comply with all requirements set in the AWP 2019: 
Benefits versus the state of the art:  
Those are discussed in section 1.4 showing our key progresses vs. the scientific literature available to date 
especially through TRL advances and vs. the industry status quo where AWP are not valorised. They will 
be reassessed as a conclusion of WP6. This activity will encompass the comparison of the Recover 
solutions with current EoL as the sustainability assessment.  
Relationship with other projects:  
Networking and clustering with other projects, clusters and initiatives will be addressed in WP7. A number 
of relevant ones are already discussed in section 1.3 and section 2.  
Sustainability assessment:  
WP6 includes an LCA following ISO standard ISO 14040 and ISO 14044 , LCC and techno -economic 
analyses. Optimise resources even by studying best logistic aspects (reduce trans port, energy consume 
etc.). Some initial environmental indicators  regarding the current improper EoL approaches and 
replacement of fossil plastics with biobased ones are also discussed in section 2.  
Compliance with relevant EU legislations & standardisation aspects: 
Regarding the core biodegradation process for fossil p lastics to be developed in the project, there  are no 
pre-existing standards that would directly apply so wherever relevant we will back up on existing regulatory 
framework such as degradation standards ISO 14855 (compost) and ISO 17556 (soil). 
In order to positively influence the political framework for Recover exploitation, specific fact -based, 
scientifically backed information will be used in policy recommendations in WP7 to contribute to the 
discussion on emerging standards for biodegradation of such mat erials. To that end, we will provide a 
number of up scaled test results, to complement emerging scientific studies (see section 1.4).  
Regarding other aspects of the project, applicable standards will also be considered such as food contact 
requirements fo r the chitosan -based packaging , high-power raw materials for sustainable fertilizers, 
performance as pests control, etc. for agriculture applications. 
Although not mandatory requirements from the AWP 2019, as valuable to ensure a successful fate for our 
results towards the market, we will also consider: 
- Logistics aspects will be addressed in terms of sourcing in WP1 and in terms of different flows along our 
new value chain for cascade processing in WP5, and cascade strategies in WP6, based on the projec t 
results. 
- Business aspects are discussed including a preliminary outline of the investment needed for ex situ  
degradation solutions for farmers/agr i-cooperatives as well as for MSW management organizations in 
section 2.2 The business plan will be much f urther explored during the project implementation in task 7.3 
and 7.4. 
Funding between 2  
and 5 M€ 
In keeping with the expected range, the  RECOVER proposal has a budget of ca €5.7 million and an EC 
contribution of ca. €4. 4 million, therefore being within the range guided by the call text ( including 23% in 
kind contributions by partners as described in section 2). The project will generate excellent value for money 
for the bio-based industries value chains while delivering a number of bio-based solutions.