1.4 Ambition 
To support the European Strategy for Plastics  in a Circular Economy 12 and contribute to alleviate the environmental problems 
faced by plastic waste contamination, RECOVER has the ambition to provide biotechnology -based tools (involving 
microorganisms, novel enzymes, earth-worm and insects) with plastic degrading capabilities that will be suitable for application 
in ex-situ (composting, vermicomposting, reactor, insect chambers) or in-situ (soil) treatment of plastic contaminated matrix . 
Biotech solutions will include symbiotic bioprocesses between prev iously reported high powered microorganisms through 
microbiotic systems vectored by several insect species. In addition, the outputs of these processes will be chitin from insects and 
biofertilizers from insects, earthworms, larvae etc. Our ground -breaking project objectives will lead to significant knowledge 
advancements to the state-of-the-art (SoA): 
  
A. State of the art and advances in the field of plastic controlled waste management and treatment technologies 
Plastic waste fractions pose a serious envi ronmental threat due to its non -biodegradable and recalcitrant nature 13. Besides, 
physical degradation of plastics in the environment produce s secondary micro-plastics that cause even higher negative impact. 
Agroecosystems are likely to be the most plastic-contaminated terrestrial system outside of landfills and urban spaces. The source 
of these micro-plastics are recycled wastewater, biosolids and compost derived from non-source-separated residential waste or 
mixed municipal solid waste. Microplastics do not disappear naturally and, when mixed with soil, lead to decline of soil quality by 
hindering the transfer of water and fertilizer between soil and plants 14. The final processing step for compost is typically sieving 
using 8-, 10-, or even 15-mm mesh sizes. Microplastics, defined as particles smaller than 5 mm, will therefore pass through these 
sieves and enter the compost. The quality and quantity of plastics to be rec ycled is a major obstacle to the develop ment of this 
recycling process. The fact that the microplastics present in municipal waste consist of mixtures of different types of plastics, each 
                                                             
12 EU Strategy on Plastics: Protecting the Environment and Citizens from Plastic Waste (2018) 
https://www.interregeurope.eu/policylearning/news/3132/the-eu-strategy-on-plastics-protecting-the-environment-and-citizens-from-plastic-waste/ 
13 Moharir, R. V., & Kumar, S. (2019). Challenges associated with plastic waste disposal and allied microbial routes for its effective degradation: A 
comprehensive review. Journal of cleaner production. 208, 65-76 
14 Ng et al. (2018). An overview of microplastic and nanoplastic pollution in agroecosystems. Science of the total environment, 627, 1377-1388. 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 12  
consisting of a mixture of synthetic polymers, residual monomers and  chemical additives adds a little more complexity to the 
problem15.  
The recycling of multilayer films, used broadly both in packaging and agriculture sectors, is still an important problem, which 
currently is not carried out in an industrial scale. There a re several reasons for this, such as the  large variety of materials used 
for each layer,  large differences in the processing properties of the materials used for multilayer films,  lack of systems for 
identification of multilayer film (e.g. PA/PE, PS/PE, P VC/PE, PET/PE, etc.), lack of system solutions for the collection of these 
materials, which results in storage with other foil materials with similar visible characteristics (colour, thickness, stiffness), lack of 
standard research of the properties, proce ssing and applications of composites based on recycled multicomponent materials,  
lack of economically viable systems of segregation of the various materials. To some extent, the flexible packaging suffer similar 
difficulties in their recycling even when monolayer due to their difficult sorting and handling (separators are more suitable for rigid 
counterparts).16   
The collection, transport, and treatment of these mixed plastic waste is difficult and often they end up in landfills, or in best option 
to incineration17.  
In RECOVER, with the help of plastic monitoring tools, equipment and logistic studies as stated in SoA below (C), a strategy for 
the targeted plastic waste collection and delivery to the appropriate degradation plant will be proposed and in the cases where a 
collection is not seen viable and an in situ (soil, compost) degradation is preferable, this will be highlighted (WP1). 
 
B. State of the art and advances in the field of Biotech tools for plastic biodegradation 
The biodegradation of plastics in the environment is a complex process that involves a combination of many abiotic and biotic 
factors. After fragmentation or modification accomplished by abiotic factors and microorganisms, the bulk polymer becomes more 
available for biological attack. Extracellular depolymerizing enzymes from microorganisms release monomers that are further 
intracellularly metabolized by them. Consequently, microorganisms and their enzymes are ultimately responsible for the complete 
mineralization, which is the transformation to carbon dioxide (CO 2), and the final removal. Research on the biodegradation of 
recalcitrant synthetic polymers with carbon -carbon backbones, namely PS, PVC, PP and PEs, has proved that they can be 
attacked, under different lab and actual site conditions, by a variety of mixed microbial communities and enzymes and pure fungal 
or bacterial strains obtained from terrestrial or aquatic environment and from some earth -worm and insects larval gut 18. 
Earthworms and insect larvae are also able to degrade plastics in which process their gut microbiota play key role. Most work in 
this area has been focused on PUR and PET that are easier to biodegrade but biodegradation of other more recalcitrant plastics 
or mixtures are also scarcely covered19. 
Beyond the SoA, biotechnology-based solutions to mitigate the challenges associated to AWP management will be developed by 
RECOVER by providing biotech-tools (in WP2) that are able to biodegrade AWP, namely: Microbial consortia and novel enzymes 
with faster AWP biodegradation ability; Earthworms with improved capabilities for AWP biodegradation; Insect larvae with 
improved capabilities for AWP biodegradation. Such synergistic combinations were never reported before in the literature. 
  
Bacteria reported for their prospective use in biodegradation of plastics include species of the genera Pseudomonas, 
Streptomyces, Rhodococcus, Comamonas, Clostridium  and Butyrivibrio. Among the bacteria, one that stands out as potential 
candidate for plas tic biodegradation is Pseudomonas because of its diverse metabolic and stress -resistance capabilities and 
genetic plasticity 20. Several fungi also have the potential to degrade plastics in aquatic and soil environments. Aspergillus, 
Fusarium, Pycnoporus and Mucor are among those proposed for the biodegradation of plastics. In addition, fungi capable of 
degrading lignin in nature are of particular interest with respect to particularly inert structural elements of plastics such as C–C or 
C–Cl bonds. Lignin res embles certain plastics in not being hydrolysable and possessing similar structural elements that are 
oxidized and cleaved during lignin degradation by enzymes like laccase and lignin peroxidases that might enable them to degrade 
the C–C bond-based PE and PP21. 
To date, the rates achieved by pure microbial cultures have been low and almost all isolates are restricted to growth on a si ngle 
type of plastic under optimal lab scale conditions22 (Table 1.6). Consequently, microorganisms and enzymes are needed that 
can more rapidly and efficiently degrade complex plastic mixtures. 
                                                             
15Weithmann et al (2018)Organic fertilizer as a vehicle for the entry of microplastic into the environment, Science advances: Environmental Studies, 4(4), 
eaap8060. 
16 Zenon Tartakowski, Recycling of packaging multilayer films: New materials for technical products, Resources, Conservation and Recycling, Volume 55, 
Issue 2, 2010, Pages 167-170, ISSN 0921-3449, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2010.09.004 
17 https://www.amazon.it/Riutilizzo-materiali-polimerici-Mauro-Aglietto/dp/8868125242 
18 Raddadi, N., & Fava, F. (2019). Biodegradation of oil-based plastics in the environment: Existing knowledge and needs of research and innovation. 
Science of The Total Environment 679, 148-158 
19 Wierckx et al. (2018). Plastic biodegradation: Challenges and opportunities. Consequences of Microbial Interactions with Hydrocarbons, Oils, and Lipids: 
Biodegradation and Bioremediation, 1-29. 
20 Wilkes, R. A., & Aristilde, L. (2017). Degradation and metabolism of synthetic plastics and associated products by Pseudomonas sp.: capabilities and 
challenges. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 123(3), 582-593. 
21Krueger (2015). Prospects for microbiological solutions to environmental pollution with plastics. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 99(21), 8857 
22 Paço, A., Jacinto, J., da Costa, J. P., Santos, P. S., Vitorino, R., Duarte, A. C., & Rocha-Santos, T. (2019). Biotechnological tools for the effective 
management of plastics in the environment. Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology, 49(5), 410-441 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 13  
  
Table 1.6. Maximum biodegradation of synthetic plastics reported in literature for microbial pure culture17 
Plastic Microorganism Weight loss (%) Period 
PUR Comamonas acidovorans 48-100 7 d 
PE/LDPE/HDPE Zalerium maritimum 70 21 d 
PET Ideonella sakiensis 100 6 weeks 
PP Pseudomonas stutzeri 0.25 60 d 
PVC Pleurotus sp., Phanerochaete chrysosporium, Poliporus 
versicolor 
0.55 30 d 
PS Bacillus 23 30 d 
PC Phanerochaete chrysosporium 5.4 12 m 
   
Microbial consortia can improve degradation capabilities and promote the degradation of a more diverse group of plastics23. 
For example, the decomposition of micro-sized polyethylene (PE) by mesophilic mixed bacterial culture obtained from a municipal 
landfill sediment reduced the dry weight of particles (18% after 60 d)24. Also, microbial communities isolated from plastic garbage 
processing areas has been used for enhanced degradation of low density polyethylene (LDPE) strips and pellets with weight 
reductions of 81% and 38%, respectively, after 120 days25. 
The enzymes produced by microorganisms offer an additional alternative for plastic biodegradation. The enzymes reported to 
be involved in the breakage of polymers are cutinases, esterases, laccases, lipases and enzymes involved in lignin metabolism26. 
These are moderately active on hydrolysable polymers such as PET and PUR but no enzymes acting on the high molecular 
weight polymers such as PS, PVC are known27. There are a few examples of bacterial and fungal laccases and peroxidases that 
reduce the molecular mass of PE and cutinases and lipases with PET -degrading capacity. Using a combination of enzymes is 
also known to enhance polymer hydrolysis. Hydrolytic enzymes, are already produced in bulk quantities and low cost for a variety 
of applications. The French firm Carbios  (to which Carbiolice, who in our AB and committed to collaborate with RECOVER, is 
affiliated) has optimized an enzyme that depolymerizes 97% of pretreated PET into monomers in 24 hours. The enzyme Carbios 
patent mentions bacterial and fungal cutinase and lipase enzymes28. Hence, the design of novel enzymatic degradation modules 
employing plastic hydrolases with high rates of plastic depolymerization is possible. 
Beyond this, considering that the diversity of known enzymes and microbes acting on plastic polymers is still rather limited, their 
degrading activity is low and the action on complex plastic mixtures is not currently covered, RECOVER ambitions to explore the 
diversity of the cultivated and non-cultivated microorganisms (metagenomes) to seek for the building up of microbial communities 
and the identification of novel enzymes biocatalysts for AWP biodegradation. The search and final design of mixed tailored 
microbial/enzyme will be adjusted to each AWP degradation scenario, i.e, soil, compost, reactor or feeding earthworm & insect 
larvae. 
 
As for the design of novel enzymes , knowledge -based design of enzymes is very poorly established, and the underlying 
understanding of structure-function relationships is so partial as to limit it substantially. Specific exceptions exist, such as 
strategies for P450 enzymes through biophysical property modification of active sites29 (the basis of Oxford Biotrans technology) 
or modular cons truction30. Anyway t hese are rare and based upon modification of unusually well characterized enzymes. 
Frequently the largest influencers of enzyme activity do not lie within the active sites, and the most impactful random mutagenesis-
generated improvements often lie in locations that could not have been predicted; and often are not understood even after they 
are identified. As a result, the principle source of new enzymes remains biological prospecting and screening for new activit ies 
and substrates. 
We have identified metabolic enzymes with strong associations with higher fermentation productions and with increased substrate 
use (unpublished/commercially sensitive). This reveals that different evolutionary lineages are adapting with unlinked modula r 
changes, and leads to a novel strategy for their recombination. The concept of enhanced recombination was established 20 years 
ago, when Pim 31 recombined four cephalosporinases and increased resistance 270 -fold, and reviewed in 32. This approach is 
                                                             
23 Drzyzga, O., & Prieto, A. (2019). Plastic waste management, a matter for the ‘community’. Microbial biotechnology, 12(1), 66 
24 Park, S. Y., & Kim, C. G. (2019). Biodegradation of micro-polyethylene particles by bacterial colonization of a mixed microbial consortium isolated from a 
landfill site. Chemosphere, 222, 527-533 
25 Skariyachan, et al. (2017). Enhanced biodegradation of low and high-density polyethylene by novel bacterial consortia formulated from plastic-
contaminated cow dung under thermophilic conditions. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 24(9), 8443-8457 
26 Narancic, T., & O'Connor, K. E. (2018). Plastic waste as a global challenge: are biodegradable plastics the answer to the plastic waste problem?. 
Microbiology, 165(2), 129-137 
27 Wierckx, et al (2015). Plastic waste as a novel substrate for industrial biotechnology. Microbial biotechnology, 8(6), 900 
28 Boisart, Cédric; Maille, Emmanuel. Method for recycling plastic products. U.S. Patent Application No 14/443,524, 15 Oct. 2015 
29 Sowden, R.J. et al. (2018) Biotransformation of the sesquiterpene (+)-valencene by cytochrome P4509cam) and P450(BM-3). Organic and biomolecular 
chemistry. 3(1): 57-64. 
30 Lapidoth. et al. (2005) Highly active enzymes by automated combinatorial backbone assembly and sequence design. Nature Communications 9: 2780. 
31 Craeri, A. et al. (1998) DNA shuffling of a family of genes from diverse speces accelerates directed evolution. Nature 391: 288-291. 
32 Carbone, M.N. & Arnold, F.H (2007). Engineering by homologous recombination, exploring sequence and function within a conserved fold. Current 
opinion in structural biology 17: 454-459   
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 14  
limited by the practicalities of molecular biology, species and sequence barriers to recombination, and identification of candidate 
variation for uses in new enzyme generation. We have developed tools and resources to identify the candidates affecting function, 
within and beyond the active sites (unpublished), that are part of tools originally intended to identify genes and polymorphisms 
that correlate with exploitable biological properties within bacteria. 
Beyond the SoA, in RECOVER we will apply our unique comparative genomics tool to strains and species within and beyond our 
collections. This will be used to inform the design of synthetic sequences that optimally represent the behavior and activity  
determinants within enzyme classes. This combines novel genomics, with the  latest synthetic DNA capabilities, and a new 
strategy for recombination that allows exploration of variations many orders of magnitude greater than was possible previousl y. 
A feature of this approach is that it permits multiple potentially cooperative cha nges to be generated in the new enzymes, 
traversing large parts of the enzyme fitness landscapes in single experimental steps. The goal is to both establish these new  
methods, which have wide potential applicability to green biotechnology and the sustainable bio-economy; and to generate new 
high-activity enzymes that target waste plastics as the specific objective of the project. 
 
Earthworms provide multiple environmental services in agroecosystems33. These invertebrates exert a strong stimulating effect 
on soil microorganisms through their continuous ingestion of soil (endogeic earthworms) and leaf litter mixed with soil (anecic 
earthworms). In addition, the intense burrowing activity of these soil organisms contribute to disperse microorganisms in soil, so 
increasing the decomposing process of organic matter in the soil matrix 34. Some studies suggest that these annelids may 
contribute to degradation of organic pollutants, thus resulting a complementary strategy of in-situ bioremediation35. Accumulating 
evidence suggest that earthworm interact with microplastics in soil 36. Degradation of microplastics was demonstrated in the 
gastrointestinal tract of L. terrestris incubated in microplastic-contaminated soils. L. terrestris exposed to 7% microplastic LDPE 
(Low density polyethylene) could uptake LDPE and decrease its particle size thus facilitating the decay of LDPE as it passes 
through the gut. The bacteria consortia from the earthworm's gut were able to decrease particle size and metabolize it releasing 
long-chain alkanes as byproducts of bacterial decay 37. However, these studies have been performed using soil -dwelling 
earthworms, and comparable interaction should be investigated in composting, epigeic earthworm species such as Eisenia fetida. 
Several studies performed with this genus have revealed that they build up their cast microbiome by selecting from the pool o f 
ingested bacteria. A metagenomic analysis to characterize the bacterial communities of casts from E. andrei fed with different 
food sources found that the bacterial communities of cast strongly depended on the food source ingested by earthworms38. These 
promising results encourage the use of earthworms in the biodegradation of AWP wastes. This novel approach would increase 
the potential use of these organisms to manage plastic waste by farmers 
Beyond this, RECOVER will explore the feasibility of inducing improved plastic degrading capabilities in soil -dwelling and 
epigenetic earthworms by strategies involving exposu re to plastics contaminated environment and feeding or mixing with 
microorganisms. The improved earthworm s are intended for mixed plastics biodegradation in soil and vermicomposting 
environments in WP4. 
  
Larvae of some insects such as waxworms (Plodia interpunctella) and mealworms (Tenebrio molitor) are reported to feed on 
plastics and degrade them. In this process their gut bacteria play an important role in their ability to adapt to different f oods and 
degrade plastics. Waxworms are capable of chewing and eating LLDPE films and two bacterial strains isolated from their guts, 
Enterobacter asburiae and Bacillus sp., were capable of degrading non -pretreated LLDPE (weight loss of up to 10% after 28 
days) 39 . Mealworms readily ingest and biodegrade polystyrene ( PS) to CO 2 and one bacteria isolated from their gut 
Exiguobacterium sp. was capable of PS degradation. This study showed that mealworms degrade nearly half of the ingested PS 
within the 12− 15 h in the gut, which is higher than the mass loss reported by the isolated Exiguobacterium sp. and other plastic-
degrading bacterial isolates40. Recent work has also demonstrated that mealworm can also be fed on PE, PS and a mixture of 
both, and the microbiome present in the gut is necessary for the biodegradation ; these two polymers were mineralized and/or 
incorporated into mealworm b iomass. Analysis of the gut microbiome by next -generation sequencing revealed Citrobacter sp. 
                                                             
33 Blouin, M.; Hodson, M.E.; Delgado, E.A.; Baker, G.; Brussaard, L.; Butt, K.R.; Dai, J.; Dendooven, L.; Peres, G.; Tondoh, J.E. et al. A review of 
earthworm impact on soil function and ecosystem services. European Journal of Soil Science 2013, 64, 161-182 
34 Yang, P., van Elsas, J.D. Mechanisms and ecological implications of the movement of bacteria in soil. Applied Soil Ecology 2018, 129, 112-120 
35 Rodriguez-Campos, J.; Dendooven, L.; Alvarez-Bernal, D., Contreras-Ramos, S.M. Potential of earthworms to accelerate removal of organic 
contaminants from soil: a review. Appl Soil Ecol 2014, 79, 10-25 
36 Huerta Lwanga, E.; Gertsen, H.; Gooren, H.; Peters, P.; Salánki, T.; van der Ploeg, M.; Besseling, E.; Koelmans, A.A., Geissen, V. Microplastics in the 
terrestrial ecosystem: Implications for Lumbricus terrestris (Oligochaeta, Lumbricidae). Environ Sci Technol 2016, 50, 2685-2691 
37Puerta. Decay of low-density polyethylene by bacteria extracted from earthworm’s guts: A potential for soil restoration. Sci Total Environ 2018, 624, 753-
757 
38 Aira, M., Olcina, J., Pérez-Losada, M., & Domínguez, J. (2016). Characterization of the bacterial communities of casts from Eisenia andrei fed with 
different substrates. Applied Soil Ecology, 98, 103-111 
39 Yang, J.; Yang, Y.; Wu, W.-M.; Zhao, J.; Jiang, L. Evidence of polyethylene biodegradation by bacterial strains from the guts of plastic-eating waxworms. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48 (23), 13776−13784 
40 Yang et al. (2015). Biodegradation and mineralization of polystyrene by plastic-eating mealworms: part 2. Role of gut microorganisms. Environmental 
science & technology, 49(20), 12087-12093 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 15  
and Kosakonia sp. strongly associated with both PE and PS as well as species unique to each plastic. Consequently adaptability 
of the mealworm gut microbiome enables degradation of chemically dissimilar plastics41. 
According to these studies it is feasible to induce a specialized plastic -degrading microbial community in the gut of mealworms 
and to improve their capabilities by adjusting rearing conditions. Finally, the possibility of modifying and increasing capabilities of 
the microbiome within these organisms by feeding them with microorganisms is a subject to consider. Recently it has been shown 
that inoculating insects with symbiotic bacteria Enterobacter cloacae, Enterococcus faecalis provide a readily transferable tool for 
insect rearing systems that improve fitness by providing additional protection against infection, or by normalizing insect physiology 
increasing survival rates42. 
Beyond this SoA, RECOVER will explore different insect larvae in addition to that reported in literature for their capability to 
degrade plastic mixtures and also targets to improve plastic -degrading capabilities of insect larvae by strategies involving 
optimization of rearing conditions, including feeding or mixing with microorganisms. Improved insect larvae are mainly intended 
for ex-situ treatment of AWP in insect rearing chambers (in WP4) and, after their death, the adults produced will be used for chitin 
extraction in WP5. 
 
C. State of the art: EoL plastic monitoring. 
The sorting of polymers is a key step for the recycling industry. Equipment to automatically sort plastics are already widely  
commercially available (e.g. via spectroscopic identification systems, including near -infrared, X -ray, colour, or laser, and 
combinations thereof). All these identification techniques require a pre -calibration. Among those, near infra -red (NIR) 
spectroscopy is a well -established technique for inline composition monitoring. It is indeed highly  sensitive to the chemical 
signature of a wide range of materials, especially organic ones. Using advanced data analysis approaches to treat the resulti ng 
spectra, it can predict fine multi-parametric information on the concentration of the substances of i nterest. Furthermore, 
hyperspectral imaging (HSI) is chemical imaging technique that records a hyperspectral image of the sample, providing not only 
the local chemical composition, but also its distribution. As such, the use of hyperspectral cameras goes far beyond the standard 
camera-based vision systems more widely spread in the industry. The spatial localization of the sample is especially exploited for 
sorting, e.g. plastic waste in the recycling industry, but also for analyzing the homogeneity of a product surface or identifying the 
presence of foreign bodies based on both chemical and physical insights. NIR and HSI were for example proved to be able to 
detect the presence of pesticides residues down to ppm levels43. While the use of HSI to identify plastics is quite common, its use 
to track plastic disintegration/biodegradation is rarely reported in the literature, some related data were mainly found to the related 
microplastics detection in ocean water44,35,45. 
RECOVER will demonstrate the capacity of using HSI optimized for each purpose below in terms of optical hardware and of data 
treatment algorithms (calibration thanks chemiometrics or even more sophisticated Artificial Intelligence approaches such as 
neural networks) at different steps of the process. This to automate the: i) identification of input End of Life materials composition 
(possibly used in the future composting plants as a pre -sorting, sorting of the materials they should feed into the degradation 
reactor); ii) detection of toxic substances that could jeopardize the later degradation such as pesticides which could be found on 
mulching films; iii) tracking of the degradation in terms of plastic fragments size reduction along time for each type of plastics as 
a support to later degradation optimization (to reach this objective, strategies to maximize the penetration of the HSI analysis in 
the compost will be devised and/or ability to relate the surface analysis to bulk composition will be checked). 
  
D. State of the art: Biodegradation modelling. 
Even for conventional biodegradable plastics, biodegradation is poorly controlled and understood mechanism influenced by the 
crystallinity, crosslinking, molecular weight, additives, but also by the environment (moisture, temperature, pH, microb ial 
activity…). While different models, such as BIOWIN, BESS, METABOL, etc. exist for the prediction of the biodegradation of 
organic compounds (chemicals), no model is available for the prediction of the biodegradation of polymers. Due to the 
underlying c omplexity and number of influencing variables, and even more when talking about novel conventionally non -
biodegradable plastics degradation, it seems unrealistic to envisage a mechanistic model that would properly describe the actual 
behaviour of such plastic item in our target new end of life process conditions. In contrast, data driven approaches can cope with 
such challenges. Data representing decomposition profiles can be modelled by benchmarking different machine learning 
algorithms accounting for the effects of the known parameters influencing the disintegration and biodegradation. "Deterministic" 
controllable test parameters and properties (polymer type, exact vermicompost composition...) and the less controllable 
                                                             
41 Brandon, A. M., Gao, S. H., Tian, R., Ning, D., Yang, S. S., Zhou, J., ... & Criddle, C. S. (2018). Biodegradation of polyethylene and plastic mixtures in 
mealworms (larvae of Tenebrio molitor) and effects on the gut microbiome. Environmental science & technology, 52(11), 6526-6533 
42 Somerville, J., Zhou, L., & Raymond, B. (2019). Aseptic Rearing and Infection with Gut Bacteria Improve the Fitness of Transgenic Diamondback Moth, 
Plutella xylostella. Insects, 10(4), 89. 
43 Optical Technologies for Determination of Pesticide Residue Yankun Peng, Yongyu Li and Jingjing Chen, Chapter 24 in Infrared Spectroscopy – 
Materials Science, Engineering and Technology, Theo M. Theophanides, InTech, 2012 - 510 pages, ISBN 953510537X, 9789535105374 
44 Shan et al., Simple and Rapid Detection of Microplastics in Seawater using Hyperspectral Imaging Technology, November 2018, AnalyticaChimicaActa 
1050, DOI:10.1016/j.aca.2018.11.008 
45 https://daim.idi.ntnu.no/masteroppgaver/014/14972/masteroppgave.pdf 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 16  
environment characteristics (moisture, temperature, microbial activity, etc.) can be differentiated. A Case Based Reasoning (CBR) 
approach can also be adopted in which successful configurations (i.e. environmental parameters and compositions) are stored in 
a historical database. CBR has been successfully used for relevant bio-industrial applications such as fermentation46. 
Beyond the state of the art lacking any model for polymer biodegradation and building upon the BBI project Biontop that start ed 
in June 2019 focusing , among other, on modeling the biodegradation in industrial and home composting conditions of novel 
polylactic acid (PLA) copolymers, in RECOVER, data driven models will be developed to predict the degradation based on the 
results of the tests performed with different p lastics and enzymes/microorganisms/insects mixtures in WP 4. The resulting 
predictive models will be embedded in a decision support system (app) to provide recommendation on the most suitable process 
depending on the AWP composition to recover as monitored in WP1 for the upscaled trials and future exploitation stage. 
 
E. State of the Art: added value products based on chitin and chitosan 
Extraction 
Chitin is a polysacharide tha t can be found in the exoskeletons of invertebrates , but also in fungi, green alga e and yeast cell 
walls47. Chitosan has degree of deacetylation (DD) of at least 60%, and is generally described in terms of DD and average 
molecular weight 48.Only chitosan with an average molecular mass of 10 5 to 5 × 10 6 g/mol shows antimicrobial activity 49,50,51, 
currently chitosan with a similar molecular weight is considered in packaging research 52,53,54. 
Chitin can be extracted by classical chemical methods or by biological approaches. Either case require the exoskeletons to be 
cleaned, dried and ground into a powder prior to the actual chitin extraction by deproteinization , demineralization and final 
conversion by deacetylation. In chemical extraction, demineralization is conducted under acidic conditions whereas 
deproteinization and deacetylation is performed under alkaline conditions . Even irradiation can be used for deacetylation 55. 
Chemical extraction is effective and feasible at large scale, but harbors several disadvantages: by-products of chitin extraction 
such as minerals and proteins cannot be used for further applications and it is environment-unfriendly as high amounts of waste 
and wastewater accumulate. Biological approaches applying either enzymes (not economically viable), or fermentation by starter 
cultures56 have been proposed, considering that several bacterial species are applicable for chitin extraction and conversion to 
chitosan57. 58. Biological methods favors the further usage of chitin extraction by -products, but  is microbiologically complex , 
depicts incomplete process yield and takes longer than chemical methods.  
When irradiating polymeric materials application of lower doses enhances cross-linking of the material whereas higher doses lead 
to material degradation. The irradiation of raw material accelerates downstream steps during conventional chemical extraction59. 
This clearly indicates that irradiation is able to initiate degradation of chitin.  
Beyond this state of the art, in RECOVER we aim to establish a novel method for chitin extraction  on laboratory scale using, 
irradiation by electron beam (eBeam) treatment to degrade the tight chitin network allowing the application of recyclable and more 
sustainable solvents for the actual chitin extraction. Additionally, eBeam treatment will convert  α-chitin to chitosan, and reduce 
the amount of alkaline solutions and acids during conventional chemical extraction. Moreover, extracted chitosan will be evaluated 
regarding DD level and average molecular mass to meet the requirements for high performance and (active) packaging.  
 
Chitin and chitosan processing for coatings and films 
Chitosan is characterized by non -toxicity, biodegradability, film -forming capacity, antimicrobial and antioxidant properties and 
                                                             
46 Montague, G., Martin, E., O'Malley, C. (2008) Forecasting for fermentation operational decision making, BiotechnolProg. 2008 Sep-Oct;24(5):1033-41 
47 El Knidri et al. (2018) Extraction, chemical modification and characterization of chitin and chitosan. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules 
120: 1181–1189 
48 Mati-Baouche et al (2014) Chitosan as an adhesive. European Polymer Journal 60: 198–212. 
49 Matsuhashi et al. (1997) Enhancement of antimicrobial activity of chitosan by irradiation. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 73: 237–241 
50 Zivanovic, et al. (2007) Physical, mechanical, and antibacterial properties of chitosan/PEO blend films. Biomacromolecules 8: 1505–1510. 
51 Varun et al. (2017) Extraction of chitosan and its oligomers from shrimp shell waste, their characterization and antimicrobial effect. Veterinary World 10: 
170–175. 
52 Gaellstedt et al. (2005) Packaging-related properties of protein- and chitosan-coated paper. Packaging Technology and Science 18: 161–170 
53 Zhang, H.Z., He, Z.C., Liu, G.H., and Qiao, Y.Z. (2009) Properties of different chitosan/low-density polyethylene antibacterial plastics. Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science 113: 2018–2021 
54 Kurek, et al (2012) Barrier properties of chitosan coated polyethylene. Journal of Membrane Science 403–404: 162–168 
55 Ershov, B.G. (1998) Radiation-chemical degradation of cellulose and other polysaccharides. Russian Chemical Reviews 67: 315–334 
56 Brueck et al. (2015) Von der Krebsschale in die Creme: Mikrobiologische Nutzung von Fischerei-Abfall. Biologie in unserer Zeit 45: 160–167 
57 Gadgey, K.K. and Bahekar, A. (2017) Studies on extraction methods of chitin from crab shell and investigation of its mechanical properties. International 
Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Technology 8: 220–231 
58 Brueck, W., Bracharz, F., Brueck, D.W., and Brueck, T.B. (2015) Von der Krebsschale in die Creme: Mikrobiologische Nutzung von Fischerei-Abfall. 
Biologie in unserer Zeit 45: 160–167; El Knidri, H., Belaabed, R., Addaou, A., Laajeb, A., and Lahsini, A. (2018) Extraction, chemical modification and 
characterization of chitin and chitosan. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules 120: 1181–1189. 
59 El-Nesr, E.M., Raafat, A.I., Nasef, S.M., Soliman, E.A., and Hegazy, E.A. (2013) Chitin and chitosan extracted from irradiated and non-irradiated shrimp 
wastes (comparative analysis study). Arab Journal of Nuclear Science and Applications 46: 53–66 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 17  
good barrier properties of films against oxyge n60,61,62. By chitosan application , it is possible to realize films and coatings 
with intrinsic antimicrobial properties and this is just this characteristic that differentiates chitosan from other common 
antimicrobials (for example, ethanol, sorbic acid, bacteriocins as nisins, lysozyme, essential oils etc.).  
Antimicrobial and barrier properties depend on chitosan molecular weight and deacetylation degree, its concentration, the solvent 
used for its solubilisation, the pH and possible plasticizers or other a dditives added in the formulations. Antimicrobial activity is 
possibly owing to the positive charges which can interact with negatively charged residues of macromolecules on the microbial  
cell surface, causing membrane leakage63. 
The thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of chitin shows a weight loss between 250 °C and 400 °C that indicates deacetylation and 
cleavage of glycosidic bonds, chitin is therefore much more stable than starch and can be processed together with thermoplastic 
polymers by extrusion. Thus, PLA and chitosan can be processed by extrusion 64 as experienced by UNIPI on laboratory scale, 
and on pilot scale in the activity performed in NANO-CHITOPACK and POLYBIOSKIN project. As well several biodegradable 
PLA/PBAT based films are available on the mar ket and their processing was experienced by RECOVER partners such as the 
formula patented by UNIPI for production of flexible transparent films based on PLA and a reactive plasticizer65 . 
Coatings based on chitosan may be not transparent when printed. Since  in some packaging , the transparency of the films is 
required; this issue will be addressed in the optimisation planned in the project since based on literature 66 even in presence of 
chitosan transparent films may be achieved, the issue is mainly focused in achieving a good compatibility in the blends that can 
be obtained with food grade approved additives such as poly(vinyl alcohol)67 and polyethylene-graft-maleic anhydride68 (used in 
amount lower than 4% not to hinder compost ability).  
Beyond the state of the art compounds based on compostable bio-polyesters will be processed for films production in presence 
of chitin/chitosan, as well commercial compostable or soil biodegradable films will be used as substrate for coatings with chitosan 
for active packaging and improved mulching films due to chitin or chitosan presence as well as for agriculture items (pots, yarns, 
etc), thus in addition to direct effects on plant nutrition and plant growth stimulation.  
 
Chitin-derived products have also been shown to be toxic to plant pests and pathogens, induce plant defences and stimulate the 
growth and activity of beneficial microbes. Chitin -based treatments augment and amplify the action of beneficial chitinolytic 
microbes. In addition to direct effects on plant nutrition and plant growth stimulation, chitin-derived products have also been shown 
to be toxic to plant pests and pathogens, induce plant defences and stimulate the growth and activity of beneficial microbes, since 
chitin-based treatments augment and amplify the action of beneficial chitinolytic microbes69.  
Plastic mulching (PM) is an emerging agricultural practice as it provides several beneficial properties. The use of PM is known to 
facilitate pest70 control by suppression of weed growth71, and to reduce the amount of applied herbicides72. Moreover, PM functions 
as light regulating 73 greenhouse, increases the soil temperatur e74, and reduces evaporation that conserves the soil humidity 75. 
Therefore, the agricultural yield is higher76 and harvest in cool climate77 is facilitated which provides an advantage in the market 
                                                             
60 Verlee et al, Recent developments in antibacterial and antifungal chitosan and its derivatives, Carbohydrate Polymers, Vol. 164, pp. 268-283, 2017 
61 M. Aider, Chitosan application for active bio-based films production and potential in the food industry: Review, LWT-Food Science and Technology, Vol. 
43, pp. 837-842, 2010 
62 M. Kong, X.G. Chen, K. Xing, H.J. Park, Antimicrobial properties of chitosan and mode of action: A state of the art review, Vol. 144, pp. 51-63, 2010 
63 Zheng, L.Y., and Zhu, J.F. 2003. Study on antimicrobial activity of chitosan with different molecular weights. Carbohydrate Polymers, 54, 527-530 
64 Bonilla, J. 2013. Effects of chitosan on the physicochemical and antimicrobial properties of PLA films, Journal of Food Engineering, 119, 236–243; 
Correlo, V. M. et al. 2005. Properties of melt processed chitosan and aliphatic polyester blends, Materials Science and Engineering A, 403, 57–68 
65 A. Lazzeri, T.V. Phuong, P. Cinelli. PCT/IB2013/053302 (WO 2013164743 A1), “Copolymers based on reactive polyesters and plasticisers for the 
manufacture of transparent, biodegradable packaging film” 
66 Svagan, A. J. et al. 2012. Transparent Films Based on PLA and Montmorillonite with Tunable Oxygen Barrier Properties, Biomacromolecules, 13, 
397−405 
67 Grande, R., Carvalho. A. J. F.  2011. Compatible Ternary Blends of Chitosan/poly(vinyl alcohol)/poly(lactic acid) Produced by Oil-in-Water Emulsion 
Processing, Biomacromolecules, 12, 907–914 
68 Suyatma, N. E. 2010. Compatibilization method applied to the chitosan-acid poly(L-lactide) solution, Journal of Applied Polymer Science, Vol. 117, 3083–
3091 
69 Agronomy 2013, 3, 757-793; doi:10.3390/agronomy3040757 agronomy ISSN 2073-4395 www.mdpi.com/journal/agronomy Review A Review of the 
Applications of Chitin and Its Derivatives in Agriculture to Modify Plant-Microbial Interactions and Improve Crop Yields Russell G. Sharp 
70 Gamliel, A.; Austerweil, M. & Kritzman, G. (2000). Non-chemical approach to soilborne pest management - organic amendments. Crop Protection, 19, 
847-853 
71 Rajablariani, H.R.; Hassankhan, F. & Rafezi, R. (2012). Effect of colored plastic mulches on yield of tomato and weed biomass. International Journal of 
Environmental Science and Development 3, 590-593 
72 Kasperbauer, M.J. (2000). Strawberry yield over red versus black plastic mulch mention of a trademark or product does not constitute a guarantee or 
warranty of the product by the usda and does not imply its approval to the exclusion of other products or vendors that may also be suitable. Crop Science, 
40, 171-174. 
73 Ham et al. (1993). Optical properties of plastic mulches affect the field temperature regime. J. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci, 118, 188-193.  
74 Díaz-Pérez, J.C. (2010). Bell pepper (capsicum annum l.) grown on plastic film mulches: Effects on crop microenvironment, physiological attributes, and 
fruit yield. HortTechnology, 45, 1196-1204 
75 Tarara, J.M. (2000). Microclimate modification with plastic mulch. Hortscience, 35, 169-180. 
76Ashrafuzzaman (2011) Effect of plastic mulch on growth and yield of chilli (capsicum annuum l.). Brazilian Archives of Biology and Technology, 54, 321-
330 
77Waterer (2000) Effect of soil mulches and herbicides on production economics of warm season vegetable crops in a cool climate. HortTechnology, 10, 
154-159 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 18  
competition with warmer countries. 
Market volume worldwide of plastic mulches is estimated to be around 700.000T per year just for LLDPE78 and over 1 MTons of 
mulching films are used w orldwide79, but also shows an impressive growth rate of about 25 % with enormous potential for 
assimilating new mulching technology80. PM is mostly based on LDPE, and suppresses gas exchange 81 resulting in changes in 
soil air composition. This can negatively affect soil quality and gas microclimate as oxygen deficiency may occur. A variety of 
strategies has been discussed and are partially already under application, e.g. strategies for temperature, moisture and gas 
exchange regulation under plastic mulches by the use of differently-colour and perforated films 82 as well as strategies optimizing 
soil conditions including green manuring,83 planting a vegetation cover between mulch-covered row84, and using phytochemicals85 
or conventional fungicides.  
Beyond this state of the art, RECOVER will modify existing conventional PMs by application of by-products from AWP degradation 
and chitin extraction. We aim to optimize gas permeability of PMs by modification based on determined permselectivity of the 
applied components f or optimized conditions of the soil provided by the mulching films. The utilization of chitin extraction 
byproducts in optimized mulching films provides significantly increased added-value and closes the loop in agreement with a full 
biorefinery approach.  
 
Irradiation to enhance Chitin/chitosan bioplastic products 
Irradiation curing is applied in various industries to enhance the polymerization and adhesion of different types of coatings  to 
distinct substrates as reviewed by Mehnert 86,  irradiation treatment for crosslinking of monomers on natural films induce a 
significant improvement of the physico-chemical properties of films, improving the compatibility of the polymer network and water 
resistance87.  
For several polymers including chitosan blends irradiation at low doses can enhance barrier function as well as the mechanical 
properties88,89 given that cross -linking is the predominant effect. Moreover, it was demonstrated that irradiated chitosan has a 
higher antimicrobial activity than unirradiated chitosan90,91. It was demonstrated that low dose eBeam irradiation of chitosan prior 
to coating additionally enhances the preservation. i.e. inhibition of fungal growth, and further prolongs the shelf life92.  
Beyond this state of art in RECOVER t he plastic substrates coated with chitin or chitosan in WP5, will be irradiated to improve 
the mechanical and barrier properties. By performing low dose electron beam irradiation curing on wet and semi -dry chitosan 
coatings, RECOVER will further enhance the performance of chitosan. 
 
F. State of the art: added-value products. Biofertilizers and biological control agents. 
A bio-fertilizer is substance which contains living microorganisms that promote plant growth by increasing the supply or availability 
of nutrients to the host plant , including all organic resources for plant growth which are rendered in available form for plant 
absorption through microorganisms, or plant associations, or interactions93. The commercial history of bio-fertilizer began with the 
                                                             
78 Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2012) 32:501–529 DOI 10.1007/s13593-011-0068-3 
79 Halley  et a; (2001) Developing biodegradable mulch films from starch-based polymers. Starch 53:362–367 
80 Espí, E.; Salmerón, A.; Fontecha, A.; García, Y. & Real, A.I. (2006). Plastic films for agricultural applications. Journal of Plastic Film and Sheeting, 22, 
85-102.  
81 Subrahmaniyan, et al. (2008). Soil properties and yield of groundnut associated with herbicides, plant geometry, and plastic mulch. Communications in 
Soil Science and Plant Analysis, 39, 1206-1234; Nishimura,  et al, N. (2012). Nitrous oxide evolved from soil covered with plastic mulch film in horticultural 
field. Biology and Fertility of Soils, 48, 787-795. 
82 Gosar, B. & Baričevič, D. (2011). Incorporation of a ridge–furrow–ridge rainwater harvesting system with mulches in high-value plant production. 
Irrigation and Drainage, 60, 518-525 
83 Fageria, N.K. (2007). Green manuring in crop production. Journal of Plant Nutrition, 30, 691-719;  Elfstrand, S.; Hedlund, K. & Martensson, A. (2007). 
Soil enzyme activities, microbial community composition and function after 47 years of continuous green manuring. Applied Soil Ecology, 35, 610-621  
84 Rice et al (2007). Reducing insecticide and fungicide loads in runoff from plastic mulch with vegetative-covered furrows. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 55, 1377-1384.  
85 Anjorin, T.S.; Salako, E.A. & Makun, H.A. (2013). Control of toxigenic fungi and mycotoxins with phytochemicals: Potentials and challenges. In Mycotoxin 
and food safety in developing countries (ed H.A. Makun),pp. InTech.  
86 Mehnert, R., 1995. Electron beams in research and technology. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions 
with Materials and Atoms 105, 348–358. https://doi.org/10.1016/0168-583X(95)00634-6 
87 International Atomic Energy Agency, 2014. Radiation processed materials in products from polymers for agricultural applications 
88 Nasreen, Z., Khan, M.A., Mustafa, A.I., 2016. Improved Biodegradable Radiation Cured Polymeric Film Prepared from Chitosan-Gelatin Blend. Journal of 
Applied Chemistry 2016, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/5373670 
89 Ozdemir, M., Yurteri, C.U., Sadikoglu, H., 1999. Physical polymer surface modification methods and applications in food packaging polymers. Critical 
Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 39, 457–477. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408699991279240 
90 Aktar, J., Hasan, Z., Afroz, T., Harun-or-Rashid, Pramanik, K., 2017. Application of gamma radiation and physicochemical treatment to improve the 
bioactive properties of chitosan extracted from shrimp shell. Nukleonika 62, 245–251. https://doi.org/10.1515/nuka-2017-0036 
91 Matsuhashi, S., Kume, T., 1997. Enhancement of antimicrobial activity of chitosan by irradiation. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 73, 237–
241. 
92 Hewajulige, I., Sultanbawa, Y., Wijeratnam, R.W., Wijesundara, R., 2009. Effect of irradiated chitosan treatment on storage life of fruits of two 
commercially grown papaya (Carica papaya L.) varieties. Journal of the National Science Foundation of Sri Lanka 37, 61. 
https://doi.org/10.4038/jnsfsr.v37i1.458 
93 Ju et al (2018). A review: Biofertilizer-A key player in enhancing soil fertility and crop productivity. Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology Reports, 
2(2). 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 19  
launch of “Nitragin” by Nobbe and Hilther in 1895. This was followed by the discovery of Azotobacter and then Blue-green algae 
and a host of other microorganisms which are being used till date as bio-fertilizer94. Bio-fertilizers are usually amended with carrier 
material to increase effectiveness of the bio-fertilizers, they are environment friendly and do not cause pollution unlike inorganic 
fertilizers which often ‘run off’ into water bodies causing eutrophication and ‘blue baby syndrome. Bio -fertilizer acts as a soil 
conditioner adding organic matter to the soil which helps to bind the soil particles together preventing soil eructing, desertification, 
and erosion while increasing the water retention capacity of the soil 95. It enriches the soil with benefici al microorganisms while 
boosting the already existing ones unlike chemical inorganic fertilizers which acidify the soil making it hard for microorganisms to 
survive. Organisms that are commonly used as bio -fertilizers components include nitrogen fixers (N – fixers), potassium 
solubilizers (K – solubilizer) phosphorus solubilizer (P – solubilizer), phosphorus mobilizers (P – mobilizers), used solely or in 
combination with of fungi 96. The most important limitation of bio -fertilizer is their nutrient content wh en compared to inorganic 
fertilizers, that can be curbed by the addition of substances such as bone meal, wood ash or organic wastes. New amendments 
should still be explored to improve performance of biofertilizers available in the market. Among the compon ents currently 
employed for biofertilizers formulation, chitosan stands for one of the most emerging ones utilized in the induction of the defense 
system in both pre and post -harvest fruits and vegetables against fungi, bacteria, viruses, and other abiotic  stresses. Besides 
that, chitosan has been employed in soil as a plant nutrient and has shown great efficacy in combination with other industria l 
fertilizers without affecting the soil’s beneficial microbes. Based on exhibiting such excellent properties, there is a striking interest 
in using chitosan biopolymers in agriculture systems97. 
Besides the use of more sustainable fertilizers the moving toward a “conscious agriculture” is relying on the biological control (BC) 
to replace pesticides. Biological control is the use of a population of one organism to reduce the population of another organism. 
Four different types of biological control are known: natural, conservation, classical, and augmentative biological control.  Natural 
biological control is an ecosy stem service whereby pest organisms are reduced by naturally occurring beneficial organisms. 
Conservation biological control consists of human actions that protect and stimulate the performance of naturally occurring natural 
enemies. In classical biological control, natural enemies are collected in an exploration area and then released in areas where 
the pest is invasive, often resulting in permanent pest population reduction and enormous economic benefits. In augmentative 
biological control (ABC), natural enemies (parasitoids, predators or micro -organisms) are mass -reared for release in large 
numbers either to obtain immediate control of pests in crops with a short production cycle (inundative biological control) or  for 
control of pests during several generations in crops with a long production cycle (seasonal inoculative biological control). Biological 
control has been in use for at least 2000 years, but modern use started at the end of the nineteenth century. Cock et al. 98 
mentioned 170 species of inverteb rate biological control agents that have been used in BC in Europe while Van Lenteren 99 
provided a list of about 230 species of invertebrate biological control agents that have been used in pest management worldwide, 
but recognised that this list was not yet complete. After predators and parasitoids, microbial biological control agents are the next 
most commonly used organisms in BC. About 209 microbial strains from 94 different species are currently commercially available 
for control of pests, but the numbers may be larger. During the first decade of the twenty-first century fewer new biological control 
agents came to the market, but during the second decade we again experienced a new phase with strong growth in both the 
development of new agents and a market for biological control100. 
Beyond the SoA, following a cascade valorisation strategy, RECOVER will explore new biofertilizers based on chitin/chitosan 
extracted from insects and biological control agents. Such bio-fertilizers will play a key role in productivity and sustainability of soil 
and protect the environment as eco-friendly and cost effective inputs for the farmers. 
 
Innovation potential 
The innovation potential from the RECOVER project derives from its main outcomes: 
● Advancement in biotechnology and enzymes selection  
● A selection of high powered microorganism selected and specialised in mineralization of AWP 
● A selection of worms and insect able to assimilate and degrade AWP 
● A valorisation of RECOVER by-products such as vermicompost, fertilizers derived by worms/ insect, and chitin/chitosan 
extracted from insects into active packaging and enhanced mulching films. 
● Additional environmental services (bioremediation, LCA, TEA assessment, process design, etc)  
 
 
                                                             
94 Kribacho. Fertilizer ratios, krishak and bharati cooperative Ltd. Journal of Science. 2010;5(8):7-12. 
95 Knobeloch L, Salna B, Hogan A, et al. Blue babies and Nitrate contaminating well water. Journal of Science .2009;2(1):6-24. 
96 Khosro  et al Bacterial bio-fertilizers for sustainable crop production: A review APRN Journal of Agricultural and Biological Science. 2012;7(5):237-308. 
97 Sharif et al. (2018). The multifunctional role of chitosan in horticultural crops; a review. Molecules, 23(4), 872. 
98 Cock et al (2010) Do new access and benefit sharing procedures under the convention on biological diversity threaten the future of biological control? 
BioControl 55:199–218 
99 van Lenteren JC, Godfray HCJ (2005) European science in the enlightenment and the discovery of the insect parasitoid life cycle in The Netherlands and 
Great Britain. Biol Control 32:12–24 
100 van Lenteren, et al. (2018). Biological control using invertebrates and microorganisms: plenty of new opportunities. BioControl, 63(1), 39-59. 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 20  
Advancement in biotechnology and enzymes  
Biotechnological improvements related to AWP management is a cutting -edge issue in worldwide R&D projects in order to 
produce novel approaches including several EU & International programs. Promising results from several groups using enzymes, 
microorganisms and specially insects and worms are increasingly obtained. In that respects, RECOVER will deliver new 
microorganisms and enzymes capable to produce plastic degradation, obtained by isolation from i) plastic polluted environments, 
ii) selected insect/earthworms with these abilities, or iii) neosynthesized enzymes developed using in silico technologies. Several 
advances to incorporate exogenous enzymatic capacities on substrates such as biochar are right now included in cutting -edge 
research institutions vg . USDA and others 101 to be used as active surface to reduce pollution by i mmobilization and/or 
degradation102 
 
High powered microorganisms selected and specialised in mineralization of AWP 
AWP presented in agricultural soils are commonly a complex mix of compounds with significant differences in terms of 
degradability. The identification of new microorganisms and specially the combination of microorganisms expressing novel or 
improved enzymatic activities enabling the degradation of mixtures of plastics is a major goal in the innovation potential of 
RECOVER. In addition, the development of formulations based on the efficiency tested in ex-situ and specially in-situ conditions 
will be a significant output. 
 
Earthworms and insects able to assimilate and degradate AWP 
Increased research dealing earthworm and insects abilities to degrade xenobiotics and plastics are reported. However, no 
significant data are found in literature about the combination of enzyme-microorganism and earthworm/insect consortium for 
magnification of AWP degradation. RECOVER propose break -through procedures to produce biodynamic platforms using 
earthworm and insects as symbiont with incorporated consortia of functional microorganisms/enzymes to be used in diffuse media 
such as soils or natural to enhance or produce active bioremediation of specific ions, compounds, nano or microparticles. This is 
a significant outcome to be produced in order to obtain specific functionality on biotic or abiotic platforms or combined systems. 
These complex systems including insect metabolism and specially earthworm mucus can produce also a long -lasting cleaning 
capacity far over performing any other enzymatic approaches. In terms of plastics EoL management, RECOVER will reduce the 
operation costs and environmental impacts of conventional AWP treatments based on in situ degradation.  
 
Valorisation of RECOVER by-products such as vermicompost, fertilizers derived by worms/ insect, and chitin/chitosan 
extracted from insects into active packaging and enhanced mulching films.  
Worldwide and EU fertilizer market are right now in a new reorientation on the product formulations due to the polluting acti ons 
on hydrosphere and atmosphere of conventional ferti lizers vg. reactive Nitrogen (N), Phosphorus (P)  overdose etc. The new 
approaches are in line with Circular Economy portfolio, looking to biobased actions focused on microorganisms, including 
biofertilizing, biostimulant and other added value properties including depolluting effects vg. Pesticides or other hazards such as 
microplastics. This process will be leaded by joint venture between administration, policy-makers and ground-breaking innovation, 
including a potential market of >1000 million euro. RECOVER formulations are designed to act not only on biofertilizing purposes 
but also on specific uses such as biocontrol and bio stimulating capacities by the inclusion of beneficial microorganisms-enzymes 
activities by RECOVER procedures. RECOVER will also act  as a NPK major nutrient recovery strategy from waste producing 
slow release fertilizers avoiding the hazards linked to direct application of raw waste fluxes and contributing also to reduc e the 
emergent pollutants (antibiotics, plastics and pesticides) in creasingly appearing in fertilizers and composts 103. The use of 
RECOVER solutions (composting, insects and earthworm consortia) will produce a virtuous synergy to enhanced process, 
enhanced quality of derived fertilizers (higher fertilizer capacities, lower salts contents, higher humic like compounds, and specially 
the reduction of plastic particles that will be considered in next compost quality assessment vg. microplastics).  
 
Chitosan-derived products may prove useful as replacements raw material and as brand new components for: nanotechnology, 
as substit ute advanced materials for plastics in consumer products, as carriers and encapsulators of microorganisms 
(biotechnology), biosensors raw materials, for certain medical applications, etc. Production of chitin/chitosan can be done b y 
several procedures, suc h as chemical and biological extraction. Concerning insects as chitin/chitosan source, results of 
comparative analysis demonstrated that the quality of chitosan from insects is as good as from shrimp shells which shows that  
insects are indeed an effective, inexpensive alternative chitosan source which is readily available104,105,106. In addition, powdered 
                                                             
101 Ro, 2016. Bioenergy Res. 9:447:453 
102 Sanchez-Hernandez et al. 2018 Sci Total Environ. 612: 1407-1416 
103 Compost quality and safety for agriculture Summary report, WRAP, 2017 
104 Badawy, R.M., Mohamed, H.I., 2015. Chitin extraction, composition of different six insect species and their comparable characteristics with that of the 
shrimp. Journal of American Science 11, 127–134. 
105 Liu et al. 2012. Extraction and Characterization of Chitin from the Beetle Holotrichia parallela Motschulsky. Molecules 17, 4604–4611.. 
106 Marei, N.H., El-Samie, E.A., Salah, T., Saad, G.R., Elwahy, A.H.M., 2016. Isolation and characterization of chitosan from different local insects in Egypt. 
International Journal of Biological Macromolecules 82, 871–877. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2015.10.024 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 21  
chitosan from insects is available for industrial, environmental, cosmetics and pharmaceutical purposes107.  
 
Additional environmental services 
The coupling of AW P degradation with the resource production of biodegradable plastic can be a driving force to produce a 
virtuous cleaning circle providing ecosystemic services to modern agriculture and urban waste management.  
 
RECOVER procedures can be used to produce abiotical products with exogenous enzymes to enhance bioreactions in agricultural 
soils to reduce GHG emissions, enhance N atmospheric fixation etc. Significant investments on cleaning of agricultural soils all 
over the world from high -refractance pesticides or its degradation products due to the increased standards of production of 
worldwide food distributors (trace-free labelling in food). RECOVER insects may have another commercial output within the sector 
of biological pest control. In two areas: "in vivo" production of natural enemies in biofactories, which can reduce production costs; 
its use as "non-pests" food in the open air and in greenhouses to improve and increase the management systems of insect pest 
natural enemies acting as the biological control (with production of natural enemies), an exponential increased market (valued 40 
million euros per year only in Almeria province (Spain)108. RECOVER earthworm not only will degrade AWP but also can produce 
during this process an enhanced carbon sink effect due to the use/deposition of AWP microparticles from the topsoil in the burrow 
wall, obtaining an additional barrier to food chain transfer.  The use of living biodynamic platforms (Lumbricus terrestris) will add 
an additional virtuous cascade of sustainability by improving physical and hydro-physical properties in intensivist soils, removing 
plastic debris from radicular zone. 
 
Augmentative biological control is largely a market-driven enterprise with a defined, but constantly changing, economic value. It 
is estimated that approximately 230 natural enemies are available from over 500 suppliers with an end-user market value >$200 
million globally (2012 data) 109. In 2015, the global pesticide market had a value of US$ 58.46 billion 110. The global market of 
biological control agents (invertebrates and microorganisms) was approximately US$ 1.7 billion in 2015111, which is less than 2% 
of the pesticide market. Growth of the market for synthetic pesticides is expected to be between 5 and 6% over the next five 
years112, but interestingly, growth of the biological control market has been faster: it showed an annual increase of more than 15% 
per year since 2005. The largest European biological control companies are still getting the main part of their income from sales 
of invertebrate biological control agents, but the contribution of microbial biological control agents is steadily increasing . 
Commercial ABC is used in protected crops and high -value outdoor crops, contributing to about 80% of the market value of 
invertebrate biological control agents. The remaining 20% of the market value for natural enemies comes from application of 
relatively simple, cheap but effective biological control programs often using only one biological control agent (e.g., Trichogramma 
spp. against lepidopterans in cereals and sugarcane, and Cotesia spp. against lepidopterans in sugarcane). Almost 40% of the 
income of the European companies originates from invertebrate biological control agents sold for control of Thrips, another 30% 
for control of whitefly, 12% for control of spider mites, 8% for control of aphids, and the remaining 10% for control of various other 
pests. Since 2005, predatory mites have contributed enormously to the growth of the market for invertebrate biological control 
agents as a result of: the (re)discovery of their use for control of whiteflies, finding more efficient species for Thrips control, the 
development of techniques to enhance dispersal and establishment of predatory mites in crops, and the development of new 
highly economic production technologies. 
 
RECOVER can produce environmental solutions on waste treatment and valorisation, one of the most significant area to innovate 
in order to achieve win-win strategies in industries with increased costs linked to environmental assessment plans. In urban solid 
waste management, the enhanced treatments must be applied mainly on non -separated rubbish, a significant concern in non -
developed countries. Nowadays in China, the use of insect -based urban waste management facili ties is increasing. Shandong 
Qiaobin Agricultural Technology is right now managing 50 m 3/day using cockroaches in Jinan city. On wastewater fluxes, other 
RECOVER outcomes could be linked to the use of specific activated earthworms and insects in vadose polluted zones to obtain 
bio-restoration capacities, vg. pesticides, dyes, water bodies with high BOD/COD contents. 
 
As seen, the innovation potential of the RECOVER technologies is extremely broad in the area that will be explored and beyond, 
but to ensure we can reach it, we have also carried a patent analysis which will be much reinforced in the project WP7. 
                                                             
107 https://ento.farm/; http://sflyproteins.com/sfly-products/ 
108 Teruel-Moreno M. (2010). El sector del control biológico en España. Informes y monografías no. 33. Fundación Cajamar, Almeria, Spain 
109 Naranjo SE, Ellsworth PC, Frisvold G (2015) Economic value of biological control in integrated pest management of managed plant systems. Annual 
Review of Entomology 60: 621-645. 
110 Research and Markets (2016a) Global pesticides market segmented by type, application area and geography. Trends and forecasts (2015-2020). 
Sustainability, regulation & competition. http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/4hd338/global_pesticides 
111 Dunham, Evolution and future of biocontrol. Paper presented at the 10th Annual Biocontrol Industry Meeting (ABIM), Basel, Switzerland, October 20th, 
2015. 
112 Research and Markets (2016a) Global pesticides market segmented by type, application area and geography. Trends and forecasts (2015-2020). 
Sustainability, regulation & competition. http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/4hd338/global_pesticides 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 22  
 
Freedom to operate  
The use of insect Tenebrio mollitor for degrading waste plastics and recycled plastics, and bacterial strains capable of degrading 
petroleum-based plastics, and microbial consortia including such strains has been already patented 113. Also, enzymes for the 
degradation of PET114 and method for recycling mixed PET plastics involving enzymes115 has been developed by CARBIOS and 
patented (but in that case the enzymes are encapsulated and compounded in the plastics rather than added in EoL management). 
In addition a method of degrading a plastic by the use of the fungi Aspergillus oryzae or Aspergillus sojae and also transformant 
microorganism recombined with DNA containing a gene encoding a surface active substance has been developed by Tohoku 
Techno Arch Co., Ltd 116. However up to date there are no patents on the use of earthworms, other insect species and novel 
enzymes acting in a wider range of  plastics, and even less on their innovative combination as planned in the project, therefore 
we are confident we have freedom to operate and even to protect our breakthrough approaches. 
  
Whole value chain coverage 
As previously mentioned in terms of multidisciplinary considerations, as well as in link with the interest to exploit the dif ferent 
above discussed processes and products to be delivered in the project, the RECOVER consortium, complemented by its AB, 
covers the whole required bio -based value chain to bring the project results to the market. The actions for the new value chain 
set up are described in WP7 and its foundation and different segments further justified in section 2.1 in link with the call topic 
KPI2. In particular, we cover the supply of raw materials for the new biotech process (EoL plastics can be provided by IDELUX, 
ASAJA and SAV; and NATURPLAS and FEMTO, respectively as post consumers and post-industrial wastes), enzymes (ASA), 
insects (NUTRINSECT) for the bioprocess. We also count with equipment and technology suppliers to optimally perform the 
biodegradation (OWS RF in terms of composting and AD reactors design, IRIS in terms of process monitoring and modeling). 
Finally, in view of the circularity of our value chain, the end-users of the RECOVER process partly overlap with the raw materials 
suppliers to recycle. Indeed ASAJA  and SAV can use it to remediate the soil contamination by mulching films and generate 
potentially even a new business through, as for IDELUX, the treatment of their wastes. The initial plastics converters can in turn 
become the users of the chitosan extracted as a by -product from the AWP valorisation: FEMTO and NATURPLAS can benefit 
from bio -enhanced packaging materials and mulching films respectively. Keeping in closed loop and in view of a cascade 
valorisation, the by products from the biotech process developed are also used by the agri-food sector end users: improved food 
products shelf life (MANOR) and improved fertilizers composition (ENTO and SAV). 
 
2. Impact