1.1 Objectives  
Due to their unique properties, lightweight and versatility, plastics have outgrown most man-made materials. They are especially 
used throughout the agri-food value chain (the waste thereof will be referred to in the proposal as AWP: agri-food waste plastics1). 
From the globally produced 350 Mtons (million metric tons) of plastics per year, our target sectors consume in the range of 50% 
(packaging 40%, agriculture 3.5%)2 and, in fact,  they represent even a greater share of single and short -term use plastics. 
Nevertheless, the challenges linked to their end-of-life have long been under environmental scrutiny. Indeed, only 31% of plastic 
are currently rec ycled and an excessive 30 -40% are landfilled, this being due to infra -developed technologies or to their 
unsatisfactory economic viability 3. In addition, according to the Ellen MacArthur Foundation 4, as much as 32% end up out of 
controlled waste management systems and leak in our environment.  
Plastic durability is a further challenge for agricultural films, which collection for materials recycling at end of life is broadly 
jeopardized due to their fouling. The affordable biodegradable plastic alternatives cannot degrade in the soil but could be sent to 
                                                             
1 Throughout the proposal we will refer to AWP for the plastics used in agriculture and food industries, those are for example mulching films or food 
packaging present in municipal solid wastes (MSW). Overall the project will develop biotech solutions for the degradation of 4-6 selected most 
representative fossil AWP and will be selected in WP1. In terms of MSW, we will focus on currently non recyclable mixed fractions such as plastic films, 
trays, etc. 
2 https://www.plasticseurope.org/application/files/6315/4510/9658/Plastics_the_facts_2018_AF_web.pdf 
3 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/news/first-ever-europe-wide-strategy-plastics-2018-jan-16_en 
4 The new plastics economy rethinking the future of plastics, Ellen MacArthur foundation, 2016 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 3  
composting plants adding a significant economic hurdle to their greater material cost and lower performance than mostly used 
fossil counterparts. As of 2017, approximately 6,300 Mtons of agricultural films plastic waste had been generated, around 9% of 
which had been recycled, 12% was incinerated, and 79% was accumulated in agr i-fields (buried), landfills or the natural 
environment.  
Likewise, more than half of the used food packaging collected in municipal wastes cannot be easily recycled due to the presence 
of leftover products and the fact that- as for certain mulching films and for most of food packaging, they contain complex laminated 
materials preventing their reprocessing. As such, most of the flexible and/or multilayer packaging are currently incinerated or even 
landfilled. This amounts for in the range of 13 Mtons per year in Europe5. 
 
RECOVER is a disruptive RIA proposal built upon the actual needs to solve the contamination of agro -fields with non -
biodegradable agro-plastics from our end users as well as to improve municipal waste handling by decreasing drastically the 
packaging fraction going to unsustainable waste management routes. 
 
We intend to reach our ambitious objectives applying biotech solutions that will include symbiotic bioprocesses between previously 
reported high powered microorganisms through microbiotic systems vectored by several insect species. Indeed, one of the main 
innovations in our proposal is the combination of endogenous and exogenous microorganisms and their inoculation on insects. 
This will allow achieving higher levels of biodegradation and direct conversion (at the same time) of AWP in insect by -products 
such as chitin-chitosan (high value as bioplastics raw materials and other interesting industrial applications).  
 
 
 
 
 
A great attention will be dedicated to establishing simple and reproducible environmental conditions that can be replicated in the 
farms or municipalities as a profitable activity that can benefit the whole value chains from plastic producers to the end -users 
involved in the project. As such, the business model, Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), Life Cycle Cost (LCC) and Technology 
Advanced Analysis (TEA) will be studied throughout the project. To validate the new metabolic routes and biotech tools, furth er 
certifications will be carried out regarding the actual biodegradation reached and innovative tools will be developed to support the 
implementation of the new process on suitable pre-sorted plastics fractions.  
It is estimated that taping upon a share of the yearly used agricultural films and non-recyclable food packaging (43% of plastics 
                                                             
5 Gesellschaft für Verpackungsmarktforschung (GVM). Flexible Plastic Packaging Market in Germany and in Europe; GVM—Gesellschaft für 
Verpackungsmarktforschung: Mainz, Germany, 2017. 
Fig 1.1: concept of the project and life cycle of our biotech tools 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 4  
consumed in EU) , the newly developed organic recycling route will help increasing plastic recycling in EU by 12 % (details in 
section 2) generating ~3.460 new jobs and an annual turnover of €724 million by 2030 (details specified in section 2). Furthermore, 
it will reduce CO2 emissions derived from the AWP previously incinerated. The proposed bioremediation approach could be further 
expanded to recover plastic in existing landfills and highly polluted areas. 
 
All in all, whereas there are huge challenges with the currently available end of life treatment of the plastics used in the agriculture 
and food industries, RECOVER will help providing novel biotechnological solutions  applying microorganisms, novel 
enzymes, earthworms and insects to degrade conventional plastic packaging and agricultural films waste streams but 
also result in new feedstocks for the bio -based industries. The process will be optimized and performed eithe r ex-situ in 
insect rearing chamber and composting reactors (preferred route for non -recyclable plastics from municipal solid waste or for 
agricultural films that can be collected easily) or in-situ in the case of bioremediating soil pollution, by e.g. mulching films, further 
to contributing to the long -term removal of non -biodegradable polymers from the environment. In the former case, the project 
will also deliver chitin/chitosan extracted from the vectorized insects after their use which can in turn be a  new source 
of bioplastics used in our target sectors for e .g. improved mulching films and active packaging, as well as in new 
fertilizers valorising in cascade any by-products of the process. In addition, RECOVER can solve the microplastics pollution 
at the level of both industrial composting and soil. 
 
To achieve our goals a 48-month work plan with the following specific objectives, linked to their specific WPs and performance 
indicators (used as milestones for project implementation) has been defined: 
 
Objective 1. To quantify and characterize AWP in order to select the proper ones for the project and define feasible logistic for 
collection, sorting and pre-treatment (Linked to WP1) 
A comprehensive inventory and report on plastic types, collection strateg ies, cost, quality, safety and sustainability of AWP 
collection and possible pre-treatment will be made. All partners will be involved in this task and the collected data constitutes key 
elements to set the further approaches to treat AWP and RECOVER business strategies. KPI1: by month 6 (MS1), a selection of 
4-6 types of most representative fossil plastics (including in each case virgin plastics and AWP counterparts ) picked individually 
from MSW or agricultural films will be available in order to prov ide normalized samples to all the WPs. By month 12 (MS2) , 
obtaining the matrix for the definition of the classification, characterization and recommended biodegradation procedure. By month 
12 (MS3), definition of the abiotic pre-treatment to be used depending on the mixture of AWP to biodegrade, and of micro-macro 
organism suitable for AWP biodegradation.  
 
Objective 2. To select microbial communities, novel synthetic enzymes, earthworms and insects for AWP biodegradation (Linked 
to WP2) 
We will identify strains with greater capacity to use AWP as carbon source and explore the coding space of enzyme families in a 
focused fashion to combine independently evolved enzyme optimizations from different lineages of the same species, and from 
independent lineages that would have no capabilities to recombine and co -evolve enzymes in Nature.  At least 4 -6 species of 
insect and 2 species of earthworms for biodegradation of AWP will be tested. KPI2: by month 12 (MS4), 3-4 microbial consortia 
and 2-3 enzymes selected. By month 18 (MS5), 2-3 microbial/enzyme pool for each earthworm and insect selected. By month 24 
(MS6) novel enzymes and ne strategy for directed evolution available.  
 
Objective 3. To upscale the production of the suitable biotechnological solutions and combine them (Linked to WP3) 
Stable plastic-degrading microbial/enzyme consortia (PMC) and worms and insects/larvae fortified with PMC for enhanced AWP 
degradation capability will be produced. KPI3: by month 24 at least 2-4 stable microbial/enzyme inoculums (MS7) and 1-2 fortified 
insects and earthworms (MS8) will be available for the upscaling AWP biodegradation trials in WP4.  
 
Objective 4. To upscale and monitor biodegradation capacities of the fortified microbial consortia (FMC) (Linked to WP4)  
The inoculum from the previous WP will be tested adding it in soil as bioremediation to AWP pollution as well as to feed 
earthworms/insects larvae permitting them to improve AWP biodegradation in bioreactors. Monitoring and modelling strategies 
will be put in place to optimise th e process. KPI4: by month 30 (MS9), process conditions for enhanced  AWP biodegradation 
defined (MS9). By month 36 upscaled ex-situ and in situ AWP biodegradation processes performed (MS10) and biodegradation 
modelling established (MS11).  
 
Objective 5. To develop added value downstream products (Linked to WP5)  
A green process will be set up to extract chitosan from the waste insects involved in the AWP degradation. The valorization of 
chitin and derived chitosan will be tested as additive in active plastic for packaging and mulching films providing anti -microbial 
and self-healing properties. Biofertilizer from vermicompost, insect manure and residues from chitosan extraction will be tested. 
KPI5: by month 36 (MS12) 2-3 fertilizer products based on vermi -compost, insect and/or chitin available. By month 42 (MS13), 
extraction process for chitin from RECOVER by -products defined. By month 48 (MS14), 2-3 prototypes of products containing 
chitin (film, sheet, coated substrates) will be available and tested in food packaging and agriculture.  
 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 5  
Objective 6. To assess risk s, safety, environmental impact, costs, logistic and cascade strategy for the RECOVER process 
(Linked to WP6)  
Data collected during the project by all partner will be processed to perform analysis of risks and safety , in view of the 
implementation of the RECOVER AWP EoL. LCA, LCC and sLCA will be performed. The different RECOVER process scenario 
will be analysed to complete a techno -economic analysis, considering also the logistic aspects. Based on these results, the 
RECOVER cascade strategy for the full valorisation of RECOVER main and secondary products will be defined. KPI6: by month 
42 (MS15), a protocol for safe AWP processing and risk management and complete LCA results will be available to show the 
sustainability advantage vs. current EoL (target reduced CO 2 footprint by at least 50%) - KPI7: by month 48 (MS 16), 
recommendations for RECOVER cascade process upscaling towards future full scale implementation available. 
 
Objective 7. To disseminate the project results and foster their efficient exploitation (linked to WP7) 
In order to maximise its impact, dissemination and communication activities via traditional means (website, printed materials , 
press releases, etc.), scientific publications (peer-reviewed journals, conferences, etc.), specialised industrial workshops as well 
as via social media presence will be developed. An exploitation roadmap consolidating commercialisation plans and business 
opportunities, which will pave the wa y towards successful market entry of the products will be designed. KPI8: by month 48 
(MS17), the KPIs (e.g. organised workshops, participation to exhibitions and fairs, in -store boosts, newsletters, website, 
publications) listed in Section 2.2 (Table 2.3) will be achieved and a business plan including a roadmap for commercialisation of 
project results will be available. By month 48 (MS 18) achieve industry, stakeholders and policy guidelines.