3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables and milestones  
 
Brief presentation of the overall structure of the work plan 
A competitive work plan has been devised in order to deliver on the objectives of the RECOVER project providing tailored end 
of life solutions for a number of AWP using innovative biotech approaches. This will preserve our environment and resourc es 
but also meet the society and regulatory demands. The project objectives have been used as the starting point for planning 
the work that needs to be implemented within the project (Section 1.1). All the actions that are required to meet the objecti ves 
of this Research and Innovation project have been collectively analysed by the interdisciplinary consortium. It was agreed how  
best to distribute the workload among the various experts in keeping with their relevant fields of knowledge, capacity, 
infrastructure, resources and in the context of bioplastics supply, packaging textile industry value chains, as well as waste 
management companies. This bottom -up planning process has greatly facilitated the task of arriving at a clear, comprehensive 
and realistic w ork plan (see Gantt Chart and Pert Diagram below), whereby all partners their ownership.  
To fulfilling the project objectives, our work plan is split into 8 WPs with clear tasks that will enable the project’s objec tives to 
be fulfilled through a coherent s tructure that will also facilitate project. To ensure the clear focus towards the target application 
of this Research and Innovation Action building upon past successful research, most WPs are led by industrial partners. WP1 
deals with industry -led specifi cation in terms of A WP sourcing to match the market needs. WP2 deals with the lab scale 
development of the new biotech tools to degrade AWP and WP3 with the upscaling of their production and their combination. 
WP4 comprises field trials and large scale com posting trials to validate the new process in an industrially preliminary scale. 
                                                             
152 https://climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu  
153 https://ec.europa.eu/eip/agriculture/ 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 44  
WP5 considers the validation of the by -products of the process into high added values applications for different food and 
agriculture end uses. WP6 is a transversal stage that  will be focus on the environmental and economic sustainability, and other 
assessment towards the safe and regulatory compliant uptake of the new process by the industry. To complement the first 6 
WPs linked with scientific & technical (S&T) development an d validation activities WP7 addresses the innovation, exploitation 
and dissemination activities to prepare the market uptake and maximise the project impact. The last WP, WP8, will address 
the full management of the project in order to make all the propose d developments in line with defined project and BBI JU 
objectives. 
The work plan is clearly linked to the objectives set out in Section 1.1 and the consortium is confident that this work plan is 
robust to ensure that the project’s S&T and innovation goals are fulfilled. The research and development work is encapsulated 
in a comprehensive risk assessment and management strategy, sound communication and training to heighten the impact of 
the knowledge generated, as well as knowledge management to pave the way  for planning and implementing the project’s 
exploitation and dissemination pathways, and robust project coordination and ISO certified project management procedures. 
The work packages and tasks form a complex inter -weaved matrix of actions, many interdepe ndent, with very close interaction 
between the WP and task leaders, which is essential for the delivery of the full suite of outputs. During the work planning s tage, 
consideration has been given to logistical matters, such as the time needed for ordering p arts/components, the time needed 
for shipping of samples from development to test sites, installation times, the ‘what if’ scenarios of partial results not ar riving, 
installation work throwing up challenges, delays in necessary inputs/results from feed in tasks or subtasks, etc. The link 
between WPs in terms of needed output material/sample quantity required by next activities were also accounted for. As this 
is a highly experienced development team, and in particular with many members of the consortium exp erienced in applied 
R&D under tight timeframes, as well as experience in integration work at industrial sites, the work planning has benefited fr om 
this ‘on the ground’ pragmatic experience, especially in terms of consideration of interdependencies and tim ings. The potential 
risks have been identified and contingency plans proposed, which are discussed in Section 3.1 under “Critical risks and 
mitigation measures”. Importantly, the collective planning of the work plan has achieved the ‘buy-in’ of all the project developers 
and participants and an early understanding of the importance of a team effort, team planning and active communication 
among all WP and task leaders. Moreover, it is felt that the one -page Gantt itself (which also includes all the deliverab les and 
milestones) will be a very effective tool for high level control and obtaining a “helicopter overview” as part of effective p roject 
management during the project.  
 
 
 
Pert diagram of the components showing their interdependencies 
 

                                                                                                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
   
887648- RECOVER – PART B             Page 45  
Gantt chart showing the timing of the different WPs and their components outline  
  
No WPs and Tasks Del. & MS 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48
1 # ##