2.2 Measures to maximise impacts 
a) Dissemination and exploitation of results  
 
Outline of the dissemination plan 
The dissemination plan for RECOVER comprises a set of actions to spread the non-confidential results generated during the project to 
ensure that as many relevant audiences as possible have access to these results. The aim underpinning the dissemination strategy is 
to heighten awareness about the tangible and intangible outputs of RECOVER RIA, to contribute to knowledge building and 
advancement of innovation in Europe as well as to avoid duplicity of research work. In order to safeguard the commercial opportunity, 
the dissemination activities will subject to a confidentiality policy. By default, and building on top of the consortium experience in 
collaborative projects, any result of the project is to be treated as confidential and can be disseminated only after agreement of the 
project partners following the relevant clauses of the consortium agreement. This approach allows us to have the complete control and 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 35  
make sure that no “exploitable” information is disclosed before being protected. The protection of the intellectual property rights (IPR) is 
of invaluable importance for the participating partners. Therefore, the non-confidential results and information on the project to be publicly 
disseminated will be carefully identified. The RTD participants in the consortium aim to publish results (and indeed, for us, publications 
are a very positive success indicator reinforcing the cutting edge aspect of our research and also serving as peer reviewed documents 
towards the industry, standards bodies and policy makers) while the industry partners and market actors are also eager to showcase 
and exhibit results at tradeshows and exhibitions and through other industrial channels (technical/sectorial magazines, trade fairs, etc.). 
The IPR & Exploitation Manager (Dr. Marco de la Feld from ENCO) will work closely with the project innovators to manage the 
identification of non-confidential disclosable information that can be published/disseminated. He will lead the project partners in 
strategically planning and effectively implementing the dissemination during a dedicated task in the Work Plan, Task 7.4 Exploitation 
and Dissemination Planning. All the measures (outlined in table 2.3) will be tailored taking into account the project needs, the target 
groups’ background and the expertise of the project partners. Our project dissemination activities will intersect dissemination strategies 
of the BBI-JU, via BIC associated members in our consortium (UNI and UAL) and others such as SPIRE (IRIS, ENCO), which will 
contribute to the distribution of project outputs across the relevant European and international communities and amplify the project 
dissemination effort. All the dissemination activities will be developed with an eye towards the exploitation of the project results by other 
parties, in order to lay down the basis for subsequent innovation actions as well as other private initiative which can accelerate the route 
towards the take-up of new technologies within the plastic sector, also beyond the RECOVER selected applications. 
We intend to approach both traditional channels such as dissemination at conferences (presentations, including submissions of papers 
and posters), publications in peer-reviewed and open access journals, dissemination in industry magazines, newsletters and online 
platforms, as well as more vanguard channels, such as social media platforms (ResearchGate, Academia.edu, SlideShare), project 
blogs, etc. Also the project website will serve as a lasting virtual hub for disseminating downloadable public deliverables and outputs of 
RECOVER, as it will house also the ‘RECOVER Green Channel’ for open access to the peer-reviewed publications of the project (it will 
be widely disseminated across Europe and worldwide to generate visitors and traffic to the site). 
In particular, the network of COPA across the European agricultural value chain should be highly instrumental in identifying and 
approaching prospective business partners and potential licensees. With more than 60 farmers associations across the EU, ASAJA 
through COPA will echo the RECOVER results among the policy makers and major stakeholders in this industry. The association also 
has access to several channels of communication within the agricultural industry, ranging from the agri-food newsletter with the widest 
circulation, to one of the most widely-followed (12.5 k followers) Twitter accounts focusing on agri-food topics.  
 
Table 2.3: Outline of the RECOVER Dissemination Plan 
Target Audience Tools & Channels How contributing in achieving Impacts 
Research community & Academic 
stakeholders 
OA Journal Articles:  Food Packaging and Shelf 
life (I.F. 3.347); Food research International (I.F. 
3.520); Innovative Food Science and Emerging 
technologies (I.F.3.116); Environmental Science & 
Technology (I.F .,7.149); Microbial Biotechnology 
(I.F.4.857); Bioresource Technology (I.F. 5.807); 
Environmental Pollution (I.F. 5.714); Journal of 
Biotechnology (I.F.: 3.163), Nature Biotech nology 
(open access fee) (I.F. 35.724), Mic robial 
Genomics.  
Specific events and symposia:  Innovation in 
Food Packaging, Shelf life and Food Safety 
Conference (DE); Open day at Universities, 
Researchers' Nights, Knowledge Open Festivals 
Effective knowledge sharing among the 
research and scientific communities in order to 
accelerate the shift towards affordable 
solutions for biodegrading AWP 
Early stage researchers Attract more young people to scientific and 
research careers, enriching their curricula with 
knowledge from the project. 
Early stage re searchers inspired by the results, 
will be motivated to remain in EU - research and 
possibly work in areas that are beneficial for 
society, sustainability and innovation for agrifood 
industry. 
Farmers, organic farmers, farmer 
associations as well as films and 
plastic manufacturer for this 
sector 
 
Trade fairs/exhibitions:  BIOFACH (DE); SANA - 
International Exhibition of Natural Products - 
Nutrition, Health, Environment (IT); BIONORD - 
Organic Industry Fair (DE); BIOSÜD - Organic 
Industry Fair (DE); VIVEZ NAT URE PARIS - Bio 
Agriculture and Natural Products Fair (France); 
Plastics Recycling Show Europe (Holland) 
Magazines: Farmers Weekly, Organic Farming 
Magazine (UK); Organic Life 
Foster new sustainable, cooperative and 
inclusive agri-food value chains, replicating the 
RECOVER innovation in other territories and 
rural areas beyond the project boundaries. 
Multi-actor approach to support the transition 
towards a post-petroleum economy 
Leading to the wider adoption of RECOVER 
system across EU farmers. 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 36  
Food processors 
Agri-food enterprises, 
Packaging converters as well as 
plastic manufacturer for this 
sector 
Trade exhibitions and conferences: Interpack 
(GE); FoodTec&Anuga (DE); INNOV -AGRI (FR); 
Smart Packaging 2020 (GE); AGROKOMPLEX 
(SK); SEEDS  and CHIPS exhibition; WorldBio, 
EFIB (EU), IFIB (IT), regional spearhead cluster 
meetings (FL), BIC/BBI meetings (EU);Bioplastics 
Business Breakfast (GE);  International Conference 
and Exhibition on Food Processing & Technology 
(UK); Alimentaria (ES); Pla stics News Europe 
Project’s training events, PLAST2020 Milano, (IT) 
Magazines/Journals: Food Business News; 
Plastics News Europe; Food for life 
Newsletters: IFST newsletter 
Enzyme companies 
Insects suppliers and earthworm 
Biological control companies 
Trade fairs/exhibitions:  EFIB, Compounding 
World Expo, European Biotechnology Congress 
Open Access Journals (OAJ): Polymers,, Journal 
of Biotechnology, Nature Biotechnology, Microbial 
Genomics 
Widespread of the use of the project 
innovation. 
Multiply success of the project by inspiring new 
initiatives based on the project results. 
Fertilizers companies Trade fairs/exhibitions : Agritechnica Hannover, 
Startup Europe Smart Agrifood Summit,  
Open Access Journals (OAJ): New bio-fertilizers, 
Green industries and va lorization of agro -plastic 
wastes by high powered biodegradators. 
Widespread of the use of the project 
innovation. 
Multiply success of the project by inspiring new 
initiatives based on the project results. 
Building new collaborative value chains among 
fertilizers clusters and associations. 
Industry Multipliers - Sectorial 
Associations (PlasticsEurope, 
Fertilizers Europe, CEFIC, Plastics 
Europe, PAFA - Packing and Film 
Association, European Crop 
Protection Association, European 
Association of Agricultural 
Economists) and other 
associations 
Conferences, seminars and workshops  
(participation in organising, scientific committees, 
with poster, papers, presentations, or chairing): 
Annual World Food and Innovation Forum; Bio -
based World, Biopolpack, Biopol, Susta inable 
Bioplastics, Bioplastics, Biorefining, Bio -based 
Materials, Ecomondo, etc. 
Features in Newsletters and e -bulletins: food 
production daily, agronotizie, plastics today, food 
production daily, plastic news, etc. 
Dissemination of new knowledge and 
technologies 
Building new collaborative value chains among 
food clusters 
National food safety authorities, 
EFSA, EC, EIP Agri, FAO, WHO 
  
Policy makers & Decision-makers 
Policy dialogue:  joining roundtables fostering 
multilevel and horizontal discussion on RECOVER 
results. 
Collaboration with public administration will drive 
better informed decision making processes across 
Europe 
Include several requirements in PAC policies for 
awarding farmers for AWP collecting and valorising. 
Market push 
Increase the influence of the project and its 
results in policymaking 
Creation of a positive framework for the take up 
of RECOVER results 
H2020 projects, international/ 
national projects/initiatives 
IoF2020, AGRICHEMWHEY, ANTARES, 
PROTEIN, STEP -IN, REFUCOAT, BioBarr, 
HYPERBIOCOAT, SuperBIO, BioSTEP, Open-Bio, 
InnoNet, BIOCOMPLACK, ReTAPP AGRIMAX, 
SHEALTHY, etc. 
Engagement and cross -fertilization with other 
similar H2020 projects and reuse between 
previous and future projects. 
 
Initial Exploitation and Business Plans for RECOVER Key Exploitable Results (KERs) 
The RECOVER consortium mobilizes the necessary partners not only for the upscaling of the biotechnological solutions for degrading 
plastics (WP3), the scale up of both in situ and ex situ degradation trials (WP4) but also for the development of chitin/chitosan based 
bio plastic applications (WP5) but also safety, environmental, social and economic sustainability assessments (WP6), a set of  
activities which are all highly relevant for future market exploitation (WP7). 
A market-oriented approach will drive RECOVER R&D activities, capitalizing on participating bio-insecticulture (NUTRINSECT), food 
processors (MANOR), agriplastics manufacturers (NATURPLAS and the largest final users ASAJA & SAV), fertilizer producer 
(ENTO), novel technologies and monitoring solutions (IRIS) complemented by the AB, which includes FCC, SOTRAFA, REPSOL, 
ALGAE-ENERGY as large industries, BioCampo, CinG, METGEN and Carbiolice as SMEs and Remedia, CLT, PACKCLUSTER 
and ISWA as industry associations. In addition, Task 7.4.4 ensures that sufficient knowledge is collated to steer the research towards 
delivering a solution with good market potential. Our intention is to realize all the exploitation pathways for the results:  
a) Commercial exploitation: a key exploitation route will be the industrial use of the project knowledge for the creation of new 
biotech solutions for plastics degradation, together with innovative bio-based and biodegradable materials products, within 
and beyond the validated applications (biofertilizers, bio agricultural films, food packaging), new processes and advisory 
services to deliver high competitiveness and growth impacts.  
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 37  
b) Education and training: the use of the new knowledge generated for upskilling and for enriching curricula in European 
education will have a high impact for raising the European knowledge base to prepare agricultural, food, packaging, 
fertilizers and other industry sectors to transition to the bio-based economy;  
c) Further research: planning future spin-out research and development projects especially in areas that will contribute to the 
transferability of the project results to new applications (e.g. application of enzymes and microorganisms specifically 
inoculated insects (vectors) as means of biodegradation improvement and bioremediation of soils with different types of 
contaminants without generating problems of pests or diseases, etc);  
d) Contribution to standards: while making available new end of life options for standard plastics, the project results could 
on the long term contribute towards a new and/or revised regulations and standards in the field of agri-food plastic waste 
and soil biodegradability 
Detailed business plans will be developed in Task 7.4, Subtask 7.4.1 Business and exploitation planning, and annexed to the PEDR, 
in order to provide the details on how the project’s results will be used in commercial exploitation activities, for training purposes, 
further research as well as standardization activities. Further measures will be planned in the framework of this task to increase the 
likelihood of continuity of the established ecosystem and value chains, as well as market uptake of RECOVER KERs for European 
industrial and primary sector sustainability, competitiveness, growth, and jobs. During the proposal stage, each partner has 
communicated clear exploitation expectations (Table 2.4), as well as expected growth derived from the proposal in line with the share 
of the respective previously discussed overall growth of the sector he represents and that he could tap in. This will be planned in 
greater detail during WP7 to maximize the innovation impact but while growing large companies by few percent already has a 
significant impact, it is especially massive for smallest biotech companies like ASA and NUTRINSECT. 
 
Table 2.4. Summary of exploitation intentions of the RECOVER partners 
No Short Name   Exploitation intentions of the RECOVER partners  Turnover 
increase  
New 
Jobs 
1 UAL Development of microbial consortia and insects for licensing. Use of the knowledge generated in further 
projects. Potential patent on procedure for plastics removal by microbial consortia  
NA, non profit 
2 UNIPI Exploit chitin/chitosan -based materials for active packaging, agriculture and health care products, 
exploit logistic system for plastic collection (licensing) 
NA, non profit 
3 ASAJA Exploit valorisation procedures to introduce as requirements in CAP (Common Agricultural Policy). 
Further development of procedures for bonus to the sustainable farmers who include Agri-plastics 
waste collect, pre-treatment and valorisation. Possible patent licensing specific plastic collect and pre-
treatment (mechanical and biodegradation) machinery, 
NA, non profit 
4 BRUNEL Enzymes developed will be made available to project partners, and subsequently other commercial 
users under collaborative and licensing agreements, as appropriate for protection of IP and further 
enzyme development. IP will be developed, protected, and through Brunel’s commercialization team, 
and relevant spin-outs (including Syngenious) 
NA, non profit 
5 UMH Development of procedures for fortification of earthworms with microbial/enzyme consortiums for 
licensing. Possible patent licensing specific plastic biodegrading systems including earthworms 
NA, non profit 
6 ASU Chitin extraction and Chitosan modification for packaging applications used in services and projects. 
Possible patent licensing on extraction process and modified materials. 
NA, non profit 
7 NATURPLAS Commercialization of new active mulching films. 7% 2 
8 ASA Commercialization of enzymes tailored for AWP degradation 25% 5 
9 NUTRINSECT Commercialization of insects tailored for AWP degradation 25% 5 
10 IRIS Further development (customization service) of the biodegradation predictive models and licensing of 
the derived app. Commerciali sation of monitoring systems or specific chemiometrics package to be 
installed in existing waste sorting plants. Use of the knowledge generated in further projects. 
5% 3 
11 OWS 
(Terminated) 
Increased knowledge on biodegradation of materials. Possible application of the process in the 
DRANCO and SORDISEP system developed and patented by OWS for treatment of mixed organic 
municipal waste. 
6% 2-3 
12 IDELUX Exploit the technologies developed to improve the compost quality and reduce plastic environmental 
contamination. 
NA, non profit 
13 FEMTO Exploit chitin/chitosan -based materials for active packaging and agricultural products, possibility to 
promote its product as degradable by RECOVER approach 
10% 3 
14 ENTO Commercialization of new chitin/chitosan fertilizers. 25% 5 
15 MANOR Commercialization of chicken products in new packaging and edible coatings. >1% 2 
16 ENCO Use of the knowledge in bio-based plastics market in further related projects as well as in consultancy 
services.        
10% 2-3 
17 SAV Use of the knowledge in fertilizers and improved mulching films validation to improve their agricultural 
practices. Use of RECOVER approach as a new source of revenues for the valorisation of EoL plastics 
and remediation of pollution. 
5% 3 
18 OWS RF Increased knowledge on biodegradation of materials. Possible application of the process in the 
DRANCO and SORDISEP system de veloped and patented by OWS for treatment of mixed organic 
municipal waste 
6% 2-3 
 
 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 38  
The following table 2.5 gives a summary description of a selection of the expected RECOVER KERs: 
 
 
Table 2.5. RECOVER Key Exploitable Results (Knowledge, products or technologies) 
WP KER Owner(s) Envisaged IPR Tool  Type of 
exploitation 
Target end-users Timetable 
1 Monitoring system for waste 
materials  
IRIS Confidential know -how 
for hardware calibration 
+ design, software 
secured by a code 
Sales of turnkey 
solutions 
Plastic waste 
managers  
2 years after the 
project 
2  Microbial consortia for plastic 
degradation 
UAL  Patent or trade secret  Licensing   Organic waste 
treatment facilities and 
entities involved in 
bioremediation 
2 year after the 
project  
Protocol for producing insects with 
plastic degrading capabilities  
 UAL Patent or trade secret  Licensing  Insect producers 2 year after the 
project  
Novel degradative enzymes and 
design-knowledge 
BRUNEL Patent or trade secret Licensing and 
spin-out 
Farmers, waste 
management 
companies, plastics 
manufacturers, 
circular bio -based 
industries 
2 year after the 
project  
3 Protocol for producing earthworm 
with plastic degrading capabilities 
 UMH Patent or trade secret Licensing Earthworm producers 2 year after the 
project 
4 Predictive models and derived 
app for biodegradation 
optimisation, as well as 
biodegradation monitoring system 
IRIS Confidential algorithms 
that will be used in 
software development 
secured by code 
Licensing, Sales of 
turnkey solutions 
Farmers and plastics 
waste management 
companies 
1-2 years once large 
Recover facilities are 
established for 
integration of the 
predictive model in a 
software product 
Biological process for treatment of 
waste polluted with plastics 
OWS RF Patent or trade secret Licensing Organic waste 
treatment facilities 
2 years after the 
project 
5 Chitin extraction and Chitosan 
modification for packaging 
applications 
ASU Patent or trade secret Licensing Packaging producers 1-3 year after the 
end of the project 
Active plastic based on chitin and 
or chitosan 
UNIPI 
FEMTO 
Patent or trade secret FEMTO for its own 
products, possible 
licensing 
Packaging and health 
care products 
2 years after the 
project 
6 Design and assessment services 
for the AWP processing full scale 
implementation 
OWS RF 
ASAJA 
 
knowhow Provision of 
services to 
potential users 
Farmers, MSW 
managers 
Start supporting 
results roll out right 
after the project 
(possibly also via 
follow up funding 
rounds for early 
adopters taking the 
risks) 
 
 
In order to demonstrate the affordability of the investment for adopting the RECOVER ex situ biodegradation solutions by 
both farmers/agri-cooperatives and MSW management organizations,  the CAPEX/OPEX have been estimated, Business 
Case 1 (Fig. 2.6a) and Business Case 2 (Fig.2.6b), respectively.  
For Business Case 1 (farmers/agri-cooperatives), an initial investment of €200.000 is required in Y0. This includes the physical 
assets (Installation costs; Pre-fabricated unit for the biodegradation of AWPs; Collection tools; Mechanical pre-treatment tools) to 
be acquired for the RECOVER set-up. The OPEX that are worth €50.000 include the expenses necessary to keep the RECOVER 
solution running (Annual amortization AWPs collection tools non-self-propelled; Annual amortization AWPs tools for mechanical 
pre-treatment; Initial insects population and yearly repositions; Microbial consortia; Novel enzymes; Logistics service; Workforce 
costs; Licenses, s anitary, gas, energy and water consumptions; Other indirect costs; Annual amortization - av. Type 10% - 
dependent on national law) over pre-fabricated unit for the biodegradation of AWPs). In addition, we have considered 10% of the 
CAPEX for the equipment maintenance.  
 
 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 39  
In view of the expected revenues that will derive from the commercialisation of the high value chitin-chitosan-based formulations 
from the conversion of AWP in our target markets (biofertilizers, agricultural plastic products and food packaging), the Break Event 
Point (BEP - point at which total cost and total revenue are equal) is expected to be reached in Y3 as the profit starts to be positive 
(€50.770,00). Revenues have been estimated according to the added value products prices (€/kg) estimated in Table 2.1. 
The overall benefits of RECOVER along the value chain will be much higher than the figures outlined here.  
 
 
  
Figure 2.6a: Business Case 1 - primary producers - Investment breakdown to adopt RECOVER full scale AWP valorization 
process 
 
For Business Case 2 (MSW management organizations), an initial investment of €1.700.000 is required in Y0. This includes 
the physical assets (as listed above but sized for a much greater treatment yield) for the RECOVER process set -up. The OPEX 
necessary to keep the RECOVER solution running are worth 1.500.000 (+10% of equipment maintenance) . According to the 
expected revenues that will derive from the sales of chitin-chitosan-based formulations from the conversion of AWP in our target 
markets, the BEP is expected to be reached in Y3 as the profit starts to be positive (€15.500.000). Revenues have been estimated 
according to the price (€/kg) estimated in Table 2.1. 
In both scenarios (Business Case 1 and Business Case 2) presented does not include the extra investments needed to reach 
TRL9, as it is part of post-project measures.  
 
 
  
Figure 2.6b: Business Case 2- MSW management organizations - Investment breakdown to adopt RECOVER full scale 
AWP valorisation process 
 
In line with the expected market penetration (0.1%) previously discussed in terms of the impact in the call linked jobs creation and 
using the expected revenues from table 2.6 a and b for each RECOVER process  uptake, we expect our 220 agri-cooperatives 
and 400 MSW treatment organisations early adopters in Europe  to generate annually close to €  724million turnover150, €38.4 
million net profit151, and ~3.460 new jobs already by 2030 as previously discussed. The potential for further deployment in the 
                                                             
150 It derives from the expected revenues from agro -cooperatives (selling price is €200.000 paid by 220 agro -cooperatives and from MSW landfills (selling 
price is €1.700.000 paid by 400 MSW organizations). 
151 Calculated as 10% of the expected revenues from agro -cooperatives (totalling €44.000.000, i.e. €200.000 x 220) + 5% of the expected revenues from 
MSW (€1.700.000 x 400) 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 40  
broad agriculture and MSW sectors globally goes well beyond this. 
 
In terms of the measures that will be in place in order to effectively plan for the exploitation of the results of the project, the robust 
industry involvement in the consortium (SMEs and Large companies), backed by strong knowledge management, knowledge 
transfer and market exploitation plans, and their key role in the proje ct activities will boost an industry -driven approach to the 
project respecting market, end-users (farmers/MSW organisations) and regulatory requirements. This will ensure that RECOVER 
is successful in transitioning knowledge towards the market overcoming potential barriers that may hinder the swift uptake of the 
results of RECOVER research in the post-project phase. 
Effective knowledge transfer, under Subtask 7.4.4, from technical partners to SMEs (internally) and end -users (externally) will 
also be fundamental  for paving the way towards commercialization, guaranteeing that sufficient knowledge is assimilated and 
competencies to exploit results are acquired. To this end, the involvement of RTDs of international renown in the fields of polymers 
(UNIPI), microorganisms (UAL), in silico modelling (BRUNEL), vermicompost and worm monitoring (UMH), Chitosan extraction 
and use (ASU) and who have a philosophy of working close ly with and in transferring research results to industry, as well as 
providing training and educational programmes, are value assets, which when combined with industry drive will ensure we bridge 
the innovation gap that frequently prevents industry adoption the results and R&D outputs. The non-industrial partners will exploit 
the results of RECOVER project to enrich their education offer with the novel concepts and system design principles that will be 
identified and developed during the project. Some of the topics tackled in the project shall become part of Master courses, as well 
as research topics for Master & PhD theses, offering students a taste of research problems that have practical impact and interest, 
and the opportunity to perform research in a hi gh-quality international environment. Results from this project will be potentially 
reflected in the courses offered to students. Significantly the inclusion of a company with experience in market penetration (ENCO) 
is an important added value for the cons ortium and will contribute to ensuring a systematic and methodological approach to 
planning for the important post-project stage.  
RECOVER consortium includes key partners, which have directly links and communications with end-users across Europe (COPA 
as AB) and Spain (ASAJA) as well as further multipliers in the AB (ISWA, PLACKCLUSTER…). Importantly, we will follow a 
cautious and transparent communication policy both in terms of sourcing and end of life, backed up by consequential LCA results, 
which will contribute to raising industry confidence that will allow us to deliver a positive breakthrough in the context of 
environmental-friendly plasticulture. This will be complemented by the lobbying power of COPA through ASAJA as well as of APE 
on policy makers towards the introduction of requirements in CAP policies for awarding farmers for AWP collecting and valorising. 
Sound management of the knowledge generated during the project, active planning in relation to post -project exploitation 
activities, further r esearch work for escalating along the TRLs, as well as scouting for possible viable financing routes to 
commercialization that will allow us to quickly scale up to complete the bridging to the Innovation Gap and the subsequent 
navigation of the ‘Valley of Death’, to swiftly overcome the critical stage between pre-competitive results and the market. All this 
will be complemented by a solid communication strategy to distribute non-confidential results to relevant audiences as well as to 
market actors, multipliers and policy makers. 
 
How the participants will manage the research data generated and/or collected during the project 
Although the exploitation interests will be favo ured by default when considering the project results, the RECOVER project will 
participate in the Pilot Open Access Research Data scheme for a selected amount of research data generated by the project. As 
such a data management plan has been included among WP8’s deliverables (D8.5). It guarantees that research data will be 
made findable, accessible, interoperable and re-usable (FAIR) and also instrumental for the IP and dissemination action. Non -
confidential results will be widely disseminated in Open access media as further discussed (publications, selected biodegradation, 
LCA and characterization results will be considered among others to provide the scientific community with understanding of e.g. 
the operational conditions to enhance bioremediation process, the biodegradation modelling after an agreed embargo time 
allowing excluding the co mmercially sensitive details). All publicly available data will be protected by copyright statements and 
some with commercial values could be available under a fee. Data curation and preservation will be ensured by an intranet with 
a specific platform to be developed as part of the project website, accessible only to its partners. In it, all the necessary information 
will be uploaded in the appropriate formats for its optimal use. In this context, this information will be kept for a maximum  period 
of two ye ars after the end of the project. Moreover, all data exchange transactions (including external surveys for the social 
acceptance study) will be made in accordance with the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). In terms of data curation 
and preservation management, ENCO is responsible for the managing of the intranet, and therefore the information contained 
therein. 
 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 41  
Strategy for knowledge management and protection 
The Knowledge Management Strategy (Fig. 2. 7) which will be 
followed during the RECOVER lifecycle is heavily 
interconnected with the exploitation and dissemination activities 
to pave the way forward for post -project exploitation. An 
integrated approach will be followed for the iden tification, 
capture, retrieval, distribution, sharing, use and reuse of 
RECOVER information and knowledge assets. This will be 
essential to drive the value and benefits of these information and 
knowledge assets, and contribute to maximise the innovation 
impact of the action. Knowledge Management sessions will be 
taken place regularly during the project meetings. These 
sessions will be chaired by the IPR & Exploitation Manager (Dr. 
Marco de la Feld, ENCO) attended by all project beneficiaries 
and will facilitate the disclosure of the IP and the novelty of the 
project results. The aim of these sessions is to review: i) 
Expected results per Work Package (WP). ii) Evaluation of the 
IP (technology watch/prior art review). iii) Evaluation of 
protection options (IP R tools evaluation). iv) Third party 
components included in the project activities including tools and 
datasets. v) Confidentiality of project results. vi) Foreseen 
publications per partner. vii) Exploitation intentions per partner. 
 
Background IPR and access rights 
Background- information and knowledge (including inventions, databases, etc.) held by the partners prior to their accession to 
the EC grant agreement, as well as any intellectual property rights which are needed for carrying out the project or for using 
foreground held by the consortium, or indeed by third parties- is defined in the proposal preparation phase (pre-Grant Agreement). 
The current status of the Background being brought to the project by the consortium is listed in Table 2.6. Access to Background 
that is, or will be found to be, necessary for the implementation of the project will be granted royalty free and background needed 
to use the results of the project will be provided either royalty free or under fair and reasonable conditions. 
 
Table 2.6. Background per partner 
No Short Name  Background 
1 UAL  Know-how in microorganism selection and testing for bioremediation of recalcitrant molecules and xenobiotics and 
microbiology of composting. Know-how on insect studies at lab scale  
2 UNIPI Knowledge on polymer characterization, know how in polymer processing and processing of chitosan and chitin and their 
application in packaging and health care. 
3  ASAJA Knowledge in AWs mixtures at farm and MSW level 
4 BRUNEL. Knowledge in comparative genomics and outputs applicable to novel enzyme selection and synthesis 
5 UMH Know-how in earthworm uses in bioremediation (degradation of polyphenols, pesticides and other pollutants); Know -how 
in composting, vermicomposting and biochar 
6 ASU Know-how in extraction and formulation (including functionalization) and processing of biopolymers for packaging 
applications.  
7 NATURPLAS Knowledge in market and requirements from agriculture films 
8 ASA Know-how in enzymes, enzyme technology, fermentation, down-stream processing 
9 NUTRINSECT Know-how in insects and industrial production of insect-based new materials  
10 IRIS Know-how in monitoring systems for waste composition detection especially including NIR, HSI -Knowledge on data 
mining for predictive modeling. 
11 OWS 
(Terminated) 
Knowledge on biodegradation tests in all kind of environments according to international standards and on the analysis of 
organic recyclability such as compostability (e.g. the complete EN 13432 testing program). Know -how on improving 
biodegradation test procedures. Know-how on LCA. 
12 IDELUX Industrial experiences of biowaste treatment, knowledge and experience of the plastic waste stream and know -how in 
composting and plastic contamination 
13 FEMTO Know how in polymer processing and recycles 
14 ENTO Know-how in formulation of fertilizers from chitosan. Know -how in BSF (black solider flies) valori sed bio-fertilizers from 
wastes 
15 MANOR Know-how in packaging and edible coatings. 
16 ENCO Knowledge in communication, business & market analysis. Knowledge in innovation, exploitation and IPR management 
17 SAV knowledge in fertilizers and mulching films validation for agricultural and gardening practices.  
18 OWS RF Knowledge on biodegradation tests in all kind of environments according to international standards and on the analysis of 
organic recyclability such as compostability (e.g. the complete EN 13432 testing program). Know -how on improving 
biodegradation test procedures. Know-how on LCA. 
Figure 2.7: RECOVER Knowledge Management Strategy 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 42  
 
Results definition, protection, ownership and access rights 
Selected results from the project were previously listed in Table 2.5 along with the expected scenarios of results ownership.  
This table will be fully completed for all project results, and it wil l be periodically revised and updated during the project in line 
with developments. The project results will be continually assessed in terms of novelty, patentability and protection through  
T7.3, as part of an effective knowledge management strategy. The choice of the most suitable form of IP protection, as well 
as the duration and geographical coverage depends on the results at stake, but also the business plans for their exploitation  
and legitimate interests of consortium partners. By default, results wi ll be owned by the partner generating them. To avoid 
doubt or confusion over ownership, a protocol of procedures will be defined, which will be followed by each partner to clearl y 
show the development of the generation of knowledge or results. In case wher e a result is jointly generated (i.e. where the 
separate parts of some results are attributed to different participants), it will be jointly owned. Consequently, Joint Owner ship 
Agreements will regulate the allocation and the terms of exercising this joint  ownership(s). However, an overriding principle 
will be that the participating industry partners are always provided with the access that they need to the results to exploit  them 
in keeping with the needs and strategy of their business. As such, access rig hts to results for implementing the project will be 
granted on a royalty -free basis. Access rights for use purposes will be granted either royalty -free, or on fair and reasonable 
conditions (these conditions will be established in Exploitation Agreements t hat will be negotiated between the requester and 
granter if the access rights). A first draft of the Exploitation Agreement will be available by M18 (D7.3) and will be contin ually 
revised and edited throughout the project, and a final version will be signe d by all partners at M48 (annexed to D7.5).  
 
Open access to peer-reviewed scientific publications 
RECOVER partners will provide peers and end -users with free of charge on -line access to the project peer -reviewed scientific 
research articles. Partners can f ollow two routes towards open access (1) by self-archiving their journal articles in an open 
access repository, also known as 'green' open access, or (2) by publishing in an open access journal, known as 'gold' 
open access. Whereas fees to cover publishing  in Gold open access journals have been budgeted, RECOVER will privilege 
green open access, whereby the partners will publish in peer -reviewed scientific publications and then self -archive a version 
in repositories (using only those indexed in specialized search engines like Scopus). The project website will complementarily 
house the ‘RECOVER Green Channel’ for open access to the peer -reviewed publications of the project. In relation to expected 
publications from the project, these include and are not limit ed to: results from demonstration of the pre -compatibility of micro 
and macro-organisms consortia for plastic biodegradation; results from the upscale of ex and in situ biodegradation process; 
results from value chains analysis;  LCA, s -LCA and LCC; result s of the testing of the different developed added -value 
downstream products (biofertilizers, chitin and chitosan derived bioplastics and coated materials), etc.  
 
 
b) Communication activities  
Communication activities are of the outmost importance for effec tively promoting our action and outputs towards the 
stakeholders that we want to reach though this BBI action. To successfully connect, cooperate with and acquire positive 
support of our public a strategic plan will be implemented in Task 7.5, on top of th e preliminary outline drawn up in Table 2.7. 
The overall communication campaign, which covers the whole project duration, will be led by the Communication Manager, 
Mr. Juan Almansa (ASAJA), who already holds an established extensive network and communication capacity to ensure that 
benefits and impacts of the project are genuinely conveyed to key stakeholders and general public. Our aim is to i) generate 
understanding about what RECOVER is seeking to achieve, ii) stimulate interest and support, and iii) motivate the collaboration 
of actors along the value chain as well as of general public in order to boost the transition to the bio -based economy in EU.  
RECOVER communication campaign leverages one -way and multilateral strategic channels, following  these criteria: Why – 
Outcomes expected; What will be communicated – the message; To whom – the audience; How – the method; When – the 
timing. 
Following a preliminary stakeholder analysis (that will be exhaustively developed in Task 7.2), the target audie nces of 
RECOVER communication activities comprise Agricultural Cooperatives; Farmers; Insecticulturers; Plastic manufacturers and 
converters; Packaging industry; Food manufacturing industry and retailers; Fertilizers companies; Soil bioremediation and 
waste management companies, Consumers & Consumer organizations; Public authorities and Policy makers; Standardization 
& Safety Agencies/Organizations; Scientific communities; Particular efforts will be paid to engage with and raise awareness o f 
the general public, also to gain social acceptance. It is important to address the public concerns by informing the public on our 
strong dependence on conventional plastics which shall be adequately handled at EoL through innovative biotech solutions 
and on the advantage s to choose innovative bio -based materials adjusted to the applications. The awareness actions carried 
in RECOVER will aim to generate acceptance for our different value -added products but also towards insecticulture which is 
a growing arena and here funda mental to maximizing the enzyme and microorganisms efficiency for plastic degradation 
through optimal communication and transparency using appropriate language. A set of key messages will be developed 
specifically to popularize complex subject and to bring  the issue closer to people’s lives by making it more understandable. 
The campaign will be rolled out through various channels and tools ( table 2.7 ), with the following approach: 1. ‘Push’ 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 43  
communication (graphic identity, newsletters, press releases, promo tional materials, gadgets, etc) and 2. ‘Pull’ communication 
and interactive (website, social media, liaison with other initiatives, joint communication, etc). The fact that our demonstr ators 
are in part focused on consumers applications like packaging and in the broad part on plasticulture will allow maximising the 
awareness of the impact of bioeconomy, and indeed BBI programme, on their everyday life.  In RECOVER, collaboration with 
the European Climate Adaptation Platform (Climate -ADAPT)152 and agricultural European Innovation Partnership EIP -AGRI153 
will be particularly pursued to magnify the replicability of the project results, by sharing the project experience and lesso ns 
learned with stakeholders while simultaneously learning how these actors are managing and reacting to similar problems 
focused primarily on the problem of AWPs. In addition, to provide added value to the RECOVER end -users, EIP Multiactor 
Practice Abstracts will be prepared (in all partner languages)  - 1.000 to 1.500 characters) highlighting  main practical 
recommendation (how can practitioner make use of the RECOVER results).   
 
 
Table 2.7: RECOVER Communication Toolbox and Approach 
Appro
ach 
Measure Timing Impact Key Metrics 
Push Effect 
Logo & Project Identity M1 Recognizable project identity that will help 
increase awareness about the project 
At least 1 logo, 2 templates, 1 set of 
imagery 
E-Newsletter 6-monthly Create community sense & Give visibility to 
events and activities related to the project. 
At least 150 enrolments per year 
Press Releases & 
Media presence (TV, 
Radio) 
6 per year Achieve maximum awareness of the project 
& share project vision 
At least 5 press-releases, 10 articles 
and 5 interviews in media (Radio/TV) 
Digital/Printed Material M1-M12-M24-M36-48 Create awareness of the project. 
Spread project results. 
At least 3 flyers designed & 1500 
printed; 3 posters; 3 infographics 
Videoclip M30 Showcase benefits and results At least 1000 visualizations 
Pull Effect 
Project Website M1, regularly updated Create awareness, disseminate information 
about the project. 
At least 5k unique visitors 
Social Media M2, content online Reach & engage different target audiences At least 1000 fans 
Interaction with ongoing 
initiatives/projects 
Linking projects, 
platforms and 
database 
Synergies with cross-cutting initiatives and 
cross-fertilization 
At least 3 officially MoU signed for 
cross-fertilization 
Participation to events 
& conferences 
At least quarterly from 
M3 
Increase awareness of the project and its 
results 
At least 2 events per partners 
Final Conference M47 Engage public & stakeholders to amplify 
outreach of RECOVER 
At least 100 attendees 
 
 
3. Implementation