3.3 Development of plastic-degrader formulations. ■■
4 # ##
4.1 Development of biodegradation processes. ■
4.2 Set up of pilot-scale ex-situ plastic degradation process ■
4.3 Set up of in-situ bioremediation of AWP in soil. ■
4.4 Monitoring of AWP degradation ■ ■
4.5 Establishing protocol of action of the overall fortified system. 
Sequential study ■ 
5 # # #
5.1 Development of upgrade biofertilizers ■
5.2 Extraction of chitin, and conversion to chitosan ■
5.3 Processing of chitosan and chitin. ■ ■ ■ 
6 # #
6.1 Mass, energy balance and techno-economic studies and 
development of RECOVER cascade strategy ■
6.2 Life cycle analysis ■ ■
6.3 Risk assessment and social acceptance ■
6.4 Logistics approach for RECOVER large scale implementation ■ 
7 ##
7.1 Innovation Management
7.2 Roadmap for the set up of RECOVER value chains and new 
cross-sector interconnections in the bio-based economy ■ ■
7.3 Knowledge and IPR management
7.4 Exploitation and Dissemination Planning ■
7.5 Communication Campaign ■ ■ ■ 
8 Project Management ●ᴥ ¤ ●ᴥ
¤ ¤ ●ᴥ ¤ ¤ ●ᴥ ¤ ¤ ●ᴥ ¤ ¤ ●ᴥ ¤ ¤ ●ᴥ ¤ ¤ ●ᴥ ¤ ¤ ●ᴥ ¤
8.1 Management of project resources ■ ■ ■ ■
8.2 Implementation of the management procedures ■
8.3  National Ethics Councils (NEC) requirements ■
8.4 Ethic Position Questionnaire (EPQ) requirements ■
8.5 Coordination with and Reporting to the BBI JU ■ ■ ■ ■ 
D6.1-D6.4; 
MS15, MS16
D3.1, D3.2; 
MS7, MS8
■ Deliverable / # Milestones  / ¤ Technical Management Committee Meeting  / ᴥ Innovation Committee
D1.1-D1.3; 
MS1-MS3
D4.1-D4.3; 
MS9-MS11
Cross-cutting activities and Innovation impacts
D5.1-D5.4; 
MS12-MS14
D7.1-D7.6; 
MS17, MS18
D8.1-D8.11
Agri-food-plastic waste (AWP) mapping, characterization, collection 
strategy and pre-treatment
Up-scaled production of biotech tools for AWP biodegradation
Pilot scale ex and in situ degradation of municipal and rural AWP
Validation of value-added downstream products
Safety, environmental, social and economic sustainability assessments
Selection of biotech tools for AWP biodegradation
D2.1-D2.3; 
MS4-MS6
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 53  
4.  Members of the consortium.  
 
4.1. Participants (applicants) 
 
4.1.1. Partner 1. University of Almeria (UAL)- Spain 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
The University of Almeria (UAL) is a research-education oriented public university, founded in 
1993. It has currently 32 degrees available, 42 Master and 14 PhD programs available, counting with 854 professors and more than 
13,000 students, including 600 doctorate students. A total of 14 departments and 11 research institutes are devoted to research and 
training. UAL has been beneficiary of more than 30 EU projects and it is a member of ceiA3, aimed at the advance and dissemination 
of agrifood-related activities that also offers a wide variety of technical services to companies and stakeholders. The Research Results 
Transfer Office (OTRI) links scientific activity with the business world. The European and International Research Projects Office 
(OPEI), in charge of administrative management of international projects, have extensive experience in managing European Projects 
and supports the researcher. The Unit called Outreach Unit (CCU- Unidad de Divulgación Científica) helps in dissemination activities. 
This unit is part of a network on Scientific Culture and Innovation (UCC + i) belonging to the Spanish Foundation for Science and 
Technology (Public Foundation of the Ministry of Economy Competitiveness). Central Research Services support R+D+i activities by 
providing instrumental analysis and scientific laboratories with advanced equipment and highly skilled technicians. 
The UAL team involved in the project includes researchers from two groups of Dpt. Biology and Geology: BIO-175 group (Experts 
in Microbiology, Unit of Microbiology, “Development of microbiological techniques for improvement of soil of agricultural interest”) and 
AGR-107 (Experts in insects, Unit Zoology, “Plant Protection in Greenhouse Crops).  
BIO-175 is specialized in Microbial Biotechnology. Main research activity has been focused from the last 25 years on the 
biotechnological valorisation of organic wastes (mainly lignocellulosic wastes) by both composting and bioconversions to value-added 
microbial products and bioremediation/biodegradation of recalcitrant molecules. As one of the outcomes of this activity, the group has 
a large collection of microorganism isolated from diverse environments that are useful for recalcitrant molecules biodegradation, 
biological control and plant - growth promotion. These includ e microorganisms and consortia that produce ligninases, 
polyphenoloxidases, lipases as well as dye -decolorizing and other xenobiotics -degrading microorganisms. Biodegradation, 
compostability, eco-toxicity, lignocellulose biotransformation, enzyme production and analysis, bio-deterioration, bioremediation and 
microorganisms screening and identification are among the main tests developed so far by the team that could be relevant for the 
tasks attributed in the project. In particular, the use of polyurethane foam (PUF) either hard or soft was found to be an emerging 
technology for the production of ligninolytic enzymes by white rot fungi immobilized in this support. UAL in collaboration UNIPI 
developed this technology that give rise to EU patent Nr. EP2677030. Their activity has been financed by public and private funds 
through more than 30 national and international projects and led to publication of over 80 peer-reviewed papers, 5 books, 8 book-
chapters, 3 patents and more than 130 congress national and international communications. 
AGR-107 group has been working in the last 28 years in research, development, and innovation in the following lines: applied 
entomology, taxonomy, biology and ecology of insects, rearing insect and mite pests and their natural enemies (predators and 
parasitoids). Evaluation of entomo-pathogens (viruses, bacteria and nematodes). Arthropod pest control technology: Development 
of biological control programmes against arthropod pests. Mathematical models applied to arthropod pest ecology. The activity has 
been carried out through 119 research projects and 54 research agreements and contracts with companies and official organizations. 
The scientific output of the group has been covered by 450 published scientific papers, 37 books, 82 book chapters, and 20 patents. 
Main role in the project WPs envolvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
UAL will support the analysis and selection of biotech tools for APW biodegradation in WP2 where they will be involved in 
the microbial commu nity development and strain selection (Microbiology experts) as well as insect selection and lab scale 
studies (Insect experts). In WP3, UAL will participate in the analysis and design of formulations containing AWP -degrading 
microorganisms and insect larv ae, and provide feedback on their performance during pilot scale experiments in WP4 and 
further downstream processing in WP5. Finally UAL will contribute to providing data for environmental and socio economic 
sustainability analysis, dissemination activiti es and exploitation of their results. UAL will coordinate the project with support 
from ENCO to guarantee the Grant agreement technical and economical fulfilment. 
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 
Dr. JOAQUIN MORENO (Male) - Full Professor (1998) – He is the Leader of the BIO -175 group (1988). He received his 
PhD (1986) in Pharmacy. His main research activity is the study of microorganisms isolated from different environments, mainly 
composting, that are useful for industrial and environmental applications. He has been the PI of 12 national projects, and 1 
international project. He published more than 80 scientific papers and 2 patents. 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 54  
Dr. MARIA J. LOPEZ (Female) - Associate Professor (2002) - She received her PhD (1996) in Pharmacy. Her research is 
focused on the study of microorganisms that produce lignocellulose -degrading enzymes and the use of microorganisms for 
bioremediation. She has been the PI of 3 national projects, leader of UAL -team in 3 EU project and 1 USA project. She 
published 56 scientific papers and 3 patents.  
Dr. FRANCISCA SUÁREZ-ESTRELLA (Female) - Associate Professor (2018) - She received her PhD (2001) in Biology. 
Her research is focused on the study of phythopathogen antagonists and Plant Growth Promoting Microorganisms-PGPMs for 
agronomic applications and the analysis of metabolites from microorganisms a nd analysis of microbial populations by 
respirometry. She has been the PI of 2 national projects, she published 42 scientific papers and 2 patents.  
Dr. Ing. MACARENA M. JURADO RODRÍGUEZ (Female) - Assistant Professor (2019) - She received her PhD (2015) in 
Agricultural Engineering. Her research is focused on the study of composting, PGPMs for agronomic applications and 
identification of microorganisms. She published 12 scientific papers. 
Dr. Ing. JUAN ANTONIO LÓPEZ GONZÁLEZ (Male) - Assistant Professor (20 19) - He received his PhD (2015) in 
Agricultural Engineering. His research is focused on the study of microorganisms involved in microbiology of compost and 
culture collection maintenance and screening. He published 13 scientific papers. 
Dr. Ing. TOMÁS CABELLO GARCÍA (Male) – Full Professor (1997) – He is the Leader of the AGR-107 group (1991). He 
received his PhD (1985) in Agricultural Engineering. His main research activity has been carried out in Agricultural Entomology: 
Pest species, taxonomy, biology, ecology, biological control. He has been PI or has participated in 45 national project and 2 
international project, and also in 54 research contracts. He published more than 157 scientific papers. He has been director or 
co-director of 12 Doctoral’s Thesis and 70 Grade and Master’s Thesis. 
Dr. PABLO BARRANCO VEGA (Male) - Associate Professor (2001) - he received his PhD (1997) in Biology. His research 
has been developed in several lines of Entomology: biology of crop pests and its control, biology and ecology of cave dwelling 
and subterranean fauna, and taxonomy in seve ral orders of insect and arachnids. He has been the PI of 4 national projects. 
He published 128 scientific papers and 1 patent.  
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 AGRIMAX-G.A. 720719 (2016-2020). Agro and food waste valorisation co-ops based on flexible multi-
feedstocks bio-refinery. H2020-BBI-PPP-2015-2-1, BBI.VC3.D5-2015. 
 SABANA-G.A. 727874 (2016-2020). Sustainable Algae Bio-refinery for Agriculture and Aquaculture. 
H2020-BG-2016-1, BG-01-2016  
 FORBIOPLAST- G.A. 212239 (2008-2012). Forest resource sustainability through bio-based composite 
development. FP7-KBBE-2007-1.  
 Characterization of biological capabilities of the microbiota associated to composting” -AGL2012-36434 
(2013-2015). Grant agency: Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness of Spain. 
 Development of an environmentally friendly protection of sweet pepper and strawberry. QLK5-CT-2001-
70484 (2002-2004). E.U. CRAFT. 
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Prederently 2013-2019 
years  
 López-González, J. A., Suárez-Estrella, F., Vargas-García, M. C., López, M. J., Jurado, M. M., Moreno, J. 
(2015). Dynamics of bacterial microbiota during lignocellulosic waste composting: Studies upon its structure, 
functionality and biodiversity. Bioresource Technology, 175, 406-416. 
 Jurado, M., López, M. J., Suárez-Estrella, F., Vargas-García, M. C., López-González, J. A., Moreno, J. 
(2014). Exploiting composting biodiversity: Study of the persistent and biotechnologically relevant microorganisms 
from lignocellulose-based composting. Bio-resource Technology, 162, 283-293. 
 López, M. J., Suárez-Estrella, F., Vargas-García, M. C., López-González, J. A., Verstichel, S., Debeer, L., 
Wierinck, I., Moreno, J. (2013). Bio-delignification of agricultural and forest wastes: Effect on anaerobic digestion. 
Biomass and Bioenergy, 58, 343-349. 
 Ricaño, J., Güerri-Agulló, B., Serna-Sarriás, M.J., Barranco, P., Lopez-Llorca, L.V. (2013). Evaluation of 
the pathogenicity of multiple isolates of Beauveria bassiana (Hypocreales: Clavicipitaceae) on Rhynchophorus 
ferrugineus (Coleoptera: Dryophthoridae) for the assessment of a solid formulation under simulated field conditions. 
Florida Entomologist, 96 (4), 1311-1324. 
 Alarcon, F.J.; Martinez, T.; Barranco, P.; Cabello, T.; Diaz, M.; Moyano, F.J. (2002). Digestive proteases 
during development of Rhynchophorus ferrugineus (Olivier, 1790) (Col.: Curculionidae). Insect Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, 32, 265-274.  
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
BIO-175 (Microbiology experts) has three research laboratories (microorganisms lab; molecular biology lab; sample 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 55  
analysis lab), equipment for microorganism’s culture, conservation, identification, enzyme production and analysis [culture 
chambers, -80ºC fr eezer, water baths, 2L Minifors bioreactor, microscopes, thermocycler (Biorad), RT -PCR (Biorad), UV 
transiluminators]; equipment for chemical and enzyme analysis/characterization [ultrafiltration units (Pellicon), 
spectrophotometers, Qbit 2.0 Fluorometer, microplate spectrophotometer and fluorimeter (EON -Biotek), luminometer 
(Thermofisher), electrophoresis chambers (Biorad), centrifuges; additional equipment for chemical analysis [COT Shimadzu 
analyser, Lignocellulose analyser (Atkom)] 
AGR-107 (Insect exper ts) has equipment with two laboratories, one insect breeding chamber, 6 Climate Controlled 
Cabinets, and one Potter tower. 
Other equipment available in UAL for the project at the Central Research Services are: LC/GC -MS (Hewlet Packard 
SERIES 1100), UPLC/GC -MS-Q-TOF (Waters), FTIR -RAMAN (Bruker Vertex 70), Micro -analyser CHNS (Elementar Vario 
Micro), Single Crystal Diffractometer (BRUKER AXS SMART APEX), X-ray Powder Diffractometer (D8 ADVANCE-DAVINCI), 
X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (BRUKER S4 PIONEER), TE M (JEOL JEM 2100), SEM (HITACHI S -3500N) microscopes, 
confocal fluorescence microscope, NMR (Avance III HD 300 and Avance III HD 500) and DNA/RNA analysis and sequencing 
equipment (Ion PGM (Personal Genome Machine) sequencer, with Ion OneTouch™ 2; System, from Life Technologies; Hitachi 
3500 8 capillary genetic analyzer AB; MyGo Pro Real-Time PCR Instrument; GeneAmp PCR System 9700 Thermocycler) 
 
 
4.1.2. Partner 2 University of Pisa (UNIPI) Italy 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
The Department of Civil and Industrial Engineering part of Pisa University (UNIPI) is located 
in Largo Lucio Lazzarino 1, in the center of Pisa. The Industrial Chemistry and Materials Science 
group, directly involved in RECOVER project activities, consists  of about 30 researchers and 10 
technicians. DICI was established in 2012, following a major reform of the Italian higher education 
system, as a merger of the former departments of Aerospace Engineering, Chemical Engineering, 
Industrial Chemistry and Materials Science, Mechanical, Nuclear and Production Engineering, and a part of the Department of 
Civil Engineering. The institute research covers a wide variety of skills in Materials Science: characterization and development 
of materials, polymer processing,  design and modelling of mechanical properties. These research activities have a strong 
influence in areas of high social and economic impact, such as materials and environment, health, energy, industrial. The 
research activity is carried out in the DICI -UNIPI laboratories by employing advanced scientific instruments in collaboration 
with a variety of both national and international academic and private institutions.  
UNIPI is very skilled in projecting polymers blends composition (additives selection, processing conditions) in order to tune 
properties of materials including biodegradability, morphology, thermal and mechanical properties as attested by papers, 
patent, and participation in European, National and regional projects but also by the direct cooperation with industries to bring, 
e.g., their patented results to the market. UNIPI staff has experience in test of compost, and biodegradability in soil and marine 
water, as well as reactive extrusion, copolymerization, selection of plasticizers, nucleating  agents, and compatibilization of 
natural materials with polymeric matrices. UNIPI staff is also expert in studying and quantifying the crystalline and amorphous 
fractions of a material, whose ratio affects biodegradability many physical properties, as barrier, mechanical, thermal, ageing, 
adhesion, and, consequently, the final performance of a material.  
Main role in the project WPs envolvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
UNIPI will support WP1 where they will cooperate is s plastic characterization, in setting the logistic approach for plastic 
waste selection, collection and transport to the waste treatment facilities, WP2, WP3 and WP4, for analysis of plastic before  
and after degradation, WP5 for valorisation of chitin and chitosan and coordinating valorisation of other recover by -products, 
in WP6 for the logistic approach and for supporting for data collection, necessary for safety and environmental assessments, 
in WP7 with teaching, training, dissemination in conferences and papers, and as partner in WP8. UNIPI will also contribute to 
the project technical management. 
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 
Prof. Patrizia Cinelli (female) is associate professor of Pisa University for applied chemistry and Materials Technology at 
Master Degree student of Construction Engineering and Architecture at Pisa University, and master degree students of Materials 
and Nanotechnology. She was researcher at Inter University Consortium of Materials Science and Technology, and then 
researcher at National Research Council (CNR), Institute for the Physical and Chemical processes (IPCF) unit of Pisa. She 
graduated in Chemistry at the University of Florence, and then achieved a PhD in Chemistry at Pisa University partly performed 
at the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Peoria, IL, USA. 20 years of experience in materials science, polymer 
processing and characterization, biodegradation and life cycle assessment. She is co-author of over 70 papers in peer-reviewed 
journal, 9 book chapters, and 8 patents on innovative materials, with a scopus h-index of 25, and 2102 citations. She has worked 
in over 15 EC project from FP5, FP6, FP7 and Horizon 2020, directly following writing, scientific activity, and reporting. She is 
currently coordinator of the Horizon2020 project ECOAT GA 837863 BBI.2018.SO3.R9 started the 1st May 2019.  

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 56  
Prof. Maurizia Seggiani (female)  is full professor of Synthesis of Chemical Processes and Chemical Industrial 
Instrumentation at Master Degree in Chemical Engineering, University of Pisa. She was graduated cum laude in Chemical 
Engineering at University of Pisa in 1993. She was junior researcher at the ENEL (Italian National Electricity Company) (1995-
1997), in 2000 completed her PhD in Chemical Engineering at the University of Pisa. Assistant Professor (2001-2014) and from 
2014 Associate Professor of Industrial and Technological Chemistry at University of Pisa. Her current research activities are 
focused on waste management (treatment/recovery/valorisation of industrial wastes), biomass gasification/pyrolysis, development 
of biodegradable/compostable composite materials and modelling/simulation of chemical processes. Over 70 papers in peer 
reviewed international journals and 1 patent. She coordinated Regional projects on gasification of industrial wastes and on the 
development of green biodegradable composites based on PHA and natural fibres for marine applications.  
Prof. Antonio Pratelli (male) (DICI-UNIPI) is associate professor in Transport Planning at the Department of Civil and 
Industrial Engineering of the University of Pisa and professor of Distribution Logistic at the Leghorn Logistic Centre of the University 
of Pisa. He participated, with Dr. Petri, in many logistic projects like the Regional Rural Development project called Intrav iva, 
regarding the nursery gardening logistics, the Linfa Project, in the Regional Research and Development Program, about drug 
logistics, the Go Smart Med and LIST-Port Project inside the Italy-France Maritime European Program, respectively about port 
freight logistic and noise emissions in the peri-portual areas and the project Furbot aims to develop a new vehicle to improve the 
urban city-logistic (European 7th Framework Programme). 
Prof. Andrea Lazzeri (male) was graduated in Chemical Engineering at University of Pisa in 1982, in 1984 joined UNIPI as 
research associate. In 1991 completed his PhD at Cranfield University. He has been lecturer (1991-2002), Associate Professor 
(2002-2008) and from 1st January 2009 Full Professor of Materials Science and Engineering. He is specialized in preparation and 
use of micro-and nano-particles in polymeric composites, rubber toughening of plastics, deformation and fracture of materials and 
in ceramic matrix composites. He is author of 40 publications on international journals and 4 patents. Didactical activity in Materials 
Science and Engineering and Materials Science and Technology for Cultural Heritage. He coordinated two European projects on 
materials science in FP7 (FORBIOPLAST and HELM), and coordinated a project in Horizon 2020, NMP -21-2014-IA, 
Nanocathedral.  
Dr. Massimiliano Petri (male) PhD in Territorial Spatial Analysis at University of Pisa and co-professor of a course for Logistic 
Distribution at Pisa University, actually he is consultant inside the Technical Group of the Italian Ministry of Infrastructure and 
Transport. He received a Doctoral Award from the Italian Association of Regional Science and a Research Award from the Italian 
Ministry of Youth for its PhD-thesis on urban mobility and logistic demand simulation (2001). In 2018 is scientific coordinator of 
the project SaveMyBike, admitted to the final of the European Regio Stars Awards. Petri has 15 years of experience in researches 
and studies regarding logistic and freight transport (he elaborated the Tuscany Region freight and passenger model, the Freight 
Demand Study for the European Rail Freight Corridor n.6 “Mediterranean” and actually is working to the national freight/passenger 
model called SIMPT). He published more than 30 articles regarding logistics/mobility and participated in many research projects 
with Prof. Antonio Pratelli at Regional, National and European level.  
Prof. Maria-Beatrice Coltelli (female) (DICI-UNIPI) is associate professor in Materials Science at the Department of Civil and 
Industrial Engineering of the University of Pisa. She obtained the graduation in Chemistry on February 2001 and the PhD "Galileo 
Galilei" in Chemical Sciences on 2005. Her researches were focused onto polymer science, in particular recycling of polymer 
blends and composites. She is co -author of more than 30 publication s and 2 patents. She followed the scientific activity of 
European projects on materials science, bio -based polymer processing and nano -composites. Currently she supports the 
didactical activity of courses for Chemical Engineers and Construction Engineers. 
Dr. Francesca Signori (female), Researcher at Department of Civil and Industrial Engineering, Pisa University, PhD in 
Biomaterials at Trento University (Italy) in 2003. As PhD student, she performed part of the research (2001-2002) at the University 
of Twente, The Netherlands. In 2006 she received the European Biomaterials and Tissue Engineering Doctoral Award, by the 
European Society of Biomaterials. Her research topics focus on polymer chemistry and physics, mainly on the synthesis, the 
engineering and th e structure -properties relationship assessment of biodegradable polymeric materials for biomedical 
applications. Moreover, she got interested in the use of biodegradable thermoplastic materials in the field of nanotechnology and 
for industrial applications. She is also active in the preparation and investigation of biodegradable based polymer composites and 
blends. Her scientific activity is testified by co-authorship of 35 papers in peer-reviewed international journals. 
Dr. Nicoletta Barbani (female), is graduated technician in Biology, with elevated professionality (EP3) at the Department of 
Civil and Industrial Engineering (DICI) of Pisa University. Head of Infrared Spectroscopy Chemical Imaging Laboratory. 
Collaboration with important researchers from other research centers (Institute of Biomaterials, Department of Materials Science 
and Engineering, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany; Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, 
Polytechnic University of Turin Italy), responsible for numerous scientific research projects for important Companies working in 
the biomaterial field (Fidia Advanced, Chiron S.R.L, Novartis Vaccines). Co -author of scientific publication published both in 
national (9) and international journals (126), 125 communications at national and international conferences and 3 patents. Highly 
experienced in material science for application in biomedical and environmental fields.  Expertise in physicochemical and 
mechanical characterization, by instrumental techniques (TGA, DSC, SEM, FTIR-ATR, UV, DMA); optimization of FTIR Chemical 
Imaging methods for the chemical characterization of materials. 
Dr. Sara Filippi (female), PhD in Chemical Science at University of Pisa, has 20 years of experience on polymer science: 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 57  
synthesis and characterization of LCP and energetic polymers, chemical modification of polymers, compatibilization of polymer 
blends, recycling of thermoplastic polymers, preparation and characterization of polyolefin organoclay nanocomposites, 
production and characterization of polymer modified asphalts with anti -ageing properties. She is co -author of more than 50 
publications and she supports the didactical activity of courses for Civil and Construction Engineering.  
Dr. Vito Gigante (male)  is a Chemical Engine er graduated at University of Pisa on 27 February 2015 with a thesis on 
‘Properties of mixed compounds and base poly (lactic acid) (PLA) / polycarbonate (PC) made from recycled polymers’. He got a 
PhD in Chemical Engineering cum laude, at Pisa University. He studies biodegradability, life cycle assessment and the process-
ability and mechanical properties of sustainable multiphase polymer systems for structural applications.  
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 NANO-CHITOPACK: Sustainable technologies for the production of biodegradable materials based on 
natural chitin-nano fibrils derived by waste of fish industry, to produce food grade packaging (GA no:315233, FP7-
SME, completed) 
 DIBBIOPACK: Development of injection and blow extrusion molded biodegradable and multifunctional 
packages by nanotechnology: improvement of structural and barrier properties, smart features and sustainability 
(GA no: 280676, FP7-NMP-2011-LARGE-5, completed) 
 OLI-PHA: A novel and efficient method for the production of polyhydroxyalkanoate polymer-based 
packaging from olive oil waste water. (GA no: 280604-2, Completed)* 
 AGRIMAX: Agri & food waste valorisation co-ops based on flexible multi-feedstocks bio-refinery processing 
technologies for new high added value applications (BBI GA no: 720720) 
 POLYBIOSKIN: High performance functional bio-based polymers for skin-contact products in biomedical, 
cosmetic and sanitary industry ”Horizon 2020 / BBI-JU, Call: H2020-BBI-JTI-2016, BBI PPP, GA no:745839) 
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Prederently 2013-2019 
years  
 P. Cinelli, M. Schmid, E. Bugnicourt, J. Wildner, A. Bazzichi, I. Anguillesi, A. Lazzeri. "Whey protein layer 
applied on biodegradable packaging film to improve barrier properties while maintaining biodegradability", Polymer 
Degrad. and Stability, 2014, 108, 151-157. 
 P. Cinelli, M. Schmid, El. Bugnicourt, M.B. Coltelli, A. Lazzeri, "Recyclability of PET/WPI/PE Multilayer 
Films by Removal of Whey Protein Isolate based Coatings with Enzymatic Detergents" Materials, 2016, Vol. 9(6), 
473; doi:10.3390/ma9060473.  
 P. Cinelli, M. Seggiani, N. Mallegni, V. Gigante, A. Lazzeri "Processability and Degradability of PHA-Based 
Composites in Terrestrial Environments”. International journal of molecular sciences 2019,” 
DOI:10.3390/ijms20020284,  
 M.Seggiani,; P.Cinelli, E. Balestri; N. Mallegni, E. Stefanelli, Eleonora; A. Rossi, C. Lardicci, Claudio; A. 
Lazzeri, "Novel sustainable composites based on poly(hydroxybutyrate-co-hydroxyvalerate) and sea grass beach-
CAST fibres: performance and degradability in marine environments”, Materials, 11(5), 772 ,2018, doi: 
10.3390/ma11050772.  
 P. Cinelli, M.B. Coltelli, N. Mallegni, P. Morganti, A. Lazzeri, “Degradability and sustainability of 
nanocomposites based on polylactic acid and nanochitin” Chemical Engineering Transaction 60, 2017, ISBN 978-
88-95608-50-1, ISNN 2283-9216  
 A. Pratelli, M. Petri, C. Rindone, F. De Bari (2017) “A Feasibility Study for New Transport Connections 
between Italy and Algeria”, Journal of Civil Engineering and Architecture 11 (2017) 691-700 doi: 10.17265/1934-
7359/2017.07-006 
 A. Pratelli, M. Petri, “Vehicle Routing Problem and Car-Pooling to solve home-to-work transport problem in 
mountain areas”, International Conference on Innovation in Urban and Regional Planning nature, planning and 
ecosystem services, Cagliari (Italy), 24-26 June 2019 
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
Fourier FT-IR Nicolet 380; Charpy Impact Tester CEAST 9050; Thermogravimetric analyser TG/DTA 7200 Seiko EXSTAR; 
Differential Scanning Calorimeter Perkin Elmer DSC4000 and DSC 8500 equipped with Intracooler III; Infrared spectrometer 
Spectrum Two Perkin Elmer equipped with diamond ATR; Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) instrument Agilent 
Technologies 1200 Series equipped with two PLgel 5 µm MiniMIX-D columns and a refraction index detector; Carver hot press; 
X’Pert PRO (PANalytical) powder diffractometer -Cu Kα radiation (1.541874 Å); Sonotrode Hielscher UP200S, 
Spectrophotometers Color quest Hunter Lab n°2, Universal testing machine Instron 4302, and Mod. 5966; MFI (melt flow 
index) CEAST automatic. Differential Scanning Calorimeter TA Q200DMTA; Gabo Eplexor® 100N; Microtome Leica Reichert 
Ultracut E; Scanning Electron Microscope, JEOL JSM-5600LV; Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope, FEI. 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 58  
4.1.3. Partner 3. Asociación de Jovenes Agricultores de España (ASAJA) - Spain 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
ASAJA (Asociación de Jovenes Agricultores de España) is the most important collective organization 
of Farmers in Spain (250.000 members from agriculture, farming, livestock and agrofood sectors) 
representing 100% of the Country’ territory, 60% of the Agrofood turnover, and 34 % of the Spain farmers.  
140 offices all over the Spanish Regions, more than 1600 employees, giving assistance to the 
thousands of associates (250.000) and representing the legitimate interest of the farmers versus the 
European and national Institutions and governmental and public Authorities.  
- has a Young Entrepreneur Organization ANGA, an internal audit – REV -, a training agency - ENAPRA -, an editorial 
agency – SEPE – and a service Centre – CAAF.  
- is a full member of COPA COGECA and CEJA in Bruxelles, of Farm Europe in Paris, and of the National Food Technology 
Platforms Food For Life.  
Main role in the Project WPs envolvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
ASAJA will support WP1, WP3, WP5, WP6, WP7: 
WP1 - Mapping of APW and their characteristics: Samples and Written report linked to APW inventory and 
characterization task and 1.2 including the specifications of APWs and their availability as well as selecting of 4-6 types of most 
representative fossil plastics (including in each case virgin plastics and AWP counterparts picked individually from MSW or 
agricultural films). 
WP1 -Report on AWP collection and monitoring strategies and the pre -treatment options to enhance 
biodegradation of AWP. Review in terms of state of the art for the research on the use of micro/macro organisms for their 
degradation. Written report on the outcome of tasks 1.3 and 1.4 and samples of 4-6 selected APW after pre-treatment. 
WP1 -Strategy for APW collectio n and sorting. Obtaining the matrix for the definition of the classification, 
characterization and recommended biodegradation procedure. Manual of action in the points of generation of the 
biodegradable plastics mixtures following RECOVER. 
WP1 -Pre-treatment rules and procedures basing on composition of mixtures of APW. Obtaining the matrix for the 
definition of each type of abiotic pre -treatment to be used depending on the mixture of APW to biodegrade (fragmentation, 
micronization, thermal treatments, UV irradiation, oxidizing agents, pH and irradiation) following RECOVER. 
WP3 -Protocol for the production of insect and earthworm plus PMC with enhanced APW degrading capability. 
Formulations of plastic-degrader microorganisms, enzymes, microorganism-enzyme-fortified earthworms (EFW) and insects 
(EFI) tests results according their potential up-scaling formulation for production and commercialization. 
WP5 -Up-graded bio fertilizers formulation. Determination of the formulation matrix to the obtaining of several industrial 
mixtures of up-grade bio-fertilizer products. Written report including the specifications of the processes to produce high-value 
fertilisers in comparison with similar and conventional products. 
WP6 -Social impacts report. Including three survey s on social impacts (social impacts and social acceptance). 
Referencing 3 main scenarios of rural development. 
WP7 -Industry, stakeholders and policy guidelines. Publication of the "Guidelines for Industry, stakeholders and policy 
regarding RECOVER waste management" (optimal manage RECOVER waste). 
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 
Pedro-Mauricio Barato Triguero (Male):  ASAJA president - institutional representation and European Association Co -
leader. 
Ana-Leticia Plaza Simón (Female) : journalist, communication manager of ASAJA. Wide experience in 
communication/dissemination, design/coordination and promotion/execution of corporative communication plans. 
Communication leader in BBI-JU projects. 
Jose-Fernando Sánchez (Male): Industrial Engineer. Master in International Project Management in Univ. Polytechnic 
Madrid. 15 years’ experience in high direction of innovation projects. Master in Standardization and Quality assessment. 
Santiago Carretero-Martin (Male): Technical-admin. Support. European dissemination coordinator. 
Manuel Lucena Marcos (Male): Technical Support. Grant-fulfilment manager. Dissemination support and managing. 
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 ECOTROFOOD - EIP-Eco-Innovation 2010 (ECO/10/256253). 
 ENFFI - EUROPE INNOVA - EUROPEAN NETWORK FOOD INNOVATION FINANCING. FP6-2005-
022491. 
 FOOD WASTE TREATMENT - LIFE 11 ENV/ES/000601. 
 Microbiome Support- “Towards coordinated microbiome R&I activities in the food system to support EU 
and international bio-economy goals (2018-2021; EU H2020; No 81811). 
 GIST - EIP-Eco-Innovation 2010 (ECO/10/277217). 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 59  
And more than 30 relevant projects related to the development of this project. 
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Prederently 2013-2019 
years  
1. Markets legislation. 
2. Food Hygiene and safety Regulations. 
3. Local Initiatives on regional ground. 
4. Insect role in agro-food sector including development of guidelines and mentoring to administration. 
4. New food chains and farmers role in New business models and consumer behaviours biomasses, new macro and micro 
materials, food and no food. 
5. New Business models and consumers behavior. 
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
Infrastructure: ASAJA have a wide network of agricultural and farming and agro-food association. Specifically ASAJA 
will provide insect fluxes and expertise, including 4 insect producers in Spain to provide all the research in Europe in this 
topic. In addition all the field trials in Spain. 
Equipment: testing agronomic field including controlled green housing and control equipment for in-situ validation tests. 
Staff: 8 persons directly dedicated to the specific tasks/WP of RECOVER-project and 120 transference and innovation 
personnel in ASAJA. 
 
4.1.4. Partner 4. Brunel University London, UK 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
 
    Brunel University London in West London is a dynamic institution with over 12,500 students 
and over 1,300 academic staff operating in a vibrant culture of research excellence.  With a turnover of more than £200 million, the 
University is a Higher Education and research establishment with considerable intellectual, financial, and social resources and makes 
major contributions to the economy and community of the West London region. It also plays a significant role in the higher education 
scene nationally and has numerous national and international links and partnerships with both academia and industry. 
Brunel University London has climbed 14 places in the 2019 QS World University Rankings, and is now placed in the top third of 
universities worldwide, in the top 200 in engineering and technology, and in the top 50 for international outlook. Brunel prides itself on 
its multicultural environment and has gained countless benefits from having staff and students from over 113 different countries 
contributing to both its academic and social environment. The university holds a European Commission HR Excellence in Research 
award for its commitment to supporting its researchers. 
Brunel has a long history of successful bidding for European funding and of managing EU projects, Brunel was involved in 120 
projects within FP7 with a cumulative value of over 37 Million Euros, and has been successful with over 60 Horizon 2020 proposals 
to the value of 30 million Euros, of which it is leading and coordinating 9 projects. 
Since the launch of the university in 1966, research has been at the very heart of Brunel's academic activities; consistent with its 
establishment mission as a ‘Wilson University’ to apply science to the practical work through translational and applied research and 
education. Today, we have three Research Institute’s covering most of these areas. The research groups within them are world 
leading, with highly cited papers, substantial grant income, established reputations for particular methodological approaches, and a 
community of PhD graduates pursuing successful careers in industry and academia. 
The Institute of Energy Futures has a holistic approach to the energy costs of food distribution, bringing together researchers from 
a range of disciplines, as well as mainstream engineering research. We have particular strengths in refrigeration, heating and cooling 
and in environmental design.  
The Institute main themes include Advanced Powertrains and Fuels, Energy Efficient and sustainable technologies, Smart Power 
Networks and Resource Efficient Future Cities. 
Institute of Environment, Health and Societies aims to achieve internationally acknowledged excellence in all forms of research 
relating to the quality of our environment, and to our health and wellbeing. From assisting governments with environmental and health 
policies, to offering lung disease sufferers drug-free, medically proven treatments, to helping consumers with food allergies make 
better choices, our practical research has helped millions of people worldwide lead healthier, happier lives. 
The Institute main themes include Environment & Health, Ageing Studies, Health Economics, Synthetic Biology, Biomedical 
Engineering & Welfare Health and Wellbeing. 
Institute of Materials and Manufacturing research aims to improve the performance of materials and structures, including their 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 60  
design, manufacturing, integrity and use, through a combined theoretical approach. Its vision is to become the leading recognised 
international provider of materials and manufacturing research, addressing current major societal questions. 
The Institute main themes include Structural Integrity, Liquid Metal Engineering, Micro -nano Manufacturing, Materials 
Characterisation and Processing and Design for Sustainable Manufacturing.  
The expertise relevant to the current project lie within Synthetic Biology, one of the 15 University Strategic Research Themes, 
and will also have access to the newly established expertise in enzymes and biotechnology in the newly established Department of 
Chemical Engineering. It will be hosted within the dedicated synthetic biology research labs which provide an integrated wet-dry, 
bioinformatics-laboratory research environment; and led by the head of the Synthetic Biology lab and Research Theme. 
Main role in the project WPs envolvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
UBRUN will primarily contribute to Work Package 2, through the development and application of new methods for the 
generation of ‘better than nature’ enzymes based upon new strategies exploiting comparative genomics and synthetic DNA-
based methodologies. They will also contribute to the integration of these enzymes with other parallel and later Work Packages. 
In addition, they will provide expert genomics support for other Work Packages studying microbe content and changes within 
compost and insects. Finally, they will contribute to the project dissemination and strategies for the further development an d 
translation of enzymes. 
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 
Dr Ronan McCarthy BSc (Hons), PhD, FHEA. (male) Senior Lecturer in the Biosciences Division in the College of Health, 
Medicine and Life Sciences since 2018. Formerly: Higher Scientific Officer at the Animal and Plant Health Agency- Weybridge 
UK (2017-2018), Visiting Academic at the MRC Centre for Molecular Bacteriology and Infection at Imperial College London 
(2017-2019), Postdoctoral Research Associate Visiting at the MRC Centre for Molecular Bacteriology and Infection at Imperial 
College London (2014-2017). 
Since joining Brunel University London Dr McCarthy has established himself as one of the Departments foremost 
researchers. This is reflected in him being selected as the Universities nominee for the Blavatnik Award for Young Scientists 
in Life Sciences 2019. Dr McCarthy has established an interdisciplinary international research collaborations with key leaders 
in his f ield and has secured funding to travel to China, Sweden and Kazakhstan to present his research and cultivate 
collaborations (Newton Fund, Global Challenges Research Fund, Young European Research Universities Travel Award). Dr 
McCarthy has extensive bioinformatic expertise particularly in bacterial genomics and in the development of novel strategies 
to modulate enzyme activity (Atomwise Artificial Molecular Screening Award x2). He has secured funding from leading funding 
bodies including the British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy (2019), Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research 
Council (2018) and the Wellcome Trust (2018). In 2019, he was also awarded an Innovate UK Smart Grant to work with 
synthetic biology company CC Bio Ltd. This grant is hig hly relevant to this proposal as it uses synthetic biology approaches 
such as modular assembly to develop novel enzymes capable of tackling microbial dysbiosis. In 2021, Dr McCarthy was 
awarded a highly prestigious BBSRC New Investigator award along with an Academy of Medical Sciences Award. 
Dr Ashley Houlden (Male) is an experienced molecular microbial ecologist having studied the impact of disease and injury 
in animal models on the GI microbiome. Some key research findings include how the intestinal paras ite Trichuris muris  
manipulates its host microbiome to protect itself and has its own specific internal microbiome, published in Science Advances. 
This experience, in both biological and bioinformatic microbial ecology analysis in a range of disease situations would be a key 
part to fit the research team for this proposal. Dr Houlden was part of the team that secured the BBSRC funded 
FoodBioSystems Doctoral Training Partnership and the UKRI supported Partnership for Sustainable Food Future – Centre for 
Doctoral Training at BUL. Dr Houlden also has experience with analysing the microbial communities capable of degrading 
plastic waste. 
Dr Sophie Howard (Female) is an experienced molecular microbiologist who has extensive in analysing bacterial 
regulatory pathways and recombinant protein production and purification. She completed her PhD in Imperial College London 
in 2020. During her PhD she published a number of high impact studies in publications such as PNAS, Cell Reports, mBIO 
and eLife. 
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 Valor Plus (FP7). Project valorisation project for C5 and lignocellulosic products. NS work package lead 
(based in UK, Spain, Austria, and Germany) for microbial aspects of the project, in addition to contributions to 2 
work packages: microbial strain optimization for C5-metabobolism, furfural tolerances, and butanol / product 
tolerance; and conversion of waste glycerol as a feedstock. Plus, support role for Technical University of Munich for 
optimization of strains for C5-rich hemicellulose-derived sugars (2013-2017).  
 SupraBio (FP7). Work package (added for last 2 years) to address issues of strain safety and optimization 
for the production on of 2,3-BDO in Gram negative bacteria. (2012-2014) 
 SynbiSTRAIN. A project supported 75% by SynbiCITE (the UK Synthetic Biology Accelerator) and 25% by 
Brunel, to establish core strain collection and genomics tools for the (10) priority species nominated by the 
academic and commercial partners of SynbiCITE to support synthetic biology translational research in the UK and 
beyond. (2015-17, and ongoing) 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 61  
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Prederently 2013-2019 years  
Our relevant work in these areas of biotechnology are largel y subject to commercial and partner agreements that do not 
lead to publishing in the academic literature, or are part of ongoing development towards commercialization through Sygenious, 
a company listed through Brunel University as a vehicle for development of resources and project development work in several 
areas. 
 The SynbiSTRAIN collections and supporting genomics are available to academic and commercial collaborators 
and co-developers, directly, or through SynbiCITE. 
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
There is an integrated synthetic biology research lab, with both bioinformatics and wet-lab facilities. The wet lab has three 
key parts, for strain storage, microbiology and culture, and a clean lab for molecular biology. There are dedicated within-lab 
facilities for QPCR, bioanalyzer, nanodrop, qubit, FastPrep, small-scale fermenters, and 96-well spectrophotometer for strain 
growth profiling and comparisons (for sequencing and strain / enzyme performance analysis), in addition to standard molecular 
and microbiology laboratory equipment. 
In addition to standard workstations, there is a dedicated central server for bacterial bioinformatics (64 cores, 1.5TB RAM), 
and as a host on the particle physics grid we have access to 4 -10,000 cores if / when necessary (for which we are an 
established / registered non-physics user group). 
There are a number of bespoke and unique bioinformatics resources and pipelines specifically developed for strain 
identification, typing, population genetics, and comparative and evolutionary genomics established on these resources. 
 
4.1.5. Partner 5. Miguel Hernandez University (UMH) - Spain 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
UMH of Elche is a public university located in southeast Spain, an area of high economic and business 
potential (about 2000 employees, 18000 students). 28 bachelors, 51 Masters and 13 Doctorates are included 
in our teaching scheme. A total of 27 department s and 5 research institutes are devoted to research and 
training. UMH has been beneficiary of more than 40 EU projects. The Research Results Transfer Office 
(OTRI) links scientific activity with the business world and specifically the European and Internat ional 
Research Projects Unit is in charge of administrative management of international projects, has extensive 
experience in managing European Projects and supports the researcher. Pre-doctoral expertise in formation on waste 
treatment, management and val orization, courses on recycling and advanced instrumental techniques for waste 
characterization is relevant to this proposal.  
The Applied Research Group on Agro-chemistry and Environment (GIAAMA) team, involved in this proposal belong 
to the Dept. of Agro-chemistry and Environment. GIAAMA has extensive research work about waste valorization throughout 
the last 15 years including:  
a) waste fluxes characterization using classical and new techniques (vg NIRS),  
b) co-composting strategies for several organic waste fluxes, specially manures and digestato,  
c) bio-fertilizer design and development mainly based on compost and vermicomposting 
d) Enzymatic profiling of soil-plant systems and organic matter degradation in forced and natural environments. 
d) Agronomic field validation of bio-fertilizers and new bio-products in commercial conditions using of wastes coming from 
the agriculture, the agro-food industry, and from urban origin (bio-solids and urban solid wastes).    
Their activity has been financed by public and private funds through more than 25 national and international projects and 
led to publication of over 120 peer -reviewed papers, 20 books, 24 book -chapters, 8 patents and more than 200 congress 
national and international communications 
Main role in the project WPs envolvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
UMH will support in the pre -treatments to enhance AWP biodegradation in WP1. In WP2, UMH will provide earthworm 
samples for microbiomes determination to other partners and develop lab scale assays with earthworms to monitor key 
activities related to plasti c degradation. In addition, pre -compatibility tests will done between earthworms and 2 -3 
microbial/enzyme pools, including survival and key enzymes. In WP3 (leaded by UMH) we will participate in the production of 
microbial/enzyme consortia (PMC) and earthworm fortified with PMC. UMH will help in WP4 to ex -situ and in-situ pilot-scale 
plastic degradation processes using fortified the earthworm collection from WP3. In WP5 UMH will help in the development of 
vermicompost products and residues of the AWP degrad ation processes including greenhouse tests. Finally, UMH will also 
contribute to providing data for environmental and socio economic sustainability analysis, dissemination activities, exploitation 
of their results and project management.  
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 62  
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 
RAUL MORAL HERRERO (male). BSc, PhD in Agro-chemistry, Professor at UMH (H-index 35) since 1994 and full professor 
since 2010. Extensive experience with research project management (15 projects), supervision (13 PhD students, 22 MSc theses), 
teaching (3 MSc). Extensive expertise in development of commercial organic fertilizers (7 within official Spanish fertilizer list). 
JUAN C. SANCHEZ-HERNANDEZ (male, UCLM member). PhD in Environmental Science (Univ. Siena, It), postdoc Marie-
Curie Fellowship (Univ. Lancaster, UK). Associate professor at UCLM since 2002 (H-index 25, Scopus author ID: 7004278012). 
Expertise in terrestrial ecotoxicology and bioremediation of pesticide-polluted soils using earthworm and biochar. 70 SCI research 
papers (85.7% in Q1), leadership of 10 national/regional projects, 9 book chapters, 1 edited CRC/Press book on bioremediation 
of agricultural soils, and 1 national patent on biological procedures for removal pesticides in soil (ref. P2013001180, 29/02/2016). 
CONCEPCIÓN PAREDES GIL. (Female) BSc, PhD in Chemical Sciences. Professor at UMH from 2001 to the present. She 
has supervised 7 PhD students and 23 MSc theses. Her scientific activity is focused on the characterisation of agro-industrial 
waste, their composting and agricultural valorisation. She has participated in different research projects and in advisory services 
with companies and administrations and she is author of 74 papers in SCI journals (h -index: 31; Scopus Author ID: 
http://www.scopus.com/authid/detail.url?authorId=7006458594). 
MARIA ANGELES BUSTAMANTE MUÑOZ. (Female) PhD in Chemistry (UMH), postdoc Juan de la Cierva (CEBAS -CSIC). 
Assistant professor at UMH since 2014 (H-index 21). 83 research papers published, 70 in SCI journals (56% in Q1), 3 books (1 
of them as co-editor) and 51 book chapters. Participant in 24 competitive research projects, 7 of them financed by the European 
Union. Supervisor of 5 PhD theses, 11MSc theses and 21 BSc theses. Expertise in organic waste management, obtaining of 
organic added-value materials by composting and use of organic materials in different agricultural sectors (organic and intensive 
farming and soilless cultivation).  
MARIA DOLORES PEREZ MURCIA. (Female) BSc, PhD in Chemical Sciences. Professor at UMH from 1994 to the present. 
She has supervised 5 PhD students and 27 MSc theses. Her scientific activity is focused on the analytical chemistry related to 
agronomy and environment including chemical and instrumental determinations. She has participated in different research 
projects and in advisory services with companies and administrations and she is author of 58 papers in SCI journals. 
XAVIER BARBER VALLÉS (Male) PhD in Statistics, Associate Professor at UMH (H-index-13). Extensive experience with 
supervision (Msc theses) and teaching (3 MSc). Extensive expertise in designing experiments and Bayesian methods applied to 
ecology and agronomy. 
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 REGROW-Reclamation of olive waste abandoned lagoons using bio-recovering strategies in a circular economy 
scenario. Ref: LIFE16 ENV/ES/000331, 2017-2020 (partner).  
 Earthworms and biochar: testing synergistic interactions to reduce pesticide impact in soil. CTM2014-53915-R. 
Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad (Madrid), 2017-2018. 
 Recovery and Use of Nutrients, Energy and Organic Matter from Animal Waste–ReUseWaste. Ref: 289887. 
Program PEOPLE, Initial Training Network. 2012–2015 (assoc. partner).  
 Enzymatic bioremediation of pesticide-polluted soils. PEII-2014-001-P. Consejería de Educación, Gobierno de 
Castilla-La Mancha (Toledo, Castilla-La Mancha), 2014-2017. 
 Contribution of earthworm activity to enzymatic bioremediation of pesticide-contaminated soils. CTM2011-25788. 
Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad (Madrid), 2012-2014. 
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Prederently 2013-2019 
years  
 Sanchez-Hernandez, J.C. 2018. Biochar activation with exoenzymes induced by earthworms: A novel functional 
strategy for soil quality promotion. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 350, pp. 136-143. 
 Vico, A., Pérez-Murcia, M.D., Bustamante, M.A., (...), Pérez-Espinosa, A., Moral, R. 2018. Valorization of date palm 
(Phoenix dactylifera L.) pruning biomass by co-composting with urban and agri-food sludge. J. Environ. Manage., 226: 408-
415;  
 Sanchez-Hernandez, J.C., Ríos, J.M., Attademo, A.M. 2018. Response of digestive enzymes and esterases of 
ecotoxicological concern in earthworms exposed to chlorpyrifos-treated soils. Ecotoxicology, 27 (7), pp. 890-899.  
 Jouni, F., Sanchez-Hernandez, J.C., Mazzia, C., Jobin, M., Capowiez, Y., Rault, M., 2018. Interspecific differences in 
biochemical and behavioral biomarkers in endogeic earthworms exposed to ethyl-parathion. Chemosphere, 202, pp. 85-93.  
 Sanchez-Hernandez, J.C., Notario del Pino, J., Capowiez, Y., Mazzia, C., Rault, M. 2018. Soil enzyme dynamics in 
chlorpyrifos-treated soils under the influence of earthworms. Science of the Total Environment, 612, pp. 1407-1416.  
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
Infrastructure: GIAAMA group facilities in EPSO campus (Orihuela, Spain), incl. technical labs, pilot scale composting 
facility, computer-controlled tunnels for compost optimization, open-air composting area for commercial scaling. Full-
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 63  
equipped biochemistry lab at the UCLM. 
Equipment: Culture chambers for earthworms, liquid chromatograph Agilent 1200 Series equipped with diode-array and 
fluorescence detectors, microplate-scale spectrophotometers, refrigerated centrifuges, MicroResp equipment, tissue 
homogenizers, vertical electrophoresis units for proteins. 
Staff: 7 Ph.D. permanent researchers, 2 post-docs, 3 PhD students, 1 technician. 
 
4.1.6. Partner 6. Albstadt-Sigmaringen University (ASU) - Germany 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
     
Food technology & nutrition is the core part of the education programme and the applied research in the faculty of Life 
Sciences of Albstadt-Sigmaringen University. Its activities belong to food product & process innovation (e.g. research projects 
in optimisation of food processing, functional & nutritional properties of food and food packaging) and production of cosmeti c 
products with botanical extracts. Business in novation modelling is also a central part in the faculty of Business Science & 
Management of ASU. Advanced materials are the core research and teaching field for the faculty of Engineering. ASU is a 
project partner in the field of safeguarding food quality & sustainable food packaging and in the field of developing new business 
models. It aims to expose students & scientific staff to real world problems in an EU-scale, thus enabling them to interact with 
other skilled actors in an international environment. 
Main role in the project WPs envolvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
ASU will support in WP1 where they will irradiate AWP via electron beam (eBeam) as abiotic APW degradation pre -
treatment to initiate chain scission. ASU will also sup port in WP5, where they will establish a more sustainable method to 
extract chitin from insects. This method will be based on eBeam irradiation. Within the same WP, they will evaluate coated 
specimen concerning optical properties and surface energy in term s of contact angle measurements as well as water steam 
permeability and permeability against O 2. Also in WP5, ASU will modify chitosan coated materials to enhance barrier, 
mechanical and anti-microbial performances for food packaging materials. Furthermore, ASU will characterize chitin/chitosan 
by-products and will use them to improve mulch materials for optimized conditions such as temperature and O 2/CO2/H2O 
contents considering soil respiration. The chosen chitin extraction residues will be applied to existing mulching films by coating 
and/or by compounding to mulching film polymers closing the loop within the RECOVER approach. 
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 
Prof. Dr. Markus Schmid (male) is a graduate in business administration. He holds a diploma degree in Food Technology 
and a master degree in Food Processing from the University of Applied Sciences Fulda as well as a Doctor´s degree from the 
Technical University of Munich, Germany. As Professor at Albstadt -Sigmaringen University his major research and teaching 
areas are in the field of Process Technology and Process De sign in Life Sciences with emphasis on food preservation and 
sustainable food packaging technology. He is actively involved in preparing project proposals and works as project manager 
in food packaging related public founded and industrial projects. He is author and co -author of more than 50 peer -review 
publications in journals of high repute and is regularly invited to speak at workshops and conferences. He was involved in 
several National and European projects dealing with the use of residue derived fractions in food packaging. (e.g. ThermoWhey: 
EraNet-ManuNet 02PN2020; Bio4MAP: FP7- 606144, BioBoard: FP7- 315313, ProgRESS: CorNet). 
Prof. Dr. Astrid Klingshirn (female)  holds a diploma degree in Home Economics and Nutrition from the Technical 
University of Munich as well as a Doctor´s degree from the University of Bonn, Germany. As Professor at Albstadt-Sigmaringen 
University her major research and teaching areas are in the field of Physical Food Analysis, Sensory Analysis, Food Product 
Development and Innov ation Management, Appliance and Food Service Technology, with a special focus on the impact of 
food preparation and storage technologies on physical and sensory food quality parameters. She is currently actively involved 
in research projects driving the standardization of home appliances and professional catering equipment related to performance 
parameters (e.g.: IEC SC 59 M/WG 4, CENELEC/TC 59X WG18). 
Kristina Eissenberger (female) holds a bachelor and a master degree in Biology from the Ludwig -Maximilian University 
Munich. As PhD student of University of Hohenheim she has a strong background in food microbiology and bacteria -plant-
interactions. As researcher at Albstadt -Sigmaringen University she is actively involved in studies on the effect of eBeam 
irradiation on the properties of bio-based polymer films. 
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 Biontop (H2020 BBI, in grant preparation): Novel packaging films and textiles with tailored end of life and 
performance based on bio-based copolymers and coatings, 2019-2023 
 Humidity Loss of Fresh Produce in Refrigerator Storage Compartments: Evaluation of test method options with high 
repetitious accuracy on behalf of the European Committee of Domestic Equipment Manufacturers (APPLiA), 2016. 
 Scientific evaluation of test methods for Refrigerated Food Storage Quality Performance  on behalf of the European 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 64  
Committee of Domestic Equipment Manufacturers (APPLiA), 2016. 
 Coolfresh: Development of internationally applicable test standards to assess the essential food preservation 
characteristics of household refrigerating appliances (WIPANO-Project,  03TNG001B), running 
 AlpBioEco - Valorisation of innovative bio-economical potentials along bio-based food & botanical extract value 
chains in the Alpine Space. WP T1 (walnut value chain - food/cosmetic applications) & WP T2 (Business models in 
regard to the walnut value chain), running project. 
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Prederently 2013-2019 
years  
 Mueller, K., Zollfrank, C., Schmid, M. (2019):“Natural Polym ers from Biomass Resources as Feedstocks for 
Thermoplastic Materials“ Macromol. Mater. Eng.,  
 Kaiser, K., M. Schmid and M. Schlummer (2018). “Recycling of Polymer -Based Multilayer Packaging: A Review.” 
Recycling 3(1): 1.Schumann, B., & Schmid, M. (2018). Packaging concepts for fresh and processed meat–Recent progresses. 
Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies. Sängerlaub, S., Schmid, M., & Müller, K. (2018). Comparison of water 
vapour transmission rates of monolayer films determined by water vapor s orption and permeation experiments. Food 
Packaging and Shelf Life, 17, 80-84. 
 Cinelli, P., Schmid, M., Bugnicourt, E., Wildner, J., Bazzichi, A., Anguillesi, I., Lazzeri, A. (2014):”Whey protein layer 
applied on biodegradable packaging film to improve barrier properties while maintaining biodegradability”. Polymer 
Degradation and Stability, 108: 151-157  
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
Access to laboratory equipped with latest state -of-the-art extraction units and eBeam technology (Comet). At ASU the 
faculty of Life Sciences scientific staff is very experienced in the development and characterization of food packaging. This  
includes the biopolymer extraction and processing, surface modification of bio-based films as well as the incorporation of active 
packaging constituents and the full characterisation of packaging relevant properties. Additionally, the faculty has the analytical 
equipment for characterizing the mechanical as well as barrier and optical properties of packaging films.  
 
4.1.7. Partner 7. NATURPLÁS PLÁSTICOS AGRICOLAS, S.L. (NATURPLAS)- Spain 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
 
    NATURPLÁS is a SME company founded in 2012, producer of plastics for a wide variety of 
agricultural applications. We offer products adapted to the agriculture needs; plastics for greenhouse covering, small tunnels, 
double chambers, padding, disinfection / solarisation, silage and geomembranes. 
Naturplas was set up in 2012 in order to meet the farmers’ needs and since then we are growing with them. Our business 
history of more than 30 years in the sector confirm us as a quality and confidence benchmark.  Our factories are in Portugal, 
because we are part of the Grupo Polivouga, one of the main plastics manufacturers in the Iberian Peninsula and among the 
top ten in Europe. We have two warehouses and centres for format transformation in Andalucía, located in Almería and Huelva. 
Logistically, they allow us to supply, within 24 hours, any area in the Iberian Peninsula. 
Naturplas products reach all over Spain and also Latin American and Maghreb markets, areas where there is an important 
growth in the consumption of agricultural plastics. 
As an European Community company, we are submitted to the European Union standards and protocols, which ensure 
safety and quality of our products. 
Naturplas is ISO 9001:2015 certified. 
Naturplas differentiates from competitors for the customization level of its products, which are always custom -made 
products, in order to meet our customers’ requirements, according to the type of cultivation and production area.  
Main role in the project WPs envolvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
NATURPLAS will support in understanding the market, logistics and requirements from agricultural films (WP1), will provide 
samples of agricultural films for the test of degradability (WP4). and for the development of new active mulching films enriched 
with fertilizers from by products from recover cascade to test (WP5). NATURPLAS will also contribute by  providing data for 
environmental and socio economic sustainability analysis, dissemination activities, exploitation of their results and project  
management.  
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 65  
Jose María Navarro. (male) -BSc in Chemistry. 1 year of experience as plastics producer in Naturplás Industrial company. 
Rocío Castelló. (female)- BSc in Chemical Engineering + MSB Environmental, industrial and food biotechnology. Over 6 
year of experience in the agri-business. 
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
  
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Prederently 2013-2019 
years  
Among NATURPLAS leading products are: 
• Agricultural films for greenhouse cover. 
• Mulch films 
• Films for low tunnels covering a variety of crops. 
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
1 cast-film extrusion production lines, up to 5 layers. 
 
4.1.8. Partner 8. ASA Special Enzymes GmbH - Germany 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
  The business activities of ASA Spezialenzyme GmbH are the development and production of 
enzymes, microbial mixed cultures and other biotechnological products. 
The product range covers the fields of application food and feed processing, bioenergy (bioethanol, biogas), organic 
synthesis, analytics, biosensors, textile industry and paper industry. 
Since the foundation in the year 1991 se veral research projects were carried out in the area of enzymatic degradation of 
renewable raw materials resulting in new cellulase and hemicellulase products for the utilization in the production of biodiesel, 
bioethanol and biogas. Furthermore ASA was en gaged in several r&d-projects dealing with the conversion of organic waste 
materials (e.g. lignocellulytic material as grain stillage), whereby ASA developed several new cellulases, hemicellulases, 
pectinases etc.  Moreover within the scope of a r&d -project ASA developed hydrolases degradation of bioplastic material, 
which might be useful for the RECOVER project. 
Main role in the project WPs envolvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
Involvement in WP2 and 3 for the selection and upscaling of enzymes for AWP degradation as well as for exploitation 
planning of the same in WP7. 
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 
 Dr. Arno Cordes (Male), Project leader; genetic engineering; management, LCA 
 Petra Hoferichter (Female) Dipl.-Ing, Scientist; Development and scale-up of fermentation processes  
 M. Sc. Marc Schreiber (Male), Project engineer; downstream processing of enzymes;  scale-up of 
downstream processing; production of enzymes 
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 The BERBION - Project: Efficient material & energy recovery from Organic waste and waste water in the Hamburg 
district Bergedorf (BMBF, 2009-2013) 
 Valor plus: Development of processes for the production of polyhydroxyalcanoates (EC-FB7; 2013 – 2017) 
 Biotechnological recycling of electronic waste: Development of processes for the production of 
polyhydroxyalcanoates (EC-FB7; 2013 – 2017) 
 ARBOCAR: Enzyme design and enzymatic modification of lignin for the refining of thermoplastic lignin compounds 
for car interiors (BMBF, 2008 – 2011) 
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Prederently 2013-2019 
years  
 Products: Special enzymes, cellulases, hemicellulases, amylases, proteases, lipases 
 Services: contract manufactoring, contract research 
 Cordes, A., Kunze, G., Dornig, D.: Development of an enzymatic process for the improvement of biogas yield and 
quality from plant and animal biomass. Research report, Fachagentur Nachwachsende Rohstoffee.V., FKZ 22011504 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 66  
(2006) 
 Bischoff, Felix, et al. "Three new cutinases from the yeast Arxula adeninivorans that are suitable for biotechnological 
applications." Applied and environmental microbiology 81.16 (2015): 5497-5510. 
o 5. Tonin, Fabio, et al. "Comparison of different microbial laccases as tools for industrial uses." New biotechnology 
33.3 (2016): 387-398. 
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
Fermentation: incubation chambers for flask shake cultures, pilot to industrial scale automated stainless steel bioreactors 
(10 L, 20 L, 100 L, 300 L, 1.000 L) 
Downstream processing: ultrasonic cell disruptor, glas bead mill, ultrafiltration systems from laboratory to technical scale, 
chromatography columns up to pilot scale, freeze dryer 
Gene technoology: PCR, electrophoresis systems, electroporator 
QC and analytics: electrophoresis systems, UV/Vis scanning spectrophotometers, 2 analytical HPLCs, 1 preparative HPLC 
 
4.1.9. Partner 9. NUTRINSECT SRL (NUTRINSECT) Italy 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
 
Nutrinsect is a biotech company with headquarters both in Italy and Spain specialized in alternative 
protein and nutrients production by breeding and industrial insect transformation. Nutrinsect provides a 
sustainable solution to address the organic waste increasing production and nutrient deficiency. We use 
insects as the food waste bio -transformers. Through organic waste disposal and treatment, we obtain 
natural fertilizer rich in nutrients ideals to biological culture and insects’ protein used such as nutrient source for animal feed. 
As innovative aspects we highlight: 1. Vertical breeding, maximizing space / land 2 -Feeding by organic waste 3 -High 
conversion rate, which allows to obtain large productions in short periods of time (between 14 days and 2 months) 4-Reduced 
environmental impact, (livestock Traditional is responsible for 16% of greenhouse gases, compared to 3% of insects) 5 -
Comprehensive use, 100% of the insect is edible (no other livestock is used 100%) and greater digestibility 6-Circular Economy, 
enhancing zero waste. One of the main costs in obtaining current proteins (raising livestock and fish for animal protein, or 
cultivating land for vegetable protein), is the feeding of livestock and the use of natural resources such as water. Insects feed 
on organic waste and their growth is exponential (unlike livestock and crops), which favours the reduction of costs and obtaining 
the product in less time. Faced with the instability of the prices of vegetable proteins (usually commodities) and the problem of 
supply (70% of soybeans are imported) we offer agreed price / deliveries because we do not depend on weather conditions or 
crop losses. The main suppliers for the operation of our activity are producers of vegetable waste, as they are the food of 
insects, and whose feeding will influence the quality of our final product. We have to take into account that the waste must be 
clean of possible pesticides, with what the ideal supplier are food industries that have done some type of treatment such as 
canning, freezing, and waste treatment plants, since they have washed, scalded etc, that have contributed to eliminate any 
type of insecticides applied at source. In addition, some of these suppliers can become cust omers of both our main product 
(protein meal) and other products obtained in the transformation process, such as organic fertilizer. 
Main role in the project WPs involvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
To follow the circular economy policy Nutrinsect will support the project for the agricultural plastics biodegradation by insect 
breeding (mainly T. molitor) on an industrial scale. Finally they will contribute to the project dissemination and plan exploitation 
of their results. 
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 
●  Tommaso Pinto, Tommaso Pinto, doctor in Marine biology, R&D manager and operative breeding phase 
responsible, 100% 
● Silvio Piccinini, doctor in Agriculture, operational manager of the breeding and production phases, 100%. 
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
● Assistance Regional program the “ I + D Empresarial del Gobierno de Navarra”; PLEAMAR 2018 program, 
European Maritime and Fisheries Fund of the European Union; 
● ALTERNFEED project, Substitution of fish meals and oils by alternative products; Industrial Technological 
Development Center of the Government of Spain; 
● NEOTEC financing line, where we developed 2 investigations: 1-Evaluation of alternative methods (probiotic-
postbiotic) as prophylactic tools in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) " , Ichthyopathology Laboratory of the University of 
Zaragoza; 
● H2020-EIC-SMEInst-2018-2020:Determination of the positive effects of insect-derived proteins as a protective and 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 67  
immunoenteroendocrine barrier of the gastrointestinal tract, MoBioFood research group of the Rovira Virgili University 
(Tarragona).  
● AFRODITA H2020-MSCA-ITN-2019: Innovative training Networks 
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including 
widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Prederently 2013-2019 years  
 First IPIFF International conference (21-22 /11/2017) in Brussels : "Insect for food and feed: opportunities for 
tackling societal challenges" 
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and demonstrate 
that each team has sufficient capacity 
Nutrinsect is based on the breeding of different insect species (Tenebrio molitor, A.domesticus) and is composed of a single 
body of 500 square meters. The Nutrinsect facilities includes breeding and housing room, each room is autonomously heated 
with a 12000 btu heat pump, and also an epa filter and forced air recirculation; UV-C lamp, 100 ° hot water jet washer, substrate 
(food for crickets) given daily; Abatement (cold room -20°); Microbial decontamination in air conditioning system. 
 
4.1.10. Partner 10. IRIS Technology Solutions S.L. (IRIS)- Spain 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
 
    IRIS Technology Solutions S.L. is part of IRIS Technology Group 
(http://www.iristechnologygroup.com/) is an advanced engineering Group that was established in Barcelona in 2007. It 
specialises in the manufacture and integration of Process Analytical Techno logy (PAT)-based real-time quality monitoring 
solutions for the process industries and IoT systems for smart manufacturing, predominantly targeted at the food, 
pharmaceutical and chemical industries. In particular, our product line comprises proprietary state-of-the-art IR analysers for 
at-line and in-line process monitoring.  
On the one hand, our solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics in the fields of MEMs, Near Infrared 
Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral Imaging, and Raman. On the other hand , we leverage ICTs, whereby we apply Machine 
learning, Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining techniques for predictive and active control, as well as for decision suppo rt 
systems. In addition to photonics-based analysers, we also work with IoT sensors for enabling equipment and machinery for 
smart manufacturing and transitioning industry to the Industry4.0 paradigm. Our solutions are cloud -based for mobility, 
remote monitoring and multi-site applications.  
Our Innovation Division which is governed by an I nnovation Committee comprising Senior Management, and an 
Innovation Unit for managing and executing the companies innovation roadmap,  has 3 core strategic lines, for shaping the 
Factory of the Future: 
1. New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process optimisation 
2. ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms) 
3. Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorization 
In addition to running an internal R&D programme, as well as carrying  our various joint private projects with industry 
partners, our Innovation Division is highly experienced in working in collaborative R&D projects in H2020 (both as 
coordinators and partners), principally in the SPIRE, FoF, and BBI programmes. The company was established in 2007 and 
currently employs 60+ staff with a turnover of € 5 M. It is equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet 
chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified and also is 
certified under UNE -EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i. We are also certified by the local (Catalonian) 
government as a provider of technological R&D services (Tecnio Certification). IRIS is a member of the following sectorial 
networks: SPIRE, SPIE and SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial collectives such as Smart Space (association of 
companies and organisations that specialise in the ‘smartification’ of industry). 
IRIS has a matrix of multidisciplinary knowledge groups in the company with strong expertise in engineering and science. 
With its team and resources, including electronics, mechatronics, mechanical, optical, industrial design engineers, as well as 
specialists in system engineering, application programming and web de velopment etc. the group can carry out full system 
design and engineering, including electronic design and assembly, firmware and software development, electrical harnesses 
and interconnections, mechanical design for enclosure and prototype integration, as  well as installation, validation and 
industrialisation of prototypes and equipment in production plants. As such they have recently delivered advanced plastic 
sorting devices. In addition to this broad cross-disciplinary engineering team, IRIS’ research team consists of data scientists, 
chemiometricians, chemists and physicists, among others, who have the expertise to validate the technologies developed. 
Main role in the project WPs envolvement and key task or activities to be done in each 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 68  
IRIS will support WP1 where they will test different photonic -based systems for the end of life material identification to 
ensure they can appropriately be handled with the new process but also in WP4 for the monitoring of the disintegration under 
the different tested conditions and the development of predictive models that can support the optimisation and upscaling of 
the new biodegradation approach. Finally they will contribute to the project dissemination and plan an outmost exploitation 
of their results. 
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 
Dr. Ing. ELODIE BUGNICOURT. (female) Project manager and Leader of the innovation unit in IRIS since 2009. Masters 
in Material Science & Engineering (2002), PhD in Polymers and Composite Materials (2005), both from National Institute of 
Applied Science (INSA), Lyon, France. Coordinated several European projects in the fields of bio-based packaging materials 
development, process monitoring, surface treatment. Previous industry experience: Arkema; Wacker Chemie, Ashland. 
Dr. LAURA RODRÍGUEZ TURIENZO. (female) B.S in Food Science & Technology (2008) Masters in Innovation in Safety 
& Food Technologies (2010), PhD in Biological Sciences (2011), all from University of Santiago de Compostela (USC), Spain. 
Leads the Science and Engineering department at IRIS. Has been involved in a number of EU projects. 
ALEJANDRO ROSALES (male) has a M. Sc. in Physics from the Universidad de La Habana (1986). His background 
comprises theoretical and technical skills in several scientific and technological areas: optics, lasers, high vacuum, 
colorimetry, UV -VIS-NIR-MIR spectroscopy, chemometrics and design of measurement instruments. He has extensive 
practical experience in programming, electronics and mechanical CAD design as well as R&D methodology and 
management. Currently, he is the Science & Technology Manager in IRIS. 
Dr. CUAUHTEMOC ARAUJO  (Male) Chemometrician. Degree on Physics, master degree in Material Sciences, and 
doctorate degree in Applied Sciences. Conducted research in the fields of materials sciences, optical spectroscopies and 
chemometrics. More than 20 years of experience working on a wide range of biological and non -biological applications of 
vibrational spectroscopies (i.e. Raman, MIR and NIR). Also worked closely with other characterization techniques such as: 
UV/Vis and fluorescence spectroscopies. 
Dr. LAURENT PHILIPPET  (Male) Scientist. Bachelor’s degree in science, speciality applied physics (Université Paris 
Sud). Engineer’s degree in Optical Science (Institut d’Optique Graduate School). PhD in Optical Science (University Paris 
XIII). Experimental physicist specialised in optics and photonics with specific skills in laser physics, spectroscopy techniques, 
microscopy, interferometry and optical design.  
Dr. DAVID NETTLETON. (male) Data Mining Analyst. Has a Ph.D in Artificial Intelligence from the Universitat Politécnica 
de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, M.Sc. In Computer Software and Systems Design from the University of Newcastle upon 
Tyne, U.K., and B.Sc. (Hons) Computer Science from the University of Wolverhampton, U.K. Has over 20 years experience 
of applying data mining algorithms and statistical techniques in a diversity of data analysis and modeling projects. As well as 
commercial projects, he has conducted research and lectured at two universities.  
Dr. JOSE ANTONIO IBARRA FUSTE  (male). Scrum Master. PhD. in Signal Theory and Communications, Universitat 
Politècnica de Catalunya, Spain (2014), Thesis: “Design Rules and Optimization of Electro -Optics Modulators Based on 
Coplanar Waveguides”. Master Degree in Telecommunication Systems from Univers idad de Oriente, Cuba (2005). 
Telecommunication Engineer Degree from Universidad de Oriente, Cuba (2003). Experienced in optical communication 
softwares, in electromagnetic structures simulators and in many programming languages. 
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 Hypera, Affordable hyperspectral Imaging System for on-line foreign body detection and chemical composition 
analysis, H2020- SMEInst, 2016-2017 
 MULTICYCLE (H2020 SPIRE) Advanced & sustainable recycling processes and value chains for plastic-based 
multi-materials, 2018-2021 
 Biontop (H2020 BBI, in grant preparation): Novel packaging films and textiles with tailored end of life and 
performance based on bio-based copolymers and coatings, 2019-2023 
 COMPO-BALL; Project full title: Novel on-line composting monitoring system; Grant agreement no.: 243625; Feb 
2010- Jan 2013. Funding programme: FP7 
 B2B contracts in the field of multilayer plastic films sorting. 
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Prederently 2013-2019 
years  
 Relevant product lines: Monitoring devices for real-time quality control: 
o VisumPALM: NIR technology for incoming material quality control and detection of adulteration.   
o VisumNIR: In-Line NIR monitoring for product standardization and increase of production efficiency.   
o Hypera: Hyperspectral imaging solutions for the industry 
o Services: Chemiometrics model development and training 
 A. A. Gowen, Y. feng, E. Gaston, V. Valdramidis (2015). Recent applications of hyperspectral imaging in 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 69  
microbiology. Talanta 137, p. 43-54. 
 Whey protein layer applied on biodegradable packaging film to improve barrier properties while maintaining 
biodegradability, Patrizia Cinelli, Markus Schmid, Elodie Bugnicourt, Jessica Wildner, Agostino Bazzichi, Irene Anuillesi, 
Andrea Lazzeri, Polymer Degradation and Stability (Impact Factor: 2.63). 07/2014; DOI: 
10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2014.07.007 
 A. Rosales, O. Mc Nerney. Sensing Technology. Chapter 6. Resource Efficiency of Processing Plants. Monitoring 
and Improvement.  Edited by Stefan Krämer and Sebastian Engell. Wiley-Vch. Print ISBN: 978-3-527-34074-3   
 "Wireless Sensor Network for Smart Composting Monitoring and Control". Oscar Casas, Marga López, Marcos 
Quílez, Xavier Martinez-Farre, Gemma Hornero, Carlos Rovira, Mirta R Pinilla, Pedro M Ramos, Beatriz Borges, Hugo 
Marques, Pedro Silva Girão Measurement 01/2014; 47:483 – 495 
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, a FTIR -ATR (Interspectrum), 2 UV -VIS 
(PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), an Extended -SWIR (StellarNet) and a NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as well as a 
SWIR Hyperspectral imager (Specim -Xenics). The associated staff are properly trained and skilled in chemometrics 
modelling by using a commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non-commercial chemometric tools 
(Matlab and Python toolboxes). 
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up -to-date hardware and tools: signal 
generators, wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for programming 
microcontrollers, CNC-milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD software [SolidWorks], among 
others.   
Our optical engineers work with ZEEMAX software for optimally designing of optical systems and to setup the designs by 
means of advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and related 
“optical ware”). 
Food and wet chemistry lab equipped with a DSC, a Surface Energy analyser, an HPLC, a Cobb tester, microbiological 
equipment, microscope and microtome for structural analysis, migration cells, colorimeter (for colour and opacity 
measurement), Ford cup viscometers, water vapour permeation cells, turbid meter, climatic chambers, manual and automatic 
coaters, electrospray, different drying technologies, plasma surface activation, etc. 
 
4.1.11. Partner 11 Organic Waste Systems (OWS)- Belgium (Terminated) 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
 
Organic Waste Systems (OWS) is a stock company under Belgian law, constituted in 1988. The company is mainly active 
in following areas: the area of engineering, construction and operation of composting and biogasification plants, the area of 
biodegradation and composting laboratory testing, the area of waste management consulting services and environmental 
sustainability assessment. OWS developed the anaerobic Dranco -process to treat several waste streams. The OWS 
laboratory is fully equipped to perform the  necessary tests and analyses to simulate and manage a digestion process. 
Moreover OWS has a longstanding experience in the field of compostability testing and biodegradation in all kind of 
environments (compost, soil, anaerobic, freshwater and marine conditions). OWS has tested more than 3000 products in this 
field for more than 800 different clients. The lab is recognized as testing lab on compostability and biodegradation by all 
certification institutes worldwide (TÜV AUSTRIA Belgium, Din Certco, BPI, ABA,…). OWS was, and still is, actively involved 
in the development of test procedures (and international standards) to evaluate the biodegradation of materials under different 
environments (compost, soil, anaerobic, water, marine). OWS is involved in variou s standardisation committees and 
standardisation projects:  ISO TC61/SC5/WG22 - Biodegradable Plastics (Off. Belgian delegate); CEN TC261/SC4/WG2 : 
Packaging-Organic Recovery (Off. Belgian delegate); CEN TC249/WG9 : Plastics – Degradability (Off. Belgian d elegate); 
ASTM D 20.96 Degradable Plastics; E 47.06 Chemical Fate; D 10 Packaging; D 34 Waste Management. Moreover OWS 
has an experienced staff performing life cycle assessment with technical knowledge of production chains in the chemical, 
plastic, food and energy industry, in the transport sector and in the field of waste treatment. 
Main role in the project WPs envolvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
OWS is WP leader of WP4 and involved in the development of the biodegradation processes  and upscaling. OWS will 
examine the effectiveness of the process on the biodegradation of plastic waste. Moreover OWS will perform the LCA and 
check biodegradation of chitosan and chitin formulations. 
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, Who will 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 70  
be primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 
Mr. BRUNO DE WILDE (male), lab manager, Master in bioscience eng ineering with a specialization in environmental 
technology at the State University of Gent and started working in OWS at 1989. He is the author or co -author of many 
scientific articles on biodegradation and compostability. For many years he has been active ly involved in several 
standardization committees such as ISO, CEN and DIN in the field of biodegradable and compostable materials. He is also 
a member of the Certification Committee Biodegradable Materials of DIN CERTCO (Germany). 
Mr. STEVEN VERSTICHEL ( male), lab project manager, Master of Science in bioscience engineering with a 
specialization in environmental technology at the State University of Gent. He is the author or co-author of several scientific 
articles on biodegradation and compostability. He started working at OWS at 1999 and is head of BCE (Biodegradation, 
Compostability and Eco-toxicity) department. Within OWS he is responsible for organisation of EU projects. 
Ms. NIKE MORTIER (female), lab project manager, Master of Science in bioscience engineering with a specialization in 
environmental technology at the State University of Gent. She started working in 2008 and is project manager for 
compostability and eco-toxicity testing and was responsible for EU -projects as FP7 KBBPS and FP7 OPEN -BIO. She was 
and is active in several standardization committees on biodegradation. She is also representative of ECOS (European 
Environmental Citizens Organisation for Standardisation) in standardization groups on biodegradation. 
Ms. LYNN SERBRUYNS (female) is Master of Science in Biology at the State Univer. of Gent. She started working in 2011 
and is project manager for biodegradation testing within OWS. 
Mr. STEVEN DE METS (male) is an engineer with a specialization in biochemistry. He is a project engineer of  the LCA 
department. 
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 FP7 FORBIOPLAST ‘Forest resource sustainability through biobased composite development’, tasks OWS: 
biodegradability and compostability (organic recycling) testing, LCA 
 FP7 SYNPOL ‘Biopolymers from syngas fermentation’; tasks OWS: biodegradability and compostability (organic 
recycling) testing, ecotoxicity, LCA 
 FP7 BIOBOTTLE ‘Biodegradable solutions for packaging of liquid dairy products’; tasks OWS: biodegradability 
and compostability testing (organic recycling), ecotoxicity, LCA 
 FP7 BIOCLEAN ‘New BIOtechnologiCaL approaches for biodegrading and promoting the environmEntal 
biotrAnsformation of syNthetic polymeric materials’. Investigation of bioremediation and bioaugmentation processes, LCA 
  H2020 OPTINANOPRO ‘Processing and control of novel nanomaterials in packaging, automotive and solar panel 
processing lines’; task OWS: organic recycling (composting), LCA. 
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Prederently 2013-2019 
years  
 De Wilde, B., Mortier, N., Verstichel, S., Briassoulis, D., Babou, M., Mistriotis, A. & Hiskakis, M. (2013). Report on 
current relevant biodegradation and ecotoxicity standards. 
(http://www.biobasedeconomy.eu/media/downloads/2013/01/130226%20KBBPPS%20Deliverable%206_1.pdf) 
 Phuong T.V., Verstichel S., Cinelli P., Anguillesi I., Coltelli M.-B., Lazerri A. (2014). Cellulose Acetate Blends – 
Effect of Plasticizers on Properties and Biodegradability. Journal of renewable materials 02/2014; 2(1).  
 Seggiani M., Cinelli P., Verstichel S., Puccini M., Vitolo S., Anguillesi I., Lazzeria A. (2015). Development of 
Fibres-Reinforced Biodegradable Composites. Chemical Engineering Transactions Vol. 43, 1813 – 1818. 
 Mortier N., Velghe F. and Verstichel S. (2016). Organic Recycling of Agricultural Waste Today: Composting and 
Anaerobic Digestion. Book Elsevier: Biotransformation of Agricultural Waste and By-Products. The Food, Feed, Fiber, 
Fuel (4F) Economy, Chapter 4, Pag 69-122. 
 Biodegradable Plastic Blends Create New Possibilities for End-of-Life Management of Plastics but They Are Not a 
Panacea for Plastic Pollution. Tanja Narancic, Steven Verstichel, Srinivasa Reddy Chaganti, Laura Morales-Gamez, 
Shane T. Kenny, Bruno De Wilde, Ramesh Babu Padamati, and Kevin E. O’Connor. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52 
(18), pp 10441–10452.  
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
Incubation rooms for composting vessels (200 liter vessels) and reactors (2 liter, 4 liter and 6 liter reactors). Incubation at 
different temperatures possible. 
Equipment for biodegradation tests in all kind of environments: compost, anaerobic, soil, water, marine… 
Analytical equipment for compost analyses (drying oven, muffle furnace, titrators, pH -meters, centrifuge, manual and 
automatic sieves, gas chromatographs, spectropho tometer, AAS, flow injection analyser, grinding equipment, TOC 
analyser… ).UVA weather meter 
LCA software: SimaPro LCA software in combination with the Ecoinvent and ELCD LCA databases. 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 71  
4.1.12. Partner 12. IDELUX Environnement - Belgium 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
The group IDELUX is made of five inter -municipals, respectively named “ IDELUX 
Développement, IDELUX Environnement, IDELUX Eau, IDELUX Finances and IDELUX Projets publics ”. Their common 
mission is to improve the well-being of the populations of their territories of action. The Group exercises two big jobs related 
to the prospect of the sustainable development: the economic development and the management of the environment. As a 
major concern, the assistance to the municipalities is also a big part of the work performed. 
IDELUX Environnement is responsible for the waste treatment from their collection to their valuation. IDELUX Environnement 
is managing household waste within the Luxembourg province of Belgium (4400 km² and about 340.000 inhabitants). In total, 
55 municipalities entrust to IDELUX Environnement the management of their waste. This mission of public service is essential 
for the municipalities, but also for the citizens.  In addition to the collection door to door or in the civil amenities, IDELUX 
Environnement operates three waste treatment centres including an anaerobic digester, a substitution fuel preparation unit, 
different paving stones of composting, two halls of sorting for recycling waste, a recycling of inert waste unit, two wastewater 
treatment plants, a sludge drying unit, a platform of sorting the deck for agricultural covers and finally when no other options 
remain, the waste landfill facilities. IDELUX Environnement has experience with several types of waste streams.  
IDELUX Environnement knows very well the problematic of plastics ending in the compost made of municipal waste due 
to sorting mistakes made by the citizen. As an industrial partner specialized in the waste treatment, the new technology that 
will be developed through the RECOVER project is of great interest. This will help the actual mechanical sorting and reduce 
the plastics ending in the environment despite all our efforts. Our public company makes a perfect showcase of the plastics 
end-of-life issue and will considerably contribute to the life cycle assessment or the business case analysis. Therefore, 
IDELUX Environnement  will be helpful for organic waste, digestate, sludge or other biomass suppli es. IDELUX 
Environnement will share its knowledge and properties in the biowaste flow as well as the operation of the composting facility.  
Main role in the project WPs envolvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
IDELUX Environnement will lead the WP1 for the characterization, selection and collection of the most representative 
agri-food plastic waste. IDELUX Environnement will continuously provide biowaste samples to all the other partners but more 
importantly, IDELUX Environnement will participate in WP4 to the elaboration of some pilot tests of the new technology. 
IDELUX Environnement  will help to improve the new vermicompost reactor development. For the WP6, IDELUX 
Environnement will contribute to analyse the RECOVER developed technology for both agricultural and municipal use 
scenarios and will indicate the logistic viability of the proposed solutions. Furthermore, IDELUX Environnement will provide 
plant operating data to perform the LCA (WP6). IDELUX Environnement  will also contribute fo r communication and 
dissemination tasks (WP7). The idea is to stimulate a direct public engagement from the citizens and the local policy makers 
about plastic sorting mistakes. 
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 
Marie-Aline PIERRARD (Female) has a Master of Biological Science with a specialization in ecology of fresh water, 
and a PhD in Biological Sciences, Environmental Toxicology, both at Namur University. She holds a post -Doc from the 
Luxembourg Institute of Health. She is a proje ct manager in IDELUX Environnement and is responsible for the EU -project 
H2020-Volatile as well as internal research projects.  
Hugues HANOSSET (Male) is an Electromechanical Engineer from ECAM, Bruxelles Graduate School. He is a Waste 
Processing Plants Project Leader in IDELUX Environnement.  
Marc LUC (Male) is the Operating Manager of the waste treatment plant of Tenneville. 
Christophe ARNOULD (Male) graduated as an Electromechanical Engineer at ECAM, Bruxelles Graduate School. He 
is the Waste Processing Plants Director 
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 H2020-VOLATILE – Biowaste derived volatile fatty acid platform for biopolymers, bioactive compounds and 
chemical building blocks (Grant Agreement no: 720777). 
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call conten t. Prederently 2013 -2019 
years  
 35000 tons/year of municipal biowaste treatment  
 25000 tons/year of green waste treatment 
 25000 tons/year of digestate are mixed with the volume of green waste in the composting facility 
 20000 tons/year of compost made of municipal biowaste are certified and sold. 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 72  
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
Industrial household biowaste treatment facilities (35 000 tons biowaste/year). 
Logistic of various plastic waste streams. 
Composting facilities. 
 
 
4.1.13. Partner 13. Femto Engineering (FEMTO) / Italy 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
FEMTO is a mechanical engineering and manufacturing company of a scope and size able 
to cater to product design, prototyping, engineering, production equipment design and construction and techno -polymer 
component production requirements. 
FEMTO is an SME at the moment but is in process of acquisition by a Large group (LCI) and will therefore adopt the 
financial conditions related to large companies in BBI-RIA projects upfront by providing their full budget as in kind contribution. 
FEMTO furnishes a global engineering service, working alongside customers and providing support from the  initial 
development phases of a new product up to and including complete industrialisation, with a complete suite of skills and 
instruments covering the entire development cycle, from the initial design phase to the finished product.  
With FEMTO, companies requiring technical and technological operating support can study a new product from the initial 
aesthetic/functional design phase, simulate its manufacturing processes, construct prototypes, production equipment and 
produce this in complete continuous a nd univocal partnership, without fragmentation and with fully coherent methods of 
operation, all to the advantage of development times and the substantial quality of the product. 
Since it was set up in 1995 as an engineering company oriented towards design  using state-of-the-art Cad/Cam/Cae 
instruments, FEMTO has gradually expanded through the setting up of a suite of operating structures able to provide 
customers with increasingly complete support. 
Today, FEMTO is able to follow up the entire development p rocess comprising design, engineering, calculation, model 
shop, rapid prototyping, design of equipment, construction, tooling and production, in a wide range of application sectors. 
FEMTO cooperates with a number of leading manufacturing companies operating in market sectors such as: automotive, 
transport, household appliances, electro-tools, biomedical, electro-medical, marine, telecommunications, sports equipment, 
and consumer goods in general. 
Investing more than 10% of annual turnover in R&D, FEMTO furn ishes not only technical expertise but also innovative 
machinery and technologies using software and hardware systems able to machine and manage all types of materials with 
up to concurrent 5-axis controls.  
FEMTO’s team has specific expertise in the plast ic materials, metalwork construction and composite materials sectors, 
always based on experience acquired through studies of strictly technical, precision parts and projects in forefront technical 
environments.  
FEMTO operates also with our laboratory of electronic microscopy, where we have a Field Emission Scanning Electron 
Microscope (Zeiss Merlin) able to operate structural, morphologic and chemical characterization of solid materials in a big 
range of applications. 
We are, therefore, able to offer a qualified high-value added service based on substantial completeness of the cooperation 
furnished. 
Main role in the project WPs envolvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
FEMTO will perform plastic conversion, tests with chitosan for packaging, provides specifications and samples of 
packaging to recover. 
FEMTO have a good expertise at this level, and in particular in the context of FP7 where it participated with a similar role.  
FEMTO have realized numerous applications based on the use  of bio-polymers, such us more than 30.000 pieces of ECO 
PHONE, a cordless device produced for Telecom Italy, pots based on bran and potato fibres with biodegradable polymeric 
matrices. They will have very important roles in WP1 providing support in settin g logistic approaches for plastic collection 
and handling, based on their experience in plastic production and processing, in WP5, for producing pots, tips and other 
packaging or agriculture products valorised by chitin/chitosan presence, and in WP6 to ref ine logistic of RECOVER and to 
support in data for safety, risk and sustainability analysis,.  
FEMTO is able to cover all the stages of development of a new product from conception to realization with his expertise 
on materials, design and technology applied to production process. With FEMTO is possible to define a new object, a new 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 73  
device and after provide with a complete development, indeed FEMTO has a design department, a mechanical workshop, a 
prototyping department and a production department, in addition to a microscopy and measurement laboratory certificated.    
With his multifunctional team can ensure an integrated management of the entire process reducing overlap between 
functional steps and the uniqueness information. 
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 
 Dr. Ing. Giuseppe Amato (male) Co-founder and CEO of FEMTO srl. 1995–2004 Founder and only administrator 
of Femto srl, an engineering company working for projection and production with computer and machines assistance, by 
offering services of products development and of support for Italian and foreign manufacturers.1989-1995 Freelancer. 
Consultant senior for CAD/CAM/CAE for various manufacturers strongly collaborating with national and international 
producers of software for projection and production with computers and machines assistance (Parametric Technolgy Corp., 
Open Mind, Auton, Think3..). 1987-1989 Manufacturing Manager for Officine Meccaniche DP srl. 
 Dott. Andrea Cavallo (male) Master Degree in Scienze Geologiche Roma University. Final rating 
107/110.Scientific research and technological applications of Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and the Electronic 
Microprobe (EMPA) in the field of mineralogy, petrology, experimental petrology and geology of the microstructure and the 
material sciences. 
Responsible for the use and maintenance of the following equipment installed in the laboratory of micro-analysis of the 
National Institute of Geophysics and Volcanology (High Pressure and High Temperature Laboratory of Experimental 
Geophysics and Volcanology (HP-HT): Scanning Electron Microscope Emission field (FESEM model JEOL 6500F) and the 
Electronic Microprobe (EMPA JXA model JEOL 8200). (Service Order INGV, Roma 1 Section 2/2011 and subsequent 
Internal Register no. 0000383 of 03/02/2015) 
Support activities for users outside the laboratory (INGV, other research organizations, universities and third-account)  
Activities of maintenance and development of high-tech FESEM and EMPA. 
Preparation of natural samples and experimental, electronic microanalysis for high vacuum (EMPA) .and for high resolution 
imaging (FESEM) 
Activity of design and realization in Labview development environment of a SW control and data logging that integrates 
data and controls the pressure and temperature of a press in solid medium supplied to the laboratory HP-HT of the section 
of Roma1. 
 Ing. Tommaso D’Amico (male) Bachelor Degree in Industrial Engineering (2005), from Florence Engineering 
University. Senior Production Engineer and CAD/CAM Manager in Femto Engineering. He has participated in a number of 
R&D regionally, nationally and internationally funded projects aimed at developing and validating new bio-based material 
and new production technology systems. 
 Dott. Ing. Alessandro Velenosi (male) Master Degree in Mechanical Engineering, ex Department of di Mechanics 
and Industrial Technologies, thesis: “Sviluppo di un Modello di Taglio del Legno in funzione dell’Orientazione della 
Fibratura”. Finale rating 110/110. 
Assistant Researcher for the activity: “Sviluppo di strategie per l’ottimizzazione di un processo di asportazione di truciolo 
nell’ambito del p rogetto finanziato ATENE”. The research is directly applied to the analysis of geometrical errors and 
unbalance sources of 3D Full Milled Impellers for Centrifugal Compressor in Nuovo Pignone GE Oil & Gas, focused on: Tool 
Wear and effects on cutting conditions to evaluate vane surface errors variability, tool life, chatter occurrence Machine Tool 
Kinematic Accuracy for a full optimization of Impeller geometrical errors and an increase of process capabilityVirtual 
Reconstruction Method given by the integrat ion of CAM/CAD software with developed numerical tools for data processing 
and representation 
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 2010-2104 - Customer Brandani Gift Groups production of trays and vessel in PLA for domestic tools and 
accessories 
 2008-2014 – Design and construction of moulds compatible with bio-materials for the production of table 
accessories 
 Agri and food waste valorisation co-ops based on flexible multi-feedstocks bio-refinery processing technologies for 
new high added value applications AgriMax H2020 BBI GA 720719  
 Development of Personalised Food using Rapid Manufacturing for the Nutrition of elderly Consumers
 PERFORMANCE FP7 GA 312092  
 Integrated cascades of PROcesses for the extraction and valorisation of proteins and bioactive molecules from 
Legumes, Fungi and Coffee agro-industrial side streams Prolific H2020 BBI GA 790157 
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Prederently 2013-2019 
years  
 2005-2012: Project MIUR-FIRB "Developing new technologies for the protection and defense of the territory from 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 74  
natural hazards." Within the project I supervised the launch of the electronic laboratory microanalysis (FESEM and EMPA), 
paying particular attention to the chemical composition of the products of effusive and explosive volcanic districts Italians, in 
the setup and calibration of electronic microanalysis. 
 2014-2015: Project "EPOS". As part of the Preparatory Phase of the project I have taken care of the task called 
"LabService" Work Package "WP6". 
 2007-2009: Project INGV-DPC V1 UNREST: Realization of an integrated method for the definition of the unrest 
phases at Campi Flegrei. 
INGV-DPC V4 FLANK (2007-09). UR V4 / 08 and UR V4 / 09. Hazard connected  to the flank of Etna dynamics INGV -
DPC (2004-2006) V3_2. RH 9 Campi Flegrei 
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
Microanalisys laboratory equipped with several instruments, among which the FE-SEM high resolution microscope Zeiss 
Merlin.Mechanical department equipped with different machines : Milling system Sigma MISSION 5M, Milling system Mikron 
VCP 600, Milling system Hermle C600V, Milling system Fagima SPINFAST 220, EDM system Agie AGIETRON IMPACT 3, 
Wire EDM Sodick A 535, Grinding machine Delta SYNTH 800x500 COMPACT PLUS, Radial Drill 40x1250 416.02, Circular 
saw Shark 280SX Jet, Late CU 400/1000, Column drill IM115 and 35ME 
Production department equipped with different machines :  Injection machine 9HP300/1300 SANDRETTO, Injection 
machine 9HP75/285 SANDRETTO, Injecti on machine 9HP120/430 SANDRETTO, Injection machine BMbiraghi mod. 
SINTESI 100, Injection machine BMbiraghi mod. SINTESI 35, Inkection machine BMbireghi mod. SINTESI S580, Injection 
machine Negri Bossi serie CANBIO mod. VS250… 
 
 
4.1.14. Partner 14  (Entogreen – Ingredient Odyssey, Lda)- Portugal 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
The agri -food sector faces two major challenges, desertification of soils, with the 
growing need for nutrient input, and reliance on imported nutritional sources for animal feed. However, on the other hand, 
society faces another major challenge, food waste, resulting in high inefficiencies in natural res ource management and 
nutrient loss along the value chain. 
EntoGreen is the brand for the company Ingredient Odyssey, Lda and is dedicated to the valorization of agroindustrial 
by-products, with the mission of reduci ng the nutritional waste that occurs in the value chain, returning the environmental 
sustainability to the agrifood sector and contributing to the sustainable management and efficient use of natural resources. 
The biological system we have developed is based on the principles of circular economics and returns the otherwise lost 
nutrients to the value chain, giving them a second life in the nutrition of both animals and plants. The link that allows nutrient 
circularization is the Black Soldier Fly (Hermetia illucens) larvae, an insect that has a large capacity for conversion of organic 
matter. 
Thus, by-products that would otherwise be lost on landfill or composting serve as feed for these larvae, which after about 
15 days reach a suitable larval phase to be s eparated and processed. This process allows the production of three 
differentiated end products, insect protein concentrate and insect oil (used in animal feed) and organic fertilizer (for plan t 
nutrition). In this way, we reduce food waste by acting at the agricultural producer and processor level (Figure 1). 
For their part, these new sources of animal nutrition contribute significantly to the sustainability of animal production in 
Portugal and in Europe, reducing the importation of other protein sources o n which our continent is highly dependent, such 
as soy and fishmeal. In addition, these new nutritional sources contribute to the sustainability of aquaculture by reducing this 
sector's reliance on wild fish catches, and poultry and pig production by reducing the area needed to produce their feed. On 
the other hand, the use of organic fertilizers in agricultural soils reduces the dependence on chemical and mineral fertilizers, 
which contribute to groundwater contamination. 
We hope to build a facility capabl e of converting significant quantities of by -products with a significant regional impact, 
reducing waste and offering more sustainable, locally produced, alternative nutritional solutions, making local farming 
nutritionally more independent. 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 75  
Figure 1 - EntoGreen production process. Green - Waste, Blue - Production of inoculated larvae, Red - Production, Purple 
- End products. 
 
Model 
EntoGreen is headquartered in Santarém, having a pilot unit (Figure 2) built at the National Zootechnical Station, an R&D 
center belonging to INIAV, an institution with which we have several projects submitted and approved. Among the approved 
projects we have a strategic one which is EntoValor, a project under co-promotion under COMPETE2020 and led by us and 
which serves as proof of concept for our process and business plan. 
 
Figure 2 - Processes developed at EntoGreen pilot unit in Vale de Santarém 
 
EntoGreen's business model is based on nutrient circularization, a process in which we receive plant by -products from 
agro-industrial partners which are used as a nutritional source for our insect larvae. These insect larvae, produced at 
EntoGreen's premises, are inoculated into the by-products at the right doses and at the most suitable larval phase, ensuring 
by-product bioconversion into three main products, insect protein and oil and organic fertilizer, thus creating a by -product 
solution. which do not always find a suitable destination (Figure 3).  
 
Figure 3 - The nutrient cycle in EntoGreen's production process 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 76  
EntoGreen's plans are to build a unit capable of converting 3000T of plant by-products per month, being able to produce 
about 750T of organic fertilizer, 214T of insect protein and 42T of insect oil. In addition, this unit will be able to employ over 
40 people and will be ideally located in the Santarém area (Portugal). 
The dedication to this area and the quest to make this sector a reality in Portugal recently led us to create the Portuguese 
Insect Producers and Transformers Association - Portugal Insect – which is presently chaired by EntoGreen. 
Over the years, the excellence and innovation of Entogreen's work has been recognized, not only through the approval 
of national and international projects, but also through the awarding of several awards. 
Recently the company received 4 awards that should be noted: 
- The Entrepreneurship and Innovation Award of Banco Crédito Agrícola; 
- The Born from Knowledge Award from the Portuguese National Agency of Innovation; 
- The Agri-Innovation Summit Award; 
- Also the European Union INvertebrateIT Project Award, recognizing Entogreen as one of the three most p romising 
startups in the sustainable food field. 
Main role in the project WPs envolvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
Entogreen will support WP 1 - Agri-plastic waste (AWP) mapping, characterization, collection strategy and pre-treatment, 
contributing with its expertise on insect. For the WP2 we will cooperate in testing the ability of earthworm, and insects to 
digest pla stic. In WP3, we will support the up-scale production in terms of knowhow on insects insects, including 
maintenance/depletion of plastic-degrading capacities in time. For the WP5 we will work on bio-fertilizers, and will transfer to 
scale up in WP6. We will collaborate in WP7 and WP8.  
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 
Dr. Daniel Murta (male): Project manager and Leader of the innovation unit in Entogreen. PhD in Veterinary , PhD in 
Veterinary, Researcher at CIISA(University of Lisbon) and Lecturer at Lusofona University 
Dr. Rui Nunes (male): BsC Industrial Chemistry with MBA from Coimbra University, experience in Food and Drug Industry 
in the past an at the moment fully dedicated to development of Entogreen.  
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
- The Entrepreneurship and Innovation Award of Banco Crédito Agrícola; 
- The Born from Knowledge Award from the Portuguese National Agency of Innovation; 
- The Agri-Innovation Summit Award; 
- Also the European Union INvertebrateIT Project Award, recognizing Ento green as one of the three most promising 
startups in the sustainable food field. 
- 2Colaborative Labs:  
        - INOV FEED with INIAV (National Institute for veterinary and agriculture investigation) 
        - B2E – Blue Bioeconomy  
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Prederently 2013-2019 
years  
Dezembro 2015 Os insectos na suinicultura em Portugal  
 Murta, D., Nunes R., Moreira, O. (2015). Suinicultura, 110. 
Julho 2016 Insetos: uma solução nutricional e ambiental  
 Murta, D., Nunes R., Moreira, O. (2016). Alimentação Animal, 96. 
Abril 2017 Fórum Politécnico, Valorização da Agroindústria: Redes de experimentação agrária e internacionalização, 
Ovibeja, Beja, Portugal.  
 Murta D. - Economia Circular: Produção de insetos para a alimentação animal. 
Março 2017 Green Business Week, Lisboa, Portugal.  
 Murta D. – Insetos – Uma oportunidade na valorização de resíduos. 
Março 2017 Seminário – Potenciar Sinergias na Atividade Pecuária, Santarém, Portugal. 
 Murta D.– Insetos como uma solução na atividade pecuária – Uma resposta a dois desafios. 
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
EntoGreen's plans are to build a unit capable of converting 3000T of plant by-products per month, being able to produce 
about 750T of organic fertilizer, 214T of insect protein and 42T of insect oil. In addition, this unit will be able to employ  over 
40 people and will be ideally located in the Santarém area (Portugal). At the moment, Entogreen is installed in INIAV (National 
Institute for veterinary and agriculture investigation) and have capacity to produce 1 ton/ moth of live BSF. We work with 
INIAV laboratories to evolve our technology developing new ways to produce Protein and Fat from BSF. We need to invest 
in new equipment to test and manage insects digesting plastics.  
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 77  
EntoGreen is working with a team of investors and aims to lay the foundation stone for the construction of a factory by 
the end of 2019. This unit, to be built in the Santarém District, will employ over 50 people and will be able to produce 9000T 
of fertilizer per year (plant nutrition) and about 2500T of protein and 500T of insect oil per year (animal nutrition). We wi ll 
therefore use about 3000T of plant by-products per month, giving them new life and returning them to the value chain. New 
Partnerships EntoGreen seeks to engage the agro -industry sector both upstream and downstream of its process, thereby 
seeking to partner with both farmers and industrialists and compound feed producers. These pa rtnerships have allowed us 
not only to give new destination to the generated by -products but also to create new end product lines for animal and plant 
nutrition. We anticipate that these partnerships will not only be developmental but possibly also investm ent in our process. 
The use of insects in animal feed has been a hot topic in recent months, and EntoGreen has invested heavily in research 
and development to make this opportunity a reality. An example of this is our involvement not only in R&D projects b ut also 
in the creation of master theses with students from various institutions, from ISA, FMV-ULisboa and UTAD. These 3 theses 
were all developed for feeding birds such as chickens and laying hens using larvae produced by us. We are preparing three 
more lines of research, but with the use of insects to feed swine as early as September 2019, receiving three students from 
FMV-ULHT. 
We need to invest in infrastructures to manage new developments. We will work with actual equipment, boxes, labs 
(INIAV), productions of new eggs rooms and developing new BSFL (black soldier fly larvae) forms of processing increasing 
the efficiency of the process. Working with plastics is important to test the ability to produce BSFL with plastics and test in 
the end how protein and lipids will be affected by the plastic digestions.  
 
4.1.15. Partner 15. Carton Bros -T/A Manor Farm (MANOR) - Ireland 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
 
Carton Brothers - an Irish Family Tradition since 1775  
Carton Brothers is the name of the company that produces Manor Farm chicken. It is one of the oldest family companies 
in Ireland and dates back to 1775. Manor Farm is the largest chicken processor in the Republic of Ireland currently producing 
approximately 900,000 birds on a weekly basis. The company, trading under its own flagship “Manor Farm” brand, distributes 
to all major retail outlets in the Republic of Ireland and many of the catering institutions. The company also produces “Own 
Label” product to all the major retailers in Ireland. The company is highly active in the export market where its products may 
be seen in the U.K., France, Spain, Eastern Europe, South Africa and the Far East. The company is vertically integrated in 
that it has its own hatchery, feed mill and processing plant. The farms where the birds are reared are under contract to the 
company and must follow all guidelines and procedures as laid down by the company. This allows complete traceability for 
the products. Processing moved to Shercock in Co. Cavan in 1970 becoming the first plant in Britain and Ireland to be EEC 
approved. The company whilst already at the forefront of the industry in terms of size has spent over €14m in 2005 increasing 
the size and capacity of its processing plan t at Shercock. Further investment is currently underway with an additional 
€25million planned over the next 5 years. Consistent within Manor Farm at all times is dedication to Quality and the production 
of unique and very tasty chicken products from the best chicken that we ourselves produce. Manor Farm believes innovation 
is critical to their success and support new product development to ensure that we are at the forefront of new & emerging 
technologies. Manor Farm was first to market in Ireland with cook  in the bag packaging technology & continues to invest 
resources in new packaging developments.  
Main role in the project WPs envolvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
Carton Bros (Manor) will support WP1 with information on plastic used in food packaging, and in  WP5 where they will 
validate the performance of the new material in an industrial, commercial environment from both migration & shelf life 
perspectives in comparison to existing PET & PE materials. We distribute through all fresh  food channels throughout the 
island of Ireland & are therefore in a unique position to test new materials. The project also offers interesting new 
complementary opportunities for our farmers chicken suppliers.  
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 78  
Mr JUSTIN CARTON (male) Fellow of the Association of Chartered Management Accountants, MSC MIS, BSC Marketing 
and Management. Director of Information Technology at Carton Bros Ltd, Ireland’s largest poultry industry business. Has 
worked in the poultry industry since 1984 on all aspects of integrated poultry production. He is responsible for ensuring that 
the business maintains its leading -edge position in the poultry industry, by directing its research and development 
programme, with particular emphasis on the application of “smart systems” within the industry.  
Mr Declan Kennedy (male) Manor Farm processing director. Qualification of BSC in Food Business from University 
College Cork. Prior to joining Manor Farm, Declan has over 20 years’ experience in food production in senior management 
positions with Dawn Farm Foods, Irish Country Meats and Green Isle.  
Mr Declan Prunty (male) Manor Farm Project Manager. Leads all major projects for the Manor Farm site to including 
new & emerging technologies. Qualifications include:  
2013 Lean Six Sigma Green Belt / 5S  
2009 L5 in AutoCAD Design & Computer Aided Draughting  
2008 C&G Certificate in Handling Refrigerants (Ammonia)  
2006 Project Management  
1992 C&G Advanced Certificate Refrigeration & Air Conditioning (Part 3)  
1990 National Craft Certificate Refrigeration (Part 1&2)  
Mr Liam Hilliard (male) Manor Farm Food Safety & Quality Assurance Manager. Liam has held Quality Management 
positions since 2003 working with large organisations including Kerry Foods, Irish Country Meats and Dawn Farm Foods 
before joining Manor Farm. Qualifications include:  
DIT Cathal Brugha Street, MSc. Food Safety Management 2011-2013  
DIT Kevin Street, Kevin Street, Dublin 8, Graduate Diploma (FETAC Level 8) in Food Science and Technology – 1995-
1996  
Carlow RTC, Kilkenny Road, Carlow, Diploma in Food Quality Management – 1992-1995  
Dr Zandra Reed (Montgomery) (female) Manor Farm NPD Manager. NPD Manager at Manor Farm since 2007, 
previously working as senior food technologist in Manor Farm since Oct 2005. Previously, NPD Manager at Dawn Farm 
Foods, The Mauldins, Naas, Co. Kildare (2003 -2005), NPD Project Manager, Dawn Farm Foods, Oct 2001 – Nov 2003. 
1998-2001, completed full time PhD in University of Ulster, thesis title “Sensory Quality & Consumer Acceptance of Chilled 
Ready Meals”, September 2001. Graduated from University of Ulster with 1st Class Hons Degree in Consumer Studies with 
DIS in 1998. 
Ms. Rebecca O'Brien (female) (Manor Farm NPD Project Manager). Rebecca joined Manor Farm in 2016, having held 
positions in quality, NPD, and project management in a number of flagship Irish food companies such as Kerry Foods, Carroll 
Cuisine, and Queally Food Group. Her remit in Manor Farm includes Export NPD, packaging and process development. 
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 RefuCoat (H2020 BBI): Full recyclable food package with enhanced gas barrier properties and new functionalities 
by the use of high performance coatings, 2017-2020 
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Prederently 2013-2019 
years  
 Haughton, P.N., Lyng, J., Fanning, S., Whyte, P. (2013). Potential of a commercially available water acidification 
product for reducing Campylobacter in broilers prior to slaughter. British Poultry Science, 54, 319-324.  
 Haughton, P.N., Lyng, J., Cronin, C., Fanning, S., Whyte, P. (2012). Effect of crust freezing applied alone and in 
combination with ultraviolet light on the survival of Campylobacter on raw chicken. Food Microbiology, 32, 147-151.  
 Haughton, P.N., Gomez Grau E., Lyng, J., Cronin, D., Fanning, S., Whyte, P. (2012). Susceptibility of 
Campylobacter to high intensity near ultraviolet/visible 395±5nm light and its effectiveness for the decontamination of raw 
chicken and contact surfaces. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 159, 267-273.  
 Haughton, P.N., Lyng, J.G., Cronin, D.A., Morgan, D.J., Fanning, S., Whyte, P. (2012). Efficacy of pulsed electric 
fields for the inactivation of indicator microorganisms and foodborne pathogens in liquids and raw chicken. Food Control, 
25, 131-135.  
 Haughton, P.N., Lyng, J.G., Morgan, D.J., Cronin, D.A., Noci, F., Fanning, S., Whyte, P. (2012). An evaluation of 
the potential of high intensity ultrasound for improving the microbial safety of poultry. Food and Bioprocess Technology, 5, 
992-998. (doi 10.1007/s11947-010-372-y). 
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
 Manor Farm Innovation Centre  
 Contracted Laboratories for Migration & Shelf life Testing  
 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 79  
4.1.16. Partner 16. ENCO SRL (ENCO)- Italy  
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
 
  ENCO is an innovation and research -consulting firm based in Naples, active since 
1987. Originally specialized in business consulting and industrial engineering, it has expanded its range of activities becoming 
an experienced advisor for both private busine ss and public authorities involved in territorial development and opened two 
new offices in Rio de Janeiro and Brussels. The company participates in national and international R&D&I projects as a 
facilitator for business, product, technology and process in novation in different industrial areas, including energy, 
environmental management, the agro -food sector and logistics. The company has a long track record participating in EU -
funded projects as WP leader, task leader and project coordinator. The company is specialized, inter alia, in two main fields:  
• Development of market analysis, business plan and exploitation plans: studies (elaborated at European and international 
scale) for innovative products, technical solutions and systems are focused on market trends, market profitability and 
distribution channels. ENCO conducts market surveys with potential customers, Desk analysis, SWOT analysis, identification 
of economic, legislative and behavioral barriers, customer segments analysis and competitor analysis , market feasibility 
studies and Risk analysis. Moreover, ENCO develops innovation and business strategies, quantitative assessment of pricing 
and cost-benefit analysis, identifying Capital and Operational Costs. 
• Communication and dissemination strategies: developing action plans for dissemination and communication activities; 
identifying target stakeholders, tools and actions to be implemented; developing tailor made campaign to raise audience’s 
awareness on the project rationale, activities and results; identifying and selecting events, workshops and meetings; organizing 
information and dissemination events; producing publications, newsletters, brochures, leaflets, promotional and marketing 
materials; setting up and managing project websites, and participating in relevant events and exploiting institutional communication 
channels; building a broader community around the project topics. https://www.enco-consulting.it/  
Main role in the project WPs envolvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
ENCO will lead WP7 Cross -cutting activities & Innovation Impacts to support the full deployment of the project outputs 
and results, planning and implementing dissemination and communication activities targeted to the project key audience 
groups. To achieve this, a set of activities has been outlined already in Section 2.2.  An extensive professional communication 
campaign to reach key stakeholders will be designed by ENCO and implemented in a  spirit of full cooperation by all the 
project partners. 
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 
Dr. Ing. MARCO DE LA FELD (male). Senior Project Manager, since 2008. He graduated in Mechanical Engineering in 
2003 and obtained a Research Doctorate in “Engineering of Materials and Production” in 2006. Mr. de le Feld is the Project 
Coordinator of SHEALTHY (H2020 - GA 817936) and as been the Project Coordinator of SMART GROUND (H2020 -GA 
641988), and the IP & Exploitation Manager of SaltGae (H2020 -GA 689785) and has successfully managed more than 8 
European research projects including the FOODIE project (CIP-ICT-PSP GA 621074), ALGATEC II (FP7-SME GA 315469) 
and OPTISOLV (ETB-2012-26). He is very skilled in delivering business scenarios and plans for internationalization and fast 
replication of innovative products and services. In additi on to his vast experience as a project partner/manager and as a 
research advisor in numerous European projects, Mr. de la Feld has several experiences as EU Project trainer and has led 
several capacity building workshops. (in-house consultant). 
Ms. SIMONA MINCIONE (female). Project Manager, since 2014. She holds a Master degree in International Relations 
and European Studies. She got the certificate in EU Funding and EU Project Design & Management in 2012 and WIPO 
certificate for IPR Management. She as excellent skills in the management, planning and execution of exploitation activities, 
besides managing activities of EU-funded project as FOODIE (ICT-PSP-GA 621074), Waste2Fuels (H2020-GA 654623. She 
is currently assisting the SHEALTHY (H2020- GA 817936) project coordinator. (employee) 
Ms. ANTONIETTA PIZZA  (female). Senior Project Manager , graduated in International Relations, she specialized in 
European Funding and Project Design in 2014 and got a 2nd level Master in Open Innovation and IPR in 2017. In her position 
at ENCO, she is responsible for developing project proposals and carrying out project activities, having experience in EU 
project management and operational activities of various funding programmes (H2020, CIP Eco-Innovation; FP7, EuroTrans-
Bio), in particular she assisted the Project Coordinator in the management of SMART GROUND project (H2020-GA 641988) 
and in the planning and execution of exploitation activities. In 2016, Ms. Pizza obtained the ISIPM Certificate in Project 
Management. (employee).  
Mr. Ing. GIAMPIERO DE LA FELD (male). Managing Director of ENCO since 1986, thanks to his more than 30 years of 
experience and his engineering background, Mr. de la Feld has been involved in his company’s projects and has managed 
and coordinated diverse national and international projects with strong focus on their tec hnical and financial aspects. 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 80  
Furthermore, Mr. de la Feld was president of Confindustria Campania in 2000/2002, which is a non-profit organization uniting 
different business associations from the Italian region of Campania and representing their interests, needs and demands vis-
à-vis political and administrative institutions, trade unions and other social forces. He has thus gained further insights into the 
European business world, its opportunities and difficulties, as well as experience with administrative and political institutions/ 
procedures involved in business development and innovation. Moreover, Mr. de la Feld has sound experience in supporting 
start-ups in developing their business as well as planning all the actions to undertake to facilitate mark et penetration of 
innovative systems, developed under EU-funded projects. (SME owner) 
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 BIOnTOP "Novel packaging films and textiles with tailored end of life and performance based on bio-based 
copolymers and coatings” (H2020-BBI GA 837761). ENCO leads the Market strategy and Innovation impacts.  
 SHEALTHY “Non-Thermal physical technologies to preserve fresh and minimally processed fruit and vegetables” 
(H2020-SFS GA 817936). ENCO acts as Coordinator, leads the Exploitation Management and Dissemination activities. 
 REMADYL “Removal of Legacy Substances from polyvinylchloride (PVC) via a continuous and sustainable 
extrusion process” (H2020-SC5 GA 821136). ENCO leads the Dissemination and Exploitation activities.   
 FOODIE “Open and interoperable agricultural platform hub on the cloud for the management of spatial and non-
spatial data relevant for farming” (CIP-ICT-PSP GA 621074).ENCO leads dissemination activities and responsible for the 
IPR Management. 
 WASTE2FUELS “Sustainable production of next generation biofuels from waste streams”. (H2020-LCE GA 
654623). ENCO is responsible for conducting in-depths market research and communication activities.  
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Prederently 2013-2019 
years  
 Rossetti, P., Dino, G. A., de la Feld, M., Pizza A., Coulon, F., Wagland, S., Gomes, D., and the SMART GROUND 
Team (2016). SMART GROUND Project: SMART data collection and integration platform to enhance availability and 
accessibility of data and information in the EU territory on SecoNDary Raw Materials, Geophysical Research Abstracts 
Vol. 18, EGU2016-5881-1, 2016 EGU General Assembly 2016  
 Rossetti, P., Dino, G. A., Biglia, G., De La Feld, M., Pizza, A. (2017) Characterization of extractive waste facilities 
for SRM recovery from mining sites: case studies from the SMART GROUND Project, Associazione Mineraria Sarda, IV 
SIMPOSIO Attività Minerarie nel Bacino del Mediterraneo 2017. 
 Dino, G. A., Rossetti, P., Biglia, G., Sapino, M. L., Di Mauro, F., Heikki, S., Coulon, F., Gomes, D., Parejo Bravo, 
L., Zapata Aranda, P., Lorenzo Lopez, A., Lopez, J., Garamvölgyi, E., Stojanovic, S., Pizza, A., De La Feld, M., SMART 
GROUND Project: A new approach to data accessibility and collection for Raw Materials and Secondary Raw Materials in 
Europe (2017), Environmental Engineering and Management Journal 2017.  
 Charvát, K., Kepka, M., de la Feld, M., Mincione, S., Šplícha,l M., Šrédl M. (2015) POMODORE – Smart Agri 
Food Project, ISAF 2015, 15 September 2015 
 de la Feld, M., Lorenzo A., Pizza, A., (2014). ALGATEC II: ottimizzazione delle soluzioni di riciclaggio dell’acqua di 
lavaggio delle olive, Acta Italus Hortus, Bari 2014 
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
As a leading business consultant with extensive experience in business  planning and development, communication, 
dissemination and exploitation of the project results, ENCO possesses the suitable human resource and operational capacity 
for the tasks to be fulfilled within the project. 
 
4.1.17. Partner 17. S.A. Agricultores de la Vega de Valencia (SAV)- Spain 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
 
    SAV is a large company founded in 1900, which conducts its activity in the environmental sector, 
from Gardening, agriculture, preservation of natural parks, logistic, street cleaning, and integral waste management to water  
treatment plant maintenance. Nowadays SAV has decided to diversify its activities by expanding into bioproducts markets.  
SAV has been collecting urban waste for more than 100 years. Its experience is more than a guarantee regarding the 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 81  
innovation in waste life cycle. The company provides environmental services in more than 80 municipalities across the country 
of Spain in strict collaboration with the local government.  
 
                                     
SAV has operated since 1900 in "l'horta de València" and has several owned agricu ltural fields such as vegetables, 
vineyards and olive trees. Also SAV belongs to the cooperative agricultural of Montserrat with the partner number 575 and is 
in charge of the collection of meat and vegetable remains in Valencia Central market and  in nume rous supermarkets. SAV 
regularly collaborates on activities which aim to promote local food and reduce food waste. SAV  has different lands and crops 
to use as AgroLabs (dry farming and irrigation) located in the provinces of Alicante and Valencia (Spain).  
Another of SAV activities is the management, protection and maintenance of natural parks. 
 SAV has 30 years of experience guarantees the work of 
landscape services, work such as the design, execution and 
maintenance of green areas, parks and gardens, al l under the 
strict criteria of quality and environmental sustainability. Being 
the first European organization to have their activities in 
gardening certified in the Water Footprint. 
Our company has the most modern plant of sorting 
household in Valencia. T his plant currently processes 264Tm 
daily. From the waste processed, only around a third goes to the 
landfill. The rest is separated between organic and byproducts 
(around 15%) from this almost half of it is plastic. This number 
is subjected to change since the plant is going to receive waste from other municipalities. 
In the field of water treatment, SAV manages the purification and treatment of wastewater in more than 200 wastewater 
treatment plants. The population served is more than 8 million equivalent inhabitants and the volume of treated water reaches 
640 cubic hectometers per year. SAV is a member of the European Water Platform. 
Regarding technological solutions, SAV has a software 
development team and has always tried to be an early adopter of 
innovative technology. In this contest, for example within the field 
of the logistics, CO2 emissions have been reduced by 12% through 
the use of sensors in the fleet of vehicles that helped to operate 
with efficient driving (national project winner of the 2019  
sustainable city awards) and is developing an optimal route system 
that will be use in the cities of Utrecht (Netherlands) and Alba iulia 
(Romania) within a European project. Besides a smart City platform 
has been developed by SAV as integral parts of the H2020 project 
Plasticircle (No 730292) and is currently working on an massive 
Internet of Things (IOT) platform for use in different activities. 
SAV has expertise in project coordination in this way at the present is the coordinator of the proposal WaysTUP! Value 
chains for disruptive transformation of urban biowaste into biobased products in the city context (818308). 
The department of R&D and European projects is formed by a multidisciplinary team of doctors in science and engineering 
as well as technical experts in ICT, circular economy, agriculture, food, water purification and many other disciplines. Our team 
works actively managing environmental projects and developing project proposals through the H2020 instrument, and is 
certified in the project management methodology Prince2® and Agile - Scrum. 
Main role in the project WPs envolvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
SAV will support with information on plastic use in agriculture (WP1) and in soil bioremediation experiments (WP4), will 
make the validation of the mulching films  and the fertilisers from the project (WP5) not only in agricultural production in rural 
fields but also in city parks. SAV is responsible for the maintenance of urban gardens in several cities of the Valencian region. 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 82  
Finally, SAV will contribute with data for safety, risk and sustainability analysis as well as with the project dissemination and 
management. 
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 
Dr Jerónimo Franco PhD. (male) has a Ph. D. mechanical engineering department and construction doctoral program in 
industrial technologies and materials; Design of a methodology for the obtaining of solutions to the collection of OFMR in Smart 
Cities environments by the Jaume I University .  He is also Industrial Chemical Engineer by the Technical school of Industrial 
Engineers of Valencia (UPV) with the specialty of sewage treatment. He has a master in environmental sustainability and 
participated in the UPV, in the department of machinery an d thermal engines in research groups working with physical and 
chemical modelling of internal combustion processes. He participated also in the program of thermofluid processes of 
alternative internal combustion engines. For seven years he has been respons ible for the cleaning and waste collection 
services of the city of Valencia managed by SAV. He is certified by Prince2(PRojects IN Controlled Environments) Project 
management method (04086683-01-RCK4) 
 
Ms María Pilar Uceda . (female) Agricultural Technical Engineering. Specialty: Farming operations by the University of 
Castilla la Mancha. She also has a course of Recognition and Management of Plagues and Diseases in Urban Gardening (30 
h) - (Nov-11). polytechnic university of Valencia, course of Recognition and Management of Plagues and Diseases in 
Gardening (30 h) - (Jan-09). polytechnic university of Valencia and course of Recognition and Management of Plagues and 
Diseases in Gardening (30 h) - (Jan-09). polytechnic university of Valencia. She has been Tech nical Engineer of the 
Department of Gardening and Landscape (since Oct.97) in SAV. 
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 PlastiCircle (H2020). (GA 730292)The project will rethink the different phases involved in transforming waste into 
valuable products: from the development of smart containers for separate waste collection to the improvement of 
transport routes and sorting technologies. The overall aim is to achieve recovery within the same value chain. 
(2017-2021).  
 WaysTUP (H2020) (Coordinator) (GA 818308) The project will demonstrate the establishment of new value chains 
for urban biowaste utilisation to produce higher value purpose products (i.e. biobased products, included food and 
feed ingredients,biochar for  application in agriculture ) though a multi stakeholder approach in line circular economy 
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Prederently 2013-2019 
years  
 F. Ample, J.M. Ricart, A. Clotet, D. Curulla Ferré and J.W. Niemantsverdriet (2004), ”Competitive CN and N2 formation 
on Rh(111) : a case of entropic stabilization” , Chemical Physics Letters, 385, 52. 
 Franco Gonzalez, Jeronimo; Gallardo Izquierdo, Antonio; Carlos Alberola (2019), Alternativas en la gestión de la 
recogida separada de la fracción orgánica biodegradable de los residuos sólidos orgánicos, scientific poster, VIII 
Simposio Iberoamericano De Ingeniería De Residuos, Asunción Paraguay. 
 J.Franco (2017), Design of a methodology to obtain solutions for the collection of the urban waste organic fraction in 
Smart Cities environments, Department of Mechanical and Engineering Construction, Jaume I university of Castellón. 
 J. Franco (2019), Waste4think & Plasticircle two different methodologies to improve the collection of waste in containers, 
scientific poster, Word congress ISWA 2019  
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
SAV manages the purification and treatment of wastewater in more than 200 wastewater treatment plants. The population 
served is more than 8 million equivalent inhabitants and the volume of treated water reaches 640 cubic hectometers per year. 
SAV has the most modern plant of sorting household in Valencia. This plant currently processes 264Tm daily. From the 
waste processed, only around a third goes to the landfill. The rest is separated between organic and byproducts (around 15%) 
from this almost half of it is plastic. This number is subjected to change since the plant is going to receive waste from oth er 
municipalities. 
SAV has a large fleet of garbage trucks. We have been collecting bottles and cans for more than 30 years. 
In order to reduce our emissions and to provide a cleaner city, we are currently developing an Internet of Things (IOT) 
platform for the use in environmental and activity sensors for the use of a smart city project. 
SAV is a member of the agricultural Montserrat cooperative in Spain. 
SAV  has different lands and crops to use as AgroLabs. 
Number of employees 920. 
SAV turnover is more than 100 million euros per year. 
 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 83  
4.1.18. Partner 18. OWS Research Foundation PS (OWS RF) - Belgium 
Organization description a description of the legal entity and its main tasks, with an explanation of how its profile 
matches the tasks in the proposal 
The OWS Research Foundation is a private foundation and as organization type: non for profit. It’s goal is to contribute to 
the scientifical know-how and optimization of technologies in the field of biogas, biodegradibility, compostability and ecotoxicity, 
alone or in cooperation with third parties, in Belgium or outside Belgium. 
OWS Research Foundation may therefore develop the following activities: 
• the development and execution of laboratory analyses and research, among others for the determination of the 
biological biodegradibility, compost quality, environmental sustainability, compostability, ecotoxicity and other environmental 
and biological aspects of products and packaging; 
• the delivery of recommendations, consultancy, laboratory analyses, feasibility studies, process monitoring and 
engineering studies, among others in the field of municipal solid waste treatment and waste treatment, composting, aerobic 
and anaerobic fermentation, gas fermentation, fatty acids fermentation and other fermentation, biological degradability, 
renewable energy and the environment in general; 
• contribute to the development and optimization of special installations, more specifically systems and plants for the 
treatment of municipal solid waste, organic fractions of municipal solid waste or equivalent organic waste str eams, energy 
crops or organic residues, systems and plants for the production of energy, compost, chemical and organic products, products 
for soil amelioration and substrates from agricultural crops, systems and plants that contribute to the remediation of  the 
environment or the production of renewable energy, installations for the conversion of gases via fermentation to components 
with higher value; 
• contribute to the development and optimization of the collection, the transport, the storage, the treatmen t and the 
recycling of raw materials, semi-finished products, the treatment and recycling of raw materials, agricultural crops and residues 
and waste; 
• the delivery and maintenance of certificates related to compostability, biodegradibility, environmental  sustainability, 
recyclability, sustainability. 
• participation to international, national and local scientifical or commercial research, innovation and development 
projects. 
• the application for, receiving and utilization of international, national or lo cal governmental or private subsidies, 
financing, loans, incentives or other economic benefits. 
 
Main role in the project WPs involvement and key task or activities to be done in each 
OWS RF is WP leader of WP4 and involved in the development of the biodegradation processes and upscaling. OWS will 
examine the effectiveness of the process on the biodegradation of plastic waste. Moreover OWS will perform the LCA and 
check biodegradation of chitosan and chitin formulations. 
CV and key personnel a curriculum vitae or description of the profile of the persons, including their gender, who will be 
primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed research and/or innovation activities 
• Bernard Moerman (Male), Permanent Representative of Euander BV and Authorized Representative of OWS 
Research Foundation PS. He studied at the State University of Gent and New York University School of Law. He is legal 
advisor. 
• Steven Verstichel (Male), lab project manager, Master of Science in bioscience engineering with a specialization in 
environmental technology at the State University of Gent. He is the author or co -author of several scientific articles on 
biodegradation, compostability and anaerobic digestion. He is responsible for organization of EU projects within the company. 
He was active in projects as TRANSBIO, VOLATILE, AGRIMAX and FUNGUSCHAIN. 
Relevant projects. A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
 Not applicable 
Relevant publications, products and services. A list of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services 
(including widely-used datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the  call content. Preferently 2013-2019 
years  
  Not applicable 
Relevant infrastructure and equipment a description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work. Outline the key facilities and infrastructure available and 
demonstrate that each team has sufficient capacity 
 Not applicable 
 
  
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 84  
4.2. Third parties involved in the project (including use of third party resources) 
 
The partners below will use 3rd party resources. 
Partner 1. Universtity of Almeria (UAL) - Spain  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted) 
YES  
UAL will select a sub-contractor as external independent Ethics Advisor.in order to comply with the Ethics requirements, to 
ensure the best Ethical practice and to address Ethical issues in all their shades  
The best value for money will be looked for a strong expertise in ethical issues  
 
The subcontract budget is 17K. 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties[1] NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and 
describe and justify the foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 
12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  
NO 
  
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners [2] (Article 14a 
of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
If yes, please describe the International Partner(s) and their contributions 
 
Partner 5. Miguel Hernandez University (UMH) - Spain  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted) 
YES  
UMH will select a sub-contractor in order to test earthworm pre-compatibility with microorganism and enzyme pools in WP2 
(task 2.5) and for up-scaling production of earthworm fortified with PMC consortium in WP3 (task 3.2). 
The best value for money will be looked for a strong expertise in Lumbicus terrestris earthworms and capabilities in 
environmental restoration, terrestrial ecotoxicity of pesticides, enzymatic bioremediation and biochar uses. 
 
The subcontract budget is 50K. 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties[1] NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and 
describe and justify the foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 
12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  
NO 
  
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners [2] (Article 14a 
of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
If yes, please describe the International Partner(s) and their contributions 
 
Partner 17. S.A. Agricultores de la Vega de Valencia (SAV) - Spain. 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted) 
YES  
SAV will select a sub-contractor to s upport services in field sampling techniques, specific agricultural techniques and 
fertilizer application  
The best value for money will be looked for the subcontract 
 
The subcontract budget is 12K. 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties[1] NO 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and 
describe and justify the foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 
12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  
NO 
  
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners [2] (Article 14a 
of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
If yes, please describe the International Partner(s) and their contributions 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 85  
5. Ethics and Security 
5.1. Ethics Issues 
ANIMALS: 
An Ethics assessment was performed with the completion of the Ethical Issues Table, and this project resulted to involve Ethics 
issues. Specifically, the Ethics issues identified are summarized below 
 
MOTIVATION: 
156The discovery of the presence of PE-degrading microorganisms in wax worm guts has provided a promising direction for further 
study of the microbial degradation of both PE and other plastics, along with new insights into the life cycle of synthetic plastics in 
nature. In addition, the isolation and characterization of more PE -degrading microorganisms from this source and a better 
understanding of the enzymatic system involved in PE degradation could be helpful in the development of remediation approaches 
for plastic wastes, which could eliminate plastic pollution concerns. 
 
Information to be provided: 
1) Details of the species and rationales for their use, numbers of animals to be used, and nature of the experiments, 
procedures and techniques to be used. 
Species. 
For the development of the RECOVER project the inclusion of several species of insects and earthworms has been determined, 
which are listed below (indicating number of animals to be used) approx: 
 Tenebrio molitor (150,000 uds) 
 Acheta domestica  (30,000 uds)  
 Plodia interpunctella (30,000 uds) 
 Galleria mellonella. (120,000 uds) 
 Ephestia kuehniella, (30,000 uds) 
 Sitotroga cerealella, (30,000 uds) 
 Tribolium castaneum, (30,000 uds) 
 Sitophilus granarius, (30,000 uds) 
 Eisenia andrei (5,000 uds) 
 Lumbricus terrestris (2,000 uds) 
 
Reasons for its use. 
 The uses contemplated for these commercial species of insects include the work of research, extraction, 
characterization and isolation of microorganisms endogenous to them. 
 The capacity of biodegradation of plastics that these specific communities of insects and associated microorganisms 
have is evaluated. 
 Insects are a means vector of endogenous and exogenous species of fungi and specific bacteria that allow them to 
chemically attack plastics and cause their enzymatic degradation. 
 Insects are a useful means of colonizing plastic surfaces and activate their accelerated degradation. 
 The by-products of accelerated biodegradation can be used by insects in their conversion to protein for use in various 
industries (fertilizers, chemistry, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, nanotechnology, etc.). 
 
Nature of the experiments, procedures and techniques to be used 
 Insects will only be inoculated with several potentiated microorganisms. 
 Inoculation techniques are the ones determined by development protocols and techniques published and reported as 
ethically and environmentally safe. 
 
2) Justification of animal use (including the kind of animals to be used) and why alternatives cannot be used. 
The use of the indicated insects is necessary because it is the key to the associated symbiotic biodegradation solution. This  
                                                             
156 156 Evidence of Polyethylene Biodegradation by Bacterial Strains from the Guts of Plastic-Eating Wax worms 
Jun Yang,*,†,∥ Yu Yang,†,∥ Wei-Min Wu,‡ Jiao Zhao,§ and Lei Jiang† 
†Key Laboratory of Bio-Inspired Smart Interfacial Science and Technology of Ministry of Education, School of Chemistry and 
Environment, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China ‡Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, William & Cloy Codiga Resource Recovery 
Research Center, C enter for Sustainable Development & Global Competitiveness, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305 -4020, United States 
§Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Bioenergy, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518083, P. R. China 
 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 86  
solution will allow us to perform complex plastic degradation processes under common environmental conditions without the need 
for activation of complex processes. Insects with their symbiont communities of microorganisms can have a great technical and 
even economic repercussion in the management of plastic waste. 
In this case, insects are the best biotechnological alternative to car ry and deposit specific communities of microorganisms that 
generate films on plastics, thus initiating their biodegradation through contact and reaction. 
Insects by nature generate in their own bodies and adhere to the eggs all the microbiome necessary for their use in the following 
morphological phase components of their usual life cycles. Insects are the best -prepared beings to use in symbiosis both 
endogenous and acquired microorganisms. That is why we have chosen them without the possibility of an alternative. 
 
In order to ensure the best Ethical practice according to the European regulations, an Ethics WP6 was included in the project 
work plan  WP6. Safety, Environmental, social and economic sustainability.  It is aimed at taking into account the 
abovementioned Ethical issues in all their shades thanks to the expert guidance of an external independent Ethics Advisor.
5.2 Security157 
Please indicate if your project will involve: 
 Activities or results raising security issues: (YES/NO): NO. 
 'EU-classified information' as background or results: (YES/NO): NO. 
  
                                                             
157 See article 37 of the Model Grant Agreement. . For more information on the classification of Information, please refer to the Horizon 2020 guidance: 
https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/other/hi/secur/h2020-hi-guide-classif_en.pdf. 
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 87  
Annex: Letters of support from RECOVER advisory board 
 
Summary of initially appointed AB members and respective roles: 
Name (Short name) Type Country Role 
Remedia Association Spain Advisoring in environmental impact related to GHG mitigation 
and carbon sink in agriculture of RECOVER solutions 
Biocampo SME Spain Provide requirement for organic fertilizers. Act as potential 
adopter of the solution. 
Compostingreen (CinG) SME Spain Complement the consortium with additional emphasis on 
biofertilisers, compost and vermicompost. 
Carbiolice 
(affiliate of Carbios) 
SME  France Provide insights on existing solutions for biodegrading different 
types of plastics they have recently brought to the market. 
Create synergies for exploitation, e.g. through common 
advocating for new standards supporting the EoL routes 
pursued in the project.  
SOTRAFA S.A. Large Spain Provide mulching films to valorize in the project and test the 
application of chitosan on active mulching films 
METGEN SME, BIC 
member 
Finland Provide complementary enzymes samples vs. those available at 
ASA. Be part of the future biotech value chain. 
Repsol Large Spain Provide requirements and plastic samples as large 
petrochemical company. 
AlgaeEnergy Large Spain Study the ability of coupling the biodegradation of APW with 
microalgae culture to reach a carbon neutral cascade process. 
Fomento de 
Costrucciones y 
Contratas (FCC) 
Large Spain Interest in learning more on the Recover process to implement it 
is the largest MSW management sites in Spain. 
Centro Lombricoltura 
Toscano (CLT) 
Association Italy Interest in providing earthworms knowledge and exploitation in 
vermicompost  
PackagingCluster 
(PackCluster) 
Association Spain Interest in providing insights to heighten the sustainability of the 
plastic packaging sector which is at stake in the public opinion 
and in joint dissemination 
International Solid Waste 
Association (ISWA)  
Association Global 
(based in 
NL) 
Provide requirements on feasible waste treatments approaches 
on a global basis, as well as access to many potential licensees 
of the RECOVER process 
COMITE DES 
ORGANISATIONS 
PROFESSIONNELLES 
AGRICOLE DE L UNION 
EUROPEENNE COPA 
ASSOCIATION DE FAIT – 
COPA-COGECA  
Association EU To disseminate the project results to the widest network of 
farmers in EU 
 
As discussed in section 1, these AB members will be consulted along the project depending on the needs. Further members 
could be appointed especially in order to extend the RECOVER network throughout Europe. 
  
                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 88  
  

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 89  
  

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 90  
  

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 91  
 
 
 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 92  
 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 93  
 
  

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 94  
 
  

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 95  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 96  
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 97  
 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 98  
 
 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 99  
 
 

                                                   BBI-2019-SO2-R3 
 
887648- RECOVER – PART B      Page 100