1.1  Objectives and ambition   
The main objective of the RECREATE project is to develop a set of innovative technologies aimed at exploiting the 
potential of End -of-Life (EoL) complex composite waste (mainly carbon fiber reinforced composites CFRC, and 
glass fiber reinforced composites GFRC) as a feedstock for profitable reuse of parts and materials in the 
manufacturing industry. The EU composites market size is actually foreseen to grow steadily with an annual growth 
rate of 7.5% in the next few years. Legislation is progressively banning landfilling in many countries and the amount 
of composite waste to be recycled and reused will be huge in the near future, with an estimated >80’000 ton in 2025.1 
On the other side, there is an increasing market demand of high performance fiber materials (especially carbon) at 
affordable costs, in many sectors like automotive/transportation and in general for the lightweight design field. It is 

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  2  
therefore crucial that new recycling technologies alternative to the more consolidated mechanical grinding and 
pyrolysis are identified, so as to allow the recovery and reuse of materials and components without compromise to 
downcycling, and with convincing environmental su stainability and economic profitability. In the light of these 
considerations, the ambition of RECREATE project is:  
- to develop and validate in relevant environment (TRL6) novel reuse strategies for current generation, large EoL 
composite parts (including complex multimaterial composites) based on smart recognition and inspection for 
sorting (Laser Induced Breakdown Spec troscopy - LIBS), high precision dismantling (laser -shock) and repair, 
Tassisted reshaping, design for disassembly based on reversible joints, AI-assisted decision support systems;  
- to develop and validate in relevant environment (TRL6) innovative physico -chemical upcycling technologies 
(catalyst-assisted green solvolysis, electrofragmentation) allowing simultaneous recovery of high quality, integer, 
clean fibers and of an organic resin fraction reusable as coating material, at the very end of the multiple reuse 
processes of parts;  
- to demonstrate at TRL6 the use of smart and green reversible thermoset resins as enabling materials for the 
realization of the next generation of fiber -reinforced composites (FRCs) with easier repairability and enhanced 
reusability, facilitating the transition towards recyclable-by-design composite materials and structures.  
Moreover, RECREATE will address another key objective, that is the development of a set of new digital tools for:  
- the quantitative evaluation of the environm ental and economic performance of the proposed technologies 
(LCA/LCC) as well as their circularity assessment;  
- the co-design of innovative digital learning resources, including the realization of MOOCS, serious games and 
digital twins of some specialty technologies developed in the project, with easy adoption and high replicability. 
The objectives and the ambition of RECREATE are fully compliant with the general requirements of the Horizon 
Europe - Digital, Industry and Space 2021 Work Programme, and with the specific requirements of the call 
HorizonCL4-2021-Resilience-01-01, as shown schematically in the following Table 1.  
Table 1. Project adherence to the work-programme and call: objectives, expected results and means of verifications.  
Specific  challenge  of  Work  
Programme. Call HORIZON- 
CL4-2021-Resilience-01-01  
Adherence to the call  
Objectives and expected  
results  
Means of verification  (KPI 
of the technology)  
Propose innovative dismantling 
and sorting systems enabling reuse 
and functional recycling of 
complex composite materials.  
RECREATE will adopt and 
bring to TRL6 innovative, 
laser-based technologies for 
dismantling, recognition and 
sorting, including:  
- laser-shock dismantling  
- LIBS  
Laser-shock dismantling  
Demonstration at 0.5 m 2 
scale on one interface, 
including process and 
integrity control (TRL6).  
Post-treatment material 
integrity (< 10% loss in 
tensile modulus; < 20% loss 
in flexural modulus).  
Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy - LIBS  
CFRC/GFRC composite 
recognition in waste flows 
(TRL6).  
Flow rate recognition of 25 
kg/h.  
Develop and integrate novel 
solutions for higher reuse of the 
whole products and components.  
RECREATE will develop and 
adopt different technological 
approaches for the 
remanufacturing and reuse of 
large composite components:  
- T-assisted reshaping;  
- laser-based machining;  
- design for disassembly based 
on reversible joints;  
- non-destructive  
T-assisted reshaping  
flatten curved composite 
parts with the following 
characteristics:  
- max. GFRC curvature 
radius: 400 mm;  
- typ.  GFRC  EoL 
 part thickness: 2-5 
mm;  
- content GF: ≥ 30 wt.%.  
Deflection on flat panels ≤ 10 
mm on 1200 mm length.  
Laser-based machining  
 
 disassembly/reassembly of 
complex composite parts.  
Cutting, joining and 
remanufacturing pathways will 
Surface manufacturing of 
FRCs at ply scale.  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 
20/05/2022Post-treatment  material 
integrity (< 10% loss in 
tensile modulus; < 20% loss 
in flexural modulus).  
Design for disassembly  based on reversible joints  

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  3  
be driven by AI-based decision 
support systems.  
Efficient T-triggered 
separation of dissimilar 
materials; compatibility with 
current processing 
equipment and tools.  
Residual strength < 1 MPa in 
bonded assembly after < 10 
min at triggering T; 
dismantling efficiency > 
99%.  
Non-destructive dis-/reasse mbly of complex FRC parts  
Efficient process via a new 
process chain demonstrated 
on wind rotor blades (T5.3).  
Disassembly time < 6 h per 
blade; reassembly time < 4 h 
per blade; 0 % damage to 
dismantled components.  
Develop novel, safe, environment 
friendly and commercially 
attractive methods of recycling a 
wide range of composite materials 
and reuse of secondary raw  
materials  
RECREATE will develop 
novel approaches for recycling 
complex composite materials 
and parts based on:  
- catalyst-assisted 
 green solvolysis  
- electrofragmentation  
RECREATE will also develop 
new strategies to enable 
effective use of secondary raw 
materials through the 
incorporation of new reversible 
green resins, adhesives and 
joints in new generation FRCs.  
Commercial attractiveness as 
well as environmental 
friendliness of these 
technologies will be 
demonstrated at TRL6 via 
dedicated environmental and 
socio-economic sustainability 
assessment (WP6).  
Catalyst-assiste d green solvolysis  
New green solvolysis process 
(ambient pressure, moderate 
T, non -toxic/biobased 
solvents, polymer -tailored 
catalyst selection) 
demonstrated in a relevant 
operating environment 
(TRL6).  
  
Purity of reclaimed fibers > 
90%, evaluated by means of 
thermogravimetric analysis 
(TGA); recovered organic 
fraction > 50% vs. matrix 
weight.  
Electrofra gmentation  
Process optimization via 
DoE tailored for different 
materials and EoL waste 
streams (TRL6); process 
modelling, digital simulation 
and data acquisition for 
process control and 
optimization; process 
automation.  
Purity of reclaimed fibers > 
90%, evaluated by means of 
thermogravimetric analysis 
(TGA).  
Demonstrate at pilot level the 
feasibility of reuse and/or recycle 
approaches of composites and its 
secondary raw materials.  
RECREATE will develop: 4 
physical demonstrators based 
on the reuse of GFRC/CFRC 
EoL parts after reshaping, 
repair and reversible a ssembly 
technologies; 5 physical 
demonstrators based on the use 
of innovative upcycling 
technologies for recovery and 
reuse of reinforcing fibers and 
polymer resins.  
Demonstrators: reuse of  GFRC/CFRC EoL parts  
Target industrial sectors:  
- transport;  
- wind energy; 
- aviation  
Please refer to Table 2 for 
detailed KPIs.  
Demonstrators: fibers an d resin recovery and reuse  
Target industrial sectors:  
- aviation;  
- sport;  
- industrial coatings  
Please refer to Table 2 for 
detailed KPIs.  
Develop tools that will enable to 
demonstrate the circularity and 
the environmental benefits of the 
solutions tested.  
WP6 in RECREATE will be 
dedicated to development and 
implementation of digital tools 
(IoT, b ig data, data analytics) 
to assess circularity of the 
proposed technologies. Such 
tools will be integrated into a 
freeware to be applied to the 
demonstrators and after project 
end will be available to 
stakeholders under license.  
Digital tools for circularity  assessment & acceleration  
A commercial software 
integrating digital tools for 
assessing and accelerating 
circularity of FRC reuse and 
recycling technologies.  
Application of the software 
by all industrial demo -case 
owners and end -users. 
Distribution of at least 2 
software licenses per year 
during the project.  
Consider the co-design of learning  WP7 in RECREATE will be  Co-design of learning resources and digital tools  
 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  4  
resources together with local and 
regional educational 
organizations for current and 
future generations of employees.  
dedicated to the development 
of innovative learning 
resources and tools. WP7 will 
be led by GRIFO and 
supported by METID unit 
@POLIMI, ex pert in design 
and testing tools for learning 
innovation and faculty 
development. The tools will be 
co-designed with the main 
local education stakeholders, 
and will be tested and 
replicated through the network 
of academic contacts of 
POLIMI and other partn ers 
involved in the project.   
The expected results include: 
innovative learning 
resources (e.g., e-tutorials 
and e-learning modules); a 
simulation game providing 
hands-on experience on the 
reuse of complex composite 
materials, to be fed with real 
data; realization of 
educational digital twins  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 
20/05/2022Evaluation tests included in  
the learning resources; 3 
experts of the macro-areas 
related to the topics 
involved; 2 focus groups 
organized to test the 
prototypes leading to digital 
twin first release; reference 
standard ISO 9241-11:2018 
for validation; completion 
rate over 75%; number of 
errors below 25%; system 
usability scale > 75%.  
The main progress beyond the state-of-the-art for all key technologies in RECREATE is summarized below. 
Temperature-assisted reshaping . Thermoset polymers like 
unsaturated polyesters (U -PEs) are known to be not 
thermoprocessable due to the irreversibility of the chemical 
crosslinking reaction. However recent research carried out at ICAM 
has found that it is possible to develop a cost -effective process to 
reuse large EoL parts made of PEs/vinylester GFRCs with slightly 
curved geometry, avoiding grinding and crushing (Fig.1).2 The new 
technology development is based on reshaping large parts of 
polyester composites with simple geometry using pressure and 
temperature at maximum resin deformation point. PEs-based cured  
resins typically exhibit a glass transition  temperature (Tg) ~100°C, which allows the reshaping process without 
polymer degradation. This reshaping process is affected by several factors: crosslinking density of the resin; chemical 
structure; type/geometry of composite part and reinforcement (% GFs, orientation, etc.); composite thickness. A deep 
knowledge of stress relaxation behaviour of materials and associated process variables is essential to fully exploit the 
potential of this new technology. The reshaping process will be brought up to TRL6 via a multi-step multi-technology 
approach: T -assisted deformation of the material to the required geometry (through calendering, compression 
molding); holding at the same temperature for sufficiently long time to release most of the residual stresses withou t 
thermal degradation; controlled cooling below Tg while maintaining the final planar shape. A further advancement 
will be the synergistic development of the reshaping technology along with the development and demonstration of 
new resin systems for future-generation FRC materials (WP4).  
Reversible adhesives. The traditional methods for joining plastics are mechanical fastening, adhesive joining, and 
welding. Mechanical joining via fasteners, such as screws, 
enables EoL disassembly. Unfortunately, its disadvantages 
include increasing product weight. Furthermore , 
dismantling fastened products can be expensive and time 
consuming and often needs to be carried out manually. 
Adhesive joining has many benefits including process 
speed, low weight, low cost, design flexibility, improved 
stiffness of the joint, ability t o damp noise and vibrations, 
uniform distribution of stresses over the assembled areas, 
and possibility to join dissimilar materials, as targeted in 
RECREATE. The most common strategies to obtain 
adhesive debonding on command are represented by hotmelt 
adhesives (not suitable for structural applications), modified 
resins (limited scalability), formulations with debonding fillers like thermally expandable particles. RESCOLL’s 
patented technology, called INDAR Inside®, is based on custom formulations of adhes ives and primers including 
blowing agents.3 Such proprietary materials allow high mechanical strength (15-20 MPa on Al) at room T and easy 
dismantling (residual strength <1 MPa) after heating at a specific T in the 100 -200 °C range, depending on the use 
Fig.  
1 
  
Preliminary (TRL3) results on T 
- 
assisted reshaping  
of 400mm radius GFRCs to flatter parts using a twin roll. 
  
Fig.  
2 
  
Heating patches applied for debonding nautical rear 
- 
foils  
from the engine bonded with INDAR technology (left) and debonded 
foil (right). 
  

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  5  
case and the corresponding service temperatures. In RECREATE, RESCOLL will develop a new range of dedicated 
new INDAR adhesives (or primers) based on on -the-shelf formulations. To avoid any anticipated triggering, 
premature disassembly and loss of debonding capability, it will be essential to keep a T margin (at least 50 °C) 
between maximum service T and targeted debonding T. The debonding process will be developed so that no Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 residual adhesive remains on one or both surfaces after dismantling. To date, 
RESCOLL’s technology has been successfully implemented in various applications at lower TRL (Fig.2 is an 
example of its use in the ship industry for composite foil bonding).   
Design for disassembly . Successful design for 
dissasembly is based on three different disciplines: 
selection and use of materials; geometric design of 
components, structures or products; selection and use 
of joints and fasteners (Fig.3). Multimaterial design, 
with the use of diff erent materials (e.g., metals and 
GFRCs) in a single component, has been a major 
research focus in the field of lightweight design in 
recent years. However, in the framework of circular 
economy and the highest possible recycling and reuse 
rates, components made of one material are to be  
preferred.4 The current challenge is to combine these two conflicting requirements and to enable optimal (hybrid) 
components and structures that are easy to recycle. Detachable joints, especially adhesive joints, can contribute to the 
solution. In this way, different materials can be joined together and separated again after the EoL.  
Laser-based high precision dismantling and machining. Laser dismantling consists in focusing a high power laser 
(ns, GW/cm2) on the surface of the multilayer structure to create high pressure plasma (GPa) (Fig.4). A shock wave 
is induced in the material. By playing with the laser propagation length and time, a tensile forces can be produced at 
any location inside the material with high precision, including at the 
interface of FRC laminates or multilayer assemblies. The extension of 
such process to dismantling consists in applying a laser shock over the 
entire surface of the targeted jointed surface to delaminate the material. 
No contact and local mechanical tensile stresses ensure material 
integrity for part re -use or recycling. In addition to be employed as 
active dismantling tool, high power lasers can also be exploited a source 
of energy allowing material machining. By controlling the parameters 
of the laser (duration, wavelength) and of the p rocess (gas assistance, 
laser beam moving) it will be possible to repair surfaces, assemble 
materials or cut them in non -contact mode. 5,6 Moreover laser 
technology can allow highly robotized processes. Effort must also focus 
on the integrity of the target surfaces for flawless reuse of  
materials for second -gen structures. In this framework, activities in RECREATE will be directed towards the 
development at higher TRL of hybrid processes associating delamination by laser shock and laser -based FRC 
machining. In both cases, modeling of the processes via digital twins will allow optimization and online control of 
the process with additional sensors.  
Fig.  
3 
  
Design for disassembly approach followed in RECREATE. 
  
Fig.  
4 
  
Representative image of localized laser 
- 
based  
dismantling and delamination of a complex FRC  
structure. 
  
 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  6  
Laser induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS). Industrial sectors as automotive, aviation, nautical etc. are not 
using yet well -established integrated processes for the recycling of EoL complex 
GFRC/CFRC composites due to the insufficient and/or ineffective existing recognition 
solution capacities. Cu rrent technologies for the characterization and analysis of 
plastics in general are mainly based on optical spectroscopies.7 Vis-NIR spectroscopy 
and hyper -spectra imaging (HIS) are the most commonly used so far, but these 
techniques cannot deal for ex. wi th the detection of black materials. Nevertheless, 
emerging technologies have aroused interest from recycling companies as they have 
the potential to bridge this gap (MIR-HSI, THz imaging, LIBS etc.). While MIR-HSI 
system requires a high investment and THz imaging is limited by a low specificity and 
the available bandwidths, LIBS shows a good compatibility with demanding industrial 
environments (both batch and inline). 810 However, the similar elemental composition 
of most polymers results in high similarity  of their LIBS spectra, which makes their 
discrimination challenging. To address this issue, RECREATE will go beyond the 
State-of-Art (SoA) by adopting optical spectroscopy techniques combined with 
powerful artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms and advan ced chemometric models. 
The current limit of detection, efficiency and inline integrability will be increased. IRIS 
has already demonstrated the ability to use some of these techniques developing in-line 
prototypes (e.g., SWIR -HSI for identifying the diffe rent layers in laminated plastic 
films as well as LIBS for identifying black plastics in the Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 
H2020 Multicycle project). Starting from TRL4, IRIS will aim to further the LIBS technology for inline  industrial 
applications up to TRL6 (Fig.5).  
Catalyst-assisted green solvolysis. Solvolysis is a well know technology (classified at TRL 6) for the recovery of 
high quality fibers from EoL composites. 11 The main disadvantage is the generation of a large a mount of organic 
waste to be disposed of, mainly by combustion, with generation of large amount of CO 2. Moreover, solvolysis in 
supercritical or near supercritical fluids (high T and pressure) is needed in order to break-up linkages more recalcitrant 
to de polymerization. Attempts have been made recently to develop solvolysis in green, biobased solvents like 
limonene.12 More interestingly, it has been found that catalyst-assisted solvolysis is able to recycle FRCs efficiently 
at an ordinary pressure and mild T, therefore minimizing costs and fiber damage.13 Research at POLIMI has recently 
demonstrated at lab level (TRL3/4) the possibility to carry out an efficient solvolysis of CFRCs in optimized 
conditions to recover simultaneously both high quality fibers a nd an organic fraction reusable as coating. 14 The 
approach proposed in RECREATE is thus to develop in a relevant operating environment (TRL6) a new green 
solvolysis process at ambient pressure and moderate T, with a careful selection of catalysts (depending on polymer 
resin type) and solvents (non-toxic solvents, possibly biobased). The new process will synergistically close the loop, 
enabling recovery of undamaged clean fibers and use of the liquid organic fraction as component in coating 
formulations. Solvent selection will be driven by industrial (coating) and environmental requirement. To 
maximize sustainability of the process, recycling of solvent will be pursued during coating formulation and 
preparation relying on solvent recirculation/recycling appro aches well-consolidated in the coating industry.    
Electrofragmentation. One of the innovative recycling technologies valorized during RECREATE is the high 
voltage electro-dynamic fragmentation (from now on HVF). 15 HVF is an innovative technology, which ex ploits a 
fast-growing voltage to overcome the dielectric breakdown threshold of the product under recycling and to generate 
multiple spark channels within the product itself. HVF has been tested with polyester-based GFRCs.16 Experimental 
results highlight that the process is particularly suitable for the treatment of multiphase complex materials as FRCs. 
The combination of different effects as the creation of the spark channel nearby the phase border (because of higher 
electric field variation) and the shockwave driven disaggregation of the components magnified by different acoustic 
impedances between the phases result in an output composed by cleaner fibres, longer fibre length distribution, higher 
percentage of fibres at mean fibre length and lower retaine d resin content than composites recycled mechanically. 
HVF technology could be explored to recover not only reinforcement fibers but also the resin. Despite the HVF 
technology is quite affirmed today in sectors such as mining and minerals purifications, th e technology is only 
available at lab scale for recycling at low TRL4 and several researches has to be carried on different fronts. The main 
advancements addressed in RECREATE will include: possibility to recover also the resin component; process 
parameter optimization via DoE tailored for different materials and EoL waste streams, in view of the use of HVF to 
treat entire products and not just parts (TRL6); process modelling, digital simulation and data acquisition leading to 
process control and optimization; hardware modification, including process automation.  
Fig.  
5 
  
( 
top) LIBS setup: a pulsed  
laser is focused on a sample;  
( 
bottom) example of a LIBS  
spectrum, with peaks corresponding  
to specific atomic lines. 
  

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  7  
Vitrimers and reversible green resins. Recent progresses in polymer chemistry offer innovative pathways that may 
help to improve the EoL and waste management of composites by predictive material des ign. In particular, the 
incorporation of dynamic crosslinking bonds  in the macromolecular network of polymer resins has been recently 
introduced as powerful chemical tool to equip thermosets with new thermally -triggered functionalities potentially 
enabling their repairing, welding, reprocessing and reuse in suitable and controllable moderate temperature ranges.17 
Accordingly, RECREATE project will exploit this concept to develop new smart polymeric systems to be used as 
reversible matrix polymers in a new generation of FRCs, more compliant to the principles of circular economy and 
successfully exhibiting multiple repair, reuse and de/remanufacturing capabilities when heated at specific processing 
temperatures, without affecting their usability and functional ity. The dynamic covalent chemistry approaches 
investigated in RECREATE will be based on covalent adaptable networks  (CAN) including reversible 
dienedienophile Diels-Alder (D-A) dissociative polymers and associative macromolecular vitrimers (Fig.6).18,19  
  
Fig. 6 (a) Schematic representation of dissociative (D-A) and (b) associative (e.g., vitrimers) CANs; (c-d) OM images of 
the thermally-induced scratch healing process of a D-A polymer; (e) dynamic thermosetting epoxy matrix recycling; (f) 
complete solvolysis of dynamic epoxy matrix and recovery of CFs from CFRC.  
While being thermosets at working T, such dynamic materials may undergo straightforward solvolysis in specific 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 ranges of mild temperatu res (130-160 °C), enabling direct recovery of 
clean undamaged fibres as well as of reusable resin matrix material. Additionally, the dynamic character of such systems 
will enable multiple thermally-induced repair and reprocessing cycles, thus extending the ir life span. Both polymeric 
materials derived from renewable sources and non-toxic (styrene-free/formaldehyde-free) crosslinking systems will be 
considered as preferential options. In the temperature-enhanced solvolytic demanufacturing process for fibre liberation 
and resin recovery, industrially relevant (bioderived, when applicable) solvents will be selected, avoiding hazardous 
substances with critical toxicological profile.