1.2  Methodology   
1.2.1 Overall methodology  
The proposed methodology in RECRE ATE involves the cooperation between academic institution, research and 
development centers, SME recycling companies, technology -oriented SMEs and large industries as well as 
associations, following a multi-level approach and targeting several technological and non-technological actions. The 
Consortium has been carefully built covering all the needed expertise. Two technological recycling SMEs (COBAT 
COMPOSITI and Carbon Cleanup) in the project have been involved . Their role in the project will be the 
mapping at EU level of existing composite waste, and the selection and supply to other partners of EoL parts 
(including complex multimaterial FRCs) in suitably agreed geometries/sizes to allow subsequent remanufacturing 
activities. In addition, they will also be involved in technology and recycled materials validation, benchmarking the 
RECREATE project results with solutions currently present on the market (e.g., quality of CF fibers from solvolysis 
vs. pyrolysis).  
Parts supplied by the recycling companies will  be successively investigated with 
complementary non-destructive techniques (NDT) by IRIS and FRAUNHOFER, in 
particular by LIBS and active/passive thermography, X -ray CT, ultrasound -based 
and radar-based technologies (Fig. 7). The objective here will be to  understand the 
nature and composition of complex multimaterial composites and to evaluate their 
structural integrity in view of their possible reuse. IRIS will develop and build a 
recognition monitoring prototype unit (TRL6) bringing together LIBS, engine ering 
aspects (e.g., conveyor belts, samples positioning), advanced AI and chemometric  
techniques embedded in a customized software, for a future use as a smart sorting unit in continuous processes.  
 collaborating robot (FRAUNHOFER).Fig. 7 Active thermography using a   

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  8  
An AI-based decision support system (AI-DSS, developed as a digital platform at POLIMI) will serve as digital tool 
for the selection of the most convenient disassembly/cutting strategy, and of the parts directed to remanufacturing 
and reuse. In the case of excessive damage and/or degradation of the EoL part, the latter will be instead exploited for 
fiber liberation and matrix recovery, using innovative technologies aimed at obtaining clean fibers with a minimal 
physical damage (namely, usin g catalyst -assisted green solvolysis and electrofragmentation). Both recycling 
activities will be undertaken at POLIMI. Retention of the mechanical response (modulus, strength) of the liberated 
recycled fibers will be tested and validated at TAU using a unique, high-sensitivity set-up for single fiber mechanical 
testing (microbond technique, by Fibrobotics™) available from a TAU spin-off company.  
Disassembly, cutting and – in some cases – repair of parts to be remanufactured will be carried out at CNRS through 
advanced approaches based on high-precision, tunable laser-shock and laser-machining techniques.  
The main strategies and technological approaches 
used for the realization of the demonstrators will 
includeAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 
(Fig.8):   
• Strategy A1: reuse of current generation, EoL 
GFRC and CFRC parts, through photonic-
based material identification and sorting 
techniques, high precision laser-based 
dismantling and machining, NDT for 
investigation of structural integrity, T-assisted 
reshaping, design  and application of 
reversible joints;  
• Strategy A2: fiber liberation and reusable 
matrix recovery, through catalyst-assisted green 
solvolysis and electrofragmentation;  
• Strategy A3: design and demonstration of 
nextgen FRCs from recycled fibers and smart 
polymer matrices.  
In particular, different routes for composite r euse and 
innovative recycling technologies  will be validated up to 
TRL6 through the realization of 9 demonstrators, 
schematically listed in the following Table 2.  
Table 2. Demo-case description, key technology involved, leading partner and relevant KPIs.  
Democase  Strategy / sector  Output product  Key technologies  Leader  KPIs  
1  Reuse of GFRC  
parts for transport  Technical boards  
LIBS, NDT  
Laser shock dismantling 
T-assisted reshaping  
GAIKER  
Bending strength 30-40 MPa;  
Bending modulus > 7000 MPa; 
Weight < 12 kg/m2 (6-12 mm 
thick).  
30% reduction of CO2 emissions  
2  
Reuse of CFRC  
parts for mobility  
Structural parts 
for body-inwhite 
in vehicles  
LIBS, NDT  
Laser shock dismantling  
Reversible joints  
EDAG  
> 80% crash performance compared 
to classic design with parts made of 
virgin material.  
3  Reuse of CFRC 
parts for energy  
New concept 
wind turbines  
LIBS, NDT  
Laser Shock dismantling  
Reversible joints  
REST UG  
Full mechanical properties 
retention; ≥ 50% substitution of 
virgin fibers; 30% reduction of CO2 
emissions; 20% cheaper/faster 
repair process (vs. reference rotor 
blades).  
Fig.  
8 
  
Reuse 
/remanufacturing  
and recycling 
/reprocessing 
  
strategies 
. 
  

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  9  
4  
Reuse of GFRC 
and CFRC parts 
for aviation  
Seat back-rest 
and cabin panels  
LIBS, NDT  
Laser Shock dismantling  
Reversible joints  
GEVEN SPA  
8%÷12% weight-saving vs. 
marketavailable standard; 5%÷10% 
RC cost-saving vs. reference 
process; 12%÷25% fracture 
toughness increase vs. reference 
CFRCs. 30% reduction of CO2 
emissions  
5  Recycled GF/CF 
for aviation  
Cabin sidewall 
window panels  
Catalyst-assisted 
solvolysis  
Electrofragmentation  GEVEN SPA  
8%÷12% weight-saving vs. 
marketavailable standard; 5%÷10% 
RC cost-saving vs. reference 
process.  
6  
Smart  
recognition/sortin 
g systems  
Operating 
sorting/recogniti 
on prototype  
LIBS  IRIS  
CFRC/GFRC composite  
recognition in waste flows. Flow 
rate recognition of 25 kg/h.  
7  Recycled CF for 
sport  
Padel/pickleball 
rackets  
Catalyst-assisted 
solvolysis  
Electrofragmentation 
Reversible polymer 
matrices  
HEAD Sport 
GmbH  
Fatigue test passed (cycle load of 
10.000 ball impacts).  
8  
Recycled GF for 
sport  Ski parts  
Catalyst-assisted 
solvolysis  
Electrofragmentation  
HEAD Sport 
GmbH  
Processability on prepreg line: resin 
uptake > 50 g/m2.  
9  Industrial coatings  Anticorrosion 
primer  
Catalyst-assisted 
solvolysis  BENASEDO  
Pencil hardness > B; cross cut 
adhesion 100%; corrosion 
resistance > 1000 h salt fog test.  
The aim of the demonstrators (Fig.9) will be the synergistic integration of all key technologies developed in the 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 project, which will be demonstrated in relevant environment at TRL6. 
In parallel, a widespread involvement of companies in this part of the project will ensure direct relation and immediate 
relevance with market opportunities.  
Fig. 9 Representative images of demo-cases developed in RECREATE in WP5 (from left to right: transport, mobility, 
wind, aviation, sport).  
A relevant part of the scope of RECREATE will also be the implementation of non-technical objectives aimed at:   
• the quantitative evaluation of socio-economic and environmental performance of proposed solutions;  
• the co-design, realization and validation of innovative educational and learning instruments.  
More specifically, the methodology proposed and followed in this part of the project is reported in detail as follows. 
Strategy B1: Development of new digital tools for circular economy and sustainability assessment and  
acceleration. The methodology followed will consist in:  
• development of dedicated digital tools such as the Internet of Things (IoT), big data and data analytics to enable 
the assessment and acceleration of the circular economy principles in six different ways: overcoming logistical 
roadblocks around raw material collection for reuse and recycling; sorting high-quality feedstock and tracking the 
quality of the EoL and recycled materials; separating and recycling mixed/complex-material products; enhancing 
yield and stability of reuse and recycling processes; designing composite parts for reuse and rec ycling; using 
emerging digital business models to enable reuse and recycling;  
• an integrated environmental and socio -economic sustainability assessment  (ESESA) to address the 
environmental, economic and social benefits from the reuse, recycling and remanuf acturing processes proposed 
in RECREATE. The ESESA will be based on the following major steps: 1. perform a detailed literature overview 
on materials and processes to gather data regarding the cost, the environmental footprint and the health -safety 
effects of the materials used; 2. define the goal and scope of the ESESA for the specific applications and selection 
of the key technologies to be evaluated from WP2 and WP3; specific requirements to ensure that the processes 
meet the ESESA will be defined and directed to WP1; 3. define and quantify the functional units to be used in the 
comparison of the key technologies (in collaboration with the end -users); 4. analyze the overall system which 

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  10  
includes the entire life-cycle, manufacturing and the EoL of the demonstrators; 5. perform an inventory analysis 
at which the material-, energy- and monetary flows of all processes within the system boundaries will be recorded; 
6. assess the environmental, social and economic impacts using the SLCA and the LCC methods; 7. p erform a 
final evaluation to compare novel and conventional processes, based on the analyzed sustainability indicators.   
• the definition of new dedicated circular business models , associated to two main strategies, namely composite 
part reuse and composite recycling and remanufacturing. Technology concepts will be verified in a controlled 
environment designed in tailored inno vation workshops organised to engage all participating actors for each 
strategy, building hypothetical scenarios and 
designing testing pathways. A circularity 
assessment tool will be developed. The 
assessment tool will be based on the review of 
the innovat ive technology concepts and on a 
comprehensive questionnaire aimed at 
evaluating the degree of circularity of a target 
business model at each stage of a pre -defined 
value chain with the respective relevant 
industrial environments.   
Strategy  B2:  Co-design, 
 realization  and validation  of 
 innovative  educational  and learning 
 instruments  through  digital 
technologies. An array of learning resources 
related to the broad interdisciplinary field of composite  
circularity will be designed, developed and va lidated. The learning resources will aim at transferring to current and 
future generations of employees as well as undergraduate students the core skills needed for the uptake of the 
resilience solutions developed in the project, with a particular attention to technological processes, as well as social 
skills, management competences and soft skills, enabling a highly cross -sectorial educational approach. The 
methodology (Fig.10) will involve:  
• the co-design of learning resources together with subject matter experts (academic and RTO partners in Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 
RECREATE) as well as with representatives of regional institutional bodies (e.g., through the involvement of the  
Directorate for Research, Innovation and University of Lombardy Region), with partner universities external to 
the Consortium, with other local educational organizations. This will lead to the production of the RECREATE 
“Teaching Methodologies and Strategies” guidelines. Starting from an in-depth analysis of the objectives of the 
learning and the specific needs of the different categories of learners identified (current and future professionals, 
undergraduates), this document will define the active and problem-driven approach to learning, considering also 
the requirements of modularity and flexibility of the components of the learning resources;   
• the definition of the digital tools to be used to implement such learning resources. The learning resources will be 
delivered through a gamification platform that will embed them in a specific storytelling, so that learners are 
stimulated to complete the learning pathways following intrinsic rewarding mechanisms and experiential learning. 
The use of gamification tools will facilitate the understanding of the key aspects of the subject matters, and support 
the engagement of learners. The simulation system developed as part of the learning resources will also become 
a digital twin. The simulator will eventually be able to incorporate open data or output data from real tests, in 
order to make the simulations even closer to reality;  
Fig.  
10 
  
Co 
- 
design  
strategy  
of learning resources in  
RECREATE 
. 
  

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  11  
• the validation and replication of such learning resources. The learning resources will be primarily tested through 
the MOOC platform managed by POLIMI. The modular characteristics of the learning resources developed will 
allow to assemble and arrange a number of learning paths with different objectives and target audiences. The 
MOOC will implement an active approach using a mix of synchronous and asynchronous activities (and tools), 
such as: video lectures, forum discussions , quiz for formative and 
summative assessments, single or group project works (asynchronous); 
theoretical and practical webinars (synchronous). The MOOC will be 
available on the POLIMI Open Knowledge platform  
(http://www.pok.polimi.it, currently populated with around 80 courses 
and 127.000 unique users, and with a specific MOOCs “for teachers”). 
All the videos produced for the MOOC will also be uploaded on  
 POLIMI  Open  Knowledge  YouTube  channel  
(https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCOKtBGblWKlkE-KIf-S0Fvg), 
making them widely available to broader community. Finally, the 
possibility to include such modules in existing or to -be-developed 
curricula for undergraduate studies will be assessed, with the 
involvement of some of the European university networks POLIMI and 
the other academic partners are currently part of (e.g., ENHANCE, 
IDEA League, Alliance4Tech).  
The overall concept is schematically represented in Fig.11.  
1.2.2 Relation to national and international research and innovation activities  
Table 3 lists a selection of relevant ongoing H2020 projects participated by some the Consortium partners and related 
to the topic of this application. Synergies and cooperation with these initiatives and with other EU projects dealing 
with materials circularity (including the other projects funded under HORIZON -CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-01) 
will be fostered during RECREATE and implemented within a specific task (T9.4).  
Table 3. International funded initiatives related to the main pillars of RECREATE.  
List of related projects and initiatives  Summary of topics and exploitable synergies  
FiberEUse (2017-2021, ongoing) - 
H2020, GA 730323. “Large scale 
demonstration of new circular 
economy  
value-chains based on the reuse of end-of-life fiber 
reinforced composites” Involved partners : 
POLIMI, TAU, FRAUNHOFER, HEAD Sport 
GmbH, INVENT, EDAG.  
The FiberEUse project aims at integrating in a holistic approach different 
innovation actions enhancing the profitability of composite recycling and 
reuse in value-added products. As FiberEUse will act as reference point for 
circular economy in the composite sector, the partners of RECREATE will 
interact with FiberEUse to define synergies and exploitation potential in 
higher TRL phases.  
Alma (2021-ongoing) – H2020, GA 
101006675.  “Advanced 
 Light  
MAterials and processes for the eco -design of 
electric vehicles”. Involved partners: RESCOLL.  
The project will adopt circular economy principles through the application 
of eco-design strategies to create a novel recyclable and affordable battery 
electric vehicle platform. Synergies with RECREATE will be implemented 
concerning the activities undertaken by RSC and other technology providing 
Consortium partners, which will find potential alternative exploitation 
routes on different markets.  
DeCOAT (2019-ongoing) –  
H2020,  GA  814505.  
This project will develop a solution to ensure the circular use of textiles and 
plastic parts with (multilayer) coatings, based on the development of  
“Recycling of coated and painted textile and plastic 
materials”. Involved partners: RESCOLL, IRIS.   
triggerable smart polymer material systems and appropriate recyclingAssociated 
with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 processes. Synergies with 
RECREATE will include the identification of new exploitation routes for 
RESCOLL and other RECREATE partners involved in the development of 
advanced material solutions for composites circularity.  
MULTICYCLE  (2018- 
ongoing)  -  H2020,  GA  
820695. “Advanced and sustainable recycling 
processes and value chains for plastic -based 
multimaterials”. Involved partners: IRIS.  
MultiCycle aims to deliver an industrial recycling pilot plant for recovering 
the components from thermoplastic multilayer packaging and fibre 
reinforced composites. IRIS is the coordinator of this project and it is 
involved in the development of monitoring systems for the fibre reinforced 
composites, enhancing the competences in fiber recognition area.  
Fig 
.  
11 
  
Overall concept in RECREATE. 
  

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  12  
REMADYL (2019-ongoing), H2020, 
GA 821136. “Removal of Legacy 
Substances from polyvinylchloride  
(PVC) via a continuous and sustainable extrusion 
process”. Involved partners: IRIS.  
REMADYL aims at recycling PVC additivated with hazardous legacy 
substances (LS) su ch as phthalate plasticisers (mainly DEHP) and heavy 
metal-based stabilisers (mainly lead). In this context, IRIS develops a LIBS 
system to black PA and PP parts, acting as reference point to identify other 
black plastic component in RECREATE.  
CarE-Service (2017-ongoing) – 
H2020, GA 776851. “Circular  
Economy Business Models for 
innovative hybrid and electric mobility through 
advanced reuse and remanufacturing technologies 
and services”. 
Involved partners: FRAUNHOFER, POLIMI.  
The CarE -Service project aims at demonstrating Innovative Circular 
Economy Business Models based on advanced mobility services exploiting 
hybrid and electric vehicles. Such business models will entail re -use, 
remanufacturing and recycling of components and materials of hybrid and 
electric vehicles for applications in the automotive sector as well as in other 
sectors. CarE-Service will give important input regarding re -use, 
remanufacturing and selective recycling of techno-polymeric components  
CASTLE (2016-2022, ongoing), H2020, GA 
699777. “CAbin Systems design Toward passenger 
welLbEing”. Involved partners : GEVEN SPA, 
INVENT.  
The CASTLE project aims at improving passenger cabin environment by 
means of an innovative and integrated design approach including both 
human factors and environmentally friendly materials. RECREATE partners 
will interact with CASTLE to define synergies in higher TRL phases.  
FIBREGY (2021-2023, ongoing),  
H2020, GA 952966. “Development, 
engineering, production and life cycle 
management of improved FIBRE-based material 
solutions for the structure and functional 
components of large offshore wind enerGY and 
tidal power platforms”. Involved partners: 
AVK.  
The overall objective of the FIBREGY project is to enable the extensive use 
of FRC materials in the structure of the next generation of large Offshore 
Wind and Tidal Stream (OWTS) platforms. The project will develop, qualify 
and audit innovative FRC materials for offshore applications. AVK will serve 
as direct link with this initiative, evaluating potential synergies especially 
concerning the foreseen end of life of such novel OWTS structures.  
1.2.3 Interdisciplinarity  
The RECREATE Consortium is built upon a vast group of participants from a broad variety of backgrounds, spanning 
academic and industrial research, higher education, technology development, small, medium and large industrial 
entrepreneurship, stakeholders’ representation, business management and innovation. The knowledge base is highly 
interdisciplinary combining competences in materials science and engineering, industrial manufacturing, product 
design and engineering, physics and optics, chemical engineerin g, chemistry, mechanical engineering, business 
management and implementation, cyberphysics, environmental engineering, education sciences, digital technologies, 
computer graphics and design. The success of the project relies on the interaction of expertise from different scientific, 
technological and industrial sectors, with each fundamental step of the project representing a field for cross -
fertilization as a result of beneficial synergies and interactions among different disciplines. Materials engineering as 
well as materials manufacturing are per-se fields of intersections and intimately require synergetic collaboration 
between many different fields of knowledge. However, other more specific interactions and collaborations across 
diverse yet complementary  disciplines will be required for the achievement of the proposed scientific and 
technological innovations: i) dismantling and sorting technologies – key disciplines: physics, photonics, mechanical 
engineering, materials and manufacturing engineering; ii) composite part reuse and remanufacturing  – key 
disciplines: materials engineering, product design, mechanical engineering, cyber -physics, laser physics; iii) 
sustainable and profitable recycling technologies for composite materials  – key disciplines: chemical engineering, 
production engineering, chemistry, mechanical engineering, process engineering, business engineering; iv) pilot level 
demonstration of reuse/recycle approaches  – key disciplines: production engineering, materials engineering, 
chemical engineering, prototyping, chemistry, manufacturing engineering, business engineering; v) digital tools for 
circularity and sustainability assessment – key disciplines: chemical engineering, environmental engineering, 
software engineering, business engineering and management; vi) co-design of learning resources – key disciplines: 
education sciences, pedagogy, software engineering, graphic design, computer graphics. Throughout the project, the 
Consortium will promote the engagement of actors from different scientific and technological disciplines and diverse 
business sectors implementing specific actions fostering continuous knowledge exchanges between partners (see 
Section 2.2 for detailed measures to maximize impact).   
1.2.4 Integration of social sciences and h umanities  Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 
One of the important objectives of the RECREATE project is the design of innovative learning/teaching resources to 
enable the implementation of lifelong learning programmes for curren t employees active in the cross-sectorial area of 
circularity of composite materials, in addition to targeting the future generation of workers by interacting with local and 
regional educational organization at undergraduate level. To successfully address these aspects, competences in the 

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  13  
fields of pedagogy, education sciences as well as learning sciences and technologies  are essential. Such skills will 
be implemented within the RECREATE project through the active participation of the “ Innovation in Teachin g and 
Learning” task-force (METID) of partner POLIMI. METID@POLIMI specializes in designing and testing tools and 
methods for learning innovation and faculty development, and will lead the activities related to the definition of 
innovative learning/teaching methods (T7.1) and to their modular replication and validation (T7.4). These activities will 
be undertaken in the framework of a WP entirely dedicated to the co-design and validation of learning resources 
(WP7), led by partner GRIFO whose core digital expertise is in the development and technological implementation of 
e-learning/gamification solutions at different educational levels.  1.2.5 Considerations on gender dimension  
The different activities foreseen in RECREATE will require specific considerations on sex/gender dimension and on 
how this issue will be taken into account at each level of the project development. In this respect, the Consortium has 
identified three distinct levels of scrutiny and interven tion. LEVEL 1 – PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION OF  
SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL TASKS PLANNED IN THE PROJECT. The practical implementation of 
the scientific and technological activities planned in RECREATE is assumed to be equally perceived and participated 
by male and female subjects and no gender/sex -based differences are expected in the development, demonstration 
and validation of the proposed technologies. No specific sex/gender analysis related to the execution of such activities 
is deemed relevant for RECREATE. Should the sex/gender dimension become relevant in this respect as advised by 
the Consortium partners or externally, appropriate measures will be implemented to ensure full consideration in 
project activities in line with EC guidelines.20 LEVEL 2 – DISSEMINATION OF PROJECT RESULTS. The project 
will take particular care of the sex/gender inclusion topic by designing dissemination material free from 
discrimination of any kind, by stimulating the participation and involvement of individuals with arbitrary gender 
orientation in the project activities and outcomes, and by taking specific dissemination actions in synergy with 
associations and organizations that regularly deal with these issues such as e.g. Valore D , Society of Women 
Engineers, IEEE Women in en gineering and Parks. It is widely recognized that in the area of science, technology, 
engineering and mathematics (STEM) there is still prevalent gender unbalance as well as a large underrepresentation 
of e.g. women.21,22 Access to STEM fields both at high er-education/academic level and at professional level is still 
held back by discrimination, prejudice, social norms, and expectations that make these fields less accessible for 
women and those with different gender orientations. For these reasons, attention to the use of language in these and 
other contexts becomes a key element in creating a new vision of society, and particular attention needs to be given 
to sex- and gender-inclusive language. It is through language that we get an idea of our society and the values we 
want to uphold. Teachers and trainers need to have a constant and strong commitment in this respect, not only using 
conscious and consistent language, but also raising participants' awareness and attention to this aspect. Indeed, the 
model proposed by the teacher constitutes a key starting point for reflection on this matter. Building upon these 
considerations, the RECREATE Consortium will take full responsibility in disseminating project results using an 
inclusive language, free from sex/gend er stereotypes. The partners will implement dissemination activities using 
gender neutral language (e.g., avoiding the use of masculine forms/pronouns/nouns in a universal meaning). 
Particular attention will also be given to the visual language in the creation of dissemination materials such as social 
posts, newsletters, graphic images or videos, where people/gender diversity and sex parity will be constantly sought 
and ultimately ensured. LEVEL 3 – CO-DESIGN AND VALIDATION OF LEARNING RESOURCES. The issue 
of how to develop an inclusive digital language in the broad field of STEM education is crucial for enabling a 
measurable qualitative and quantitative impact of such disciplines on society. Within this context, POLIMI is actively 
involved in the FOSTWOM project, a three-year (2019-2022) initiative co-funded by the EC's Erasmus+ for Higher 
Education program in which the inclusive potential of massive open online courses (MOOCs) is capitalized on to 
enable STEM subjects free of gender -based stereotypes. The main objective of such MOOC development platform 
is to raise awareness around gender balance indicators and ultimately enable a more inclusive MOOC design, thus 
reaching a wider learning audience. Based on this experience, RECREATE will take advantage of th e direct 
involvement of POLIMI in FOSTWOM to co-design teaching and learning resources for lifelong training of current 
and future professionals in the broad field of composite circularity, following the guidelines outlined in FOSTWOM 
for inclusive content , free of gender stereotypes. Additionally, MOOCs and digital learning approaches will be 
employed in RECREATE as strategic means for actively promoting a culture of inclusion. In this context, a 
representative example is the MOOC "Embracing Diversity" created as part of the IN2IT Erasmus+ project23 in which 
POLIMI was involved, now available in open -access mode to interested users on the Open Knowledge portal of 
POLIMI.24 These previous experiences will constitute the informed background for RECREATE to embrace diversity 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 as key means to develop talents, foster creativity and boost 
innovation in academia, society and business. 1.2.6 Open science  

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  14  
Open Science practices  will be implemented at differ ent levels and different stages during the project to ensure 
cooperative and systematic sharing of the produced knowledge and tools, in agreement with the IPR protection 
strategy outlined in Section 2.2.3. In the early dissemination of the scientific results, pre-print scientific publications 
in suitable open access online databases and repositories (e.g., ChemRxiv, arXiv) will be considered for immediate 
knowledge sharing with the community, thus promoting effective scientific and technological advancement . 
Additionally, institutional repositories (e.g., Re.Public@Polimi, Trepo@TAU) will be used for immediate access 
to research outputs through univocal persistent identifiers (PIDs), at the latest at the time of publication. Similarly, 
scientific articles based on the outcomes of the RECREATE project will be published in open access mode (either 
“green” or “gold”) and made available to the readership under CC -BY, CC-BY-NC/ND or equivalent publishing 
licenses. When available from the selected publisher, the open peer-review model will be pursued. Beneficiaries and 
authors will need to retain sufficient IPR when complying with such open access requirements. To this end, sensitive 
information subjected to IPR protection will be managed according to the IPR strategy outlined in Section 2.2.3, and 
in the case project results are eligible for patenting, actions will be taken at the earliest possible date. A preliminary 
agreement has been reached among the project partners to investigate the possibility of opting for the open-source, 
license-free and maintainable model for the developed technologies (including software-based) in order to ensure 
re-use, maintainability and further development by the entire research and industrial community. Project results that 
will be provided as open-source components will be protected under open source licenses; analogously, project results 
that will be commercially exploited will be copyright-protected. In order to ensure clear and efficient knowledge 
management and exchange within the Consortium, the Project Coordinator (PC) will establish internal web resources 
for communication among the partners and for the dissemination and transfer of knowledge and information as 
required. All Consortium members will co -operate in order to reach  the most efficient process of knowledge 
management as well as data management (see Section 1.2.7). The know-how exchanged between the partners may 
include, in certain cases, background knowledge. The Consortium has agreed on the principles for the managem ent 
of IP, as preliminarily set out in Section 2.2.3.  
Active engagement of relevant knowledge actors including citizens, civil society and appropriate stakeholders will 
be continuously promoted throughout the project with dedicated actions, such as the pa rticipation in dedicated 
dissemination events and the organization of tailored dissemination activities (see Section 3 - WP8 and Section 2.2 
for a detailed description of the preliminary Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation plan). In addition, 
specific actions will be implemented in the co-design of learning resources  for professionals as well as for 
undergraduate students to promote lifelong learning in the field of composite materials circularity, based on the 
scientific and technological outputs of RECREATE. To this end, WP7 will be entirely dedicated to these activities, 
which will be led by partner GRIFO with the direct support of METID@POLIMI, the “ Innovation in Teaching and 
Learning” task -force @POLIMI. The activities in this context will fol low the recommendations provided by 
UNESCO for open educational resources (OER) as “learning, teaching and research materials in any format and 
medium that reside in the public domain or are under copyright that have been released under an open license, th at 
permit no-cost access, reuse, repurpose, adaptation and redistribution by others”. 25 In particular, MOOCs will be 
extensively exploited in RECREATE as an effective strategy to enable broad accessibility to the learning material, 
with great potential for modular replicability, scalability and world-wide openness. 1.2.7 Data management plan  
The Consortium partners have considered issues related to the management of data and research outputs as they want 
to ensure them to be findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable (FAIR), ultimately enabling data security, 
accessibility and reproducibility. A Data Management Plan (DMP) will be implemented as part of a concrete research 
data management strategy which will minimize possible duplication of effort and the risk of data loss and will offer 
integrity to the data (first draft at M06, updated at M24/36/48). Furthermore, this approach will enable increased 
efficiency of research and development activities, time and resources savings in the long term, and compliance with 
best practices in higher TRL phases. G_MEDIA as Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation Manager 
will coordinate the DMP activities and will take responsibility for the collection, management, sharing and curation 
of the data, as well as for the day -to-day quality assessment. The DMP will describe plans for creating, organizing, 
documenting, storing and sharing data. It will take into account issues such as data protection and confidentiality, 
data preservation and data curation, and will provide a framework that  will support researchers and their data 
throughout the course of their research activities and beyond. It will be periodically updated describing what type of 
data will be generated (e.g., experimental, numerical, graphical) and what policies apply to the  data (i.e., data 
accessibility). Specific unique persistent identifiers  (PIDs) including Archival Resource Keys (ARKs), Digital 
Object Identifiers (DOIs) and Handle System Uniform Resource Names (URNs) will be considered to ensure Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 findability of data and research outputs. Funding and legal policies as well as 
data management practices  such as backups, storage, access control, archiving will be defined in the DMP. 
 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  15  
Moreover, the Consortium partners will clearly describe which data will retain value after the end of the project, how 
their reuse will be enabled, and how the long-term preservation of such data will be ensured after the original research 
is completed, to ensure effective data and research output reusability. Partners will share the generated research 
data allowing other partners to replicate, validate, or correct their results, thereby improving the scientific record and 
ensure knowledge advancement. This will increase research integrity and replication as Fig. 12 Data management plan 
strategy in RECREATE. those who make use of their data and cite them in their own research  
will disseminate the results possibly in other disciplines, sectors, and countries. Partners will not share sensitive parts 
of their research data whenever the achievement of the main objectives of the project may be jeopardized by making 
those specific parts of the research data openly accessible. The methodology and standards, whether and how these 
data will be shared and/or made open, as well as how they will be curated and preserved, will be defined in the DMP 
by the Consortium during project implementation. For each dataset generated, the DMP will be based on the following 
essential implementation steps (Fig.12):  
✓ Data set reference and name: identifier for the produced data.  
✓ Data set description: description, nature, scale, information about integration and reuse etc.  
✓ Standards and metadata: reference to the standards that will be used and how the metadata will be created.  
✓ Data sharing: access procedures and license (e.g. Creative Commons, Open Data Commons), software or other 
tools needed for access, repository, reasons for confidential data.  
✓ Archiving and preservation: procedures for the long-term preservation of the data, estimated end volume.  
  
     
 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  16  
2.  Impact   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022