2.2  Measures to maximise impact - Dissemination, exploitation and communication  
The RECREATE strategy for Communication, Dissemination & Exploitation (CDE) aims at supporting the 
achievement of the Expected Outcomes, within the project lifetime, and facilitating the achievement of the 
 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  25  
mediumlong term Wider Impacts, beyond the project. The communication activities will generate awareness of the 
project among different stakeholders and interest in obtaining the disseminated results. The management of research 
data and IPR will guide the dissemination activities t o serve the academic community while protecting the 
consortium’s interest in commercial exploitation. Dissemination and exploitation of the project results will be based 
on large-scale demonstration action of cross-sectorial circular value-chains for the recovery and re-use of FRC into 
high added value products. Among the main existing barriers, D&E actions will address (i) the lack of circular 
business models for boosting profitability; (ii) the poor customer acceptance for remanufactured products. Main goals 
of the CDE workpackages (WP7 -8) will be (i) facilitating the industrial uptake within local eco -systems; (ii) de -
risking future Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 industrial uptake through private investments; (iii) 
increasing awareness for a more conscious consumer behaviour. Large-scale replication and multiplication will take 
advantage of the Vanguard Initiative “De-and Remanufacturing for Circular Economy” pilot network.  
 2.2.1  Exploitation of the project results  
The CDE plan and the related process will be led by G_MEDIA, the RECREATE CDE Manager (Section 3). The 
company has consolidated expertise in engaging, training and support capacity building with relevant stakeholders 
brought to the dedicated unit Circular Business Academy ( www.circularbusiness.academy) and to the development 
of the Roadmap Towards the Circular Economy in Slovenia.  
In the implementation of the exploitation part of the plan (WP8), the RECREATE exploitation team will coordinate 
the partners and define the organisational aspects needed to address the market. The process will be based on 4 
workshops, namely “WS1: Industrial thematic workshops with potential stakeholders”, “WS2: KER exploitation 
workshop and dedicated exploitation session”, “WS3: Exploitation implementation workshops”, “WS4: How to 
pitch” workshop”. These workshops will provide each demo -case with the opportunity to work on (i) the 
identification/grouping of key exploitable results; (ii) the first definition of the related use mode; (iii) the identification 
and mapping of risks related to the exploitation; (iv) follow -up actions.  These WS will follow the path tracked by 
the Lean Canvas approach that will be used for the Business and Use Model Development of the KERs. A crucial 
step for exploitation is the identification of the risk factors hampering future use, the evaluation and prioritization of 
the risk factors and the identification of actions to minimize their impact. Risk factors will be screened following 
these categories: Partnership, Technological, Market, IPR, Environmental and Financial risks.  RECREATE aims at 
fostering competitiveness and growth and increasing benefits to the partners involved and to EU economy and 
citizens. Depending on the project result type, the consortium has developed an innovative method for identifying 
KERs in a comprehensive and systemic way, targeting different exploitation routes customized to the specific 
demonstration strategies. Moreover, the RECREATE consortium has analyzed all the exploitable solutions generated 
at value-chain level and identified four stakeholder groups for exploitation:   
• Technology and B2B-service providers – TP - and Design & Engineering groups – DE -, which are interested 
in selling the solutions (or the use of the solutions) and new designs developed in RECREATE to largest 
possible target end-user groups, contributing to a sustainable transition to Circular Economy.  
• Recyclers and Remanufacturers – RR - (Lead-users), recycling companies and remanufacturing/repair 
companies interested in using the new demand-driven recovery and remanufacturing solutions developed by 
RECREATE for (i) selling recovered components/materials to end-users (ii) selling services to end-users.  
• Product Manufacturers and B2C -service providers – MFG - (End-users): The manufacturers, which are  
interested in making a concrete transition towards circular economy business models which can enhance the 
ability to decrease the costs of composite materials, to propose new customized “green” products to the 
market, and to contribute to the environmental sustainability of their production processes.   
According to the project goals, the main exploitable solutions, and the respective exploitation plan will be as reported 
in Table 8.  
Table 8 Preliminary identification of KERs and exploitation routes.  
Exploitable 
products  
Main Exploiter(s)  Route to exploitation  Time to 
market  
Target Industry   
During RECREATE  After RECREATE  
New products offered at value-chain level    
Added-value, 
customized 
products re -
using fibers 
and resins.  
TP: POLIMI, GAIKER, 
TAU, IRIS.  
RR: Carbon Cleanup, 
COBAT COMPOSITI. 
MFG: GEVEN SPA, 
HEAD  
Sport GmbH, 
BENASEDO.  
RECREATE will test the 
effectiveness of the 
developed solutions 
and will demonstrate 
the benefits at pilot 
scale in 5 demo -cases 
The RECREATE demo-cases 
will be translated into new 
products. Extensions to other 
markets will be considered 
according to the output of the 
exploitation strategy.   
4 years after 
the project 
ends.  
Form: internal 
product 
development,  
RTOs spin-
offs.  
• Furniture  
• Automotive  
• Sport 
equipment  
• Design   
• Appliances.  
 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  26  
for high -value 
customized products.  
• Consumer 
goods  
FRP 
components 
modular 
design, reman., 
repair, 
reforming, and 
reuse  
TP: Fraunhofer, ICAM,  
CNRS, IRIS, INV, 
POLIMI DE: REST 
UG, EDAG.  RR: 
COBAT COMPOSITI  
MFG: EDAG, REST 
UG,  
GEVEN SPA  
RECREATE will bring the 
modular design, 
disassembly, 
remanufacturing and 
reforming processes at 
TRL  
4-6 and will test the 
properties of the 
remanufactured 
components.  
MFGs have strategic 
interest in opening new 
markets for this attractive 
circular economy solution, 
after validation by 
customers and business 
model refining.  
4 years 
after the 
project 
ends.  
  
Form:  
patenting.  
• Wind energy  
• Marine  
• Aeronautics  
• Automotive  
• Furniture  
New 
sustainableby-
design 
composite 
materials with 
enhanced  
functionalities  
TP: POLIMI, INVENT, 
EDAG.   
DE: EDAG.  
RR: COBAT 
COMPOSITI.  
MFG: EDAG, REST UG  
RECREATE will develop 
and demonstrate 
solutions for sustainable-
by-design materials 
including by (i) new 
green reversible resins, 
(ii) reversible joining, and 
(iii) modular structures.  
These solutions will be 
transferred to the industry at 
large scale thr ough 
dedicated dissemination 
workshops, in order to 
investigate potential market 
uptakes in different sectors.  
4 years after 
the project 
ends.  
  
Form:  
patenting.  
• Wind energy  
• Marine  
• Aeronautics  
• Automotive  
• Furniture  
New software technical enablers. MULO (Make, Use, Licensing, Outsourcing)   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 
20/05/2022 
Circular 
Economy  
digital platform 
for supporting 
the adoption of 
products re -
using 
materials and 
components   
M, L: G_MEDIA, UPAT, 
GRIFO  
U: All project partners .  
  
  
RECREATE will design 
and develop core data 
structure and services to 
support value chain 
integration and  
collaborative 
development of new 
products using 
composite.   
The RECREATE partners 
will have strategic interest in 
promoting the platform and 
push for the replication, by 
large system integrator and 
services providers, in 
different markets.  
2 years 
after the 
project 
ends. Form: 
packaging 
of services 
of the 
platform.   
• All sectors of  
RECREATE  
• Customers,  
• Investors,  
• Waste mgmt. 
consortia.  
• Municipalities.  
• Regions  
Digitalisation 
of knowledge 
about new 
materials, 
products and 
innovative 
processes for 
composite re -
use for 
training tools 
and 
gamification.  
M, L:  POLIMI, 
GRIFO U: all 
stakeholders, 
including end -
customers, service 
providers, policy 
makers, regulators, 
standardization and 
certification bodies.  
  
RECREATE will develop 
a large pool of digitalized 
knowledge, including 
data, pictures, KPI 
figures, validation data, 
description of materials, 
designs, testing, 
certifications etc.. for all 
the demonstrated 
products and best 
practices on how 
conduct a succ essful 
replication.  
POLIMI and other scientific 
partners will continuously 
update the digital platform 
database and the set of 
collected examples and will 
provide the access to the 
library to the EU 
stakeholders. GRIFO will 
design services to make the 
digital learning tools 
available to external users.  
1 year after 
the project 
ends.  
  
Form:  
Licensing.  
• Composite  
production.  
• Composite 
reuse industry.  
• Public 
authorities, 
certification 
and 
standardisation 
bodies  
2.2.1.1 Preliminary Business Plans for RECREATE Exploitable Products and Enabling Technologies  
Individual Partner Business Plan – HEAD Sport GmbH: The main industrial interest is to validate the re -use of 
CFs in padel and pickle-ball rackets (Table 9). The flat surfaces require isotropic properties and the use of recycled 
material from early beginning of these growing markets will set the standards. Yet the technical requirements of these 
impact sports remain high and the material needs to comply with them. The result must be highly competitive against 
current solutions under development. It is assumed the lower costs of the material allow additional production steps 
necessary for working with recycled fibers. For recycled GFs, the interest is to replace a f leece with rGFs, which is 
in nearly every ski produced. The fleece must provide interlaminar strength. To achieve this, there is a potential rGF 
use of 20-25% of total GF volume used. The introduction of recycled materials should not exceed current target cost. 
Table 9 Potential economic benefits for HEAD Sport GmbH demo -cases.  
Benefits  RECREATE  +1 years  +2 years  +3 years  +4 years  +5 years  
Sales skis [n° units]    50.000  100.000  100.000  200.000  400.000  
Sales rackets [n° units]    20.000  20.000  60.000  90.000  100.000  
Gross Sales Revenue [M€/year]    7.900.000  1.5400.000  16.200.000  31.800.000  62.000.000  
Accumulated Turnover in 5 years       
Expenses [M€/year]  0  7.310.000  13.860.000  14.580.000  28.820.000  55.800.000  

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  27  
EU grant [M€/year]  319.000  0  0  0  0  0  
Own investment (M€/year)  120.000  200.000   0  0   200.000  0  
NET Benefits per year [M€]  439.000  390.000  1.540.000  1.620.000  2.980.000  6.200.000  
Accumulated earnings in 5 years   12.291.000     
2.2.2.2 Industrial Impacts: Innovation for Market Success  
RECREATE will produce multiple impacts in the European industry. The participation of industrial partners will 
ensure that the project will directly impact on the following wide range of industries: Aeronautics, Automotive, Wind 
Energy, Sport Equipment, Ma rine, the recycling / remanufacturing and the composite manufacturing industry as a 
whole. The following table summarizes the relevant exploitation strategies of a sub-set of project partners (Table 10).  
Table 10 Main strategic interest of partners towards exploitation  
End users  
HEAD Sport 
GmbH  
Paddle and pickle ball are young trend sports and grow at a fast level and in new countries. A successful democase will be 
further developed into serial products, which will probably need two years for market introduction. It is excepted that at least 
half of the range can be produced by the new technology (appr 5 years time frame), bringing the total revenue >3 Mio Euro.  
REST UG  
The design and production of rotor blades with recycled GRP material will be set up for a novel 100 kW twin rotor wind 
turbine. It is expected that the benefits of this new blades will improve the market position of REST UG 100 kW turbine. The 
technology will also be used to be licensed to other blade manufacturer.  
GEVEN SPA  
The recycling of seats that contain composites components at present is done by GEVEN SPA customers. GEVEN SPA can 
exploit project results by adjusting its business model and adopting the developed technologies to recover, recycle, reuse or  
resale the seats composite components. The investigation on business model changes and how this affects the present GEVEN 
SPA economic activities (also the financial viability) will be assessed. Technological scale -up at plant level will be 
implemented in one year after the project with the ambition to have at least 50% more sustainable products within 2030 that 
will enhance the enterprise sustainability brand and will allow to increase the turnover (estimated around 30-40%), create new 
employment (+30%) and attract the best talents.  
EDAG  
EDAG acts as a multiplier and enabler to the automotive OEM and the large system suppliers. EDAG will investigate and try 
to implement the technology of reusing End -of-Life (EoL) composite waste as a source for parts in different series 
development projects of automotive body structures (e.g. body in white, interieur, exterieur). Our customers increasingly 
 expect sustainable solutions in car development, and the expected results of this project will be a good lever to offer 
themAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 what they are seeking.  
BENASEDO  BENASEDO will exploit internally the results of the demo -case focused on the re -use of resins for coating applications. A 
new product line may be launched at the end of the project, if the results are demonstrated to match target KPIs  
Technology Providers  
INVENT  
Adhesive bonding is important for composite assemblies, but SoA technologies don’t allow any disassemble without damage 
of the components. With a damage free debonding technology INVENT would be able to offer customers novel design 
opportunities for sustainable products in terms of e. g. recycling, repair, and maintena nce. It is expected to develop new 
business opportunities like follow-up projects and orders from the industry bringing a revenue of >1 -2 Mio EUR in the first 
3-6 years after the project.  
IRIS  Key Exploitable result: Smart recognition and monitoring system for fiber reinforced composites. Type of IPR protection: 
Patent. Type of exploitation route: commercialization, direct sales. Target users or clients: Waste treatment plants, recyclers.  
RESCOLL  
RESCOLL will mainly benefit from the licensing of the laser shock technology to companies in the composite industry and 
other related sectors that could benefit from the continuous dismantling of multimaterial parts. RESCOLL will also benefit 
from sells of debondable adhesives to industries such as energy and transports that are in demand of such technology.  
GRIFO  
GRIFO expects to exploit the project results to enlarge its portfolio of e-learning contents and digital games, by adding a new 
field of application, the promotion of best practices connected to reuse of materials and the circular economy. The direct target 
for this type tools will be academic entities and public bodies, with a view also to B2C commercial exploitation.  
Post-use products (waste) managers and recyclers  
COBAT  
COMPOSITI  
COBAT COMPOSITI will exploit project results i) developing an optimal reverse logistics network configuration for 
composite waste, and ii) contributing to the definition of actions to mitigate/remove barriers related to the legislative 
framework. The project outcomes will provide information to support the development of an industrial initiative to be realized 
in synergy with the Next Generation EU program in order to treat volumes of waste wind blades that will be produced in the 
coming years in Italy.  
Carbon 
Cleanup  
Carbon Cleanup will further develop the recycling strategies for carbon composites together with HEAD Sport GmbH and 
other potential customers. It is expected that Carbon Cleanup can grow its technology competences into further business 
models.  
Academic Partners and RTD  
TAU  
TAU will use the RECREATE results for specific use cases in the future to benefit further research and development actions 
but also the direct company projects. Further, as an academic partner TAU will focus on using intern ational open -access 
publication channels to distribute basic knowledge related to recycled fibres enhancing the exploitation of the RECREATE 
results globally.  

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  28  
POLIMI  
POLIMI will exploit the demand -driven approach for composite fibers and resins re -use within the network of industrial 
stakeholders of the infrastructure for Circular Economy of the Lombardy Region (AFIL Cluster). Furthermore, the research 
and innovation results achieved in the developm ent of the new recycling and reprocessing technologies will be exploited 
through patents and technology transfer to local companies within POLIMI’s network. POLIMI will also develop and exploit 
new e-learning methodologies for education, to be further shared with other EU academic partners.   
Fraunhofer  
Fraunhofer IWU and WKI as well as Fraunhofer headquarters in Munich actively support IP transfer, licensing and the creation 
of spin-offs and fostering entrepreneurship skills among Fraunhofer employees. F raunhofer research outputs of this project 
will be a methodology for design of reversible joints and a methodology for modular design of next-gen composite structures. 
Furthermore, Fraunhofer will exploit a new process for automatic evaluation, repair and remanufacturing of rotor blades.  
ICAM  Disseminate information in the industrial network of Icam and help developing the industrial sector.  
UPAT  
UPAT will develop two digital tools in RECREATE: a digital tool integrating IoT, big data and data analytics for the 
assessment and the acceleration of circularity of composites parts and a digital tool for the implementation of the ESESA. The 
knowledge that will gained fro m RECREATE will be used in Training Schools targeting scientists and PhD students, in the 
development of future collaborations and projects and in the updating of the education material in the area of composites 
sustainability.  
GAIKER  
GAIKER will transfers or licence this know-how to companies interested in remanufacturing and reuse composite waste into 
new composite parts in different sectors (like composite panels for transport, energy, or construction). Additionally, the 
temperature-assisted reshaping know -how will open more opportunities for research with different chemistries composites 
than polyester increasing the GAIKER research competitiveness.  
CNRS  Project Outcomes will provide specifications going towards industry through partner RSC. Produced patents will be licensed. 
CNRS will organize Training seminar in hybrid laser processes.  
Associations  
APRA 
Europe  
APRA Europe represents the remanufacturing industry and is constantly striving to communicate new ideas, technologies, 
products and solutions as well as precise business cases. The remanufacturing, and, much earlier in the life cycle, the desig n 
for remanufacturing, of composite-based products is still not part of current daily operations in the industry but it offers huge 
potential to be exploited.  
AVK  
AVK is one of the largest composite networks in Europe. One of the main goals of the AVK is to broaden knowledge about 
the materials and to promote their use in industry. The knowledge gained in the project serves to support the essential goals  
of the AVK work.  The knowledge gained will not be used in an economic way, but rather used to promote the use of the 
materials and to make the latest knowledge available to the network.  
2.2.2.3 Impact on standardisation (at national and international level)  
Standards are important levers when dealing with exploitation in the circular economy area, which nowadays lack of 
systematic approaches, as well as in relatively new areas such as data management, communications, security and 
cloud computing. During RECRE ATE activities, partners will adhere to existing standards (Table 11) as much as    
possible and will identify the emergence of needs for new standard within WP8.   
Table 11 RECREATE: Identified reference standards Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 
Reference standards, protocols, systems  
Composite 
standards  
ASTM's composite standards are instrumental in the evaluation and determination of the physical, shear, 
tensile, flexural, and compressive properties of various forms of composite materials used in structural 
applications. D7205 / D7205M - 06(2011) and D4762 - 11a (Standard Guide for Testing Polymer Matrix 
Composite Materials). ISO 1268 (Composite Manufacturing methods). 
http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_tc/catalogue_tc_browse.htm?commid=49462.  
Remanufacturing  ISO/DIS 10987-2 (Earth-moving machinery -- Sustainability -- Part 2: Remanufacturing).  
Connection to 
data sources  
  
OPC-Unified Architecture (Open Platform Communications, industrial Machine to Machine communication 
protocol for interoperability); Classic OPC; XMPP (Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol for 
message-oriented middleware based on XML); MTConnect (manufacturing industry standard to facilitate 
the organized retrieval of process information from numerically controlled machine tools); 
B2MML(Business To Manufacturing Markup Language: XML implementation of ISA-95 standard); QIF 
(unified XML framework for computer-aided quality measurement systems)  
Cloud/digital 
systems  
IEEE Standards Association (IEEE-SA) draft P2301 (cloud profile), P2302 (intercloud). EU ETSI Cloud 
Standards Coordination (CSC) initiative outputs. ISO/IEC 19086-1 (Cloud computing - Service level 
agreement (SLA) framework), ISO/IEC 20933:2016 (Distributed Application Platforms and Services 
(DAPS).  
 2.2.2  Dissemination and Communication of RECREATE results  
The Communication and Dissemination part of the CDE plan will tackle both B2B and B2C relations along the 
crosssectorial value-chains to reinforce the engagement of participating actors and establish the “pull” effect created 
by the demand -driven orientati on of the project. Both plans will aim at: (I) identifying target stakeholders, (II) 
articulating modalities to reach and engage them effectively for the project scope, while reducing overlapping with 
other European projects and initiatives, (III) increasing acceptance levels of products embedding re-usable materials 
and components by industries, consumers and citizens at large, thus unlocking the future demand for circular product 
use, and (IV) increasing acceptance level of modern non -ownership business models through cross-sectorial value 

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  29  
chains, favouring take -back of post -use products by the consumers and enabling a steadily evolving collection 
process. Dissemination activities include (i) target groups mapping and analysis, objectives, means, activitie s; (ii) 
brand strategy and visual identity toolkit, website design and editorial process embedded in the digital communication 
strategy; (iii) development of the methodology for consumer involvement and citizens awareness raising, based upon 
user-centred research and product design, training, gamification and the implementation through the use of Fab -lab 
network and living labs; (iv) establishment of circular value chains supported by the capacity -building programmes 
destined to all involved stakeholder gro ups; (v) Key Performance Indicators to monitor success of communication, 
dissemination and exploitation; (vi) Risk analysis and data management plan. Dissemination approach builds upon 
synergies with EU projects, clusters and the CCRI. G_MEDIA, a knowledge company, founded in 2012 and created 
to support partners in sustaining value through excellence in management and communication in the context of 
change and development,  will be in charge of developing and continuously updating the  Dissemination & 
Communication activities. The role of all partners in the dissemination activities is listed in Table 12. Table 12 
Specific partners activities for the Dissemination and Communication plan of the RECREATE results  
PARTNER  DISSEMINATION & COMMUNICATION ACTIVITIES  
G_MEDIA  
Dissemination, Communication, Exploitation WP leader; responsible for the coordination of public awareness, 
community engagement, dissemination and communication strategy and implementation. G_MEDIA will drive the 
process of identifying the stakeholders to target, the modalities to reach and engage them and the other feature to 
ensure a targeted awareness raising and dissemination of the project results and active involvement of the 
stakeholders. A time -defined Dissemination Action Plan will be designed including the project web site design, 
implementation and curation. Two internal knowledge exchange meetings will be organized.  
FRAUNHOFER  Communication and dissemination towards the wide network of connected stakeholders. Dissemination of scientific 
and technological project results through publication of scientific articles.  
RESCOLL  Presentation of RECREATE on Rescoll’s blog and social media. Participation to events and fairs related to composites 
(JEC world, Composites Meeting, ECCM). Exploitation of the project results on debondable adhesives (sales) and 
laser dismantling (services)  
IRIS  
IRIS as technology provider for smart recognition and monitoring system for fiber reinforced composites will support 
the dissemination and communication activities described below, by means of participating in relevant events or 
conferences, publications, and providing diffusion of the project and its results through its social media.  
COBAT COMPOSITI  Dissemination towards the wide network of industries and companies connected, as a composite related waste 
manager. Communication to the public authorities and the legislation bodies by exploiting the available network of 
stakeholders at Italian and European level.  
POLIMI  
Dissemination and communication activities towards the scientific community in the material science and 
manufacturing domains within the participated scientific and industrial networks (Eucia, CIRP, IFAC), communication 
towards regional and national authorities and industrial facilitators, co-design and preparation of learning materials for 
supporting education of current and future generation of employees. Dissemination of scientific and technological 
project results through publication in open-access mode in high-impact scientific journals (see  
Table 15).  
TAU  Dissemination and awareness-raising activities related to RECREATE results towards the whole composite industry 
in Finland.  
HEAD Sport GmbH, 
REST  
UG, GEVEN SPA, 
EDAG, BENASEDO, 
GAIKER  
Dissemination targeting specific customers, sectors and value -chains. Design and implementation of specific 
marketing strategies for the supporting the future market uptake and launch of the new demonstrated products.  
INVENT  
Design of specific dissemina tion, communication, and marketing campaign for supporting the future introduction of 
the innovative RECREATE green and digital technologies in the worldwide market, with specific interest on de-bonding 
technologies as novel design opportunities for custom ers will at designing and manufacturing new easy -to-
disassemble sustainable products  
AVK  
Dissemination targeting potential future users of enabling demand-driven circular economy solutions at global level, 
for enabling industrial uptake and technology transfer to future business cases, according to the replication and 
multiplication. Dissemination towards the whole composite network, for animating replication both in mature and niche 
sectors.  
APRA Europe  
Dissemination towards the automotive remanufacturing network, for animating replication in different industrial business 
caseAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022s. APRA makes  
use of various well -established events, channels and par tners such as Automechanika Frankfurt, APRA European 
Symposium, Social Media, own Newsletters.  
  
With respect to Communication, the main channels that will be activated in the project are listed in Tables 13/14. 
Relevant ongoing/upcoming EU projects will be monitored, in link with the CCRI, for max cooperation opportunities.  
Table 13 Stakeholder groups targeted by RECREATE communication activities.  
Target groups  Aims (Benefits that RECREATE project will offer to them)  Main channels and methods  
Recycling industry  Awareness, Involvement, Exploitation: Demonstration of 
economical viable mechanical and thermal recovery of composites.  
Industry Associations, Exhibitions, Conferences.  

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  30  
Technology 
providers and 
design studios  
Awareness, Involvement, Exploitation: Demonstrations of design 
solution supporting remanufacturing, online database of recovered 
fibers’ properties  
Industry Associations, Exhibitions.  
European 
manufacturing 
industry  
Awareness, Involvement, Exploitation : Strong industrial 
involvement towards developing new products from recovered and 
remanufactured glass and carbon fibers in high -value and high -
strength applications. Inspiration and best practices for the 
development of new Circular Economy businesses.  
Direct proactive communications. Industrial training.  
Demonstration workshops. Exhibitions (ReMaTec, 
JEC). Clusters.  
Vanguard ESM. Associations. Project web site. Social 
media.  
Education and Training.  
European 
Technology 
Platforms  
Awareness, Multiplication: Implementation of Strategic Research 
Roadmap’s topics and successful demonstrators  
Direct communication, input to strategy papers and 
research roadmaps.  
Standardisation, 
certification bodies  
Awareness, Involvement, Exploitation : New guidelines for 
sustainable circular economy services. Contribution to standards for 
EoL cloud-based platforms.  
Direct Proactive communication. Participation to 
CENELEC working groups.  
Professional 
Associations  
Awareness, Understanding: Sharing guidelines with the 
associates. Involve associates to RECREATE training sessions.  
Direct Proactive communication. Industrial training 
webinars and hands-on sessions.  
Teachers and 
Students  
Awareness, Understanding: Up-to-date information on CF and 
GF recyclate use in industry sectors. Attractive jobs in sustainable 
circular economy businesses.  
Material to be used in education and vocational 
training.  
Research 
community  
Involvement, Exploitation: New methods for recovery and 
remanufacturing to be extended to other materials and 
technologies.  
Scientific publications. Dissemination workshops.  
Regional agencies 
and initiatives  
Awareness, Involvement : Showcase of the implementation of 
Regional Smart Specialization RIS3 Strategies, involve in the 
preparation of the CEAP.  
Direct communication, Demonstrators’ Open-Door 
event.  
Policy makers  
Awareness: Recommendations for legislation guidelines 
supporting the business model of RECREATE also through the 
‘Innovation Deals'. Evidence of benefits of  
Circular Economy at large scale  
Direct Communication; Clusters, White papers from 
associations, European Commission’s events on 
Circular Economy.  
NGO, Citizens  Awareness: Closing of material streams to the benefit of the 
environment  
Project web site. Social media, Action under the EU  
Week for Waste Reduction Demonstrators’, Open Door, 
Press release.  
  Table 14 Specific activities and methods for dissemination and communication in RECREATE.  
Specific Channel  Scope and procedure for design, set-up and maintain the channel  
The project image 
and identity  
Image and visual identity will be documented in the stylebook. The image will include the logo, project specific 
design elements and templates for MS Office tools. Promotional material utilizing the visual identity will be 
generated (Prezi, SlideShare) and two Youtube videos will be produced to communicate the project’s vision, 
objectives and results.  
The project website  
Will be produced by a professional marketing company to support the implementation of the project and it will be 
main interface for communication to the public. The website will host communication tools and a blog to facilitate 
interaction between partners and interested parties. The private section will facilitate the communication within the 
consortium.  
Social media  Will be utilized by the consortium to communicate the project in professional social networks (e.g. LinkedIn). Official 
LinkedIn groups will be used to raise awareness of professional network groups.  
The website blog  Will highlight outcomes, distil updates, presents the growth of the network and relevant news concerning 
exploitation opportunities and offering by the RECREATE companies.  
The project factsheet  Will be prepared at start of the project and twice updated. The first version will focus on the project’s objectives and 
the vision. The second version will highlight achieved results while the third and last version will demonstrate key 
results and uses cases.  
Scientific 
publications  
Will be increasingly submitted throughout the project to disseminate the results to the scientific community and 
experts in the industry. In the beginning of the project various conference participation will allow presentation of 
posters and publishing of abstracts. Thereafter, the accumulating results will be published in peer-review scientific 
journals.  
Trade articles in 
professional 
magazines  
Will be prepared to disseminate the results to experts and investment decision makers. Attendance on trade fairs 
and exhibitions are foreseen to present the project’s results and to foster customer relationships and prepare for 
the commercial exploitation of results.   
Press releases  The consortium will issue regular press releases at key milestones of the project by employing the main media 
communications (special websites, TV, newsletters, journals radio, etc.).   
Regarding publications, the project will publish scientific and techn ical results in high impact open -access journals 
and relevant technology focused congresses. Table 15 identifies a list of target journals, conferences and fairs.  
Table 15 Journals and Magazines, Conferences, Industrial Fairs and Exhibitions  
JOURNALS  MAGAZINES  
CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology, NDT & E International, 
Journal of  
Remanufacturing, Resource, Conservation and Recycling, Journal of 
Cleaner Production, Waste Management, Journal of Renewable 
Materials, Advanced Materials, ACS Sustainable Chemistry & 
Engineering, Composite Science and Technology.  
APRA Newsletter, Lightweght Design newsletter, Manufacturing 
Global,  
Renewable Matter, Recycling Magazine, CompositesWorld, 
Composites Manufacturing Magazine, RemanWorld, JEC 
Magazine.  
CONFERENCES  
 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  31  
CIRP Design Conference, CIRP General Assembly, CIRP Conference on Life-Cycle Engineering (LCE), JEC World, European Conference 
on Composite Materials  
(ECCM), International Conference on Remanufacturing (ICOR), Circular Economy European Summit (IEEE ICIT),  IARC, SAE AeroTech 
Congress & Exhibition, Enterprise Integration, Interoperability and Networking, International Composites Congress (ICC), Euro pean 
Biomass Conference, Plastics Circular Economy Congress.  
INDUSTRIAL FAIRS AND EXHIBITIONS  
Automechanika Frankfurt; Rematec; EGG  CONTROL; ECOMONDO;  Plastics Recycling Show Europe; European Trade Fair & 
Forum for Composites,  
WindEnergy Hamburg, Husum Wind, JEC World Paris, Singapore Air show, International Paris Air Show Le Bourget, Luftfahrtmesse 
Farnborough, Dubai Air Show, Aircraft Interiors Expo, Mouldtec, EXIST, World Remanufacturing Summit, World Circular Economy 
Forum – WCEF.  
  
  
2.2.2.1 KPIs for the C&D&E activities   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 In 
order to support the ambitions of RECREATE, equally ambitious target KPIs have been defined for RECREATE. The 
achievement of these KPIs will be constantly monitored and reported in WP8.  
  
Table 16 Key Performance Indicators for C: Communication, D: Dissemination and E: Exploitation activities.  
ID  Indicator  Number of:  Year 
1  
Year 
2  
Year 
3  
Year 
4  
KPI1  C+D through the internet  RECREATE unique website visits  1500  2500  5000  10000  
KPI2  Other websites linking to the RECREATE website  25  40  60  70  
KPI3  Website updates  10  20  30  40  
KPI4  Contributions to discussions in social media (Youtube, Linkedin, 
Twitter, Facebook)  
20  35  45  45  
KPI5  Uploaded presentation to SlideShare/Prezi  4  6  12  20  
KPI6  Number of press release  5  10  15  20  
KPI7  C+D through general 
media  
Media coverage (print, radio, TV)  5  8  10  10  
KPI8  C+D through presentations  Scientific/technical presentations  6  10  20  40  
KPI9  D through scientific 
publications  
Submitted publications in Journal and Conferences  2  6  10  15  
KPI10  D activities promoting the 
results’ exploitation  
Events attended to present the demonstrators  3  10  18  22  
KPI11  Industry participants in the exploitation workshop  N/A  N/A  60  120  
KPI12  Requests from industry  15  30  50  100  
KPI13  Showcased products in the RECREATE library  N/A  N/A  20  50  
KPI14  N° of training webinar modules for industry and academic      8  15  
2.2.1.2 Contributions to the EC policies in the 2020 Circular Economy Action Plan  
According to the G7 Summit Declaration of June 2015: “The G7 Alliance on Resource Efficiency promotes Circular 
Economy, Remanufacturing and Recycling as strategic actions for limiting the consumption of natural resources and 
reducing waste”. Moreover, at E U level, the “2020 Circular Economy Action Plan for a Cleaner and More 
Competitive Europe” sets policy “sustainability principles“ among which (i) enabling remanufacturing and 
highquality recycling and (ii) increasing recycled content in products, while en suring their performance and safety, 
(iii) incentivising product -as-a-service or other models where producers keep the ownership of the product or the 
responsibility for its performance throughout its lifecycle; (iv) mobilising the potential of digitalisat ion of product 
information, including solutions such as digital passports, tagging and watermarks; (v) introducing a ban on the 
destruction of unsold durable goods. These are core pillars of the demand-driven circular approach of RECREATE. 
RECREATE will directly contribute to the implementation of these political orientations by proposing value -chain 
oriented solutions combining suitable sets of options for composite products post-use and re-use with a cross-sectorial 
approach tacking all the aforementioned sectors.  
2.2.2.3 Contribution to relevant legislation   
The RECREATE consortium conducted an in-depth analysis of Regional and European regulatory frameworks that 
may potentially create boundaries for the market exploitation of the RECREATE cross -sectorial circular economy 
value-chains. The output of this analysis is briefly summarized in Table 17 and specific actions described in T8.5.    
  
Table 17 Relevant norms and legislation for the RECREATE cross-sectorial circular economy value-chains.  
EU Norm and subject  Implications for RECREATE  Contribution of RECREATE (T7.9)  
General Directives on waste  

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  32  
List of Waste 2000/532/EC:  
Waste classification.  
EU Waste list in relation to the Waste 
Framework Directive 75/442/EEC.   
The most relevant six categories for FRP waste are: 12 01 05, 16 
01 19, 17 02 03, 17 02 04* (M), 19 12 04, 20 01 39. RECREATE 
will support the potential identification/definition of new categories.  
Directive on End of Life of 
Vehicles 2005/53/EC; EPR 
Legislation  
2002/96/EC:  Reduction of waste 
arising from ELVs.  
Clear targets and timelines, 
independently on the materials 
adopted in cars.  The directive involves 
four major stakeholders, the producer, 
the recycler, the last holder and the 
authorities.  
Absence of minimal requirements for manufacturers involvement 
in EPR schemes. Requirements given only by total weight of 
recycled/re-used material. RECREATE will provide inputs for the 
extension of similar regulations for other product categories, such 
as wind turbines waste, and for clarifying the flow of 
responsibilities between value-chain stakeholders.  
Directives on waste transportation  
Regulation 1013/2006:  Waste 
shipment regulation.  
Defines procedures and control 
regimes for the shipment of waste, 
depending on the origin, destination 
and route, the type of waste and 
treatment at its destination.  
RECREATE will provide inputs for Regulation advancement through 
the potential adoption of the developed digital solutions for the full 
traceability of the composite waste, from its origin to the treatment 
facility.  
Directives on waste treatment  
Directive on Waste 2008/98/EC:   
Waste management.  
Sets the basic criteria to characterize, 
to declare and to re-commercialize ex-
waste to a new “product”.   
Poor consideration of remanufacturing. Absence of standards for 
the quality of secondary raw materials. RECREATE will provide 
inputs for introducing standards for traceability of materials and 
for standardized certification of highquality materials and 
components.  
Eco-design Directives  
Eco-design Directive 
2009/125/EC:    
Sustainable product design  
Attention to the product design phase 
and establishes a framework to set 
mandatory ecological requirements 
for energy -using and energy related 
products sold in all 28 Member States.  
Requirements and labels are mainly related to the use-phase 
energy and not to manufacturing operations. Eco-design is not 
considering the product design for disassembly and re-use. 
RECREATE will provide suggestion to improve requirements and 
labels with material efficiency indicators such as reusability, 
reparability and recyclability. Focus on composites products design 
for remanufacturing and on co-designed products embedding re-
usable materials.  
 2.2.3  Management of research data, knowledge and Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Associated with 
document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 
The management of research data, knowledge and IPR is an integral part of the project’s innovation management. 
RECREATE will yield extensive research data sets (Table 18). The project’s Quality Assurance Plan (QAP), 
including the “Good research practice”, will ensure in -detailed documentation of research data (T9.1). The 
consortium is committed to open access principle and supports sharing of results where appropriate. Results will only 
be published with IPR protection clearance. The consortium will avoid disclosure of business sensitive data by 
nondisclosure or aggregation for numeric data. Owners of the data can decide on the openness and usage policies for 
their own data. Data ownership, especially of data generated by and obtained from industrial research and prototype 
testing, will be identified in the CA.   
  
Table 18 Sub-set of data generated in the project and to be made available to external parties.  
Data  Origin  Format  External Sharing   
Raw data from experiments  Validation and verification tasks 
in WP2,3,4,5,6.  
Data sets, excel files, text files, 
html files.  
Only upon request and respecting 
IPR agreement.  
Generalised, agglomerated data 
and metadata  
Validation and verification tasks 
in WP2,3,4,5,6.  
Graphs showing qualitative 
materials behavior.  
Via open access publications. 
Metadata repositories  
Product Eco-Design guidelines  Deliverable 2.7  Instructions, pictures, technical 
details of co-designed products.  
Public access will be given. 
Download from the web-site.  Idea Manager files  Deliverable 5.5  
Virtual and Product Library files  Deliverable 5.5  3D animation and rendering, 
codesigned products (text).  
Public access will be given to the 
Library to stakeholders.