2.1  Project’s pathways towards impact  
RECREATE overall scale and significance:  RECREATE directly affects through its demonstrators 70% of the 
composite consumption sectors (EU Composite industry market size 16B€ in 2019, growing at 8.8% worldwide in 
terms of CAGR from 2021 -2025),26 i.e. transportation (14% in value, 27 EDAG), wind en ergy (14%, REST UG), 
aerospace (15%, INVENT, GEVEN SPA), consumer goods (24%, HEAD Sport GmbH). Moreover, in terms of 
geographical distribution of composite use in manufacturing, the RECREATE covers the 90% of the European market 
distribution. Therefore, there is a massive potential for replication and multiplication of the RECREATE solution at 
world-wide scale.  
RECREATE key challenge and opportunity:  The reduction of cost of fibers is the greatest opportunity in the 
composites market. The reduction in the cost of fibers is expected to decrease the cost of composites, thereby driving 
a wider penetration of fiber composites in various applications, expecially in the e-mobility sector. At the same time, 
issues related to recycling pose the greatest challenge for composites manufacturers . The complex material 
compositions and the crosslinked nature of composites, especially thermoset composites, make the recyclability of 
composites difficult. Most of the composites used are disposed in landfills, or incinerated . As a consequence, by 
enhancing the greatest market opportunity, i.e. making lower cost re -usable materials available in traceable and 
certified way, and by limiting the market threats, i.e. demonstrating viable demand -driven solutions for circular 
business cases, RECREATE will be a game changer in the composite industry. Therefore, the economic, social and 
environmental figures derived in the following paragraphs, focused on a sub -set of sectors due to space limitation, 
are only conservative estimates of the potential impact of RECREATE at global worldwide scale and at European 
scale in the next 5-10 years, in line with the European Green Deal time horizon.  
  
Current status and trends of the European wind energy industry. The European wind energy industry (NACE Group 
29.1) can be mainly divided into onshore and offshore solutions. In 2019 wind energy supplied 15% of the EU’s 
electricity. In 2019 there were in total 153GW of installed wind energy capacity in the EU -28, corresponding to 
117GW onshore and 37GW offshore.28 By 2030 it could reach 350GW, supplying up to 24% of electricity demand. 
The European Commission, in the long -term decarbonization strategy to 2050, estimates that wind alone could 
provide 50% of the EU’s electricity demand by 2050. Europe is the main market for wind power generation and the 
global leader in offshore wind. The global Wind Energy market size is projected to reach 9B€ by 2026, and the 
European wind power market is expected to register a CAGR of 6.5% until 2026. The outbreak of t he COVID-19 
pandemic during the initial quarters of 2020 moderately subdued the growth of the wind energy sector.   
Small and Medium size wind energy sector : Small-scale wind energy for private use is still in the beginning phases 
in countries like Germany . These turbines are typically single installations on a farm, domestic property or small 
business, and they primarily provide electricity for on-site usage. Typical annual energy production is up to 1000kWh, 
for small turbines with blades up to 18m long, and up to 60000kWh, for medium turbines with blades up to 25m long, 
with maximum power of 200kW (50kW according to IEC 61400-2). Europe small wind turbine sector accounted for 
the largest market share of 41.32% in 2016, with a market value of USD 1,440.2 million and is projected to continue 
to develop growing at a CAGR of 16.5% (global cumulative installed capacity of 4.8GW by 2025). Interest in this 
technology is gaining traction in light of rising electricity prices and the sociopolitical direction we are heading in to 
invest more in renewable energies in the future. In order to be able to produce electricity evenly throughout the entire 
year, the combination of small-scale wind energy, photovoltaics and storage systems is of particular interest. Small 
wind turbines, for domestic and small -scale commercial use, are currently relatively expensive and struggle to 
compete with solar solutions. The key to increasing their competitiveness is bringing down their cost and improving 
performance. The RECREATE circular business case of disassembling blade sections and remanufacture them to be 
sold at lower cost while keeping the performance of new blades could unlock the diffusion of this solutions especially 
in peri-urban areas and local eco-systems.   
Baseline situation with respect to post-use turbine blades composites. The recyclability of wind turbines has been 
reported as an industry challenge restricting growth. The standard lifetime of a wind turbine is approximately 20-25 
years; the challenge for the materials manufacturers and wind OEMs is to enhance the re-use of materials.  
Current status and trends of the European aeronautics industry. The European aeronautics industry (NACE Group 
35.3) is one of the key, high-tech sectors of the EU, employing about 794,695 people in 2014, +2.2% with respect to 
2013, and generating a turnover of 140.5 billion, with a gross value added of 38 billion euro in 2014. R&D 

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  17  
expenditure for aeronautics reached in €20 billion in 2014. The sector in Europe is dominated by the productio n of 
large civil aircrafts – aircrafts designed to carry more than 100 passengers. The aircraft traffic measured in RPK 
(revenue passenger-kilometers) will double in the next 20 years with an annual growth of 4.6%. By regions, Europe’s 
traffic will grow by 3.6% and airlines forecast to acquire more than 7,300 new airplanes valued at over $1 trillion.  
Clearly, this sector and the entire industry has been profoundly affected by the recent COVID -19 pandemic crisis, 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)382 3781 - 20/05/2022 therefore needing more than other sectors a boost towards innovation to 
speed-up recovery in the post-COVID era.  
Baseline situation with respect to post-use aeronautics composites. 6,000 commercial planes are expected to reach 
EoL by 2025. Airplanes are typically 50% made of composites. This means around 100,000 Tons of composites from 
airplanes, with a share of approx. 20% glass fibers and 80% carbon fibers, are expected to be disposed EU-wide.  
Current status and trends of the European automotive industry. The automotive industry (NACE Group 34.1) is a 
strategic sector in the EU, producing 16.2 million cars, vans, trucks and buses every year. A recent report of European 
Automobile Manufacturers’ Association (ACEA) estimated that 12.9 million people - or 5.3% of the EU workforce 
- are employed direct or indirectly in the automotive sector. The 3.1 million high -skilled jobs in automotive 
manufacturing represent 10.3% of the EU’s manufacturing employment. The transportation sector accounts f or the 
25% of the GHG emissions according to the IEA (International Energy Agency). In this context, a promising strategy 
for reducing carbon emissions is the Electro-mobility. It is estimated that a realistic market share for new, electrically 
chargeable vehicles would be 3% to 10% by 2020 to 2025 and up to 35% by 2040. The key factors contributing to 
the growth of composite penetration in this market are increased demand for electric and hybrid vehicles, a constant 
need for fuel efficient cars (reduction in vehicle mass by 10% improves fuel efficiency by 6.5%), no compromise in 
safety and component mechanical properties, and stringent environment regulations.  
Baseline situation with respect to post -use automotive composites The ELV directive requires automotive 
manufacturers to reach 95% material recovery by 2020. Since recovery routes for composites are currently not in 
place, the increase in composite share in cars can strongly undermine the achievement of these target limits, especially 
for future hybrid and electric vehicles. This poses serious concerns on the recovery and remanufacturing of composite 
parts in the automotive sector. Composite use in the automotive sector is currently 92% glass fiber, 7% natural fibers 
and 1% carbon fibers. Carbon fibers are mainly used in chassis and fenders, but their cost makes them difficult to be 
applied at large scale, although they contribute to a reduction of 75% of the part weight.  
Pathway to impact  
The RECREATE project has defined the following pathway to impact (Fig.13), further described in the next sections.  
  
Fig. 13 RECREATE pathway to Impact: from activities to Expected Outcomes [EO] and Wider Impacts 
[WI].  
Basic assumptions and parameters  
The calculation of all the quantitative analyses reported in this section is based on the following set of assumptions,  
data, market figures, extracted by the referred sources.  
  
Parameter  Value used in the quantitative impact forecasts  Source   

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  18  
Avg. price of virgin fibers 
(varies with type/form).  
2300 €/ton for GF and 20130 €/ton for CF. Trend: increasing.  Frost&Sullivan, 2015.  
Potential price of recovered 
and re-usable fibers.  
1350 €/ton for GF and 6000 €/ton for CF  AVK-TV Composites Market Report  
2019, FiberEUse H2020 outcomes (D2.6). 
Cost of processes.  Electrofragmentation: 1200 €/ton; Solvolysis: 9000 €/ton.   RECREATE target KPIs.   
Energy and emissions  Electrofragmentation: 1.2 kWh/kg, 770 gCO2-eq. Solvolysis: 3 
kWh/kg, 1196.22 gCO2-eq.  
SELFRAG CFRP Project. Karki et al., 
2019, Oliveux et al. 2015.  
Expected volume of disposed 
turbine blades.  
In 2025, 70,000 t of composites from rotor blades with a share of 
approx. 70% glass fibers and 30% carbon fibers are expected to be 
disposed EU-wide. 10% of the expected thermoset waste in 2025.  
WindEurope “Accelerating Wind Turbine 
Blade Circularity” 2020.   
Expected volume of waste 
composite parts from 
aeronautics.  
6,000 commercial planes are expected to reach EoL by 2025. 
Airplanes are 50% made of composites. 100,000 t of composites 
with a share of approx. 20% GF and 80% CF.  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 
20/05/2022Aircraft Fleet Recycling Association  
(AFRA). ICAO Environmental report 
2016.  
Total demand of composite 
in the automotive industry.  
Monetary value of 6.5 B€/year in 2019. A total amount of 2 
million tons of GF and 37,000 tons of CF needed worldwide.  
AVK market report 2019.  
Total demand of composites 
in the construction industry.  
380,000 Tons of GFRP and 6,000 Tons of CFRP.  Composite for Europe, 2017,  
https://www.composites-for-europe.com/  
Average remanufactured 
product value.  
Price for remanufactured part is between 50%-70% of new parts. 
The regeneration rate in remanufacturing is ~0.8. The average 
price for a new turbine blade in small wind energy applications 
(15m long) is ~15k€/part. Remanufactured parts provide higher 
margin vs. new parts, so estimate margin = 3k€/part is considered.  
APRA – Automotive Part  
Remanufacturers Association.   
A Detailed Wind Turbine Blade Cost  
Model, NREL, national laboratory of the  
U.S. Department of Energy, 2019.  
Cost of landfill in Europe.  300 €/ton on average.  Web-sources  
2.1.1 RECREATE impact on the expected outcomes  
The RECREATE cause-effect diagram towards the expected outcomes is reported in Fig.14. These propagations of 
effects are further motivated and explained in the following tables, linking the project developmen ts and outputs to 
the outcomes listed in the call text.  
  
  
Fig. 14 RECREATE cause-effect diagram - Technological solutions (blue), Expected Outcomes (green).  
  
Expected Outcome 1 [EO1]: Reuse of composite material and recovery of secondary raw materials with higher 
value than currently available.  

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  19  
Narrative: RECREATE will develop and demonstrate new routes for reuse of composite-made parts including (i) 
remanufacturing for function restore, (ii) remanufacturing by reshaping and function upgrade and (iii) 
demanddriven recycling for re-use in high-value products. The first route will be achieved by laser-based high-
precision disassembly and reversible joints. The second route will be achieved by thermally-assisted re-shaping 
after laserbased high-precision disassembly. The third route will be achieved by demand-driven 
electrofragmentation and catalyst-assisted solvolysis to obtain high-performance fibers and reusable organic 
fraction. The materials/components obtained by all routes will have considerably higher value than current 
downgraded uses.  
Target Groups: Recycling companies. Manufacturers of high value-added composite parts in different sectors. 
Composite component manufacturers/remanufacturers.  
Scale & Significance: The economic feasibility of the three RECREATE strategies will be validated in 9 
democases, validating both closed-loop re-use and cross-sectorial re-use options in real prototypes. The 
significance will be high since the value of remanufacturer parts will be between the 70% and 80% of the same 
parts using virgin materials. Moreover, both the electrofragmentation for GFRP parts and the solvolysis for CFRP 
will feature positive economic performance, with value of the recovered fibers between the 35% (rCF) and the 
90% (rGF) of  
the value of new fibers. Transferring the results of RECREATE to the industry, by 2030 a total increase in value Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 added of 0.208 B€ is achievable in the targeted European sectors  
Expected Outcome 2 [EO2]: Reduction of waste sent to landfill and positive environmental impact.  
Narrative:  RECREATE will demonstrate technical and economic feasibility of re-using recycled fractions after 
selective disassembly by embedding them into high-value products with a cross-sectorial approach. The core idea 
of the demand-driven vision is that the circular value-chain is transformed into a “pull” system, where the 
requirements and specifications on the materials and components to be reused are transferred directly from the 
demand side in terms of characteristics and functionalities of the high added-value products re-using such materials 
and components. This approach will guarantee that the materials and components obtained through circular 
economy practices are actually re-usable into new products that are demanded by the market. Moreover, the 
remanufacturing and recycling solutions of RECREATE will considerably reduce the environmental footprint and 
energy with respect to current composite production.  
Target Groups: Manufacturers of high value-added composite parts in different sectors. Composite component 
manufacturers/remanufacturers.  
Scale & Significance: RECREATE will demonstrate sustainable reuse options for post-use composite parts thus 
avoiding landfill (90% recovery rates, 80% remanufacturing rate) and reducing environmental footprint of 
processes (reduction of manufacturing energy: 80%, for GF, 95%, for CF) demonstrated by LCA and energy 
measurement within demonstrated processes. Transferring the results of RECREATE to the industry, by 2030 a 
decrease of materials going to landfill of 44,100 kTons/Year (GF) and 7.2 kTons/Year (CF) can be achieved, 
together with 2.64 TWh/year of energy savings and kTons CO2/year of emissions (see next section).  
Expected Outcome 3 [EO3]: Creation of new value streams through new technologies with potential for 
commercial exploitation; new business opportunities and revenue flows for recycling companies, benefiting 
particularly SMEs which dominate this sector of the market.  
Narrative:  RECREATE will bring at higher TRL6-7 innovative promising technologies for remanufacturing 
(LIBS-based inspection and sorting, laser-assisted disassembly, thermally-assisted reshaping, high-value 
remanufacturing) and recycling (electrofragmentation, catalyst-assisted solvolysis) that will open new markets both 
for companies providing these technologies, and for recycling companies, mainly SMEs, that will act as users of 
these technologies for providing high-value materials to end-reprocessors and manufacturers.   
Target Groups: Recycling companies, focus on SMEs. Composite component manufacturers/remanufacturers.  
Scale & Significance: Demonstration of circular process-chains enabled by 4 new disassembly and 
remanufacturing technologies and 2 new demand-driven recycling solutions. Potential sales of new 
remanufacturing and recycling equipment for about 800 MEuro by 2030. Additional revenue from European 
recyclers from selling re-usable recovered materials 24MEuro by 2030 (see next section).  
Expected Outcome 4 [EO4]: Increased uptake of novel composites materials in industrial applications e.g.  
enhanced lightweight designs for transport, currently limited due to costs and adherence by industry to 
environmental legislation and the end of life directive.  

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  20  
Narrative: RECREATE will develop and demonstrate solutions for novel composite materials and components by 
(i) formulating new smart and green resins, making the composites easier to be recycled and remanufactured, (ii) 
developing strategies for reversible joining through novel adhesives, and by (iii) designing a new generation of 
lightweight modular structures for automotive and wind, for easier disassembly, repair / remanufacturing. These 
solutions will decrease the life-cycle cost of the composite-made components by facilitating multi-use cycles in the 
same and different (by re-shaping) applications. The reduction of composite part cost will contribute to the wider 
diffusion of these components in critical industries such as the automotive, contributing to the achievement of 
targets fixed in the environmental legislation, for emissions during the product use-phase, and the end of life 
(ELV) directive, in particular in view of the on-going transition to hybrid and electric vehicles.  
Target Groups: Composite component manufacturers. Composite material suppliers. Resin suppliers.  
Scale & Significance: Demonstration of 2 innovative solutions for reversible joining through activated adhesives, 
1 re-design concept for future electric vehicles with modular structures, formulation of new resins for thermally 
activated processes. Life-time extension of newly design automotive structures of a factor of 5 (target  
1.000.000km), reversible resins with disassembly temperature below 150° and disassembly time <30 seconds.  
2.1.2 RECREATE impact on long term (Wider impacts-Destination work programme)  
The RECREATE c ause-effect diagram towards the wider impacts reported in the destination work -programme is 
reported in Fig.15, showing the connection between individual expected outcomes and the wider impact propagation 
effect.   
  
  
Fig. 15 Cause-effect diagram: contribution pattern of RECREATE to the destination work-programme.  
  
Wider Impact 1 [WI1]: Resilient, sustainable and secure (critical) raw materials value chains for EU industrial 
ecosystems, in support of the twin green and digital transformations.  
Narrative: The improved traceability of material and component volumes and characteristics along the value-chain, 
facilitated by the RECREATE digital tool, will facilitate the identification of cross -sectorial re-use possibilities in 
the medium -ling term. RECREATE will increase the resilience and boost socio -economic recovery at 
localecosystem level in the most severely affected sectors, by increasing the availability of secondary raw materials 
in the local eco-systems by setting up local circular value-chains and by increasing the robustness, adaptability and 
flexibility of production systems in order to accept both virgin and secondary raw materials. This pathway will boost 
the green and digital transition of EU companies in different target sectors by providing a concrete scenario to 
support cost-benefit and financial analyses to properly evaluate the business case.  
Target Groups: Local manufactures of composite parts, local recyclers, waste managers, public administrations 
boosting open innovation, local eco-system facilitators (Clusters).  
Scale & Significance:  Through the dissemination, exploitation and communication activities of RECREATE at 
least 30 new re -use business cases will be identified during RECREATE that will be further advanced after the 
project through local clusters, such as AFIL (Lombardy), Merge (Saxony), Polymeris (France).  
Wider Impact 2 [WI2]: New sustainable-by-design materials with enhanced functionalities and applications in a 
wide range of industrial processes and consumer products.  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 
 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  21  
Narrative:  RECREATE will develop and demonstrate solutions for sustainable -by-design materials including by 
(i) new smart and green resins, (ii) reversible joining through novel adhesives, and (iii) new lightweight modular 
structures for automotive and wind for multiple use-cycles. Actions towards other industries (e.g. naval, consumer 
goods, furniture, construction) will be promoted during the project to open new markets to be exploited after the 
project. The design guidelines and training programs elaborated by RECR EATE will make it possible to increase 
the level of skills of the European manufacturing workforce and to ultimately boost the creation of new 
knowledgeintensive jobs promoting circular solutions in Europe.  
Target Groups: Composite component manufacturers. Composite material suppliers. Resin suppliers. Composite 
component manufacturers.  
Scale & Significance:  At least 5 large scale dissemination and demonstration events targeting industries not 
represented by RECREATE partners (e.g., Milan Design Week). Advanced and innovative learning mechanisms for 
transferring the technical features of the new materials. Design guidelines for improving the capability of designers 
to exploit the functionalities of these materials into new consumer products in B2C markets.  
Wider Impact 3 [WI3]: Leadership in producing materials that provide solutions for clean, toxic/pollutant free 
environment, decarbonising industry, and safeguarding civil infrastructures.  
Narrative:  RECREATE will support the achievement of this wider impact by boosting the capacity of the European 
industry to reduce emissions, re-use materials, reduce the use of hazardous materials, and avoid waste to be landfilled 
with direct impact to the automotive, aeronautics and wind energy sectors.    
Impact on resource efficient transport system. The European Commission recently adopted a roadmap, “Towards a 
competitive and resource efficient transport system”, of 40 concrete initiatives for the next decade to build a 
competitive transport system. At the same time, the proposals will dramatically r educe Europe's dependence on 
imported oil and cut carbon emissions in transport by 60% by 2050. These are ambitious targets that may not be 
concretely reached without composites, fundamental materials for sustainable transport. Composites create a 
virtuous circle which allows engines to become lighter. RECREATE will support a stable transition to circular 
economy model for composites in the e-mobility sector, thus boosting their adoption.  
Reduced landfill. According to research published in 2015 in the International Journal of Epidemiology, health is at 
risk for those who live within five kilometers of a landfill site. Researchers showed a strong correlation between 
Hydrogen Sulphide (used as a surrogate for all pollutants co-emitted from the landfills) and deaths caused by lung 
cancer, as well as deaths for respiratory diseases, for people living close to landfills. Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022RECREATE will tackle the 
problem at the source, avoiding waste flows of high-performance materials, thus contributing to improve health and 
safety of the European citizens.   
Reduced use of hazardous substances. The RECREATE processes will avoid the use of toxic substances which are 
typical of chemical recycling methods. Moreover, in the remanufacturing stage a particular care will be given to the 
selection of low environmental impact polymer resins, avoiding, or at least minimizing, the use of hazardous 
substances like styrene (as reactive diluent) and formaldehyde (as crosslinker).  
Target Groups: European citizens at large, manufacturing companies in strategic EU sectors.  
Scale & Significance: Massive reduction of composite materials going to landfill (potentially 90% in the long term), 
market penetration of lightweight composite structure since a solution for their end -of-life will be demonstrated, 
zero use of hazardous substances and contaminants in the new formulations of resign and composite materials.  
Wider Impact 4 [WI4]: Leadership in circular economy that strengthens cross-sectorial cooperation along the value 
chain and enable SMEs to transform their activities and business models.  
Narrative: Through its cross -sectorial re-use approach, RECREATE will simultaneously improve the circularity 
and sustainability across several sectors in Europe, by providing industry with solutions to keep resources within the 
eco-system along multiple use-cycles. The “market pull” RECREATE demand-driven circular approach will open 
the demand for new high-value products re-using materials and components, at affordable prices.   
Target Groups: SME in the B2C context, designers, cross-sectorial business facilitators (Clusters).  
Scale & Significance: At least 4 new cross-sectorial value-chains demonstrated in RECREATE and at least 15 new 
cross-sectorial value -chains identified through the open innovation approach of the platform and within the 
conducted training, dissemination and communication workshops.  
Wider Impact 5 [WI5]: Increased adoption of key digital and enabling technologies in industrial value chains and 
strategic sectors, paying particular attention to SMEs and start-ups.  

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  22  
Narrative: RECREATE will facilitate European high-tech manufacturing SMEs in gaining competitive advantage 
in new markets by providing them with an innovative set of digital and hardware technologies for demanufacturing, 
sorting, reprocessing, and re-using materials and components. The RECREATE consortium is very close to SMEs 
problems, since 8 out of 12 industrial partners are SMEs (67%). In the medium term, the RECREATE solution will 
translate in a resource efficiency increase worldwide, as the RECREATE systems designed and produced in Europe 
will be exploited in foreign industries. In this replication and multiplication of effects, RECREATE will also benefit 
from the existence of a large network of hub for circularity, developed within the “Vanguard Initiative – New Growth 
Through Smart Specialization”, also DG Regio Pilot Action and DG Grow TAF Service, namely “De -and 
Remanufacturing for Circular Economy”, currently involving more than 150 European stakeholders, designed to 
deliver services to industrial stakeholders by leveraging on multi-regional synergies and complementarities, with the 
goal of de-risking private investments in innovative and emerging Circular Economy business cases. This initiative 
will represent a viable solution to upscale RECREATE and promoting a large -scale replication and multiplication 
of the project results.  
Target Groups: European SME, both end-users and technology providers.  
Scale & Significance:  8 regional hubs in the inter -regional VI De -and Remanufacturing for Circular Economy 
network, more than 100 de -risking project expected in the next 5 years, potential turnover of about 500MEuro 
generated for European SMEs using the hubs for exploring their transformation path towards circular economy.  
In the following, the RECREATE consortium has quantified the economic, social and environmental impact of the 
project for a sub -set of demo -cases cross-linking different sectors. The considered scenarios include the re -use of 
CFRP from the aeronautic sector back to the aeronautic sector (demo -case 5), the re -use of GFRP from the wind 
energy sector into the automotive sector (demo-case 6), as well as the remanufacturing of sections of modular wind 
blades in the small wind energy sector (demo-case 3). The resulting figures are, therefore, conservative measures of 
the overall RECREATE impact. Data/assumptions are available in Basic assumptions and parameters part.  
Economic Impacts (overall figures in Table 4)  
Economic Impact for the EU wind energy industry. RECREATE will contribute to the wind energy industry by:  
• Providing solutions to re-use glass fibers from the wind-energy industry into automotive industry, avoiding landfill.  
• Providing solutions to remanufacture and re-use small wind turbine blades.  
In 2030, 70,000 Tons of composites from rotor blades with a share of approx. 70% glass fibers and 30% carbon fibers 
are expected to be disposed EU -wide. By applying the RECREATE solution, the GFRPs of the rotor blades would 
be recovered and reused into automotive structures. This will result in landfilling cost sav ings of 13,230,000€/year 
by 2030 with a recovery rate of 90%, and, more important, saving 44,100 Tons per year of GFRP going to landfill. 
The impact of the second innovation is analyzed next. The cumulative small wind energy installations in EU are 
expected to reach 4.8 GW by 2025, meaning that in 2025 approximately 114,300 small blades will be produced (4 
blades per turbine), with a CAGR of 16.5% and being first small wind installations dated back in 2005. Considering 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(202 2)3823781 - 20/05/2022 a market share of the solution of 30%, it can be assumed that out of 
these blades the RECREATE remanufacturing solution will be applicable to 34,290 parts per year, with a 
remanufacturing regeneration rate of 0.8. This means an incre ase of value added of ~ 82,296,000€/year by 2025. 
Summing both, an economic benefit of 95,526,000€/year is likely achievable in wind energy industry, with total 
GFRC saving in material to be landfilled of 44,100 Tons/year.  
Economic Impact for the EU aerospace industry. By applying the RECREATE solution, the CFRP composites of 
airplanes can be recovered and reused in high -added value applications back into the aeronautics sector. By 
considering a market share of the RECREATE solution of 10% in 2030, with a recovery rate of 90%, an increase of 
value added for the sector of 80,136,000€/year can be achieved, also saving 7,200 Tons of aeronautics CFRP waste 
being landfilled, with additional, but marginal, cost savings (2M€).  
Economic Impact for the EU automotive  industry. RECREATE will contribute to the automotive industry by 
providing solutions to re-use glass fibers from the wind-energy industry. Considering that the EU28 represents about 
20% of the total worldwide car production, the demand for glass fibers in  the European automotive industry is 
450,000 Tons per year. Assuming a market share of the RECREATE solution of 10% by 2030 in the EU28 automotive 
industry, approximately 45,000 Tons of recycled glass fibers per year may be processed. As 44,100 Tons of GF will 
be originated yearly from the wind energy industry, by establishing a cross -sectorial value-chain a stable circular 
economy business equilibrium for the supply and demand of recovered composites can be generated. This would 
mean a reduction of material cost of about 41,895,000€/year by 2030.  
Table 4 Summary of RECREATE impact on market value in target industries.  

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  23  
Industry  Market share of 
RECREATE solution in 
the EU in 2030  
Increase in 
value added in 
2030 [B€]  
Circular economy output 
to same/other industries 
(Ton/year)  
Circular economy input 
from same/other industries 
(Ton/year)  
Automotive  8% (GFRP and CFRP 
re-use)   
0.041  N/a in the considered 
scenario  
44,100 GFRC  
Wind 
Energy  
30% (reman)  0.095  44,100 GFRC  N/a in the considered 
scenario  
Aeronautics  10% (CFRP re-use)  0.08  7,200 CFRC (to aero)  7,200 CFRC (from aero)  
Total  /  0.203  44,100 GFRC; 7,200 CFRC  44,100 GFRC; 7,200 CFRC  
1€ invested in RECREATE by the EU will translate into at least 21,75€ of additional added value for EU industry by 
2025.  
Social Impacts (overall figures in Table 5)  
Impact on jobs and growth in the targeted European industrial sector:   
- EU Wind Energy industry: RECREATE will increase the added value of the EU wind energy sector by 95.52M€ 
after the project (2030). Currently, 253,000 people work within the wind energy sector, with an added value 
generated per worker of 40,700€. This means additional 2347 new workplaces needed by sector after RECREATE.  
- Aeronautics industry: The value added per employee is 78,000€. This means additional 1027 new workplaces that 
will be required by this industry after RECREATE, since an added value of 80M€ will be brought.  
- Automotive industry: RECREATE will increase the added value of the EU automotive sector by 41,895M€ after 
the project. According to the actual contribution to the value added per employee in this sector (54,000€), this means 
775 new workplaces that will be required by this industry by 2030.  
  
Table 5 Summary of the RECREATE impact in the target sectors in terms of new jobs.  
Summary of RECREATE impact on occupation levels in target industries  
Industry  Employees  Increase in employment triggered by 
RECREATE  
Projection for 2025  
Automotive  12,000,000  775  
Wind Energy  253,000  2,347  
Aeronautics  487,180  1,027  
Total  12,740,180  4149  
2410€ invested by the EU will produce 1 new job in these industries at the end of 
RECREATE  
  
Impact on raw materials-environment in the targeted European industrial sectors (overall figures in Table 6)  
Energy Consumption in manufacturing operations : The process for producing composites is strongly energy 
intensive. In order to produce virgin carbon fibers approx. 165 kWh/kg of energy are needed, while the production 
of new glass fibers takes an input ene rgy of approx. 50 kWh/kg considering the material production as well as the 
manufacturing phase for both composites. A typical production process requires, in addition to the energy needed for 
the fibers, 15 kWh/kg. The liberation of re -usable glass fibers  using the RECREATE solvolysis (for CFRP) and 
electrofragmentation (for GFRP) approaches is estimated to have an energy consumption of 3 kWh/kg and 1.2 
kWh/kg respectively. The remanufacturing and repair of carbon reinforced plastics parts is expected to save 90% of 
the energy with respect to the production of the same new part (based on APRA Europe market figures).   
RECREATE re-usable materials: Given these figures, under the result that EU -wide 44,100 Tons/year of post -use 
glass fibers and 7,200 Tons/yea r of carbon fibers are re -usable from rotor blades and airplanes in 2030, 2.55 TWh 
can be annually saved by re-using fiber composites of blades and airplane parts with a cross-sectorial approach.  
RECREATE re-usable components: Assuming 34,290 small turbine blade sections are remanufactured in 2030 a total 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)3823781 - 20/05/2022 amount of 0.089 TWh can be annually saved by the new RECREATE 
remanufacturing process.  
CO2 Emissions: In the production of composites approx. 95% of the energy consumption is linked to direct fossil 
energy and approx. 5% is linked to electrical energy. For fossil energy approx. 700 g CO2/kWh, and for the electrical 
energy mix approx. 500 g CO2/kWh, are emitted in average. As a consequence, 1.492 kTons of CO2 can be saved by 
re-using 44,100 Tons/year of GF from wind turbine blade and 7,200 Tons/year of CF from aeronautics. Moreover, 
0.063 kTons of CO2 can be saved by remanufacturing blade sections in the wind energy industry.  

 
[101058756 - RECREATE]  Annex 1 – Part B  24  
Raw material use in manufacturing operations and reduction of waste going to landfill: In the considered scenario, 
51.3 kTons of waste composites per year, that would go to landfill, will be saved by RECREATE (Table 6).  
 Table 6 Summary of the RECREATE environmental impacts by 2030.  
Summary of 
Environmental 
KPIs- RECREATE  
Savings in materials 
going to landfill 
[kTons/year]  
Savings in Manufacturing 
related Energy [TWh/year]  
Savings in CO 2 
emissions [kTons 
CO2/year]  
Total  44.1 GF, 7.2 CF  2.64  1555  
  
Scientific Impacts   
The technical work of the project involves a wide range of multi -disciplinary tasks, which require partners with 
complementary skills and backgrounds. RECREATE integrates knowledge from different domains of research:  
Disassembly processes  NDT inspection  Artificial Intelligence  
Demanufacturing processes  Monitoring and sorting  Cyber-Physical Systems  
Remanufacturing/Reprocessing  Design for disassembly  Feed-forward Control  
Polymer technologies  Product Life-cycle Modeling  Decision Support System  
Materials science  Social Innovation and Inclusion  System and network optimization  
This interdisciplinary approach of RECREATE requires a unique combination of skills that can only be provided by 
the best researchers and professionals of various European countries. The project will therefore strengthen an R&I&D 
ecosystem that can foster world-class European manufacturers supported by a knowledge triangle of academia, 
research and industry, working in synergic way towards a cross-KET solution for a Circular Economy in EU.   
  
Potential Barriers and Obstacles  
The existing potential barrier s and obstacles that could undermine the achievement of the aforementioned impacts 
are described in the following Table 7.  
Table 7 Obstacles and barriers in RECREATE  
MAIN BARRIERS & 
OBSTACLES  
ACTIVITIES TO OVERCOME OBSTACLES AND ACHIEVE THE EXPECTED IMPACT  
Economic feasibility of the 
RECREATE demand-driven 
circular value-chain solution and 
business model  
The value-chain orientation of the project will allow a smooth and fair distribution of 
investments and risk among different stakeholders. A detailed validation of the economics 
of each business scenario will be carried out, under different market scenarios.  
Environmental benefits of the 
proposed circular routes  
The innovative cross-sectorial circular routes in the RECREATE demo-cases will be 
analyzed during demonstration by LCA/LCC methods in order to validate the environmental 
impacts assessed in the proposal.   
Reluctance to new technologies 
introduction.  
Gradual introduction of new technologies in the end users process. Training courses to 
improve the skills of the operators/engineers in the new technologies (WP7). Specific 
change management practices (WP8).   
Replicability of the RECREATE 
solution.  
The flexibility and adaptability of the RECREATE solution, verified in a comprehensive set 
of demo-cases covering all sectors of relevance for fiber-reinforced plastics, will assure its 
cross-sectorial application.  
Industrial secrecy can influence 
results and uptake beyond the 
project.  
The partnership agreement must outline the necessarily fine balance between conflicting 
interests. Identified results have already a designed exploiter since the proposal phase, so 
partners agree on exploitation roles.   
The presence of competing 
companies can affect 
developments   
This issue has been addressed by clearly separating roles of potential competitors (see 
consortium complementarity section below). Potential issues will be solved in the dedicated 
IPR management task (T8.4).  
Industrial reluctance to share 
data can influence adoption of 
digital platform.  
The data management policies designed by the RECREATE FIRE platform will increase the 
company confidence level and trust while loading on the platform potentially confidential 
data.   
Multi-disciplinarity challenges of 
the  
RECREATE approach.  
A well-structured and transparent management structure will ensure correct communication 
among partners and synchronise their activities; several partners have already 
multidisciplinary competences.  
Legislation boundaries on 
implementation.  
RECREATE has already investigated potential legislation barrier that could undermine the 
project success. The demo-case leaders did not, however, identified serious barriers to the 
development of the demonstrators.