4. Personal Data Page
Does this activity involve processing of personal data? Yes No
Does this activity involve further processing of previously collected personal data (including 
use of preexisting data sets or sources, merging existing data sets)?
Yes No
Is it planned to export personal data from the EU to non-EU countries? Specify the type of 
personal data and countries involved
Yes No
Is it planned to import personal data from non-EU countries into the EU or from a non-EU 
country to another non-EU country? Specify the type of personal data and countries involved
Yes No
Does this activity involve the processing of personal data related to criminal convictions or 
offences?
Yes No
5. Animals Page
Does this activity involve animals? Yes No
6. Non-EU Countries Page
Will some of the activities be carried out in non-EU countries? Yes No
In case non-EU countries are involved, do the activities undertaken in these countries raise 
potential ethics issues? Yes No
It is planned to use local resources (e.g. animal and/or human tissue samples, genetic material, 
live animals, human remains, materials of historical value, endangered fauna or flora samples,
etc.)? 
Yes No
Is it planned to import any material (other than data) from non-EU countries into the EU or 
from a non-EU country to another non-EU country? For data imports, see section 4. Yes No
Is it planned to export any material (other than data) from the EU to non-EU countries? For 
data exports, see section 4. Yes No
Does this activity involve low and/or lower middle income countries, (if yes, detail the benefit-
sharing actions planned in the self-assessment) Yes No
Could the situation in the country put the individuals taking part in the activity at risk? Yes No
7. Environment, Health and Safety Page
Administrative forms
Page 268 of 270
Proposal ID 101091668
Acronym REDOL
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20220308 Last saved 30/03/2022 23:01
Does this activity involve the use of substances or processes that may cause harm to the 
environment, to animals or plants.(during the implementation of the activity or further to the 
use of the results, as a possible impact) ?
Yes No
Does this activity deal with endangered fauna and/or flora / protected areas? Yes No
Does this activity involve the use of substances or processes that may cause harm to humans, 
including  those performing the activity.(during the implementation of the activity or further 
to the use of the results, as a possible impact) ?
Yes No
8. Artificial Intelligence Page
Does this activity involve the development, deployment and/or use of Artificial Intelligence? (if 
yes, detail in the self-assessment whether that could raise ethical concerns related to human 
rights and values and detail how this will be addressed).
Yes No
9. Other Ethics Issues Page
Are there any other ethics issues that should be taken into consideration? Yes No
I confirm that I have taken into account all ethics issues above and that, if any ethics issues apply, I will complete the 
ethics self-assessment as described in the guidelines How to Complete your Ethics Self-Assessment
Administrative forms
Page 269 of 270
Proposal ID 101091668
Acronym REDOL
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20220308 Last saved 30/03/2022 23:01
Ethics Self-Assessment
Ethical dimension of the objectives, methodology and likely impact
REDOL objectives include an important ethical dimension related to its overall methodology and regarding the use of AI and 
advanced data analysis for the development of the sorting and classification systems (WP3). 
The AI systems developed in REDOL will guarantee privacy and data protection throughout their lifecycle. Data protection will be 
ensured by identifying individuals or groups to take on a specific role or task related to the IA system, in the first instance, and 
acquiring consent from all users whose data will be part of the algorithm system. Then, PLASTICE partners will use existing policies in 
dealing with user consent, use of and access to data, privacy, security practices, technology use, and human resource management to 
provide information about what policies may be missing and should be prioritized. Faced with the risk of using unsecured protected 
data, the mitigation strategy would be to have minimum data- and model-access requirements, including the prevention of sensitive 
data download. In the case of cybersecurity threats, real-time monitoring of the environment and maintenance of the capabilities will 
be ensured to respond rapidly to potential threats or vulnerabilities. 
All AI systems developed in REDOL will follow a transparency and accountability principle. The data sets used in the AI systems will be 
documented in English and all participants and end-users of the AI-based predictive tools will be trained on their proper use and 
informed about their limitations. The interaction with the AI systems, their abilities, limitations and benefits will be presented at 
meetings, and through the design of technical documents in English in order to explain their concepts to the end-users. The role of AI 
in the predictive tools developed will be made clear and explicit to the affected individuals by: (i) Building feedback requirements 
and feedback loops into the mode-development and redevelopment life cycle; (ii) Introducing the systematic tracking and reporting 
of all models performance including errors; (iii) Identifying clear roles and responsibilities for maintaining a view of regulations and 
their applicability to data management. 
Prevention of data bias will also be taken into consideration for the development of the AI systems to ensure optimum results are 
achieved. As each problem requires a different solution and provides varying data resources, there is no single model to follow that 
will avoid bias. However, there are several parameters that can inform as it is building: (i) To choose the right learning model for the 
problem; (ii) To choose a representative training data set; (iii) To monitor performance using real data. To minimize the risk of biased 
or discriminatory model outcomes, statistically significant input variables will be reviewed to validate their usability and the 
distribution of model results will be independently reviewed and validated to be free from bias. 
Remaining characters 2051
Compliance with ethical principles and relevant legislations
REDOL will ensure respect for people and for human dignity and fair distribution of the benefits and burden of research, and will 
protect the values, rights and interests of the research participants. The necessary ethics approvals will be released before starting 
any activity and the free and fully informed consent of the research participants will be ensured. Regarding ethical needs for 
technology solutions to security and privacy, the Consortium will communicate and enforce participants data protection as a policy 
in all aspects of the approach with AI-based solutions, with the measures described above. 
Legislation such as the EU's General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (EU) 2016/679 for the control and protection of personal 
information provides the principles on which the handling of personal data will adhere to. Additionally, the wider understanding of 
privacy, such as those contained within the European Convention on Human Rights (Article 8), the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights 
(Articles 7 & 8) and related case law will also be considered and respected within the scope of the project, including definitions of 
privacy, and their relation to the security of information technology systems, as outlined within the ISO standard ISO/IEC 29134:2017. 
Also, legislation from the countries where the use cases are based (mainly Spain, but also Italy, Denmark and The Netherlands as 
replicators) will be followed and, in case of any differences with EU legislation, the strictest will be taken into consideration. REDOL 
methodology, including its AI systems, will be guided by ethical principles considering the "do not significant harm" (DNSH) principle 
as its activities do not significantly harm any of the six environmental objectives mentioned in Article 17, on the establishment of a 
framework to facilitate sustainable investment (EU Taxonomy Regulation). In fact, REDOL outcomes positively contribute to the 
objective "transition to a circular economy" by implementing technologies that enable the transition towards zero residues and 
circular value chains around SUW. 
Remaining characters 2904
Administrative forms
Page 270 of 270
Proposal ID 101091668
Acronym REDOL
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20220308 Last saved 30/03/2022 23:01
Security issues table
1. EU Classified Information (EUCI)2 Page
Does this activity involve information and/or materials requiring protection against 
unauthorised disclosure (EUCI)? Yes No
Does this activity involve non-EU countries? Yes No
2. Misuse Page
Does this activity have the potential for misuse of results? Yes No
3. Other Security Issues Page
Does this activity involve information and/or materials subject to national security restrictions? 
If yes, please specify: (Maximum number of characters allowed: 1000)
Yes No
Are there any other security issues that should be taken into consideration? 
If yes, please specify: (Maximum number of characters allowed: 1000)
Yes No
2According to the Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444 of 13 March 2015 on the security rules for protecting EU classified information, “European Union 
classified information (EUCI) means any information or material designated by an EU security classification, the unauthorised disclosure of which could cause varying 
degrees of prejudice to the interests of the European Union or of one or more of the Member States”. 
3Classified background information is information that is already classified by a country and/or international organisation and/or the EU and is going to be used by the 
project. In this case, the project must have in advance the authorisation from the originator of the classified information, which is the entity (EU institution, EU Member 
State, third state or international organisation) under whose authority the classified information has been generated. 
4EU classified foreground information is information (documents/deliverables/materials) planned to be generated by the project and that needs to be protected from 
unauthorised disclosure. The originator of the EUCI generated by the project is the European Commission.
Title of the proposal: “Aragon's REgional Hub for circularity: 
Demonstration Of Local industrial-urban symbiosis initiatives” 
   
 
Type of funding scheme: Innovation Action 
Work programme topics addressed: HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10: Circular flows for 
solid waste in urban environment 
Name of the coordinating person: Mrs. Irene Bolea 
List of participants: 
Nº Participant legal name Short name Type Country 
1 
(Coord) 
Fundación CIRCE Centro de Investigación de Recursos y Consumos 
Energéticos CIRCE RTO ES 
2 FUNDACION AITIIP AIT RTO ES 
3 Asociación de Investigación de la Industria Textil AITEX RTO ES 
4 Institute of Communication and Computer Systems  ICCS RTO GR 
5 Instituto tecnológico del embalaje, transporte y logística ITE RTO ES 
6 Instituto tecnológico de Aragon  ITA RTO ES 
7 Universidad de Zaragoza  UZ RTO ES 
8 Next Technology Tecnotessile società nazionale di ricerca r.l. NTT RTO IT 
9 Luleå University of Technology  LTU RTO SW 
10 VDZ Technology gGmbH VDZ RTO DE 
11 Amsterdam Metropolitan Solutions Institute AMS RTO NE 
12 TATUINE MEDIOAMBIENTE S.L. TAT SME ES 
13 CASALÉ GESTIÓN DE RESIDUOS, S.L. CAS SME ES 
14 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, S.L IRIS SME ES 
15 Moses Productos, S.L MOS SME ES 
16 BRILEN TECH, S.A. BRI SME ES 
17 Suite5 Data Intelligence Solutions Limited SUIT SME CY 
18 Nuevas Tecnologías para el desarrollo de Packaging y Productos 
Agroalimentarios con componente Plastica SL TEC SME ES 
19 STRANE INNOVATION SAS STRA SME FR 
20 GEONARDO ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGIES LTD GEO SME HU 
21 RINA CONSULTING - CENTRO SVILUPPO MATERIALI SPA RINA SME IT 
22 ACTECO PRODUCTOS Y SERVICIOS, S.L ACT SME ES 
23 AMB electrónica de Brescia, S.L. AMB SME ES 
24 SAICA NATUR S.L. SAI Large company ES 
25 ACCIONA CONSTRUCCION SA ACC Large company ES 
26 CEMEX ESPAÑA OPERACIONES, S.L.U. CEM Large company ES 
27 CEMEX INNOVATION HOLDING, A.G. CEMCH Large company CH 
28 FINANCIERA MADERERA SA FIN Large company ES 
29 ICLEI EUROPEAN SECRETARIAT GMBH ICL Non-Profit Org. DE 
30 Energy Efficiency in Industrial Processes ASBL EEIP Non-Profit Org. BE 
31 Ayuntamiento de Zaragoza ZAR Public body ES 
32 Comune di Prato PRA Public body IT 
33 ALIA Servizi Ambientali ALIA Public body IT 
34 Bornholms Fælleskommunale Affaldsbortskaffelse I/S BOFA Public body DK 
35 Consorcio nº1 de Huesca HUSA Public body ES 
 
REDOL
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 2 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Problem and significance 
Circular economy (CE) concepts, endorsed at European level through the CE Action Plan ( COM/2020/98), aim 
to achieve improved waste prevention and resource management by extending and closing material cycles. Solid 
urban waste (SUW) is an abundant source to produce circular products, but it is generally not exploited. In fact, 
over 500 kg of municipal waste per capita were generated in the EU in 2020, while only 45% was recycled. The 
proximity of resources and people, a sufficient scale for effective markets and the ability to shape urban planning 
and policy are key factors for cities to achieve advancements in this area, fostering circular economy strategies 
and industrial-urban symbiosis (I-US) approaches among local and regional actors . Through this approach, 
cities must become a cornerstone of the Circular Economy Package to achieve the 2030 targets for recycling (65% 
for SUW, 70% for C onstruction demolition waste ( CDW) and 75% for packaging). However, there is a need to 
overcome major existing barriers first, for which it is necessary to place the focus on the entire SUW value chains 
and promote business models that create an environment in which all parties involved perceive a win-win situation. 
Solution 
REDOL will redesign five value chains for SUW  in 
Aragon region to produce circular products through an I-US 
approach. To this end, REDOL will overcome the identified 
barriers at EU and local level by developing and displaying a 
range of new  solutions for ; (i) upgrading management 
technologies to collect, sort and classif y SUW, (ii) 
enhancing the processing techniques (e.g., chemical 
recycling) of sorted materials  to avoid landfilling and (iii) 
applying cutting-edge digital tools  to optimise recycling 
routes and interaction among key players. All these elements 
will be validated in operational environments  coming 
from local waste managers and involving industrial facilities 
from the following value chains: packaging, plastics, CDW, 
textiles and waste electric and electronic equipment  
(WEEE). These solutions will result in the production of  
circular products such as civil engineering structures, 
geotextiles, reinforced wood- boards, packaging, etc.  
Moreover, REDOL will provide the required organisational 
procedures, business models and social innovation actions 
required for the establishment of successful symbiotic interactions and hubs  for circularity at local level. Such an 
approach will result in the development of guidelines and recommendations for major decision-making bodies 
and initiatives at local and EU level and will achieve improved citizens’ perception on SUW as a local resource. 
In this way, REDOL will achieve consumer acceptance of recycled products, thus increasing their participation in 
separate collection schemes at municipality level. 
Team 
REDOL addresses this complex challenge by gathering a  competitive consortium of 35 partners, from 12 EU 
countries, counting with CIRCE as coordinator and I -US facilitator at local level, and Zaragoza city council  as 
main public body occupying the central hierarchical position of the hub for circularity. The nexus with local 
industry and stakeholders is performed through 5 public and private waste managers and a total of 8 industrial 
facilities/end-users. In addition, the involvement of 3 cities will enable the initiation of REDOL replication 
strategy. The consortium complementarity is based on the  diversified expertise, knowledge and networks, 
substantially covering all addressed SUW value chains, skills, resources and access to stakeholders. Additionally, 
several REDOL partners are active in the Process4planet partnership  and the funded ECoP on Hubs for 
Circularity. Accordingly, a bi-directional flow of information is ensured for  increasing the exchange of 
knowledge at EU level and maximizing the impact of the project results. 
Impact 
REDOL will directly impact in the transition of Zaragoza towards a zero residues city, aiming at achieving this 
objective by 2040. Such an approach will result in a total of 144.720 tons/year being re -used, valorised or 
transformed into secondary raw materials instead of landfilled (over 90.000 tons in the value chains addressed 
in REDOL). Accordingly, REDOL innovations at technical, economical, managerial and social level  will enable 
the consolidation of Zaragoza’s hub for circularity and leverage benefits within the city of over 14 B€ and 280 
ktCO2/year, economic and GHG emissions savings respectively.  
Figure 1. REDOL´s approach: Closing the Loop 
 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 3 
1. EXCELLENCE 
1.1. Objectives and ambition 
1.1.1. Objectives 
The overall objective of REDOL is to advance the technological,  managerial, economic and social readiness 
level of EU  Hubs for circularity by demonstrating innovative and sustainable routes to valorise SUW flows 
through I-US approaches. To this end, five different value chains for packaging, plastics, CDW, textiles and 
WEEE will be developed and implemented in real waste management facilities, obtaining recycled secondary 
materials for the latter production of high added value circular products. 
The specific goals that will enable the achievement of REDOL main objective are presented below: 
Specific Objective 1: To develop and demonstrate novel management systems and processing technologies for 
the valorisation of SUW to be used as feedstock for other sectors and/or across value chains. 
REDOL will demonstrate different valorisation routes for packaging, plastics, CDW, textiles and WEEE  streams. 
The processes will be  focussed on SUW that are currently disposed of, thus reducing the ratio of landfilling and 
incineration. The developed solutions, including collection, sorting, classification, processing and recycling 
technologies, will be implemented through a demonstration campaign treating real waste streams coming from 
local waste managers and industries, validating the technologies’ performance in real operation conditions. 
Specific:  Linked Deliverables & KER: D3.1, D3.2, D4.1, D4.2, KER1-11 
Measurable:  Linked Impact Factor (IF): IF1, IF5 (see section 2.1.3) 
Achievable:  Linked Partners: CIRCE, AIT, AITEX, ICCS, ITE, NTT, VDZ, IRIS, BRI, RINA, AMB 
Relevant:  Relation to the topic  (scope’s bullet point s): #1“Management and processing of waste ”, 
#4“Integration of novel sensing technology, IoT and digital tools” 
Time-bound:  Linked work packages and tasks: T2.4, WP3, WP4, WP6 
Specific Objective 2: To obtain recycled secondary materials from SUW ready to be fed in downstream 
processes for the further production of circular products, closing the production loop. 
As a result of the SUW valorisation processes, REDOL will produce secondary materials that can be used as 
feedstocks in local industries to produce new circular products (packaging, construction components, wood boards, 
etc.). The quality of circular products will be validated by industrial companies from the corresponding sectors, 
thus ensuring the straightforward integration of these products in downstream applications. In order to overcome 
barriers for their entrance to market, recommendations on regulations and eco -design practices will be provided, 
and end-users demanding these materials will be involved within REDOL Circular Community, putting in place the 
agreements and business models required for their final commercialization. 
Specific:  Linked Deliverables & KER: D5.3, D6.2, KER12, KER23 
Measurable:  Linked Impact Factor (IF): IF2, IF5 (see section 2.1.3) 
Achievable:  Linked Partners: ITA, TEC, ACC, CEM, FIN 
Relevant:  Relation to the topic (scope’s bullet points): #1”Valorisation of waste to be used as feedstock for other 
plants and companies across sectors and/or across value chains”, #5”New approach to end-of life materials” 
Time-bound:  Linked work packages and tasks: WP4, WP6 
Specific Objective 3: To enable the achievement of a zero SUW landfilling approach in Zaragoza  by 
accomplishing 55-100% recycling rates  in REDOL value chains while creating new sustainable economic 
activity in the Aragon region.  
REDOL will reduce the overall environmental impact related to the management/disposal of SUW by increasing 
the recovery rate of untapped or discarded waste streams while enhancing the energy efficiency and sustainability 
of the processes. To integrate REDOL development in an optimised way, the project will develop a n I-US 
Platform, that will provide a common framework for a standardised and secure data gathering and sharing, and for 
the monitoring and management of the value chains  in a harmonised manner. This will also ensure the 
interoperability among different value chains, easing the integration and replicability of REDOL overall solutions 
in different scenarios. As a result, REDOL will reduce the total amount of SUW in Aragon region by re-using, 
valorising and transforming wastes, by-products and side-streams into new/secondary resources of raw materials of 
high value for local industries and end-users.  
Specific:  Linked Deliverables & KER: D2.4, D5.3, D6.1, D6.3, D6.4, KER13-18 
Measurable:  Linked Impact Factor (IF): IF3, IF4, IF8, IF9 (see section 2.1.3) 
Achievable:  Linked Partners: LTU, TAT, CAS, MOS, BRI, SUIT, RINA, ACT, SAI, ZAR, ALIA, HUSA 
Relevant:  Relation to the topic (scope’s bullet points): #2” Process (re-)design and adaptation to build a new 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 4 
circular value chain ”, #3 ”Investigate the availability and distribution of “waste” resources and 
logistic”, #8”Assessment of the economic, circularity and climate benefits” 
Time-bound:  Linked work packages and tasks: T2.1, T2.5, T2.6, WP5, WP6, T8.3, T8.6 
Specific Objective 4: To establish a roadmap for the implementation of REDOL solutions  in other urban 
environments and industrial areas, tackling technical and non-technical barriers. 
REDOL will carry out an assessment of the regulatory and social landscape in the Aragon region, as well as current 
EU standards, to identify barriers and bottlenecks that could hamper SUW  valorisation. Based on this landscape 
and the results from the project demonstration, REDOL will generate recommendations for key stakeholders (e.g. 
policy makers, waste managers and recyclers) and engage a community of followers to remove these barriers and 
to support the circular design of the targeted value chain s. REDOL wil l identify and analyse the potential 
replication of the developed solutions considering their cost-benefit analysis, as well as the technical and regulatory 
obstacles. Besides, REDOL will connect with the European Community of Practice (ECoP) and other relevant EU 
bodies for knowledge sharing, dissemination of outcomes, challenges and recommendations. 
Specific:  Linked Deliverables & KER: D2.1, D5.3, D7.1, D7.3, KER19, KER20, KER22 
Measurable:  Linked Impact Factor (IF): IF6, IF7, IF8, IF9 (see section 2.1.3) 
Achievable:  Linked Partners: CIRCE, ITA, UZ, AMS, CEMCH, ICL, EEIP, ZAR, PRA, BOFA 
Relevant:  Relation to the topic  (scope’s bullet points): #6”Define assessment methodologies and evaluate 
KPIs to measure the performance of symbiosis”, #7 ”Life cycle assessment and life cycle cost 
analysis”, #11”Connect to the ECoP for knowledge sharing” 
Time-bound:  Linked work packages and tasks: T2.4, T2.6, T7.1, T7.2, T7.4, T7.5, T7.6 
Specific Objective 5: To assure a successful dissemination and exploitation of the project , through a strategic 
and I-US oriented commercialization plan, dedicated business models and key stakeholders’ engagement. 
An exhaustive analysis of the market, potential application, risk and opport unities will be performed. Different 
business model will be produced during the project , integrating circular approaches and agreements for the 
establishment of symbiotic relationships.  This approach will enable REDOL to set up a global business plan that  
optimises SUW management among the whole value chain key partners, establishing best practices for each waste 
material, according to technical (technology performance, logistics, etc.) and non -technical (legislative, regulatory, 
standardisation) aspects. Additionally, REDOL consortium will oversee the involvement of citizens, public bodies 
and othe r relevant stakeholders within the project , whereas it will develop a proper communication and 
dissemination (C&D) strategy of the major innovation outcomes to support the implementation of I -US. To this 
end, a social innovation spin- off action based on a design thinking approach will be implemented in the region, 
thus supporting users in the transition from passive consumers towards active citizens impacting the value chains. 
Specific:  Linked Deliverables & KER: D7.2, D8.1, D8.2, D8.3, KER21, KER23 
Measurable:  Linked Impact Factor (IF): IF4, IF6, IF7 (see section 2.1.3) 
Achievable:  Linked Partners: CIRCE, STRA, GEO, ICL, EEIP 
Relevant:  Relation to the topic  (scope’s bullet points): #9”Study social aspects of the community and its 
improvement through I-US”, #10”Create societal awareness (…) highlighting and communicating 
political and regulatory obstacle between regions/countries” 
Time-bound:  Linked work packages and tasks: T2.2, T7.3, WP8 
1.1.2. Ambition 
The EC highlights the key role of cities in advancing on sustainability and circular economy,1 as cities must move 
away from linear systems of resource use and learn to operate as closed -loop circular systems. In order to achieve 
this objective, REDOL aims at solving the complex challenges behind circular value chains and I -US, not only at 
technological level , but also at managerial, ecological, regulatory, economic and social  levels. Only by 
following this approach can hubs for circularity reach a mature enough readiness level, advancing in the SRL 
(Symbiosis Readiness Level ) of the symbiotic interactions among key players . To this end, d ifferent innovations 
will be implemented for each typology of residue and for REDOL as a whole , tackling barriers that affect all the 
key actors of the value chains. Digitalisation will be key  to accomplish this objective, as well as the development 
of new schemes and procedures to interact between industrial players and with local citizens. 
Starting from the technological perspective, REDOL will deploy innovations along three axis: 1) collection, sorting 
and classification technologies, 2) recycling and valorisation routes, and 3) formulation of new circular products 
that enable closing the loop in REDOL value chains. These innovations will be developed and implemented around 
5 lines of valorisation: 
 
1 “Circular Economy Action Plan for a cleaner and more competitive Europe”, European Union, 2020 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 5 
Value chain Packaging (MMPP and P&C) 
 
Gaps & 
Barriers in 
current SoA 
Packaging is an extensive family of entirely different materials. Multi-
material multilayer plastic packaging (MMPP) enables the industry 
to minimize the average thickness of packaging while combining 
functional properties, such as barriers, mechanical strength and heat 
tolerance. However, MMPP embedded heterogeneity became a 
hindering factor  for the recycling industry. Waste characterisation 
and sorting is key for increasing the recycling efficiency, but 
conventional MMPP waste management systems are not adapted to identify, separate and recycle 
MMPP, becoming a key circular economy challenge  due to the high volume of MMPP amon g 
SUW.2 Moreover, many packaging is composed of or includes paper and cardboard (P&C), which 
is the most recycled material  in Europe, with c.a. 80% recycling rate. Whereas the valorisation 
technologies are well advanced, developments  in sorting technologies are needed to improve the 
quality of recycled materials and maximise the value of each fraction to get closer to zero waste. 
REDOL 
R&I 
REDOL will improve the classification and separation system for MMPP and P&C  wastes 
managed by HUSA and SAI by means of innovative artificial intelligent (AI) and robotics solutions 
(CIRCE, AMB) and with the capacity to identify and separate different  MMPP (IRIS). Specific 
recycling techniques for MMPP based on green solvent  selective dissolution will be developed 
(ITE) and demonstrated (ACT) build ing on results  from MERLIN EU project, 3 while r ecycled 
polymers will be reused by ACC and TEC to produce circular products like  profiles for civil 
infrastructures, consumer goods, automotive parts and new packaging. 
KER KER2, KER5; KER6; KER12 (see section 2.1) 
TRL 
Prototypes already available at lab scale (IRIS, ITE) while experiences on sorting and classification 
by means of robotic systems already exist, but automatic and mobile systems of this nature are still 
at lab level (TRL5). The development and testing of these novel solutions at HUSA, ACT and SAI 
will enable REDOL to reach TRL7 and ease its industrialization. 
Value chain Plastics 
 
Gaps & 
Barriers in 
current SoA 
Whatever the application, at the end of their service life, plastic 
materials are necessary resources that must be recycled . It is  estimated 
that only 9% is recycled , and most of it  is landfill ed or in our 
environment (land, oceans, rivers, ice and air ).4 The challenge is to 
increase the amount of plastic waste recycled, addressing the most 
complex fractions and unsorted mix of plastics , but the lack of 
recycling technologies that could upgrade the value of recycled 
matter is one of the main technological barriers.  Mechanical recycling is the most widespread 
and mature, although it pres ents a series of important limitations , while chemical recycling is a 
complementary technology, that can help diverting certain plastic waste  which cannot be 
sustainably (technical or economical) recycled by mechanical processes. 
REDOL 
R&I 
Aragon region is already advancing in plastics recycling, including as an example PLASTICE HE 
project which deals with unsorted plastic waste and with whom REDOL will exploit synergies.5 On 
this basis, REDOL main challenge is to advance in plastics classificati on to increase the 
effectiveness of different valorisation routes, and thus will enhance the traditional sorting and 
recognition of plastic materials using FTIR spectrometers  combined with  AI techniques  by 
deploying integrated smart bins for urban plastics  collection at city level (ICCS and ZAR). 
Recycling techniques will be developed and demonstrated (MOS)  using green solvolysis assisted 
with microwave ( MW) and ultrasounds ( US) (AIT and CIRCE).  Additionally, REDOL  will 
generate eco-design practices to facilitate their reuse, remanufacture and recycling (AIT, TEC).  
KER KER1; KER7; KER12 (see section 2.1) 
TRL 
Consortium partners have tested the sorting and valorisation technologies in previous R&D 
projects, and prototypes are already available (TRL5). Within REDOL they will be adapted to the 
new conditions of the waste flows and demonstrated at real urban environment (ZA R) and the 
premises of MOS (TRL7). 
 
2 Containers/packaging make up a major portion of SUW, 82.2 million tons in 2018 (+28% percent of total generation). 
3 MERLIN: Increasing the quality and rate of MultilayER packaging recycLINg waste 
4 Geyer, R., et al. (2017). Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made. Science advances, 3(7), e1700782. 
5 PLASTICE: New technologies to integrate PLASTIC waste in the Circular Economy  

HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 6 
Value chain Construction and Demolition Wastes (CDW) 
Gaps & 
Barriers in 
current SoA 
Proper handling and recycling of CDW is a major challenge for the 
industry due to the increasing volume of waste  produced (≈375 million 
tons/year) and its high environmental impact (CO2 emissions). CDW is 
a highly heterogeneous mixture of materials that typically include 
metals, concrete, asphalt , mortars, brick, gypsum, wood, cardboard, 
steel, iron and plastic. As the construction sector is still one of the least 
digitalised sectors , CDW valorisation is far from the wide adoption of automated solutions that 
could contribute to the creation of novel circular value chains . Enabling management of CDW with 
advanced sorting systems can lead to less waste generation and management costs at all stages of 
the construction value chain, contributing to the transition towards a digital and circular economy. 
REDOL 
R&I  
REDOL will develop novel automated tools strengthened with robotics, separation and sorting, and 
material characterisation for better CDW valorisation. A sensor- based sorter will be developed 
(ICCS) for upgrading CDW waste management  facilities (CAS). Composites materials (≈11% 
of CDW) will be recycled within the green solvolysis system developed under the plastics value 
chain. Other classified materials will be  assessed within REDOL as alternative raw materials 
for application in the cement/concrete industry  (VDZ and CEM), formulating new components 
and products (such as Megalito ®), reducing significant CO 2 footprint and increasing resource 
efficiency. Recovered fibre glass (FG) from composites will be reused to produce reinforced wood 
particle boards (FIN) and civil engineering infrastructures (ACC). 
KER KER3; KER8; KER12 (see section 2.1) 
TRL 
REDOL will start from existing results including AI -based algorithms and know -how available on 
potential alternative materials to be valorised (TRL5). Further analyses and testing will be required 
previous to the demonstration in CAS, CEM, FIN and ACC at TRL7. 
Value chain Textiles 
 
Gaps & 
Barriers in 
current SoA. 
The EC strategy on Sustainable Products has flagged textiles as a sector 
with a high potential for circularity . Automated sorting has great 
potential for improvement to sort more efficiently and accurately most 
textile waste. Moreover, as an alternative to the more widespread 
mechanical recycling technologies, fibre-to-fibre recycling processes 
relying on chemical technologies that reduce textiles to their basic 
components need to be further developed to operate at industrial scale. 6 This approach enables to  
re-spun waste into new fibres, yarns and textiles and increase the sustainability of the sector. 
REDOL  
R&I 
REDOL will develop (NTT) and demonstrate (ALIA)  a novel textile waste sorting based on 
hyperspectral imaging selection by colour, composition and fabric/garment structure. The sorted 
textile wastes will undergo novel recycling routes to remove elastane/lycra (NTT) which is one of 
the key challenges for textile recyclers. 7  For mixed plastic -textile fibres, a depolimerization -
polimerization process through glycolysis with ionic liquids will be optimised (AITEX), followed 
by post-condensation and spinning steps at pre-industrial demonstration level (BRI). Finally, the 
recycled polyester yarn  will be remanufactured  to produce geotextiles for soil reinforcement  
(BRI) and surface veil for pultrusion of profile for civil infrastructures applications (ACC). 
KER KER4; KER9; KER10; KER12 (see section 2.1) 
TRL 
The technologies to be developed currently exist at lab scale (t ests performed at max speed 3 m/s 
for the sorting in NTT, pilot reactor of 100 L and 20 kg/day capacity in AITEX). The advance from 
TRL5 to TRL7 will be possible by a demonstration campaign in PRA/ALIA and BRI facilities. 
Value chain Waste from Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) 
 
Gaps & 
Barriers in 
current SoA 
WEEE is now one of the fastest growing waste streams including a 
large range of devices such as computers, fridges and mobile phones 
at the end of their life. 8  This type of waste contains a complex 
mixture of materials , some of which are hazardous  (Cd, Hg, Pb, 
As, oils, etc.)  and may cause major environmental and health 
problems. In addition, many WEEE contain rare and expensive 
resources (Au, Ag, Pd, Pt , etc.), which can be recycled and re -used if the waste is well managed. 
However, barriers on transport and processing costs still prevent their full valorisation.  
 
6 Köhler, A., et al. (2021). Circular economy perspectives in the EU Textile sector. Publications Office of the European Union. 
7 P. Harmsen, et al (2021). Textiles for circular fashion: The logic behind recycling options.  Sustainability, 13(17), 9714. 
8 O. S. Shittu et al., Waste Management, 120, 549-563. 

HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 7 
REDOL 
R&I 
REDOL will work both in the automation of the Print Circuit Boards (PCB) separation process 
(CIRCE) and on the development of novel processes for the recovery of precious metals and rare 
earths from PCBs  (RINA) by replacing conventional acids with the formulation of novel deep 
eutectic solvents (DES). In addition to the demonstration of these technologies at TAT, REDOL 
will make use of the casing plastics protecting WEEE and discarded in the valorisation process to 
substitute flame-retardant fillers like aluminium trihydrate in pultrusion process (ACC).  
KER KER5; KER11; KER12 (see section 2.1) 
TRL 
RINA has experience in metal recovery by DES with different wastes materials and with DES 
formulations (TRL5). The application of this know -how in the development of a novel process for 
PCB valorisation to be demonstrated in TAT will allow REDOL to reach TRL7. 
In order to successfully implement these innovations at the  SUW circular value chains, REDOL will put in place a 
set of horizontal activities that will be facilitated through the I-US REDOL’s Platform. This platform will put in 
place a multi -criteria evaluation framework for industrial symbiosis, including data sharing mechanisms and 
enabling the role of facilitators in the setting up of new initiatives. The adaptation to REDOL will enable the 
analysis of waste streams and boundary conditions to deplo y the I -US concept, as well as competences, 
stakeholders and regulations required for its successful application.  The platform will be  designed to provide new 
circular business models and analyse their environmental, economic and social impacts from a life cycle approach.  
Additionally, the logistics of the waste streams and inverse logistics of the valorised products will be analysed and 
optimised. The visualization of the containers, trucks and waste flows will be made available by means of advance 
sensing technologies, installations of novel smart urban bins and GIS applications, which will result in a digital 
twin of Zaragoza’s waste management  system. These innovations will be complemented by social initiatives 
promoted by Zaragoza’s City Hall and main RT O and waste management institutions, with the aim of involving 
and improving the behaviour of citizenship to adopt sustainable practices linked to waste management. The overall 
ambition and R&I maturity of these horizontal developments are summarised in Table 1. 
Table 1. TRL development along REDOL project. 
Development Current TRL Final TRL 
I-US Platform 
TRL5. Platforms on IS and waste management 
exist but must be adapted to the needs of  I-US 
and the region particular needs.  
TRL7. Ad-hoc tools and models integrated ; I-
US Platform tested in REDOL value chains  
using data from all key actors. 
Inline sensing 
for traceability 
TRL5. Smart i nline sensors validated for 
different sectors (e.g. DISIRE project). There is 
a need to adapt them to REDOL SUW streams. 
TRL7. Field evaluation at the addressed SUW 
value chains  in Zaragoza, data exchanged in 
real time and a secure way with the platform. 
GIS based 
mapping 
TRL5. Even though GIS is a mature 
technology, it must be implemented in the 
city’s waste management procedures. 
TRL7. GIS tool for mapping resources and 
ensure SUW traceability integrated in the 
platform and with REDOL sensing system. 
Logistics 
optimization 
TRL5. Optimization of delivery routes  is 
common for the transport sector but must be 
incorporated to SUW (inversed) logistics. 
TRL7. Optimization algorithms validated by 
using REDOL value chains and key actors 
information through the I-US platform. 
Forecasting and 
s-LCA tools 
TRL5. Models exist in current SoA, but t here 
is currently a high uncertainty in the 
availability and price of waste resources. 
TRL7. Currently available models and 
algorithms will be trained with real data and 
included in the platform and I-US agreements. 
Circular eco-
designs  
TRL5. Solutions for designing new products 
with a better end of life formulated. 
TRL7. Implementation of the solutions 
formulated in real circular products. 
I-US guidelines 
TRL5. In EU, initiatives on IS and hubs for 
circularity are currently in the process of being 
implemented or providing first experiences. 
TRL7. REDOL will generate a handbook and 
recommendations for the implementation of hubs 
for circularity based on I-US real experiences. 
I-US business 
models 
TRL5. Novel business models on CE and  IS 
are in the process of being tested in EU 
projects such as CIR4LIFE and PLASTICE. 
TRL7. Existing and new business models 
applied to the context of I -US and agreed 
among key actors of REDOL value chains. 
1.2. Methodology 
1.2.1. Overall concept and approach: Aragon as a Hub for Circularity 
REDOL project (meaning Circular project in Aragon regional dialect) has been conceived to advance the SRL of 
Aragon’s Hub for circularity  in order to demonstrate the set -up of new business models relying on SUW as 
alternative resource for local industries. Aragon is a European NUTS 21 region that has set an ambitious initiative to 
reach an innovative circular economy by 2030, enabling the f ull valorisation of residues . Main activities are 
being deployed in the capital, Zaragoza, which aims to become one of the first 100 climate neutral cities by 2030 and 
has already put in place projects such as Circular Biocarbon, the first urban biorefinery aiming to valorise 100% of 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 8 
the city’s organic residues. REDOL will therefore complement these efforts by advancing in complementary SUW 
streams addressing 5 out of 7 of the key value chains defined by the EC Circular Economy Action Plan  
(electronics and ICT, packaging, plastics, textiles, construction and buildings).9 
Previous to the development of this proposal, the implementation of a municipal-industrial symbiosis approach 
in Zaragoza was assessed  based on scientific and commercial data . 10  This assessment provided a set of 
strengths and weaknesses to be exploited/overcome within REDOL project. Main strengths include: i) Aragon 
generates a rich mix of industrial, urban and rural wastes  with the ideal volume and seasonality to implement 
effective CE; ii) The region counts with public and private entities leading innovative initiatives for recycling in the 
common framework of Aragon Circular initiative; iii) Zaragoza meets the European recycling target and counts 
with dedicated facilities for S UW treatment in contrast to similar municipalities; iv) Initiatives to incentivise 
sorting and recycling in households and business are already on- going. Key weaknesses to be addressed 
include: i) There are data limitations and lack of traceability , which makes sensing and digitalisation crucial 
within REDOL; ii) Almost 70% of SUW ends up in the mixed fraction due to the saturation and inefficiency of 
current collection and sorting systems, which implies the need for REDOL to implement innovations in this step; 
iii) Policymakers together with manufacturers and recyclers still need to put in place governance structures that 
allow, e.g. to define strategies for promoting the use of low impact materials and standards on recycled products 
that facilitate reuse and provide information to improve recycling processes. 
Taking into account the results of this analysis, in REDOL, the circular management of SUW will be done through 
coordinated actions divided along four pillars: 1) to upgrade waste manager´s facilities with new technologies 
(i.e. sorting, processing/recycling techniques), 2) to design new circular products (valorisation of secondary raw 
materials and implementation of eco-design practices), 3) to improve management and data sharing procedures 
by implementing digital tools  (e.g. smart sensors, IoT, optimization algorithms, central I -US Platform), 4) to  
generate a vibrant ecosystem around circular and symbiotic value chains (i.e. to improve the organizational 
skills of local key actors and to eng age and unlock the potential of local communities towards innovative circular 
schemes). The resulting value chains obtained from REDOL successful execution are depicted in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Overall scheme of REDOL concept and approach. 
In the following pages, REDOL implementation pillars will be described in detail, addressing facilities upgrade of 
waste managers and industrial partners (Section 1.2.2), generation of secondary raw materials  (Section 1.2.3), 
digital approaches for improving SUW management (Section 1.2.4) and managerial/social actions to be 
implemented at local level (Section 1.2.5).  Accordingly, REDOL will not only provide an environmental and 
 
9 “Circular Economy Action Plan for a cleaner and more competitive Europe”, European Union, 2020 
10 Valero, A., Torrubia, J., Anía, M. Á., & Torres, A. (2021). Assessing Urban Metabolism through MSW Carbon Footprint 
and Conceptualizing Municipal-Industrial Symbiosis—The Case of Zaragoza City, Spain.  Sustainability, 13(22), 12724. 
Solid Urban 
Waste
Management
Collection,
Identification, 
Classification 
& Separation
Processing 
/ Recycling 
of waste 
streams
Circular 
products
New 
secondary 
resources 
of raw 
materials
Flame 
retardant 
materials
Electronic
devices, 
catalysts.
Packaging
(rigid and 
flexibles)
Automotive 
parts “Megalito” 
Concrete Block 
Reinforced wood 
particle board 
Cement
PLASTICE
HE Project
Consumer 
goods Geotextiles Composite
profiles
WEEETextiles
Precious Me, 
rare earths
Solid ashes High tenacity
Polyester yarn
Glass FibersPolymers Monomers Protective 
casing plastics
Liquid oil
RGB camera, 
ML
-
DL alg. 
& 
robots
HSI 
techniques 
& AI
-
ML models
GRHUSA
Smart Urban 
Plastic Bins
AI
-
based sorting with 
advanced robotics arms
HSI sorting 
system
AI
-
based alg. 
& robots
Selective 
delamination 
of MMPP
Green 
Solvolysis 
(MW and US)
Formulation 
of recycled 
components
Elastane 
removal
IL
-
based glycolysis, 
Post
-
condensation,
spinning
Valorization 
PCB using 
DES
Films
Plastics
Plastics
Films
Films
Composites
Plastics
Plastics
AggregatesWoodComposites
RTO
Waste manager
LEYEND:
CDWPlasticsPackaging 
Recycled
Paper

HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 9 
technical solution to SUW management and valorisation, but also a managerial and econom ic one, generating 
viable models that will boost the competitiveness of the different industries involved . Such an approach has 
been designed to transform Zaragoza City and Aragon Region into a H ub of Circularity of reference for EU 
cities willing to follow CE practices. Accordingly, the project will provide a handbook for the establishment of 
hubs for circularity , aligning the project activities with initiatives such as the ECoP and will start a first 
replication stage in 3 EU cities (Section 1.2.6) with whom REDOL will exchange best practices and results. 
1.2.2. Waste managers and REDOL use cases 
HUSA Waste manager: Improvement the sorting system of a packaging classification plant 
►Waste manager description. The HUSA packaging selection plant separates different types of light packaging 
from collection carried out by citizens . The plant is a 2,280 m² warehouse, with a treatment capacity of 2 t/h. In 
2021, 6,200 tons of packaging were processed. It automatically separates the unloaded containers into 7 fractions: 
steel, aluminium, PET, PEAD, film, mixed plastic and multilayer beverage carton.  
►Technology SoA. The commercially available solutions (near -infrared spectroscopy, NIR) generally focus on 
identifying mono-materials of a few s elected types (PE, PP, PET, etc.). However, MMPP identification is limited 
because of the thickness of the packaging and the composition of the different layers. Therefore, many recyclers 
are still sorting plastics by hand, which is unreliable and expensiv e, or this multilayer plastic cannot be identified , 
and consequently recovered.      
►REDOL Innovation. REDOL will go beyond the state of the art by adopting hyperspectral imaging  (HSI) 
together with AI-Machine learning (ML) models, enable bridging practical challenges previously not feasible in 
terms of classifying MMPP . An imaging technique such as HSI is preferable for MMPP identification of small 
films or shredded material fed on a belt. Additionally, AI statistical evaluation, i mplemented using a custom-built 
state-of-the-art platform, will allow to reach sufficient accuracy and speed in the material detection to be 
implemented in the real environment.   
►Main goal s to be achieved through REDOL . IRIS will develop a  real-time monitoring system for MMPP 
identification, that will be validated at HUSA, improving the effectiveness and the quality of the output material.  
Use Case #1: Delamination of MMPP structure by selective decomposition of polymer layers (ACT) 
►Waste manager description. ACT  is a SME  dedicated to the management and recovery of waste, recycling 
hangers, fridges, yogurt cups, bottle cups or even car bumpers  (380.000 t/y) . They recycle +12,000 tons of 
packaging/y, for which ACT target finding a solution to valorise MMPP.  
►Technology SoA. For delamination of MMPP structure there are processes focused on the selective dissolution 
and precipitation of one of the polymer layers . This is solved selectively, removing later the non- soluble 
components and precipitating the polymer using a non- solvent media. These routes achieve the delamination by 
depolymerization of one of the layer, PET or polyamides (PA), e.g, using sub and supercritical H2O.     
►REDOL Innovation. Green solvent -based processes will be specifically designed to dissolve the required 
layer in MMPP waste, with different approaches. Green solvents, such as CO2 in supercritical conditions will be 
used to selectively dissolve (i) the adhesives between layers or (ii) specific layers such as the tie layer. In addition, 
it will study the influence of the presence of other internal layers in the structure such as primers and/or functional 
barriers (e.g., etilen-vinil-alcohol) in the process. 
►Obtained secondary raw materials.  Different polyester (PES) and polyethylene (PE)  fractions in the 
structures will be tentatively separated and recovered.  The produced secondary polymers could be  used in the 
plastic injection industry, e.g., hangers’ injection, automotive parts, yogurt cups.  
Use Case #2: Overcoming barriers in sorting and classification (SAI) 
►Waste manager description. The Saica Group is one of the leading companies in EU in the manufacture of 
recycled paper, with an annual production of 3.3 million tons. Saica Natur Zaragoza process in its facility a total of 
125.000 t/y. The developments carried out in optical classifi cation technology allow SAI to improve the quality of 
the materials that they provide, maximizing the value of fractions and contributing to “zero waste”. 
►Technology SoA. SAI currently has a semiautomatic sorting line and a manual picking station. Both systems 
have the purpose of removing non- paper components from the wastepaper  received from local businesses and 
household. By doing this sorting, the paper mill generates  less r esidue in the pulper during the paper making 
process. This pulper residue is a very difficult residue to recycle worldwide, and its destination is normally landfill 
or energy valorisation.  
►REDOL innovation. A novel automated mobile sorting line  for paper and packaging classification will be 
developed and demonstrated at SAI. The system will include optical equipment based on HSI and RGB cameras 
and real-time sensors for non-paper components. They will use ML and deep learning (DL) algorithms applied 
to the different spectrums images (CIRCE) and giving instructions to the pickling robotic elements  (AMB). The 
line will also include ancillary’s  services (e.g., feeder system, separation box , etc.) and flexible robots that will 
allow it to be deployed at other SUW lines addressed in the project (like WEEE at TAT).  
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 10 
►Main goals to be achieved through REDOL.  The developed sorting system will allow to improve the quality 
of the recycled paper produced in SAI. It is estimated that we will apply the REDOL technical solution in 10% of 
total managed volume, that is the one with the highest levels of non-paper components. 
ZAR Waste manager: Deployment of smart urban bins for plastic collection at citizen’s level 
►Waste manager description.  ZAR manages post-consumer plastics coming from household waste s, which are 
collected as part of mixed municipal SUW at the Complex for the Treatment of SUW in Zaragoza (CTRUZ facility 
with a processing capacity of mixed SUW of ∼ 250,000 t/y). The actual recovery of LDPE (colour and white film) 
at CTRUZ is about 2,500 t/y, while potential PP and PS waste streams are about 1,400 t/y and 460 t/y, respectively.  
►Technology SoA. Multiple manual and automatic sorting systems utilizing different identification methods have 
been developed. 11 Among them, NIR technology is primarily used, whereas alternatives like FTIR spectroscopy 
allow to obtain more precise chemical information. To facilitat e the sorting of urban mixed plastics, advanced 
learning techniques should be developed to empower cat egorization tasks and identify hidden patterns in 
spectrums, increasing the classification accuracy and reducing the inference time. This will facilitate to provide 
real-time recognition response capabilities to function on mechanical urban sorters with robotic-based mechanism.  
►REDOL Innovation. A multi-spectrum analysis will be performed allowing a smart waster sorting mechanism 
to accurate separate urban mixed of plastic in real -time. Micro-electro-mechanical-system FTIR spectrometers 
will be used to scan the disposed objects aiming to classify them in polyethylene terephthalate ( PET), 
Polyphenylene Ether ( PPE), Polyethylene (PE) and others. ML techniques based on convolutional neural 
networks will be developed to reduce the inference time and ensure the proper classification . Steppers are used to 
move the objects towards the buckets and then an air -basedPA system is used to push the object in the appropriate 
bin. Lidar sensors will be used to measure the level of the bins aiming to optimize logistics operations.  
►Main goals to be achieved through REDOL. The proposed mechanisms will strengthen the valorisation of the 
waste by tran sforming the existing streams to improved - in terms of quality, purity, safety, usability and patterns 
identified- and new ones -by creating new flows of secondary materials driven by the technology innovation based 
on separation that was not possible before - and by facilitating their improved transportation and the context in 
which citizens recycle plastics.  
Use Case #3: Green solvolysis assisted with MW and US for recycling composite materials (MOS) 
►Waste manager description. MOS is equipped with most of the plastic transformation technologies (injection, 
rotational moulding, blow moulding, thermoforming, injection moulding, etc.) devot ed to creating material that 
meets the most demanding requirements for plastic products. MOS offer advance d materials and products for 
packaging, urban waste collection and automotive sectors, combining recycled and bio- based materials. Through 
REDOL, MOS ambition to create an effective after -use plastic economy, in particular for high technical plastics: 
thermoset composites and for thermoplastic high-tech based composites. High costs of these technical materials are 
making chemical recycling of the monomers a huge opportunity for MOS business development.  
►Technology SoA. The composite waste treatment available techniques that are already commercial or are 
approaching a commercial status can be divided into mechanical, thermal, chemical and biological. 12 In a chemical 
recycling process (solvolysis), the matrix is disintegrated into a chemical solution. Compared to thermal 
technologies, solvolysis requires lower T to dissolve the resins, resulting in a lower damaging of fibres. However, it 
incorporates salts or other modifying components that damage fibres and can be highly polluting  (conventional 
solvents account for about 20% of the volatile organic compound emissions). 
►REDOL Innovation. 1) Improve the separation of the components  (resin and fibre) through energy efficient 
technologies, assisting with US (increasing 40% the current separation rate and decreasing in a 26% the operating 
time) and MW (decreasing 30% the energy demand).13  2) Test and adapting novel green solvents (e.g., biobased 
polar protic and aprotic) to replace the usually toxic and flammable organic solvents, reduce chemical waste and 
improve the safety. AIT and CIRCE will take advantage regarding their knowledge in other recycling technologies 
(mechanical and thermal) to use them as pre -treatments for the s olvolysis process to study efficiency in 
combinations and potential synergies. 
►Obtained secondary raw materials.  The innovative recycling technology will provide high quality of recycled 
fibres (mainly glass fibres) which will be directly integrated in current MOS products (lids for urban waste skips  
and bumpers for automotive sector) and chemical building blocks that will be the base of recycled polymers. 
CAS Waste manager: Deployment of AI-based sorting system with advanced robotics for CDW 
►Waste manager description: CAS is the owner of a CDW waste management plant, located in the Zaragoza 
with a surface area o f 60,000 m2. In 2021, CAS managed c.a. 80,000 tons of waste , 50% as unsorted wastes . The 
 
11 S.P. Gundupalli, et al, Waste management, 60, 56-74. 
12 W. Post et al. Polym. Rev. 2020, 60, 359. 
13 PolynSPIRE H2020-NMBP-SPIRE-820665; develop. of a solvolysis process MW-assisted for polyamide and polyurethane 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 11 
classified waste that they cannot take advantage of, such as plastics, wood or cardboard, is taken to other authorized 
waste managers, whereas the obtained recycled aggregates are incorporated back into the construction sector in the 
form of “Megalito”, a precast concrete block made with 100% recycled aggregates.  
►Technology SoA . Different automated CDW sorting systems have been developed. Among them, HSI  
technology with successive projections algorithm, extreme learning machine, particle swarm optimization and 
online learning, achieves around 90% detection accuracy.14 Although the existing sorting algorithms offer accurate 
results, new ML/DL techniques must be utilized to sort a wider range of CDW, offer higher reliability and enable 
real-time recognition responses capable of operating on robotic-based mechanical sorters.  
►REDOL Innovation. A multi-spectrum analysis will be performed allowing a robotic -based sorting 
mechanism to accurate separate CDW in real -time (ICCS and CIRCE). T he classification will be relied on 
ML/DL approaches and the separation will be based on robotic arms, upgrading the existing processes. AI will also 
facilitate to identify hidden patterns in the component analysis methodologies. To easily classify the CDW  without 
processing limitation, the industrial camera will capture the Region of Interest, whereas the hyperspectral camera 
captures the spectral information. Using 3D vision systems , the position and the shape of the wastes is identified 
within the conveyor to guide the robotic arms for picking and placing the waste in the right bin. Based on the 
extracted spectral feature bands, ML will classify the CDW in one of the following categories: glass, ceramic, 
concrete, wood, gypsum, metals, other or mixed materials . Additionally, the identification of plastics (4-55%) 
like PVC, PET, P E will be performed by multispectral cameras which will analyse the emissivity of the different 
polymeric components. Finally, the robot will pick the object and place the object to the individual container.  
►Main goal s to be achieved through REDOL . The proposed mechanisms will strengthen the valorisation  of 
CDW by transforming the existing streams into improved (quality, purity, safety and patterns ) and new ones , 
creating new flows of secondary raw materials that may be used in upcycle solutions by other industries. 
ALIA Waste manager: Novel textile waste sorting system and elastane removal 
►Waste manager description: ALIA is a management company of environmental services in Tuscany  (IT). Its 
goal is to promote good w aste management practices, promoting separate collection and safety in the management 
of plants. It includes 6 plants in the province of Florence (49 kt/a), Prato (130 kt/a) and Pistoia (26 kt/a). 
►Technology SoA. New technological solutions are needed for textile waste sorting in search of higher flexibility. 
Among the most promising technologies are NIR , HSI and radio frequency identification (RFID). However, items 
with a lining or multilayer fabric cannot be sorted correctly with these techniques and algorithms are only suitable 
for the most commercial blends. Also, the presence of elastane (lycra) prevents the optimal downstream recycling. 
►REDOL innovation. A novel textile waste sorting based on HSI selection by colour, composition and 
fabric/garment structure will be developed (NTT) and demonstrated (ALIA) with real mixed fibres blend flows. 
NTT will also validate an innovative technique to separate elastane (lycra) from textile fibres with a closed cycle 
solvent leaching for the next chemical recycling.  
►Main goal s to be achieved through REDOL: 1) Improve the textile waste sorting efficiency to provide the 
required inputs/quality to downstream recycling technologies, and 2) Remove 100% of elastane fibres from natural 
and synthetic blends for the following chemical/mechanical recycling processes. 
Use case #4: Chemical recycling of textile wastes by IL glycolysis followed by spinning (BRILEN) 
►Waste manager description: BRI is a high tenacity polyester (HT PES) yarn manufacturer (extrusion, spinning, 
drawing and winding ). When recycled HT PES yarn is produced, c urrent inputs are post -consumer PET from 
bottles mechanically recycled. Waste is not homogeneous, and properties of the final product are not as stable as 
could be with an original PET chip. PES substandard yarn can be recycled with the textile waste already managed 
by other companies of the consortium.  
►Technology SoA . Mechanical recycling approaches is the most employed at present in the textile sector. 
However, textiles cannot be endlessly recycled mechanically without reducing their properties and quality. 
Chemical recycling methods enable 100% breakdown to monomer, th en the textile could be recycled an infinite 
number of times. However, r esults of LCA show that not only chemical recycling incurs greater costs, but it also 
contributes to an overall negative impact in terms of a larger net consumption of energy and environmental effects. 
►REDOL innovation . This will be the first time a chemically recycled poly mers derived from textiles  by IL-
based glycolysis is used to produce HT PES yarn in Spain. Post-condensation is focused on increasing the 
viscosity of the polymer supplied by AITEX to comply the characteristics to be spined as a HT PES. Product has 
less than 2% of other substances, which makes the yarn almost 100% recyclable.  
►Secondary raw materials:  HT PES yarn is a technical product used as reinforcement , giving strength to 
structures. A geotextile made of HT PES with high mechanical resistance and drainage capacity will be produced. 
 
14 W. Xiao, et al., Plos one, 14(1), e0208706. 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 12 
TAT Waste manager: Deep eutectic solvent replacing acids for recovering precious metals from WEEE 
►Waste manager description: TAT is a SME located in Aragon specialised in the management and treatment of 
WEEEs. They recover strategic metals from PCBs derived from urban residues like computers, servers, digital 
devices, phones, etc. Other waste flows derived from WEEE that they manage are glass foundry wastes  (3 t/y), 
PVC plastics (24 t/y), acids (4 t/y) and plastic protective cases.  
►Technology SoA . The current process for recovering PCB metals is based on thermochemical and 
electrochemical treatments, using acids (e.g., HNO 3, H2SO4). After concentration, the strategic metals in the form 
of sludge are chemically treated in TAT laboratory. Conventional solvents exhibit aggressive profiles that may lead 
to health, environment and safety related issues, as well as damage to industrial equipment.  
►REDOL innovation: Deep eutectic solvents (DESs) have emerged and attracted increasing. DES refers to a 
mixture of two (or more) compounds, a hydrogen bond donor, and a hydrogen bond acceptor, which has a lower 
melting point than the individual compounds. DES share common properties with ILs, but they ar e more cost 
competitive, and synthesis and purification steps are easier. DES-based technology for PCB metal recovery will 
be developed by RINA for different species and under different DES formulations. The activities will be carried 
out at laboratory scale (5-10 kg per batch) up to the layout of treatment line at TAT plant (supported by CIRCE). 
►Secondary raw materials: PCB recycling will allow to recover  species like Cu, Fe, Ni, Au, Pd, which can be 
reused for manufacturing new electronic devices o in the chemical industry (catalysts). Additionally toxic and 
hazardous metals like Hg, Pb, Cd, Cr will be prevented from posing an environmental hazard. 
1.2.3. End users valorising obtained secondary raw materials 
REDOL will provide solutions for designing new circular products with better End of Life options based on the 
combination of results and generated secondary raw materials. Through the project  execution, secondary raw 
materials will undergo a final analysis to understand how they can be reintroduced in the market , while a specific 
task (T8.3) has been included to engage end-users in the acquisition of these materials, closing the circular value 
chains. For secondary raw materials that require further treatment or modifications in the production processes , a 
set of End-users are involved in REDOL to demonstrate the feasibility of producing new circular products: 
End-user #1: Fabrication of fibre glass reinforced wood particle boards (FIN) 
►End user description: FIN is a Spanish company focused on the manufacturing of wood particle boards. In their 
plant in Aragon, FIN manages 36.000 t/y  coming from domestic or industrial furniture. The use of recycled wood 
residue in current particleboard pr oduction is limited, otherwise the particle boards do not have the required 
quality. Modification with nanocellulose or the use of bio- based products has also been proposed, as well as 
hidrofugant additives, minimizing the loss of physical and mechanical properties and improving stability. 
►REDOL innovation: FIN and ITA will incorporate into the mix of wood particles used to manufacture the 
particle boards GF coming from composite wastes. The main objectives pursued with this particle addition are: (i) 
to increase the mechanical properties ; strength, stiffness, keeping constant surface strength and screw pull out 
resistance, (ii) to increase the water resistance, by reducing the swelling after and (iii) to increase the thermal 
conductivity and the fire resistance. FIN and ITA will  develop a feasibility study of compatible mixing : organic 
particles (wood chips), inorganic particles (FG chips or yarn) and inorganic or organic matrix (glue and adhesive).  
►Circular products: The new glass fibre reinforced wood particle board , 100% coming from recycled waste, 
will increase current market share of FIN in terms of tons of wood particle board and will involve the creati on of a 
new product to be incorporated to the current portfolio of the company. 
End-user #2: Civil engineering applications using secondary raw materials (ACC) 
►End user description : ACC is a greenfield developer and operator of energy & infrastructure that provides 
solutions to SDG. ACC Construction Technology and Innovation division’s polymer and composites group are 
pioneers in development of innovative solutions for challenges like  corrosion, lightweight and easy installation. 
Some of these innovations have won awards as best innovation at JEC world-France in 2010, 2011, 2016 and 2017. 
►REDOL innovation: In line with its sustainability principles, ACC within REDOL aims to provide 3 user cases:  
• Together with AIT, ACC will incorporate fibre recovered from solvolysis process in development of new 
composite profiles such as flats, beams, I sections, Box sections, etc. ACC will manufacture and validate the 
design profiles using resin infusion process by industrialized process.  
• Together with AITEX, ACC will incorporate FR surface veils using recycled fibres  (from AIT/BRIL) using 
pultrusion process. The main objective is to obtain a surface FR veil for manufacturing composites profiles 
meeting stringent FR requirements of construction industry for example railway infrastructure applications. 
• ACC will also target to demonstrate that WEEE plastic cases derived from TAT in form of powder could be 
used as secondary raw material to substitute FR fillers like ATH (primary raw materials) in pultrusion process. 
►Circular products: Through these use -cases, ACC aims one hand, improve the tenders score by increasing 
social and environmental impact, and in the other hand increase its portfolio of green composite solutions and its 
market share in geographies which gives preferences to environmentally friendly sustainable solution. 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 13 
End-user #3: Energetic and material valorisation of reject flows in the cement industry (CEM) 
►End user description : CEM Spain Operations, S.L.U. is the owner of a clinker and cement production plant 
located in Aragon. CEM has been promoting for years the use of alternative raw materials in the manufacture of 
cement to reduce the CO 2 emission factor. 15  They target  achieving 25% substitution with decarbonated raw 
materials in the manufacture processes.  
►REDOL Innovation: CEM will study the feasibility of energetic and material valorisation of certain waste 
streams derived from the addressed value chains that are currently mixed and /or cannot be used. The applied 
upstream IA-based s eparation (e.g., CDW in CAS ) will facilita te the characterization and analysis of these 
fractions as potential component of the clinker production process e.g., (aggregates, sludges, ashes from plastic 
pyrolysis, etc.). On the other hand, CEM will also perform an energy efficiency study  over other waste/by-
products derived from SUW to substitute fossil fuel in the clinker oven, e.g., pyrolysis ashes, textiles, paper,  
►Circular products: 1) Use of SUW  derived by-products as raw material to produce clinker in substitution of 
limestone (CaCO3) and obtained greener cement for the construction industry with much lower carbon footprint. 2) 
Use of rejected flows from addressed SUW value chains as alternative fuels in the clinker oven. 
End-user #4: Packaging and plastic-based circular products (TEC) 
►End user description: TEC main purpose is conducting R&D on advanced polymeric materials and their 
transformation processes for packaging and industrial plastic applications. TEC develops all its activities keeping in 
mind an eco -innovative perspective, analysing in each case the different alternatives that would reduce the 
environmental impact of both their products and/or their processes.  
►REDOL innovation: In REDOL, TEC will propose a set of economically viable technologies that will recover 
materials with high purity and performances like glass fibres, polymers/monomers from thermoplastics (i.e., 
Nylon, ABS, PP, PC, PET and PS) and thermosets after solvolysis . TEC will  demonstrate their use in new very 
stringent value chains and applications such as automotive, aviation or construction to ultimately reduce the use 
of virgin materials. This will he lp alleviating Europe’s external dependency on virgin resources and will open up 
new business opportunities and revenue flows for recycling companies. Different grades of recycled materials will 
be defined as direct substitutes of current conventional mate rials with the aim of enhancing and strengthen plastics 
secondary market. Accordingly, testing procedures and trials will be run to guarantee the required quality.  
►Circular products: Plastic products will be produced for flexible (film) and rigid (packaging, consumer goods, 
automotive, etc.) applications. The final application will depend on the final quality of the recycled material. 
1.2.4. Advanced digital technologies for SUW management and valorisation 
REDOL will rely in the application  of digital technologies to (i) increase the quantity and quality of recovered 
materials and (ii) overcome the barriers for implementing industry 4.0 concepts. Main developments include: 
• AI and ML will allow to increase the knowledge on the composition of SUW , providing a continuous mass 
balance of the entire process for the digital models developed within REDOL. 
• RFID systems, which allow greater traceability of all selected materials, better management of warehouses 
and stocks and, ultimately, optimization of the logistics. 
• Dual systems of AI and advanced robotics  to improve the capacity of waste selection, obtaining a greater 
number of materials, of better quality and improving the working conditions and well-being of workers. 
• Data processing, intelligent software and smart in -line sensors, from suppliers to custo mers, enabling to 
forecast, control, plan and produce intelligently, thus generating greater value for the entire value chains. 
The higher availability of data will be used in the design and development of a methodology for monitoring the 
life cycle impact of the value chains, as well as a decision-making system for improving reverse urban freight 
transportation. The measurement and improvement of SUW  reverse logistics in the hub for circularity will be 
performed attending to the environmental, economic and productive areas of sustainability. As a result, good 
practices will be established to reduce the cost of SUW  return while reducing environmental impacts and 
collection congestion, improving quality of life.  
Overall advancements in digitalisation will be integrated into REDOL I-US platform, which will enable the I -US 
data management for operation in a real industrial environment . The basic idea behind this tool is to analyse 
and simulate the operation in I -US systems, allowing the evaluation, simulation and operation of waste resource 
streams to achieve a progressive CE. B y using real-time models of different parties involved in the I-US system, it 
will be possible to understand how processes will be affected as a result of an extra- variable addition and thus, it 
enables the optimization of the raw materials and energy flows. Therefore, this platform will act as a virtual 
intermediary between partners, reproducing the characteristics of a real system while ensuring a secure data 
sharing channel. Key features of the I -US Platform will include: 1) Matching the requirements of the industries 
in real time ( availability and quality of the resources ); 2) Managing logistic procedure s (storage and transport), 
 
15 Proof of this is the project within the framework of the CEMEX Sustainability Chair with the UZ . 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 14 
optimizing the capacity of intermediaries and end users; 3) Integrate models and optimization algorithms to ensure 
the correct development of industrial processes; 4) Forecast and optimize the behaviour of waste streams. 
1.2.5. Implementation of new procedures: Change of mindset 
The success in the implementation and long- term operation of REDOL  value chains will not only rely on the 
readiness level and effectiveness of the technological innovations but will also depend heavily on the awareness 
level of the involved entities and the willingness and trust of companies  to engage in this cooperation. For this 
reason, REDOL will work in the c reation of joint management structures and the establishment of fluid 
communication channels. Generation of trust among the parties will be also ensured by the development of data 
sharing modules that enable a secure exchange of information along the value chain . REDOL will also step 
forward in the definition of the main business models’ elements to facilitate the creation of win -win 
relationships and a fair share of benefits between parties. This comprises the settlement  of price schemes for 
the products/services exchange, the definition of ownerships models for common infrastructure and services, 
schemes for risk management plans and compensation clauses between parties to minimize uncertainty of the 
symbiosis case and t he support in attracting private and public funding. Moreover, i mproving the efficiency of 
collection and sorting systems requires the proactive participation of citizens, consumers and waste managers . 
In this sense, strategies combin ing social awareness campaigns, selective collection , smart classification and 
economic instruments ( e.g., reduction waste management taxes)  will be approached.  For these strategies to be 
effective, citizens must be involved from  the very beginning, so a desi gn thinking approach will be 
implemented. Social innovations within the project will be complemented with on -going initiatives at regional 
level, which are framed within Aragon Circular initiative for the p romotion of entrepreneurial activities.  As a 
result, REDOL will create a Circular Community in which knowledge sharing activities and co -creation 
sessions will be promoted, constituting the seed for the further growth of the value chains while closing the loops. 
1.2.6. Urban areas for REDOL first stage replication 
● Bornholm (DK) is an island with administrative status as a Regional Municipality with a population of ≈ 40,000 
inhabitants. BOFA is the waste management authority and service provider and is part of the Regional Municipality 
of B ornholm. It operates waste management infrastructure e.g., a waste incinerator plant, landfilling facilities, 
recycling stations, etc. All waste is managed by BOFA, with approximately 75,000 t/y. Around 60-65% of waste is 
sent for recycling, 30- 35% is inci nerated and the remainder is landfilled. BOFA has participated in previous EU 
projects such as the newly initiated LIFE-IP project “Circular Economy Beyond Waste” that will support together 
with REDOL the transition towards CE in the island. 
►Main goals to be achieved through REDOL: As part of Bornholm’s zero waste vision for 2032, BOFA is keen 
on any participation in the proposal to inform its strategic choices and set -up of initiatives. In particular within the 
current transition to a 12- fraction waste collection system for households, it is hoped that the project can support 
increased recycling of beverage cartons (MMPP)  from the organic fraction . Previous Living Lab data has 
quantified the amounts of these factions from households to be approximately 8 kg per household per year. 
● Prato (IT) is a city  located in Tuscany, with more than 195,000 inhabitants. Historically, Prato's economy has 
been based on the textile industry with its famous textile district, which represents about 3% of EU  textile 
production. Thanks to its textile recycling techniques, Prato is considered one of the most innovative industrial 
cities in Italy. Also, Prato was the first industrial district to develop a closed water cycle to reuse wastewater. It has 
also limited the CDW by recycling and reusing various materials. 
►Main goals to be achieved through REDOL : The results from REDOL will aim at establishing new SUW 
value chains at Prato by optimising the exploi tation of local resources. REDOL knowledge transfer will enable  to 
map all existing I-US potential activities  in the city , engage local actors to guarantee the application and mutual 
learning process for CE , and develop a stronger governance model with all the actors involved at local, national 
and EU level. Prato main players and potential beneficiaries will be part of activities of cross- border cooperation 
and dissemination (WP7 and WP8). 
● Amsterdam (NE) city includes the creation of CE one of its sustainability pillars. Amsterdam is a frontrunner in 
sustainability and circular thinking and has already in place targets for 2030 (halve the use of primary resources) 
and 2050 (become 100% circular). In this sense, AMS is the institution within the Metropolitan Area that addresses 
the urban challenge of transitioning from a linear to a circular model of resource management . The whole 
metropolitan area has a population of about 2 million people and generates 398 kg/capita with a low separation rate 
(14%), of which 18% is recycled and 82% valorised for energy generation, thus achieving a zero landfilling. 
►Main goals to be achieved through REDOL : The main objective of AMS  in REDOL is to increase the 
recycling rate by providing higher added value to the recovered and classified waste. To this end, the  city has 
already identified 3 key value chains: Organic, consumer goods and CDW. Accordingly, AMS expects to learn 
best-practices from ZAR on the implementation of an urban bio -refinery (CIRCULAR BIOCARBON) and the 
establishment of approaches in CDW, which is expected to have an impact in materials savings of 500 kt, decrease 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 15 
GHG emissions in ½ Mt  and generate 700 jobs. Moreover, waste separation and return logistics are currently 
considered as a weakness, so AMS is interested in replicating REDOL digitalisation tools addressing this issue.  
1.2.7. Methodology 
REDOL concept relies on the implementation of a CE approach for the whole lifecycle of SUW . Circularity 
principles require the integration of the entire value chain, the implementation of digitalized sorting and 
classification of waste and an appropriate management and recycling to be able to valorise the secondary products . 
Having this in mind, REDOL methodology has been developed in the following phases (P): 
P1 – Data gathering, characterization and alignment between the value chain main actors 
Main 
Activities 
• To define and collect key information to be exchanged. 
• To characterise value chains and key players interaction  
• Establishment of the baseline for a participatory approach with citizens and stakeholders  
• To define key indicators and attributes to be monitored in the project. 
The first phase of the project will set the baseline for its execution. The waste flows addressed by the project and 
the related upstream/downstream processes will be analysed assessing which data sets are missing or require new 
instrumentation/data exchange procedures for gathering accurate information and characterize each value chains 
and key players. The selection of information will be performed together with the definition of KPIs to be used for 
monitoring and assessment  tasks. Waste manager  partners will oversee the data collection , while RTOs will 
provide their support in data requirements and KPIs , and in the monitorisation and digitalisation of the processes. 
The consortium counts with the expertise of LTU  as expert on digital innovation, who will set up the basis in this 
phase for a traceability system able to ensure the circularity of the involved value. Also, the governance structure to 
be implemented across the value chains and the participatory approach of REDOL will be defined to interact from 
the very beginning with citizens and key value chain entities, identifying main drivers and barriers for the project. 
The organisational, social and regulatory framework, characterisation of use cases , establishment of KPIs and 
development of the digitalisation requirements will be performed in WP2 [M1-M15], setting the basis for REDOL 
P2 – Upgrading technologies for the management and processing of SUW. 
Main 
Activities 
• To carry out the detailed design of REDOL technical solutions. 
• To test and validate at TRL6 the prototypes. 
• To carry out the detailed engineering of the I-US solutions prior to their demonstration. 
• To fine-tune the demonstration campaign linked to each development. 
The characterization steps carried out during the first phase of the methodology will provide the required inputs for 
the development of technologies in P2. This stage will include continuous communication between RTO, technology 
providers and facility managers to make sure that no deviations occur  between the development phase and waste 
manager´s needs. Due to the nature of the proposed solutions, this phase has been divided into 2 different stages: 
• P2.1 - Development of specific sorting technologies for the management of targeted  SUW streams: 1) 
Smart urban bins  for plastic collection at city level , 2) AI-based sorting sys tem for MMPP based on 
spectroscopy techniques, 3) Integrated sorting system for CDW including HSI  cameras and robotics  arms, 4) 
Novel sorting system for textiles based on composition, texture and colour  and 5) Mobile automated DL-based 
sorting system adaptable to different SUW. 
• P.2.2 – Development of processing tech nologies for the recycling of addressed value chains: 1)  green 
solvolysis of composite derived from CDW , plastic and packaging, 2) treatment and formulation of CDW for 
new purposes in the cement/concrete industry, 3) selective dissolution technologies for MMPP valorisation, 4) 
IL-based glycolysis for textiles recycling and 5) PCB valorisation using DES to extract precious metals. 
WPs 3 and 4 will oversee the development and validation of these solutions for SUW valorisation  [M9-M32]. 
These activities will provide initial designs and layouts before the activities linked to demonstration start [M25]. 
P3 – Development of digital tools for the monitorization, management and optimization of REDOL value 
chains and their linked I-US interactions among key players 
Main 
Activities 
• To generate the digital twin of REDOL I-US interactions with forecasting capabilities. 
• To provide tools for ensuring traceability of resources and logistic optimization. 
• To provide the tools for assessing the life cycle impact of REDOL.  
• To develop an ad-hoc and secure I-US Platform that integrates REDOL digital solutions. 
During this phase, a complete development of the REDOL I-US Platform will be addressed considering aspects such 
as interoperability, security and data management. The necessary procedures will be used to integrate the developed 
tools and models, as well as the mechanisms that will allow the interoperability among the different value chains and 
involved stakeholders. The offered set of solutions will provide support to key players on the most adequate strategies 
for monitoring, managing and optimizing collaborative and symbiotic interactions.   
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 16 
Digital tools development will be carried out in WP5 for two years [M9-M32], whereas their integration into the I-
US Platform and fine-tunning with real demonstration data will last for the two final years of the project [M24-M48]. 
P4 – Overall demonstration of REDOL technical, organisational and social innovations through the redesign 
of the addressed SUW streams into circular and symbiotic value chains. 
Main 
Activities 
• To deploy and demonstrate REDOL technologies at TRL7. 
• To validate the new value chains in terms of resource efficiency and cost-effectiveness. 
• To establish cooperative links between key players and deliver feasible business models. 
• To exploit the synergies among value chains and the maximise sustainability viewpoint. 
In this phase , the technical developments performed at P2 will be implemented and demonstrated together with the 
organisational and economic arrangements defined in P1, thus ensuring that each value chain is able to reach a SRL 7 
by the end of the project. P4 will interact as well with REDOL platform (P3)  to test the exchange of data and 
optimization of REDOL processes, logistics and symbiotic interactions. Also, eco-design activities will take place in 
this phase to maximize the environmental benefits of the new circular value chains established by REDOL. Finally, 
along P4 the main task responsible partners (i.e., main RTD partners and waste manager of the value chain) will count 
with the support of CIRCE as coordinator and WP leader to monitor main KPIs and execute a techno -economic 
analysis, which will enable the quantification of REDOL impacts. 
P4 will be performed within WP6, partly in parallel with P3 activities, and will last until the project’s end [M 25-
M48], validating both the developed technologies and their synergistic collaborations. 
P5 – Overall impact analysis, social actions and replication strategy. 
Main 
Activities 
• To provide contributions to decision makers and relevant EU bodies. 
• To share the benefits of REDOL with citizens through social innovation activities  
• To engage key stakeholders and study business models for REDOL outcomes  
• To develop IPR and exploitation strategies. 
• To assess and initiate the replicability of the project developments. 
The final stage will ensure that all the progress and developments that will be achieved during the project are 
perfectly compiled. In this vein, an impact assessment will be done to pave the way for exploitation and replication, 
that will take place in parallel and after the validation campaigns. To define these strategies, special attention will 
be paid to current barriers for innovation, as well as regulatory and policy frameworks, providing recommendations 
that will be shared with m ain related initiatives and bodies  (e.g., CCRI and ECESP) . Moreover, ad -hoc business 
models will be defined for the exploitation of the solutions, identifying new market segments and the required steps 
to bring I-US solutions to market. The overall conclusions will be gathered in a handbook for the development of 
hubs for circularity (D7.1) and will be used in the first replication phase at Prato, Amsterdam and Bornholm. 
Social awareness, exploitation and replication activities cover WP7 and WP8. They will last from the first year of 
the project [M1-M48] and are expected to continue in the future. 
Finally, alongside the methodology stages, C&D activities (with special attention in establishing synergies with 
ECoP) will use as inputs the outcomes  obtained in each WP, engaging the maximum possible audience for the 
exploitation of results. A more detailed description of dissemin. & Exploitation strategy is included in Section 2.2. 
1.2.8. Synergies with other national and international projects 
REDOL relies on the lessons from previous EU and national projects addressing CE and U-IS strategies. Hence, it 
will establish links with these projects to find synergies and collaboration opportunities, exchanging information 
and providing outcomes. Some of these projects in which REDOL partners are involved are listed in Table 2.  
Table 2. List of innovation projects related to REDOL. 
PLASTICE HE (2022-2026) 
Participants: CIRCE, RINA  
H2020 (2015-2019) 
Participants: IRIS 
New technologies to integrate plastic waste in the 
Circular Economy: REDOL will connect its value chains 
with PLASTICE demo-site in Zaragoza, closing the loop by 
introducing plastics recycling by-products in local markets. 
Secure Management Platform for Shared Process 
Resources: REDOL will learn from  the project 
experiences how the digital solutions can  provide robust 
and reliable information in real- time to share resources 
effectively and confidently. 
SYMSITES HE (2022-2026) 
Participants: ICL, AITEX  
HE (2022-2025) 
Participants: CIRCE, STRA, ICL 
Industrial Urban symbiosis and its social, economic and 
environmental impact on different European regions : 
REDOL will create and implement innovative social actions 
based on the knowledge and results obtained on 
SYMSITES. Lessons learned in SYMSITES will be used as 
well in the monitoring and impact evaluation strategies. 
Building a European Community of Practice of Hubs 
for Circularity: REDOL will benefit from the work on 
best practices of Industrial and Urban Symbiosis (I -US) 
as well as the E CoP network of stakeholders. H4C ECoP 
will also feed REDOL with  sustainable business models 
for the deployment of services related to I-US. 

HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 17 
 
H2020 (2020-2024) 
Participants: CIRCE, ICCS, RINA, EEIP  
H2020 (2017-2020) 
Participants: STRA 
Creation Of new value chain Relations through novel 
Approaches facilitating Long-term Industrial Symbiosis: 
REDOL will adapt the multi- criteria evaluation framework 
for IS and governance structures of CORALIS  to the I -US 
concept and key actors. 
SCALER provides mechanisms to accelerate the journey 
towards efficient and quick implementation of industrial 
symbiosis in the European process industry. REDOL will 
use best-practices on action plans and adapted solutions 
for industrial stakeholders and communities. 
 
H2020 (2021-2024) 
Participants: ITE, IRIS  
H2020 (2018-2022) 
Participants: CIRCE, AIT, RINA 
Increasing the quality and rate of MultilayER packaging 
recycLINg waste:  REDOL will learn best -practices from 
MERLIN on technologies for recycling packaging (TRL5). 
Additionally, knowledge in closing the plastic value chain 
will be adapted for their use in REDOL.  
Demonstration of Innovative Technologies towards a 
more efficient and sustainable plastic recycling : 
REDOL will implement experiences on plastic recycling 
from this project, extrapolating these approaches at I-US 
level. 
Four REDOL partners; CIRCE, EEIP, ICCS and IRIS are member of CircLean, a network of stakeholders 
interested in fostering the future of industrial symbiosis in the EU. 
1.2.9. Interdisciplinarity 
REDOL is comprised of a multi-disciplinary team from 12 EU countries with expertise in disciplines, covering 
waste management, sorting and sensing, materials processing and recycling, eco-design, citizens and stakeholders’ 
engagement, all of them with wide experience in national and international projects. This balanced group ensures 
an adequate development of the project, considering all the required domains, highlighting the following: 
● Engineering and technology.  REDOL will combine sev eral fields of engineering ( e.g., chemical recycling , 
materials science, spectroscopy, robotics, computer science, etc.) in order to develop the targeted technologies and 
their integration in novel value chains.  
● Environmental. Aiming at managing waste in an environmentally sound manner and making use of the 
secondary materials they contain, REDOL will contribute to make Europe the first digitally led circular, climate -
neutral and sustainable economy. Recommendations issued from REDOL results will lower down the barriers 
related to transitioning to a modern, resource-efficient and competitive economy. 
● Social sciences. REDOL will apply approaches from business economics, stakeholders’ engagement, education 
and policy studies (WP7) to understand the needs of main stakeholders and citizens  and ensure the full and wide 
acceptance of REDOL solutions. REDOL project will provide knowledge for developing a more resilient, inclusive 
and democratic European society facilitating knowledge transfer, deployment and uptake of project achievements. 
This multidisciplinary approach  is achieved thanks to REDOL consortium, which is explained in detail in 
Section 3.2. This partnership structure provides the complementarity and critical mass to accomplish the project 
goals successfully in terms of timing, quality and costs, ensuring that no partner is missing for the aimed activities. 
1.2.10. Gender dimension 
In accordance with EU’s Gender Equality Strategy 2020- 202518 and SDG -5 (Achieve gender equality), REDOL 
has been conceived on a gender equality basis. REDOL partners are committed to consider gender dimension in 
all research activities and foster gender equality , being fully aware of the Gender Equality in Horizon Europe 
guidelines. During the project, a full implementation of several use cases aims at cov ering the need of the whole 
population, regardless sex, gender or age. No direct output of the project directly affects women or men. 
Additionally, REDOL will plan (T2.2) and carry out engagement, networking, co-creation and knowledge-transfer 
activities (T7.3 and T8.3) in order to foster the citizens participation in the creation of Zaragoza’s Circular Hub . 
When designing and implementing such activities, gender dimension will be considered as a primary aspect  to 
avoid disparity and to foster an inclusive and democratic European society.  
REDOL will foster gender equality by promoting gender balance  in the involved research staff. The project is 
mainly linked to engineering activities, which is still considered a male oriented domain. In this context, since the 
consortium construction, the gender parity participation has been considered and, as an example, the project counts 
on a highly skilled woman as project coordinator. Consequently, REDOL will contribute to  reduce the gaps in the 
science, technology, engineering and math areas identified by the European Institute of Gender Equality. 
1.2.11. Open science practices 
REDOL partners are committed to foster ing the collaborative work and on a systematic sharing of knowledge and 
tools in the research process. REDOL will address this through the application of open science practices: 
● Early and open sharing of research:  In the first stage of WP where technologies will be developed and 
implemented (WP3-WP6), REDOL partners will preregister the methodology to increase transparency about the 
purposes and methods of the study. This preregistration document will be posted on a public available website 

HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 18 
(Open Science Framework, Registered Reports) and, once the preregistered study has been conducted, a report 
of the study and its results will be submitted for publication together with access to the preregistration document.   
● Involvement of relevant knowledge actors, including citizens: REDOL will engage the citizens and key 
local stakeholders through the information sessions, co-creation workshops, awareness raising campaigns, events 
to foster participation on the project topics and gather their main concerns in the area, providing insights for the 
development of REDOL overall solutions. Engagement and awareness creation through knowledge sharing will 
be key to support the general public in the transition from passive consumers towards active citizens. 
● Research output management and measures to ensure reproducibility of research outputs: REDOL will 
ensure the reproducibility of the outputs by covering the three main research processes that reproducibility is 
based on: reproduction, replication and re -use. All these processes rest on the availability of data and methods 
from the original study. All the outputs of the project (data, reports, publications, etc.) will be available in Open 
Access repositories either through preregistrations or through publications in open repositories or journals  
● Open access to research outputs and participation in open peer -review: A dedicated budget for open 
access scientific publications is reserved. Open access clauses will appear in the Consortium Agreement (CA) 
and the Grant Agreement (GA). For every publication, no later than 6 months after the publication is released, a 
machine-readable electronic copy of the published manuscript will be available on the website. Research data 
and bibliographic metadata needed to validate published results will be stored in the repository respective area. 
Finally, to make project knowledge publicly available, GEO will exploit EC open access portals and tools (e.g., 
OpenAIRE, Horizon the EU Research and Innovation Magazine, Research*EU Results Magazine, etc.). 
1.2.12. Research data management 
REDOL project will carry out data collection in  a set of use-cases to assess the technologies and effectiveness of 
the proposed solutions in real life conditions. All the data made available by the use -cases will be protected and 
available for REDOL partners and key value chains actor s involved through the establishment of the circular 
community. The necessity of publishing all the data generated in the project, if it does not affect exploitation of 
results or competitiveness, is aligned with ethic issues and protects the privacy of data. REDOL will make data “‘as 
open as possible, as closed as necessary”, also with the aim to encourage collaboration across disciplines. Most 
research data generated by the project will be made open & will be offered to the Open Research Data Pilot 
(OpenAIRE), in which REDOL has declared its intention to participate. Whenever possible and in accordance with 
the exploitation and IPR strategy, developed web services and data will be uploaded and shared via the EOSC. 
As an Innovation Action project , REDOL will provide the first version of a compl ete Data Management Plan 
(DMP) as an early deliverable within the first 6 months of the project (included in D1.1). The DMP will detail what 
data the project will generate, whether and how it will be exploited or made accessible for verification and re -use, 
and how it will be curated and preserved. It is expected that the DMP increases research efficiency, saves time and 
resources, enhances data security and minimises the risk of data loss. DMP will take special care to make the data 
findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable according to FAIR guiding principles:   
● Types of data/research outputs: Most relevant datasets to be generated in REDOL (reviewed in the DMP) are: 
(i) data on value chains  characterization-WP2; (ii) data on waste streams (iii) data on sensing and sorting 
technologies-WP3, (iv) data and optimization of processes, logistics and I -US interactions, (v) data obtained in 
developing Zaragoza’s Circular Hub strategy in WP7 and (vi) data on urban-industrial models.  
● Findability of data/research outputs:  A metadata list structure is proposed to be used in the DMP. By carefully 
recording the metadata elements, researchers will have a ready checklist for determining whether datasets can be made 
available on an open data basis or in EC supported repositories: OpenAIRE, ROAR, OpenDOAR and (DORAS). 
● Accessibility of data/research outputs: The CA will lay out the rules of confidentiality, including a breakdown 
of the background IP and define its access rights and/or license agreements, as well as the generated datasets and 
results (foreground IP) that will be open or not. It will also provide the protocols for accessing the data. Non -open 
research data will be archived in REDOL internal platform, while open data will be archived on Zenodo platform. 
Open research data will be uploaded as soon as the quality of the data is verified for the REDOL Data Manager. 
● Interoperability of data/research outputs: To make data generated in REDOL interoperable, the following file 
formats will be considered: Spreadsheets (e.g.,  Microsoft Excel); Comma Separated Values (CSV); Text 
Documents: (i.e., DOCX, ODF, or PDF); Presentation (i.e..ppt); Image formats (i.e. .jpg, .png), Audio formats 
(.wav, .mp3), Video formats (.avi,). Quantitative data analysis will be stored in SAV file f ormat from which data 
can be extracted using the open source spread Perl script. DMP will define in detail the data and metadata 
vocabularies, standards, or methodologies that all partners will follow to make project data interoperable. 
● Reusability of da ta/research outputs:  As a preliminary assessment, REDOL will use an open and free of 
charge platform (e.g., Zenodo) to archive open research data. In any case, the DMP will deep into the terms and 
procedures to license data to permit the widest re-use possible. Also, the CA will optimize the creation of networks, 
interaction, exchange, and access to internal information/technologies and maximize technology transfer.  
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 19 
 
2. IMPACT 
 
2.1. Project´s pathway towards impact 
REDOL project is fully aligned with the HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10 and will contribute to 
the current EU policy framework and goals. Indeed, the Horizon Europe program aims at developing Key Enabling 
Technologies and implementing R&I activities that will be able to address the major stakes of the 21 st century: the 
achievement of carbon neutrality, for which digital, low-carbon and circular industry is one of the core aspects of 
the EU strategy. This is the purpose of Cluster 4, “Digital, Industry and Space” which fulfils key strategic orientations 
(KSO) for EU. In particular, the 1st Destination of this Cluster, “Climate neutral, circular and digitised production 
(Twin-Transition)”, will address the following impact: “Global leadership in clean and climate -neutral industrial 
value chains, circular economy and climate -neutral digital systems and infrastructures (networks, data centres) ”. 
REDOL project is thus fully aligned with the key objectives of this destination, making Europe the first digitally 
led circular, climate-neutral and sustainable economy through the transformation of its mobility, energy, construction 
and production systems. This will be possible by the generation of a set of Key Exploitable Results (KERs): 
Table 3. Key Exploitable Results of REDOL project. 
Management & Sorting Recycling & processing Sensing/digital technologies Non-technical 
KER1. Smart Urban Bins 
KER2. Identification and 
classification of MMPP 
KER3. Integrated system 
for sorting CDW 
KER4. Integrated system 
for sorting textiles 
KER5. Mobile sorting 
system for SUW 
including novel AI 
algorithms and adaptable 
robots. 
KER6. Selective dissolution 
of MMPP 
KER7. Green solvolysis 
assisted with MW and US 
KER8. Formulations of 
recycled cement/concrete 
KER9. IL-based glycolysis 
for textiles 
KER10. Removal of 
elastane 
KER11. DES-based process 
for PCB valorisation 
KER12. Novel circular 
products derived from SUW 
KER13. I-US platform 
KER14. In-line sensors for 
SUW monitoring and 
traceability 
KER15. GIS-based mapping 
system 
KER16. Logistics 
optimization tool 
KER17. Forecasting and life 
cycle impact tools 
KER18. Data sharing 
blockchain system 
KER19. Handbook on 
building hubs of 
circularity 
KER20. Guidelines on 
eco-design and value 
chains redesign 
KER21. I-US business 
models 
KER22. 
Recommendations on 
regulation and EU 
roadmaps for I-US 
KER23. Circular 
community 
The overall outcomes of the REDOL project will originate from the combination of these results, that will allow to 
tackle holistically the current challenges of establishing SUW circular flows as explained hereinafter. 
2.1.1. Contribution of the project to the expected outcomes specified in the topic 
Deploy the concept of Industrial-Urban Symbiosis (I -US) on a real scale demonstrator, making the flow of solid 
waste circular in process, manufacturing and/or construction industries; 
REDOL will connect process (CEM, BRI , SAI ), manufacturing (TEC, MOS, FIN) and engineering and 
construction industries (ACC, CAS , RINA ) with regional representatives  and local authorities  (ZAR, UZ) , and 
waste managers and related stakeholders (TAT, HUSA, ACT and additional RTO partners and technology 
providers) within an active and vibrant network to share knowledge and practices related to I -US of SUW value 
chains. Such an approach will end-up in the establishment of a hub of circularity at regional level around the city of 
Zaragoza, addressing a total of 5 key value chains for the accomplishment of the EU CE Action Plan. 
Reduce 80 % (in weight or volume) solid waste generated in comparison to current state -of-the art, by re -using, 
valorising and transforming waste, by-products and side-streams into new/secondary resources of raw materials; 
Due to a combination of more efficient collection and sorting systems, recycling processes and residue valorisation 
solutions, REDOL aims at transforming Zaragoza into a zero SUW residues generation. Besides, the project will 
produce information about the environmental performance of the different recycling processes and overall value 
chains over their whole life cycle to identify the most sustainable routes and solutions for each type of waste. 
Plan actions (e.g., awareness of circularity potential) to overcome non -technological barriers for exploitation (i.e. 
waste regulations, standardisation, confidentiality and compliance, ownership, fair sharing of benefits, acceptance 
of the concept); 
REDOL counts with a specific task at regional level (T2.3) and work package at EU level (WP7) to assess current 
regulations and other non- technical barriers and to analyse the replication of the project results into other EU  
countries. The results of these activities include public guidelines and learning material (D7.1 and D7.2) on circular 
economy, I-US, business models and recommendations based on the detected barriers. This will help to shape a 
proper policy environment enabling the seamless implementation of SUW recycling technologies.  
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 20 
Develop knowledge sharing: know -how, advantages, challenges and recommendations on technological and non -
technological aspects (e.g., job profile optimisation) with the European Community of Practice (ECoP) and other 
relevant bodies, disseminating the major innovation outcomes to support the implementation of I-US; 
REDOL will deliver policy recommendations to align main outputs with upcoming legislation on CE and 
recommendations on standards and certifications to ensure the secure integration of I-US relationships. The project 
will also address this dimension by providing guidelines to waste managers and governance structures to key actors 
of the value chains for implementing REDOL solutions. The involvement of industrial partners in all the use cases 
will ensure the representativeness of this analysis, being the cornerstone for the creation of a more s ecure culture 
for recyclers companies, equipment manufactures and technology providers. In addition, the project will also seek 
for synergies with the ECoP  as an effective and sustainable forum/platform connecting hubs for circularity and 
encouraging I-US towards building new circular value chains, that will be materialized in a specific task (T7.5).  
Explore and illustrate replication potential in other regions ( e.g., by setting up a network amongst waste 
associations to optimise flow of secondary raw materials);  
REDOL will follow a full value chain approach and will identify needs and opportunities beyond the va lorisation 
processes themselves. The aim is to provide a set of guidelines to support the definition of sound business models 
and the establishment of trusting relationships and to overcome regulatory and standardisation bottlenecks. These 
outcomes will be  for the key further replication of the results through EU  and beyond, so RTO and engineering 
companies within the consortium will make use of them to become promoters and enablers of REDOL valorisation 
routes at the end of the project. To support the replication of the results, the project will deliver a platform to 
monitor the overall sustainability performance based on KPIs calculated along the whole life cycle of the products, 
verifying the environmental footprint of the project solutions. 
Implement actions to facilitate relations and to involve the local community actors (authorities, associations, civil 
society, relevant businesses, especially SMEs, educational organisations, etc.), e.g., exchanging knowledge, 
training, human capital, contributing to the optimisation of job profiles and sharing with the local educational 
establishments and with the ECoP; 
REDOL will apply approaches from business economics, stakeholders’ engagement, education and policy studies 
(namely in WP7 and WP8) to understand the needs of end-users and citizens, ensuring the full and wide acceptance 
of REDOL solutions . At regional level, this will result in the establishment of a Circular Community, the 
cornerstone to populate the value chains with additional actors and increase awareness among citizens and local 
initiatives. In addition, R EDOL will provide knowledge for developing high- quality jobs and pursuing global 
leadership of Europe’s in the CE strategies, which will be implemented in already existing training courses on C E 
performed by REDOL partners (like UZ, CEM, CIRCE) and other educational programmes at EU level (T7.3). 
Implement a social innovation spin-off action involving one of the local community actors. 
Based on established social innovation initiatives like “rqueerre”16, Zaragoza’s forest17 or programs providing a 
unique learning experience in a dynamic and inclusive environment (chair of sustainability), 18 common mechanisms 
will be developed and implemented under the leadership of Zaragoza’s city council and university (ZAR and UZ) for 
engaging citizens applying a design thinking approach. These activities will enable REDOL to create awareness,  
facilitate knowledge transfer, deployment and uptake of project achievements and promote the active participation of 
society for a better collection and sorting of residues and for the initiation of entrepenurial actions.  
2.1.2. Contribution of the project to wider impacts specified in the destination 
Accelerate the twin green and digital transition of the manufacturing and construction sectors; 
REDOL will contribute to both creating a more sustainable waste manage ment industry and increasing the 
digitalisation of the addressed value chains , by developing a set of innovative valorisation routes together with 
cross-cutting digital tools and technologies to increase the efficiency, impact and replication potential. The analysis 
of the EU landscape and potential for REDOL replication will enable the project to contribute in the following 
years to digitalise and reduce the environmental impact of manufacturing and construction sectors linked to the 
management of SUW and/or making use of the secondary raw materials produced from their valorisation. 
Create a new green, flexible and digital way to build and produce goods. T his will lead to sustainable, flexible, 
responsive and resilient factories and value chains, enabled by digitisation, AI, data sharing, advanced robotics 
and modularity. At the same time,  it will help reduce CO 2 emissions and waste in these sectors, and en hance the 
 
16 Promoted by UZ t o disseminate case studies that are carrying out circular economy and eco -innovation practices and give 
visibility to the challenges that companies face; https://www.rqueerre.com/ 
17 Promoted by ZAR to foster the implementation of environmental friendly projects while contributing to the generation of a 
700.000 trees forest within Zaragoza city; https://www.zaragoza.es/sede/portal/medioambiente/elbosquedeloszaragozanos/ 
18 https://catedracemex.unizar.es/ 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 21 
durability, reparability and re -cycling of products/components. It will also ensure better and more efficient use of 
construction-generated data to sustain competitiveness and greening of the sector; 
REDOL will significantly contribute to increase the recycling of products/components by the development of a full 
circular economy approach including guidelines to design processes and products that enable the creation of 
circular value chain s from its initial conception. The incorporation of AI techniques and forecasting tools in a 
holistic way by means of REDOL I -US platform will enable the proliferation of flexible processes that are able to 
face variability of supply, thus resulting in more resilient and sustainable value chains. 
Make the jobs of the humans working in the manufacturing and construction sectors more attractive and safer, and 
point the way to opportunities for upskilling; 
A dedicated task ( T7.3) will address Health and Safety issues from the project processes, ensuring their strict 
compliance with all the safety requirements, and will develop learning resources towards different profiles 
(graduated and professionals). Accordingly, REDOL will foster the creation of a critical mass by training the new 
generation of workers and re-skilling and up-skilling the current professionals.  
Set out a credible pathway to contributing to climate neutral, circular and digitalised energy intensive industries; 
REDOL will provide a  deeper understanding of the main challenges stakeholders involved in the recycling value 
chains face, including energy intensive industries such as SAI, BRI and CEM. Their overcoming by implementing 
new technologies and solutions on I -US will result in a set  of recommendations included in REDOL handbook for 
the creation of hubs for circularity that will support additional energy intensive industries in actively participating 
in the implementation of circular SUW value chains to increase the sustainability of their processes.  
Increase productivity, innovation capacity, resilience, sustainability and global competitiveness of European 
energy intensive industries. This includes as many as possible new large hubs for circularity by 2025 (TRL 7 or 
above); developi ng sustainable ways for circular utilisation of waste streams and CO 2/CO streams; and 
electrifying industry to enable and foster a switch to a renewable energy system; 
REDOL will contribute to increase the sustainability and resilience of the whole SUW value chain, including 
resource and energy intensive industries. They will be benefited by the increasing amount of waste material 
reintroduced into the production cycle, which will enable the creation of circular value chains  for the targeted  
streams. Ad ditionally, the technologies developed by REDOL will be designed to contribute to a lower 
environmental impact, introducing green solvents (e.g., DES, ILs and scCO2) and electrified processes (e.g. MW-
assisted pyrolysis), reducing the dependence from fossi l fuels for its performance. This approach will result in t he 
creation of a hub for circularity in Aragon and in the generation of best -practices and recommendations for the 
establishment of new hubs along Europe, maximizing the impact of the project. 
Contribute to a substantial reduction of waste and CO 2 emissions, turning them into alternative feedstocks to 
replace fossil-based raw materials and decrease reliance on imports; 
The core of the project activities is the valorisation of SUW to close the production loop; hence, the results from REDOL 
will directly contribute to this impact by optimizing resources use, keeping resources in the loop and reducing landfilling 
in the targeted use cases. 
2.1.3. Measurable impact factors 
REDOL will directly impact in the transition of Zaragoza towards a zero residues city, aiming at achieving this 
objective by 2040. Taking into account that the current recycling rate is around 50%, this would imply over 
140,000 tons /year being re-used, valorised or transformed into secondary raw materials instead of 
landfilled.19 It must be considered that potential increments in the number  of residues generated within the city 
would further increase this impact, as residues generation is currently increasing by 2% per year, but  efforts are 
placed in achieving a reduction in these figures. In order to support this objective and based on the project expected 
results, REDOL partners have agreed on a strategy that relies on: 
• More efficient and smarter collection systems. They will enable the recovery of reusable waste streams and 
the reduction of generated  mixed waste (currently representing 68% of the total share: 197 ktons ). Mixed 
waste rep resents a barrier for the landfilling targets as its recycling rate is almost two times lower than 
separated waste (40% versus close to 70% recycling efficiency). 
• The implementation of novel sorting, classification, recycling and valorisation technologies. REDOL will 
increase separation and recycling rates from mixed wastes, as they rep resent the most challenging stream  in 
the city, although valorisation technologies are available for separated wastes as well. 
 
19 Information used for the benchmark analysis and impacts calculation has been developed by project partners in the 2021 
report analysing I-US potential on SUW in Zaragoza (reference 8 of REDOL), whereas SUW generation and treatment data of 
Zaragoza come from Zaragoza City Council, and the “Plan Gestión Integral de Residuos de Aragon (GIRA) 2018–2020”. 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 22 
Accordingly, along the project execution and after  its finalization through the scale -up and replication activities to 
be implemented by its partners, the following objectives have been established to reach Zero landfilling by 2040: 
Table 4. Targets of Zaragoza strategy to reach ZERO landfilling by 2040. 
Year 2020 2025 2030 2035 
Landfilling rate 50% 
144.720 tons 
25% 
72.531 tons 
15% 
43.519 tons 
10% 
29.013 tons 
Recycling rates for mix 
waste in Zaragoza 
40% 
81.479 tons 
55% 
108.507 tons 
60% 
118.371 tons 
65% 
128.235 tons 
In particular, REDOL impact on the value chains addressed is expected to reach the following figures: 
• Packaging value chain: The overall packaging recycling rate by the end of the project is expected to be up to 
70%, which represents landfilling savings of over 24 ktons when compared to current benchmark (44% 
recycling rate for almost 100 ktons of waste packaging in Zaragoza). 
• Plastics value chain : Due to the currently low recycling rate on plastics (20%), the objective has been set in 
55%, thus resulting in up to 22 ktons of plastics being recycled . In addition, t he objective is to maximise 
synergies with on-going initiatives such as PLASTICE, whose reactors for depolymerization will be linked to 
REDOL to reach near zero plastic waste in overall. 
• CDW value chain : REDOL will make possible to classify and recycle mixed waste at CAS facilities, which 
represents about 50% of the total managed residues, 40.000 tons. The valorisations routes proposed within 
REDOL will transform 80% of these residues, i.e., 32 ktons , into valuable construction and cement 
secondary raw materials and products. 
• Textiles value chain : Only 14% is of textile waste produced in Zaragoza is currently recycled based on  
separated collection procedures. The implementation of REDOL approach after its demonstration in Prato is 
aimed at classifying and recycling the most challenges textiles, such as those  including elastane o r mixed 
fibres of PET and cotton, thus making possible the full recycling of the 12 ktons textile waste of the city. 
• WEEE value chain : Currently  WEEE counts as 100% recycled waste due to the specific collection and 
management processes. However, costs related to manual sorting procedures and valorisation processes 
prevent the reintroduction in the market of their many valuable materials. REDOL will  tackle both barriers to 
enable the circularity of the whole 315 tons of WEEE managed by TAT per year. 
The achievement of such ambitious goals and overall  impact will be based on the performance of REDOL project, 
which will be quantified according to a set of impact factors (IF) to be monitored and supervised  to ensure their 
fulfilment by the end of the project execution. They have been divided into a total of 9 IF (Table 5). 
Table 5. REDOL Impact factors 
Impact factor Quantification and rationale Scale Significance 
IF1.  Validated 
technologies 
-10 technologies will be demonstrated 
in REDOL for the sorting and 
valorisation of SUW in addition to 
solutions on digitalisation and new 
materials formulation. 
-Outputs will be of 
interest for all EU waste 
managers and relevant 
RTO and equipment 
manufacturers. 
-Efficiency of SUW 
sorting over 90%. 
-Valorisation technologies 
enabling a zero residues 
approach. 
IF2. New circular 
products in the market 
-12 circular end-products validated 
in terms of economic and technical 
feasibility within the project, 
including issues such as regulation 
and health and safety. 
-High relevance for 
manufacturing industries 
and end-users aiming to 
increase their 
sustainability metrics 
-Contribution to the 
achievement of a zero 
residues economy while 
ensuring security of supply 
for process industries 
IF3. Creation of hubs 
for circularity 
applying I-US 
approaches 
-Aragon will establish a hub for 
circularity based on Zaragoza’s city. 
REDOL will also set the basis for 
the creation of additional hubs for 
circularity in 3 EU cities: Prato, 
Bornholm and Amsterdam. 
-EU municipalities in 
the track to accomplish 
EU objectives on CE 
and key players on 
waste management and 
valorisation. 
-Contribution to EU 
targets: increase the level 
of preparation for reuse 
and recycling of 
municipal waste to 55 % 
by 2025 (65 % by 2035). 
IF4. Business models 
and organizational 
procedures adapted to 
I-US 
-New business and organisational 
models ensuring the full integration 
of the upgraded SUW value chains 
into the existing local waste 
management and industrial schemes. 
-EU Industrial clusters, 
waste managers, and 
any public or private 
institution willing to be 
involved in I-US. 
-The implementation of 
REDOL and the strategy 
for zero landfilling are 
calculated to achieve 
savings of over 14 B€. 
IF5. Enhanced 
logistics and 
traceability of SUW 
flows and secondary 
-Novel technology for inline sensing 
and traceability together with logistics 
optimization algorithms allowing for 
better decisions on resources 
-Transport companies 
and waste managers in 
charge of collection 
systems in different 
-Increase monitoring 
capabilities in 20% 
-Logistics: improvement 
of up to 90% with respect 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 23 
raw materials management will be delivered European cities to the initial situation 
IF6. Number of 
standardizations 
working groups 
-The consortium plans to be 
involved in at least 5 standardization 
groups: e.g., CEN/TC 249/WG 11 
Plastics recycling, CEN/TC 249/WG 
24 Environmental aspects, CEN/TC 
249/WG 5 Thermoplastic profiles 
for building applications. 
-Links with main EU 
standardisation groups, 
sharing inputs with other 
initiatives such as 
SPIRE, ECoP, CCRI, 
ECESP. 
-Facilitate REDOL 
replication, thus increasing 
European competitiveness, 
sustainability and security 
of supply. 
IF7. Evidence-based 
support for EU 
policies/targets in CE 
-REDOL non-technical KERs, e.g., 
roadmaps, guidance documents and 
policy recommendations, will be 
provided to over 50 local authorities 
and around 20 EU institutions. 
-The main target of IF7 
are policy makers all 
over Europe, whether at 
international, national, 
regional or local level. 
-Unlock the potential of 
I-US across Europe, 
facilitating the initiation 
of new initiatives and 
hubs for circularity 
IF8. Creation of 
benefits for society as 
a whole (sustainable 
and resilient jobs) 
-REDOL will implement social 
innovation actions to create 
awareness. Besides, the potential of 
CE to generate a net employment is 
expected to increase to about 
700,000 jobs in the EU by 2030.20 
Thus, REDOL will act as 
employment multiplier at short term, 
creating +120 high-qualified jobs in 
Aragon (counting both direct and 
indirect). 
-The target is the 
general public, both at 
local level and through 
Europe. 
-60% of the Aragonese 
population is aware of 
what CE corresponds to 
and the work carried out 
in REDOL 
-Upgrade local talent and 
human capital 
-Improved consumer 
acceptance (by 70%) of 
SUW-derived products  
IF9. Reduction of the 
urban environmental 
impact 
-In addition to the reduction of 
residues being disposed around the 
city, according to previously cited 
analysis in this section, the approach 
to reach a zero landfilling city would 
enable savings of 282 kTCO2eq 
-The target is the 
general public, both at 
local level and through 
Europe. 
-Decrease on GHG 
emissions, lower need for 
strategic feedstocks, and 
overall improved living 
conditions at urban level 
2.1.4. Potential barriers  
An analysis of the macro-environmental factors that can affect positively or negatively to the results deployment in 
the market has been carried out using the PESTLE approach. Political (P), economic (E), social (S), technological 
(T), legal (L) and environmental (E) factors that can have a hampering impact on REDOL are identified, as well as 
mitigation measures to overcome the identified barriers (Table 6). 
Table 6. REDOL PESTLE analysis. 
Factors Barriers Mitigation measures 
Political.  It is crucial to involve Member States at the 
local/regional level to adequately address the challenges and 
needs of SUW collection, classification and 
processing, since they have at their disposal measures 
to encourage the adoption of solutions . Lack of 
standardization and regulations related to waste management  
can hinder the deployment of REDOL  technologies and the 
marketability of the generated circular products.  
• Main directives ( e.g., the Packaging Waste 
Directive 94/62/EC ) will be considered in 
REDOL eco-design tasks and in the provision of 
recommendations to regulatory bodies. 
• Public commitment will be sought  to increase 
awareness and share knowledge generated in 
REDOL to reduce implementation timelines. 
• Convergence through EU policy instruments. 
Economic. High costs associated to  collection, sorting and 
processing of SUW , hamper the funding of recycling 
processes, as cost can be higher than the value of the 
secondary raw materials or obtained products . So, payback 
periods are crucia l in decision making process in I-US 
interactions. Although slightly higher payback values are 
accepted when talking about sustainability  and security of 
supply, the sector has strict requirements. L ack of solid 
business models to finance REDOL solutions in the long term 
• Detailed techno -economic analysis will be 
performed, and novel I-US business models will 
be created with the objective of spreading this 
knowledge and facilitate the implementation of 
profitable circular value chains in the EU. 
• REDOL will make available data on available 
resources, including price forecasting and 
traceability, which facilitates planning, O&M 
and eases decision-making on  investments for 
 
20 Employment and Social Developments in Europe 2019. Chapter 5: Towards a greener future: employment and soci al 
impacts of climate change Policies. 

HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 24 
constitute a barrier for many waste managers.  the modernization of waste management plants. 
Social. In a context of greater sensitivity about the impact of 
our current consumption patterns, it is necessary to 
shape individual behaviours to be greener over time. 
The limited information accessible to the general 
public about the possibilities and benefits related to improving 
the circularity of waste in urban environments is a key 
obstacle to this. On the other hand, the lack of personnel 
specialized in recycling technologies implies a barrier for the 
implementation of the developed technologies and procedures. 
• REDOL will make relevant effort in 
disseminating its results and benefits and will 
establish trust -worthy relationships between 
citizens and waste managers players.  
• REDOL will develop job profile  programmes to 
improve capabilities and technical knowledge on 
developed solutions. 
• Local ecosystems will be benefited by means of 
job creation, both direct and indirect. 
Technological. The adoption of some REDOL solutions may 
involve relevant reconfigurations and adjustments in 
existing assets and procedures.  Additional barriers can 
include l ack of data on waste resources, uncertainties 
of novel technologies and need for facilitative infrastructures 
for the replication of solutions (size, instability, etc.). 
• Digitalisation, modelling  and the virtual 
assessment platform will provide detailed 
technical information to industrial partners.  
• REDOL will enable a better and cost -efficient 
management of the solutions, thus reducing the 
retrofitting impact of the value chains. 
Legal. The Directive 2008/98/EC on waste framework defines 
the permits and registrations of waste treatment, and it 
is coupled with the Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 
which determine s the procedures for end -of-waste 
criteria. Concerns regarding unknown normative and 
differences between national and local legislations  can slow 
down consenting and licensing.  
• Analysing regulatory barriers on SUW 
valorisation is a n activity within  REDOL that 
will result in ad-hoc recommendations. 
• Credibility created through operating early  
results and dissemination a ctions based on 
proven benefits  will be the basis to foster 
positive changes in current legislation. 
Environmental. No clear barriers are faced from the 
environmental perspective , as REDOL complies with 
the “do not harm” principle. However, REDOL  
managerial structure, public authorities and consumer 
engagement campaigns will detect any potential issues 
that could hamper achievement of sustainability. 
• REDOL will demonstrate sustainable activities 
including resources savings, waste s avoidance 
and decrease of GHG emissions. 
• LCA, LCC and S -LCA tools will be integrated 
into the REDOL I -US Platform to ensure the 
sustainability of the defined business models. 
2.2. Measures to maximise impact – Dissemination, exploitation and communication 
To guarantee the uptake of REDOL results in the EU market, all partners are committed to maximise the potential 
impact of the project´s outputs in terms of its dissemination and communication actions to relevant stakeholders, 
including society, industry, t echnology providers, authorities, etc. Beyond these measures, the commercial 
exploitation of REDOL results will receive in -depth attention from the beginning of the project, resulting in the 
development of a business model and business plan for each KER and value chain of the project. 
2.2.1. Dissemination actions 
Dissemination actions start from the very beginning of the project through WP8 to identify and engage the most 
relevant stakeholders. Furthermore, REDOL partners will strongly support the dissemination of the project results 
through their reputed communication channels and strong sector -related communities. During the project, the 
targeted groups will interiorise the project approach having access to the information from successful uses -cases 
from the value chains and synergies created between  the circular community. In this context, networking will be 
crucial to exploit synergies with projects, initiatives  such as the ECoP , professional associations and consumer 
organizations. By incorporating these  interests on REDOL solutions it is expected that they will support and 
upscale REDOL replication activities beyond the project lifetime. To this end, REDOL has defined first outline 
of the dissemination strategy including target audiences (WHO) and type of communication (WHAT): 
Table 7. REDOL main dissemination actions. 
Civil society, general public, NGOs: Dissemination goals toward this group include: i) establishment and maintenance 
of adequate communication channels with all types of participants; ii) promotion of awareness about project goals and 
activities among the circular community; and iii) fostering active acceptance of the project activities and their impact; 
collecting necessary information; physical deployment of infrastructure and realization. 
Stakeholders and target groups: Citizens, neighbourhood clusters, consumer organizations, environmental 
associations, students & teachers, EU-Citizen.Science, ECOS, RREUSE, Future in Our Hands, Rethink Plastic 
Waste managers : Key stakeholders for REDOL are waste  management actors and recyclers, since they are the 
responsible of the waste streams that the project is targeting. Most of  these streams are under valorised, leading to 
costs associated to their management with no economic return. M ain messages will include: the feasibility to treat 
unsortable waste streams and to obtain valuable products f rom them, the possibility to  increase the revenue sources 
for their companies, and the environmental and social benefits of reducing landfilling and incineration. 
Stakeholders and target groups: ChemRecEurope, EuRIC, FEAD, EURITS, CEWEP, singular private waste managers 

HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 25 
Industry & economic stakeholders : The solutions developed by REDOL will stablish a harmonious co -existence 
between the citizens, waste managers and the local industry, as well as conclusions on the market analysis and roadmap 
of the developed solutions to show the potential market opportunities of implementing a circular community. 
Stakeholders and target groups: Factory managers, workers, bankers, insurers, investors, business developers 
Policy makers and public bodies : Successful use cases of the value chains , lessons learnt in REDOL project, policy 
recommendations and means to standardise the use of urban solid waste as raw materials for industries.  
Stakeholders and target groups:  EC, EU Parliament, City and regional authorities, EU policy and decision makers, 
innovation and policy advisors 
Technical experts & scientific community : Conferences proceedings, publications in scientific and technological 
specialized magazines and platforms and peer -to-peer communication. The main messages to deliver are the technical 
results, innovation and progress beyond the SoA and future challenges emerged during the project execution. 
Stakeholders and target groups: ZWE, EPRO, PRE, EPRO, EERA, PRE, EPRC 
Initiatives and projects : Synergies with project and initiatives both ongoing and finalised can save time, money and 
trouble when establishing fruitful knowledge exchange and at the same time enable a wider outreach of REDOL. 
Stakeholders and target groups:  CircLean, CCRI, Circular Cities Declaration , Circular City Centre , European 
Associations, International Associations and initiatives, European Circular Economy Stakeholder Platform (ECESP). 
Project key results  
Table 8 summarises the main results of REDOL to be disseminated to the project audience: 
Table 8. REDOL results for dissemination 
Target groups Key project results Expected impact 
Waste managers and 
value chain key 
actors 
-D1.1. Project Handbook   
-D7.2. REDOL learning materials 
-To train and build strong 
organisation culture for the 
implementation of REDOL actions 
Technology providers 
and manufacturers 
-D5.3. I-US REDOL platform 
-D3.2. Advances of REDOL automated sorting and 
classification technologies 
-D4.2. Advances of SUW valorisation technologies 
-To foster the deployment of 
innovative solutions along waste 
management value chains of cities 
around Europe 
Technical experts, 
scientific community 
and professional 
associations 
-D1.1. Project Handbook   
-D4.2. Advances of REDOL SUW valorisation technologies 
-D6.2. Guidelines for the design of process and products 
towards circularity 
-To promote the exchange of 
knowledge on technical results and 
innovations to accomplish better 
performances and overall solutions 
Policy makers and 
public bodies 
-D1.1. Project Handbook   
-D6.4. REDOL impact and catalogue of I-US solutions for 
the establishment of circular and symbiotic value chains 
-D7.1 Guidelines for Circular Hubs in Europe 
-D7.3. Roadmap for replicability and European 
recommendations 
-To support the development of a 
suitable regulatory and 
standardisation landscape that 
supports the widespread and uptake 
of REDOL solutions, and to 
facilitate I-US interactions 
Investors and 
business developers 
-D8.3 Business models for the exploitation of REDOL value 
chains 
I-ncrease I-US opportunities by 
means of increasing their BRL  
General public 
-Brochures and webpage contents, general communication. 
materials (news, magazine, etc.), REDOL legacy (videos, 
monographs). 
-To increase awareness on re-using 
and recycling and to promote their 
participation in I-US initiatives 
2.2.2. Exploitation of results 
Aligned and coordinated with communication and dissemination, exploitation activities will aim at preparing the 
playground for the exploitation of the developed technological solutions maximizing their value. To this end, under 
the guidance of the Project Coordinator (PC) and aligned with the Exploitation Manager (STRA), the consortium 
will deal with IPR protection and with the definition of detailed business models and a subsequent business plan, 
which will form the basis for the consortium’s exploitation strategy. 
Business models and business plans: Building on REDOL business case 
Business models are the main instrument to support the exploitation of project’s results , so WP8 will provide 
particular business models to each KER. In addition, novel business models based on CE and I-US will be created 
to support profitable, sustainable and long-lasting hubs for circularity. STRA and CIRCE expertise in this field will 
contribute to the creation of collaboration agreements and financial arrangements  to establish shared business 
models. They will be based on the overall business case for REDOL: the need for waste managers to increase 
their valorisation rates to reach a zero landfilling objective while exploiting synergies with both public entities 
and local industries. At the same time, municipalities will be benefitted from better environmental conditions and 
monitoring capabilities, while process industries and producers will obtain a safe and European based supply of 
raw materials and from the transformation of their productive processes into green and sustainable ones. 
It must be also highlighted that the presence and synergies of key technology developers and providers within 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 26 
REDOL consortium will enable the participants to reach exploitation agreements already  within the project 
framework and carry out the  refinement of the initial solutions design , so they are adequate for commercial 
production. Such an approach will enable REDOL to advance towards SRL 7 on the business and management 
perspectives in the last phase of execution, thus facilitating further market uptake and commercialisation of solutions. 
Exploitation strategy  
1st phase → Focused on investigating the exploitation opportunities among the project partners, developing an  
exploitation action plan and fine-tuning a list of key exploitable results  (KER). STRA will first analyse each 
technology, compare to existing competitors, evaluated the market and marketability potential and will develop a 
general exploitation strategy (T 8.4) for the most promising KER. All partners will participate in the exploitation 
meetings to elaborate an exploitation plan to ensure all identified results are covered, and an internal agreement on the 
selection of exploitable results and how they will be achieved exists. A policy and CA on IPR related issues will be 
also implemented. A first version of the exploitation plan will be presented as a result of the first exploitation meeting.  
2nd phase → Aiming at the development of the exploitation strategy by answering crucial questions such as: 
i) WHAT: clarification of exploitation results and development of exploitation routes. 
ii) WHO: identification of lead partners to achieve each exploitable result . Identification of partners 
interested in exploiting their own results and those who could delegate this task to the exploitation partner 
iii) HOW: which form(s) will the exploitation of these results take (direct industrial use, patenting, licensing, 
technology transfer, publication, input to policy making, etc.).  
iv) BARRIERS: i.e., identification of (overlapping) IPR and commercialization- related wishes of  each 
partner; conditions that need to be fulfilled to enable exploitation of the results - identification of risks for 
the achievement of exploitable results and actions to mitigate these risks; availability of knowledge and 
resources among the participants and willingness to contribute to the results. 
v) IP issues and ownership of knowledge, which is crucial and linked to the “who” aspect. 
3rd phase → Meet market requirements and address potential user preferences.  The consortium will make a 
pre-assessment of the results’ market potential and analyse the competitive situation based on the Porter Five 
Forces approach. One task will be designed to get relevant information on the potential market size and the 
competition (T7.4). For each exploitable project result, the related partner(s) will develop suitable business models 
for commercialisation and/or replication and formulate a business plan using the CANVAS approach. 
4th phase → Start-up creation and road to market . If the technology and partners are ready, it is possible to 
create a legal structure (new start-up), set up organizational procedures (IPR contracts) and team (job creation), to 
market the solution and signed the first commercial contracts before the end of the project.  
Key exploitable results (KER) 
Table 9. REDOL key exploitable results: Main partners responsible for their exploitation and IPR protection strategy 
 Sorting Recycling and processing Digital Non-technical 
KER 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 
Main responsible 
Partners 
ICCS 
IRIS 
ICCS, CIRCE 
NTT 
CIRCE, RINA, 
AMB 
ITE 
AIT 
VDZ, CAS, CEM 
AITEX; BRI 
ITE 
RINA 
TEC, ACC, CEM, 
FIN 
CIRCE 
LTU 
CIRCE 
LTU 
CIRCE 
SUIT 
ICL, STRA, UZ 
AIT 
CIRCE, STRA 
ICL, EEIP 
CIRCE 
P X X X X X X X X X X X X   X                   
KH X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
SL                         X   X X X X           
IS X X X X X X X X X X X X   X                   
OA                                     X X X X X 
*P: patent; KH: know-how; SL: software licencing; IS: Industrial Secrecy; OA: open access 
2.2.3. Communication actions 
Communication activities will target the promotion of the project to various audiences, comprising the media and the 
general public, and raising awareness on the addressed topics and findings. These activities will be especially focused 
on: i) creating a project visual identity and public image; ii) providing up-to-date information about the project; iii) 
sustaining the diffusion of results to the general public; and iv)  translating the scientific/technical results into 
messages for public outreach, comprehensible also by the non- technical audience. REDOL communication actions 
will ensure this information is shared with appropriate audiences using the most effective means and tools, at regional, 
national and international level. The interconnection of various communication tools, such as multimedia material, 
press media, audio-visual media, website and social media, will be used to achieve maximum impact (Table 10). 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 27 
Table 10. REDOL main communication actions. 
HOW (Tool/activity) WHEN Evaluation and target value 
Project visual identity & captative logo , including QR code, 
common graphics and templates Ready by M2 -Common public image/branding 
ensure visibility and recognition 
Project website.  Giving public access to relevant non -IP-
sensitive results, items, audio -visual content, deliverables, etc. 
Private area for internal use. 
Launched by M4 
-Number of hits, country of 
provenance and online visits: 
10,000 hits/year from 50 countries 
Social m edia (Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, etc.) To increase 
outreach in partners existing online communities. Launched by M1 -Nº of posts: 5,000 posts 
-Nº of members: 15,000 members 
E-newsletters. To provide up -to-date information and support 
exchanges with the community. Website update. 
From M4 (every 6 
months) 
-Nº of subscriptions to the service: 
+150 subscribers 
Promotional material : leaflets, videos, posters, roll -up banner, 
factsheet, etc. Uploaded to the project website  
M2-M6 and 
M40-M48 
-Nº of brochure/leaflet: +2,500 
-Video visualization. +1,500 
Scientific and technical publications. Peer-review scientific 
journals and confere nces proceedings Publishable version of 
deliverables in the project website. E.g., Sustainability, Journal of 
Cleaner Production, Resources conservation and recycling 
Along with 
deliverables and 
achievement of 
results 
-Nº of papers: +8 
-Downloads of technical project 
publications: +70 
Cooperation with other projects to forge communication, 
promote synergies and establish cluster collaborations  Project lifetime -Collaboration established with 
EU related projects: +12  
Social and professional networking with key sector 
associations, platforms and initiatives.  E.g., CircLean, EU -
Citizen.Science, CCRI or the Circular City Centre. 
Project lifetime -Collaboration agreements with 
relevant networks: +6 
Press media contacts (TV, newspapers, radio, websites. etc.) either 
general or specialized at EU/international levels. A press kit will 
be developed containing identity, press release, general presentation, 
key messages, a list of FAQs and copyright free images. 
On a regular basis 
throughout 
project execution 
-Nº of press releases: +25 
-Mail-outs & downloaded 
newsletters (per release): +500 
Conferences and workshops . Includes project final conference 
covering future strategy, expectations and exploitation measures. 
E.g., World Congress on Waste Management & Recycling, 
Recycling Congress, Waste Management Europe Exhibition 
From M6 
(+1 per year) 
-Nº of attended conferences: +8 
-Nº of organised workshops: +2 
-Nº participants Final Project 
Conference: +100 
*Any dissemination of results will duly display the EU emblem and include information on the EU funding.  
Considering that the main project’s conclusions will be delivered at the very end of the tasks, REDOL  
communication/dissemination activities will remain after the completion of the project to show over a long period 
of time its final results. In this sense, the project website and its deliverables are envisaged to be active by GEO for 
2 years after the finalization of the REDOL project, making also possible the  gathering of further publications and 
scientific literature developed and communicated beyond the project lifetime. 
2.2.4. Strategy and procedures for IP management 
Strategy and procedures for IP management will be an integral part of the REDOL knowledge management and 
protection strategy, so definition and management of the IPR will be registered in the REDOL CA. To ensure the 
efficient management of IP and exploitation of the developed solutions an exploitation-working group will be set 
up consisting of one person per partner as contact point for IP and exploitation issues. The group will meet regularly 
to get inputs from all partners regarding any new result that could be commercialized and smooth its way to the 
market. This exploitation-working group will be managed by STRA whose main duty will be managing the operation 
of the group, keeping record of the generated results, coordinating the implementation of the IP strategy, integrating 
the inputs from all the partners, reviewing any communication disclosure of results that could harm IP and reporting 
to the project management. IP management will be developed considering the basic principles set in the Annotated 
Model Grant Agreement, as well as the Consortium Agreement General Principles, onto which this strategy and 
procedures are built. They can be summarized as follows (precise definitions will be agreed in CA): 
Ownership of results:  results are owned by the beneficiary that generates them, whereby ‘ results’ means any 
(tangible or intangible) output of the action, as well as any rights attached to it. 
Joint ownership by several beneficiaries:  whenever results have been jointly generated by two or more 
beneficiaries, and it is not possible to establish the respective contribution, such results shall be jointly. Joint 
owners must agree (in writing) on the allocation and terms of exercise of their joint ownership , signing a  Joint 
Ownership Agreement (JOA) within 6 months from the generation of the result. 
Agreement on background:  Beneficiaries must identify and agre e (in writing) on the background for the action. 
‘Background’ means any data, models, software solutions, know -how or information held by the beneficiaries 
before their accession to the GA and needed to implement the action or exploit the results. 
Access rights: the beneficiaries have agreed on the principle of giving each other access – on a royalty-free basis – 
to the background needed to implement their own tasks under the action. 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 28 
2.3. Summary 
SPECIFIC NEEDS EXPECTED RESULTS D & E & C MEASURES 
The main need REDOL will address is 
the lack of solutions and schemes that 
results in low recycling rates (45%) in 
cities across Europe. In particular, main 
needs are related to 1) lack of traceable 
data, generating low efficient collection 
schemes, 2) lack of effective sorting 
and classification mechanisms, 
resulting in high amounts of mixed 
waste, 3) lack of recycling and 
valorisation alternatives, hampering the 
creation of circular value chains, 4) 
lack of governance structures enabling 
public bodies, local industrial facilities 
and citizenship interaction in a way that 
novel schemes for I -US can be 
implemented. 
 New collection, sorting and classifications systems (KER 1-5). To increase the 
efficiency of the waste resource separation processes and consequently upstream 
processes performance, innovations will be developed for each of the 5 value chains 
addressed by the project. 
 Novel recycling and valorisation technologies (KER 6 -12). Novel technologies 
for avoiding landfilling include: Selective dissolution, green solvolysis assisted by 
US and MW, new materials formulations, glycolysis with ionic liquids, DES-based 
process for PCB and design of new circular products. 
 Innovative digitalisation solutions (KER 13- 18). REDOL will produce new 
smart sensors for monitoring, using blockchain to make the information traceable. 
Modelling, mapping, forecasting and life cycle impact calculations tools based on 
this data will be g enerated and used within REDOL I -US platform for supporting 
the management and optimization of value chains. 
 Non-Technical results (KER 19 -23). Recommendations, business models, 
guidelines and a handbook for the establishment of hubs for circularity will b e 
shared with REDOL audience including its Circular Community. 
Dissemination: Scientific and technical 
publications, conference s, workshops, and 
events with local/regional authorities to identify 
barriers and setting the circular community 
(WP7&8). Networking based on the partners 
memberships in platforms and associations. 
Exploitation: The exploitation routes of the 
project results has been presented in Section 
2.2.2 The preferable option will be patenting of 
the valorization technologies, as well a s 
licensing of the software solutions. 
Communication: Logo and visual identity, 
online channels creat ion and updating, p ress 
media, project promotional material, 
cooperation with other projects  and initiatives, 
networking, open field site showcases. 
TARGET GROUPS OUTCOMES IMPACTS 
 Waste managers and recyclers , that will be 
able to valorise waste streams currently 
disposed to increase their revenue streams and 
turnover and minimise management costs 
 Process industries, including both producers of 
alternative raw materials and their end -users to 
produce more sustainable products in a feasible 
and certifiable manner. 
 Technical and scientific community : which 
will have access to the new technical knowledge 
and developments of the project to progress with 
the innovation in this field. 
 Policy makers, and public bodies, that will be 
able to identify barriers and elaborate more 
effective policies to support circularity in the 
waste management value chains. 
 Society as a whole , benefitting from reduced 
waste generation and GHG emissions. 
 Implementation of 5 circular- by-design value chains , 
involving all the necessary key actors together with the required 
organisational structure and business models , resulting in the 
consolidation of Zaragoza’s hub for circularity. 
 Optimisation of novel technologies performanc e, enabling 
efficiencies over 90% for sorting, between 55% and 100% for 
recycling and generating a total of 12 circular end-products. 
 Reduction of landfilled material.  Over 90 ktons in the value 
chains addressed and up to 140 ktons in total for Zaragoza until 
2040, thus achieving the zero-landfilling target. 
 GHG emissions reduction compared to the current benchmark 
in Zaragoza, achieving reduction of 282 ktCO2 by 2040. 
 Increased economic benefit by the valorisation of disposed 
waste, aiming at producing 14 B€ benefits until 2040. 
 Smart and digitalised plastic value chains, increasing current 
monitoring capabilities in 20%. 
 Improved policies and standards towards the implementation of 
I-US initiatives and circular waste management value chains. 
Scientific: New datasets and evidence about the 
technical feasibility of the circular value chains, 
including the required conditions  for sorting and 
recycling technologies, influence of the new secondary 
raw materials and product quality and the 
environmental footprint of the new processes. Results 
will be included in reports, roadmaps and papers. 
Economical/technological: Creation of more 
sustainable, safe and competitive waste value chains 
due to the integration of greener and more efficient 
valorisation processes, smart and digital solutions, and 
the effective design of new products and processes  
supported by the I -US platform and the generation of 
adequate governance structures and business models. 
Societal: Reduction of waste -related pollution and 
GHG emissions and accessibility to a higher portfolio 
of recycled products. Creation of learning re sources 
for workers upskilling and facilitation of the 
participation in new I-US initiatives. 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 29 
3. QUALITY AND EFFICIENCY OF THE IMPLEMENTATION  
3.1.  Work plan and resources  
In order to achieve the objectives established in Section 1.1, REDOL activities will be structured in 8  Work 
Packages (WPs). The overall scheme of the work plan is illustrated in Figure 3 in form of a Pert Chart.  
All the planned activities will be supported by coher ent management and coordination articulated in WP1 , 
which aims to develop an effective and comprehensive administrative, financial, technical and legal management. 
The technical activities will start with WP2 , aiming to consolidate the project baseline and  to obtain a deeper 
understanding on the preconditions  that facilitate or hinder the implementation of I -US. This WP will make sure 
that a common understanding exists  among all key players of the value chains regarding organisational, technical, 
regulatory, social and economic conditions that must be accomplished for the successful execution of REDOL. 
Main developments of the project will take place in WP3, dealing with solutions on automated sorting and 
classification, and WP4, focussed on SUW va lorisation technologies. These activities will rely on the detailed 
characterization of the value chains performed in WP2 and the close collaboration among waste managers, research 
entities and technology providers  in order to provide with detailed designs validated at TRL5 -6 for their final 
demonstration in REDOL value chains. Demonstration will therefore take place in WP6, where the value chains on 
packaging, plastics, CDW, textiles  and WEEE will be redesigned to make them more circular. Moreover, a 
dedicated task has been included to address synergies among value chains , which will engage and interact with 
end-users of the valorised products to consolidate the new value chains.  
REDOL results will be monitored and quantified according to a set of dedicated KPIs, and main conclusions will 
be gathered within WP7  in order to ensure the replication of the project results. To this end, within this WP a 
handbook for the creation of circ ular hubs and key training material will be developed, and main regulatory, 
technical, economic and managerial recommendations  will be gathered and shared with the ECoP and other 
relevant initiatives and stakeholders.  These activities will be completed by a  coherent exploitation strategy and 
dissemination plan to be developed and implemented within WP8 . In addition to traditional outreach and 
exploitation activities, specific tasks have been devoted to engaging and interact with key stakeholders within the 
region for the set-up of the final value chains and to deploy and monitor circular and symbiotic business models. 
A duration of 48 months is foreseen to be sufficient to achieve all project objectives. As part o f this methodology, 
a Gantt chart is provided (page 30), showing the timeframe of the activities planned. 
Table 11. List of work packages 
WP Work Package Title Partner PMs Start End 
1 Management and coordination CIRCE 103.2 1 48 
2 Development of a common symbiotic framework for Zaragoza's hub of 
circularity AIT 188 1 15 
3 Upgrading the management of solid urban waste streams ICCS 258 9 32 
4 Novel processing/recycling technologies for enhancing solid urban 
waste valorisation ITE 312 9 32 
5 Digital tools enabling and optimizing symbiotic and circular value 
chains: REDOL platform CIRCE 191 9 48 
6 Optimization and Implementation of circular product value chains CIRCE 400.5 25 48 
7 Plan actions, Societal Awareness and Replication ICL 204.75 10 48 
8 Dissemination, communication and exploitation  STRA 281.5 1 48 
Total Person Months 1938.95  
Figure 3. REDOL Pert chart 
Management  & Coordination
48 months
WP1
WP8
Digital tools enabling and optimizing symbiotic and 
circular value chains: REDOL platformWP5
Upgrading the management of solid urban 
waste streamsWP3
Optimization and Implementation of circular 
product value chainsWP6
Plan actions, Societal Awareness and ReplicationWP7
Novel processing/recycling technologies for 
enhancing solid urban waste valorisationWP4
:
Development of a common symbiotic 
framework for Zaragoza's hub of circularityWP2
Dissemination, Communication & Exploitation  

HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 30 
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
M7
M8
M9
M10
M11
M12
M13
M14
M15
M16
M17
M18
M19
M20
M21
M22
M23
M24
M25
M26
M27
M28
M29
M30
M31
M32
M33
M34
M35
M36
M37
M38
M39
M40
M41
M42
M43
M44
M45
M46
M47
M48
WP1 CIRCE Management and coordination
T1.1 CIRCE Overall project management
T1.2 CIRCE Progress monitoring including reporting
T1.3 CIRCE Quality assurance plan and management and data management plan
T1.4 CIRCE Integration of the Responsible Research and Innovation approach
WP2 AITIIP Development of a common symbiotic framework for Zaragoza's hub of circularity
T2.1 CIRCE Implementation of the governance structure for U-IS interaction management
T2.2 AITIIP Establishment of the baseline for a participatory approach with citizens and stakeholders
T2.3 UZ Addressing non-technical barriers for the valorisation of SUW and their use as industrial feedstocks
T2.4 AITIIP Characterisation of value chains and key players interaction 
T2.5 UZ Zaragoza waste resources mapping, logistics set up and digitalisation
T2.6 CIRCE Definition of the KPIs and impact evaluation methodology for the new circular value chains
WP3 ICCS Upgrading the management of solid urban waste streams
T3.1 ICCS Development and deployment of Smart Plastic Bins
T3.2 IRIS AI-based system for the identifaction and clasification of MMPP
T3.3 ICCS Integrated sorting system for CDW with advanced robotic arms
T3.4 NTT Novel textiles clasification solution using HSI camera
T3.5 CIRCE Mobile sorting system for SUW including novel AI algorithms, sensing technology and robots
WP4 ITENE Novel processing/recycling technologies for enhancing solid urban waste valorization
T4.1 AITIIP Valorisation of composite wastes through green solvolysis assisted by MW and US
T4.2 ITENE Selective delamination of MMPP recycling
T4.3 VDZ Formulation of recycled components for the construction and cement industry
T4.4 AITEX Recycling route for textiles based on IL-based, glycolysis, polymerization, post-condensation and spinning
T4.5 RINA-CSM Recovery of metals from WEEE-derived PCB using DES
WP5 CIRCE Digital tools enabling and optimizing symbiotic and circular value chains: REDOL platform
T5.1 SUITE5 Interoperability for data sharing and confidentiality 
T5.2 CIRCE Development of REDOL urban-industrial models 
T5.3 CIRCE Applications for forecasting and pricing on waste resources
T5.4 LTU Algorithms for managing and optimizing logistics including trazability
T5.5 CIRCE Databases and tools for life cycle assessment and life cycle cost analysis 
T5.6 CIRCE Development of the Industrial-Urban Simbiosis Virtual Assessment Platform
WP6 CIRCE Optimization and Implementation of circular product value chains
T6.1 ITENE Redesing of new circular packaging value chains 
T6.2 AIITIP Redesing of new circular plastic  value chains 
T6.3 ACCIONA Redesing of new circular CDW value chains
T6.4 AITEX Redesing of new circular textiles value chains 
T6.5 CIRCE Redesing of new circular WEEE value chains
T6.6 CIRCE Deployment of synergies across industrial sectors
WP7 ICLEI Plan actions, Societal Awareness and Replication
T7.1 ICLEI Development of the guidelines and strategy for building hubs of circularity
T7.2 CIRCE Analysis of regulations and barriers, and development of recommendations 
T7.3 UZ Social innovation activities and Building human capital and job profile
T7.4 EEIP Understading the potential of U-IS around Europe: REDOL impact quantification
T7.5 CIRCE Interaction and contribution to major EU bodies on U-IS: ECoP
T7.6 ICLEI Roadmap for replicability of solid urban waste value chains across EU
WP8 STRANE Dissemination, Communication and Exploitation
T8.1 GEO Design of dissemination and communication strategy
T8.2 GEO Dissemination and communication actions 
T8.3 ICLEI Stakeholder engagement and regional networking: REDOL Circular Community
T8.4 STRANE IPR review and exploitation strategy
T8.5 STRANE Assessment of business models for REDOL KER
T8.6 CIRCE Definition and implementation of U-IS business models within Zaragoza
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48
Kick-off General Assembly X
General Assembly X X X X
Steering Committee X X X X X X X X
Project Workshops and Final Conference X X X X X
Year 4
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4
REDOL GANTT Chart
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 31 
3.1.1. Work packages description 
Table 12. REDOL Work Package 1 description. 
Work package Number  WP1 
Work package title Management and Coordination 
Main Objective: To develop an effective and comprehensive administrative, financial, technical and legal management 
that ensure the successful execution of the project. 
Specific objectives: 
• To ensure the achievement of all project objectives in terms of time, quality and costs. 
• To set the appropriate coordination and management tools, methods and decision-making processes.  
• To carry out periodic communication and high-quality technical and financial reporting of the project to EC. 
• To work together during the whole research and innovation process with the main societal actors.  
• To ensure the GDPR when treating with data external/internal to the project. 
• To ensure proactive inclusion and participation, also in online and hybrid events. 
Task 1.1. Overall Project Management (M1-M48). Leader: CIRCE / Partners: All 
CIRCE will act as the main contact with the EC, arranging meetings with the officer in charge of the project when required. 
CIRCE will distribute the funds among partners according to the Grant Agreement (GA) and the Consortium Agreement 
(CA). CIRCE will be in charge of commissioning and applying effectively the designed governance structure and the 
communication flows and methods. These will be presented in the Kick- of Meeting (KoM) and gathered in the Project 
Handbook deliverable for common understanding and follow-up. This will be a living document that may change depending 
on the project needs during its whole lifecycle. T1.1 will contribute to the handbook by creating: quality requireme nts, 
organisational structure, general measures and actions taken, planning and control, conflict handling and IPR (according to 
CA), risk management, files and archives. REDOL will make use of management tools, specially designed for European 
collaborative projects, with online workspaces, mailing lists, etc. to facilitate partners’ cooperation. To facilitate the 
management, CIRCE will acquire the licenses for an intranet system to support the coordination tasks and monitor the 
project progress. A user gui de will be available for the partners to ease the understanding of the tool’s features, the 
condition of use and how the principal features will be utilised or accomplishing project management according to 
project handbook: e.g., how to report meetings, ho w to report advance of tasks, how to carry out the interim reports, 
how to place commitments, or where to find/place the internal documents for work.  
Task 1.2. Progress Monitoring and Reporting (M1-M48). Leader: CIRCE / Partners: All 
General Assembly will meet at least once per year to make a control and steering of the project development (coinciding 
with steering committee meetings). CIRCE will track the progr ess of the project using the intranet tool with regular 
meetings between the members of the Steering Committee (SC). This execution body will meet physically at least twice 
a year and will set conference calls every three months to update the project statu s. In the meetings, the technical and 
financial progress of the project will be reported. The technical and financial reports describing the progress of the 
project will be sent to the EC in accordance with the periods established in the GA. During the KoM, CIRCE will propose 
a set of KPIs based on the text of the project proposal to come up with a way to measure the project results. These documents 
of KPIs targets will be reviewed during the first 6 months of the project and later on will be utilised to mo nitor the 
achievement of project outcomes and strategic objectives over its duration. All partners will be responsible for updating the 
information to the WP leaders, while WP leaders, together with the PC, will oversee project reporting activities. 
Task 1.3. Quality Assurance Plan and Data Management Plan (M1-M48). Leader: CIRCE / Partners: All 
CIRCE will provide to all the partners the guidelines and instructions to ensure the quality of the works. These procedures 
will be integrated in D1.1, based on the  following concepts: quality requirements; planning and control; organizational 
structure; quality control of regular deliverables; quality control of key DLV; quality control of communication materials; 
quality control of the project. Moreover, a specific environmental impact analysis will be performed and integrated into a 
specific section of the Project Handbook together with its particular government. At the start of each WP, CIRCE will meet 
the WP and task leader(s) to discuss the WP strategy, steps, roles and commitments. Afterwards, WP leader will offer an 
explanation to participating partners and an operational 6- month plan. For q uality assurance of the DLV, specific 
instructions will be included in the Project Handbook. Moreover, a DMP will be defined with the objective of 
establishing the measures for promoting the findings during the project’s life. In this sense, the DMP will set the basis 
for the dissemination and exploitation and the procedures for the sharing of data. This task will evo lve during the 
project’s lifetime in order to present the updates of REDOL in data management.  
Task 1.4 Integration of the Responsible Research and Innovation approach (M1 -M48). Leader: CIRCE/ 
Partners: All 
CIRCE will provide the consortium with an overview of the innovations planned within the project, so all the partners have 
a common idea and approach. In this sense, information on the project innovation will be provided from different points of 
view including technical, regulatory, social and organizational. In addition, the Exploitation and Innovation Manager will 
support the project in adjusting its objectives and requirements, to better identify exploitable results, the potential for 
patents applications and maximize the replication potentials. During this task, cross cutting issues will be considered to 
ensure the interoperable, interdisciplinary and international approach of the REDOL project. All the partners will be 
initiated in Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI) practices, ensuring that th e project considers important aspects 
such as public engagement, open access, gender, ethics, education, governance and science education, promoting 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 32 
institutional change among partners to adopt RRI approach. To ensure that the RRI is being correctly addressed during the 
whole execution of REDOL, “MoRRI – Monitoring the Evolution and Benefits of Responsible Research and Innovation” 
indicators will be considered to monitor the project development and reported through progress reports.  
Table 13. REDOL Work Package 2 description. 
Work package Number  WP2 
Work package title Development of a common symbiotic framework for Zaragoza's hub of circularity 
Main Objective: To define the organisational, technical, regulatory, social and economic conditions that frame each 
value chain and the circular hub as a whole and to establish a common strategy to advance in every dimension  for the 
successful implementation of the circular and symbiotic relationships by the end of the project. 
Specific objectives: 
• To put in place common governance models that enable symbiotic relationships and agreements across value chains. 
• To define the characteristics and boundary conditions of REDOL value chains. 
• To digitalise the catalogue of waste resources and logistics of the circular hub. 
• To set the basis for the generation of digital twins along REDOL value chains based on well-defined KPIs. 
• To identify success and deferral factors to be addressed along the project. 
• To generate the strategy for participation and co-creation with local citizens. 
Task 2.1 . Implementation of the governance structure for I-US interaction management (M 1-M15). Leader: 
CIRCE / Partners: AIT, TAT, CAS, MOS, BRI, SAI, CEM, FIN, ZAR, HUSA, ACT, ALIA 
Within this task CIRCE will leverage on the organisational and financial models developed in the framework of previous EU 
projects on industrial symbiosis like CORALIS to develop and provide the main public and industrial players involved in the 
value chains guidelines and contractual templates that will shape the governance structure required to get engaged in I-US 
collaborations. These documents will be reviewed and discussed among the consortium to reach a common understanding that 
enables the achievement of a managerial readiness level (MRL) of 7. Firstly, a baseline characterization of the REDOL 
stakeholders and their main goals and functionalities of the governance structure will be assessed. It will lead to the 
establishment of the most suitable type of organization for the region to develop sustainable hub- like organization (e.g., 
cluster, PPP, innovation hub), building a strong leadership in the region. This task will engage the stakeholders for the 
implementation of the whole circular value chains enabling efficiency communication and decision- making process 
among the partners. The continuation of these activ ities in T8.3 will enable the creation of REDOL Circular 
Community. Afterwards, further mobilization of other relevant stakeholders for expanding the I -US network will be 
carried out. The task will produce a report containing the comprehensive characteriza tion of stakeholders, the identified 
scope of cooperation/cross -fertilization matrix, and the methodologies for the implementation of the governance 
structure (leaderships, engagement activities, timeline, working groups etc.). 
Task 2.2. Establishment of the baseline for a participatory approach with citizens and stakeholders (M1 -M9). 
Leader: AIT/ Partners: CIRCE, UZ, SUIT, GEO, ICL, ZAR 
Within this task a strategy for supporting users in the transition from passive consumers towards active citizens will be 
defined as part of REDOL social innovation spin off action. Its  main objective is to engage citizens and key local 
stakeholders to raise awareness and define common goals for REDOL project from a socio-economic perspective. To this 
end it is crucial to engage citizens from the very beginning, so a design thinking approach promoting co-creation activities 
will be implemented, including bu t not limited to information sessions, co -creation workshops, awareness raising 
campaigns, surveys, events, etc. Such a strategy will be developed to achieve a more sustainable use and disposal of 
resources by end-users, to promote an entrepreneurial spirit in people so they can promote new circular and/or symbiotic 
initiatives, and to identify the lack of knowledge that should be tackled by new learning resources. The output will be a 
strategy that will feed T7.3 and T8.3 to implement engagement, networking, co-creation and knowledge-transfer activities.  
Task 2.3. Addressing non-technical barriers for the valorisation of SUW and their use as industrial feedstocks (M1-M9). 
Leader: UZ/ Partners: CIRCE, AIT, TAT, CAS, BRI, SAI, CEM, FIN, ZAR, PRA, BOFA, AMS, ALIA 
UZ will analyse the initial situation to benchmark current interactions against the expected future scenario, categorize 
the typology of interactions (physical vs. logistic vs. information networks, bilateral vs. multilateral) and present 
prevailing success factors and barriers to be overcome. This will be compared with other similar cases at EU level, in 
order to identify which measures have been already implemented in cases with similar characteristics and consider their 
effectiveness. As a resu lt, a compilation and evaluation of the success and deterrent factors as well as an evaluation as 
part of a SWOT analysis will be performed. This information will be used to define actions and develop 
recommendations ad-hoc for Zaragoza city and Aragon reg ion, aiming at solving regulatory and other non- technical 
barriers that could hamper the successful implementation of REDOL circular value chains. This information will also 
feed T7.2 in order to transfer best practices at EU level and will be gathered in D2.1 together with T2.1 and T2.2 results. 
Outputs will be evaluated by the governance structure to find the strategy to overcome those barriers. 
Task 2.4. Characterisation of value chains and key players interaction (M1-M12). Leader:AIT/Partners: CIRCE, 
TAT, CAS, MOS, BRI, SUIT, STRA, SAI, CEM, FIN, ZAR, PRA, BOFA, AMS, HUSA, ACT, AMB, ALIA 
This task will study the value chains built up around the five solid urban wastes to describe the metabolism of industrial 
symbiosis in these sectors. All the needs identified in terms of resources employed, wastes generated, water use, energy, 
knowledge t ransfer and some other possible resources susceptible of Industrial Symbiosis  will be quantified . When 
necessary, the resources generated by the value chains will be characterized in terms of composition and 
physicochemical properties. The value chains stakeholders will be analysed as separate agents and as a whole ecosystem 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 33 
identifying and characterizing all the resources. The key players will be selected, and their interaction articulated around 
a Circular Community (T8.3), working together in three sessions as described in the methodology section. This task will 
also provide inputs to T2.1  to facilitate the development of the governance structure and further mobilization of 
stakeholders. The information generated will be integrated together with Task 2.5 results in the platform at T5.6. 
Task 2.5. Zaragoza waste resources mapping, logistics set up and digitalisation (M1-M12). Leader: UZ/ Partners: 
CIRCE, AIT, LTU, TAT, CAS, IRIS, BRI, SUIT, STRA, SAI, FIN, ZAR, AMB, ALIA 
In parallel with the assessment of resources available at the hub, CIRCE will generate in this task a waste resources map 
based on GIS technology and data mining (STRA), which will become a key asset for REDOL platform. Starting from this 
information and making use of the data on waste collection provided by ZAR and main waste managers, UZ will lead the 
analysis and assessment of barriers and needs on logistics (and inversed logistics) and will characterize main parameters 
to be monitored for its optimization and follow -up at platform level. STR A will contribute to the mapping of waste 
resources and logistics set up as this is the core expertise and business of its subsidiary Seitiss specialized in IS.  Based 
on this exercise, LTU will be the main partner working on the digitalization of the value chains by determin ing the 
typology and location of sensors , implementing mobile and static sensors  and defining standards and communication 
protocols for the interaction with the platform (main input to T5.1). T2.4 and T2.5 will result in D.2.2. 
Task 2.6. Definition of the KPIs and impact evaluation methodology for the new circular value chains (M4- M12). 
Leader: CIRCE/ Partners: AIT, UZ, TAT, CAS, STRA, SAI, CEM, FIN, ICL, PRA, BOFA, AMS, AMB, ALIA 
This task will define main variables to be monitored and/or calculated for measuring the progress of REDOL activities and 
analyse the project main results. These variables will be selected based on the value chains boundary conditions (T2.2), a 
benchmarking analysis of existing indicators and the set of variables currently used in urban-industrial contexts. They will 
be divided into Key Resource and Environmental Indicators (KREI) reflecting the advancement towards environmental 
and resource efficiency performance objectives and Key Performance Attributes (KPA), Once the KREI and KPA have 
been selected, their definition together with guidelines for their proper measurement will be detailed into D2.3. 
Table 14. REDOL Work Package 3 description. 
Work package Number  WP3 
Work package title Upgrading the management of solid urban waste streams 
Main Objective: To design and validate a set of technical and digital solutions for the improvement of the sorting and 
classification of waste flows in REDOL value chains. 
Specific objectives: 
• To design a set of smart bins to deployed along Zaragoza city. 
• To develop a prototype for MMPP identification encompassing HSI and AI data analysis techniques. 
• To develop a prototype for CDW classification. 
• To digitalise the sorting and separation processes at the P&C sector. 
• To automatize the WEEE classification step.  
Task 3.1. Development and deployment of Smart Plastic Bins (M9-M32). Leader: ICCS/ Partners: ZAR 
This task aims towards the development of 3 smart plastic bins, allowing a robotic-based urban waster sorting mechanism to 
accurate separate urban mixed from plastic in real-time. The design of the smart bins includes a buffer for the plastics inputs, 
a mix of steppers, FTIR sensors, air based hydraulic system, buckets for the separation and shredders. The system design of 
the sensors and the developed models for the separation will be first validated at the ICCS premises. Then the whole system 
(in a bin format) will be assembled, and the validation of the operation at TRL 6 will take place in Greece. The goal is to 
achieve a classification accuracy more than 85%. Once the first bin is validated the 2 additional bins will be assembled, tested 
and validated following the same procedure. 
Task 3.2. AI-based system for the identification and classification of MMPP (M9-M32). Leader: IRIS / Partners: 
BOFA, HUSA 
This task aims toward the development of an inline monitoring system to identify different types of MMPP waste. Initially, a 
first definition of the targeted types of materials will be done by HUSA and IRIS. The monitoring prototype will encompass 
HSI (as prioritized technology) with an innovative modelling strategy based on the combination of AI techniques. Mono- and 
multi-material layered reference samples provided by HUSA will be used to assess the accuracy in the materials identification 
and the required data processing. A preliminary selection of the hardware specifications will be established to maximize the 
accuracy of the distinction between different materials. Hybrid models based on AI data analysis techniques will be developed 
to identify the target MMPP materials based on their composition. The final prototype will be combined with a real-time data 
acquisition software with a user-friendly interface that can be customized following the end-user needs. The system will be 
shipped, installed and validated in HUSA for demonstration at TRL7 (T6.1)  
Task 3.3. Integrated sorting system for CDW with advanced robotic arms (M9-M32). Leader: ICCS/ Partners: CIRCE, 
VDZ, CAS, AMS 
This task aims towards the development and validation at TRL6 of the construction and demolition waste system that will be 
placed at the premises of CASALE. The system consists of industrial bins, mechanical separators, a conveyor, an industrial 
camera, a hyperspectral camera, at least 2 robotics arms used for the separation and a central processing unit. The system shall 
be able to separate glass, ceramic, concrete, wood, plaster and non-ferrous metals with a classification accuracy of more than 
85%. The system will be designed and tested in ICCS premises where the ML algorithms for the classification will be 
developed. The sorting will be complemented by a plastic identification system developed by CIRCE allowing the 
classification of non-separated plastic elements by a multispectral analysis adapted to most common construction polymers. 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 34 
As a next step the system will be assembled and the whole design and development will be tested and validated at TRL6 
before shipped to CASALE premises for demonstration (T6.3). 
Task 3.4. Novel textiles classification solution using HSI camera (M9-M32). Leader: NTT/ Partners: PRA, AMS, 
ALIA 
With the target to sort and separate pre- consumer and post-consumer textile waste, NTT will work on a textile sorting 
technique capable of carrying out the separation on composition, textile structure and colour level. The process is based 
on optical analysis technology developed by NTT which allows the identification of  colours and composition of multi 
blended fibres. The subsequent sorting will be  carried out by compressed -air nozzles along a conveyor belt which 
stored the textile waste in bales.  Within this task this sorting system will be validated at TRL6 building on a previous 
pilot line available at NTT premises.  Additionally, NTT will test an innovative technique to separate elastane from 
textile fibres such as wool, nylon and polyester with a close d cycle solvent leaching. The phases of the cycle to be 
investigated will be the following: optimization of the process parameters ( i.e., optimal process temperature, stirring 
conditions, number of cycles necessary for the complete recovery of the elastome r), recovery of the solvent and 
filtration, washing of the fibre to recover residual solvent. 
Task 3.5. Mobile sorting system for SUW including novel AI algorithms, sensing technology and robots (M9-
M32). Leader: CIRCE/ Partners: SAI, TAT, AMB 
A novel automated mobile sorting line for paper and SUW classification will be developed and demonstrated in this task.  
The sorting system will include all the optical equipment, based on hyperspectral and RGB cameras and sensors and the 
picking elements most appropriated for each application (robotic arm, robot or pneumatic).  The line will also include all the 
needed ancillaries (feeder system, separation box…) which will allow it to be deploy at specific locations within the plants, 
independently of the current process lines. The system will cover two applications: the sorting of no- paper material to 
improve the quality of the recycled paper produced in SAI and the enhancement of the current sorting system for electronic 
equipment and components in TAT. The identification will be based on machine learning and deep learning algorithms 
applied to the different spectrums images which will be developed by CIRCE and programmed ad-hoc for each application.  
These algorithms will command the pickling system which will be developed and integrated by AMB. 
Table 15. REDOL Work Package 4 description. 
Work package Number  WP4 
Work package title Novel processing/recycling technologies for enhancing solid urban waste valorisation 
Main Objective : To design and test and validate under controlled conditions a set of innovative solutions for the 
recycling and valorisation of waste flows aiming at its inclusion in circular and symbiotic value chains. 
Specific objectives: 
• To develop a solvolysis prototype for plastics valorisation. 
• To advance the maturity level of dissolution technologies for MMPP valorisation. 
• To validate a process based on glycolysis for textiles valorisation. 
• To upscale a PCB valorisation process and analyse alternative routes for driving down processing costs.  
Task 4.1. Valorisation of composite wastes through green solvolysis assisted by MW and US (M9-M32). Leader: 
AIT/Partners: CIRCE, MOS, ACC, FIN 
In order to upgrade the efficiency of the conventional solvolysis process 2 different approaches will be demonstrated to ensure 
the separation phase: 1) the incorporation of MW as heating source to achieve a mild process with low energy consumption; 
2) the incorporation of US which will act as high efficiency mechanical stirrer generating micro-pulses from 3000 to 25000 
rpm. This optimisation tests will be carried out at CIRCE (MW) and AIT (US) pilot reactors (1L). Best solvents (biobased 
protic and aprotic solvents, ionic liquids and deep eutectic solvents) will be selected and tested. CIRCE will also carry out 
numerical simulation assisted by Multiphysics SW . Input parameters for the study: i) material properties and solvents, 
ii) operation volume; ii) hea ting technology, and iii) chemical parameters obtained from lab trials. Finally, an up-
scalability study will be carried out and the final design will be performed that MOS will build in T6.1. The output will consist 
in a bench of parallel reactors with a capacity of 100L each with all the ad-hoc peripherals required for the incorporation of 
MW/US industrial energy sources. A monitoring system based on a combination of IR and UV spectroscopy sensors will be 
incorporated in-line to the reactors to measure and control the monomer concentration and obtain high purity batches of fibres.  
Task 4.2. Selective delamination of MMPP (M9-M32). Leader: ITE / Partners: ACC, BOFA, ACT 
ITE will perform the development and optimization of selective dissolution for delamination of the MMPP sorted in task 3.2 
to recover the main layers of the structure, such as PET and POs. ITE will also analyse pre-treatment needs (e.g., impurities 
elimination, grinding and washing, etc.) and characterise representative samples. The Hansen Solubility Parameters (HSP) of 
different traditional and green solvents will be analysed. Two different approaches will be followed: (i) definition of the 
delamination process in mild conditions and dissolution media for reduction of the interaction between layers and (ii) study 
and optimise the use of green solvents, such as scCO2, and the use of cosolvents, to solve the internal layer of the material. 
Different process parameters will be optimised and the modification and adaptation of ITE facilities will be performed to 
achieve the delamination of the multilayer, handling with the heterogeneity of the postconsumer packaging, and facilitate the 
upscaling of the process in ACT facilities  (T6.2). Once delaminated, ITE will work on the separation of each fraction 
recovered (PET and POs) by density and/or cyclone. The recovered polymers will be analysed in terms of mechanical, 
thermal and rheological properties, to evaluate the needs and the use of additives. ITE will carry out the upcycling of the 
recovered fractions in twin screw extruders, optimizing the screw profile and parameters to prevent further degradation and 
maximize the effect of the different additives into the polymer matrixes. These upcycled materials will be evaluated according 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 35 
to the same methodology previously used for the recovered fractions. 
Task 4.3. Formulation of recycled components for the construction and cement industry (M9-M32). Leader: VDZ/ 
Partners: CAS, ACC, CEM, AMS 
VDZ will receive sorted CDW from T3.3 and will analyse and characterize the fractions “concrete”, “mortar” and 
“brick”. Additionally, other materials like mineral slags will be characterized. Well sorted CDW can be used in three 
process streams in the cement and concrete industry. Finely ground materials with a well-defined chemical composition 
(mainly CaO, SiO 2, Al 2O3, Fe 2O3) can be used as raw material in the clinker burning process. With the upcoming 
cement standard EN 197- 6 they can be used also as cement main constituent . The third possible process stream is the 
use as recycled aggregate for concrete production. Accordingly, depending on the sorted fractions, VDZ will test the 
materials to determine and assess the fresh, hardened and durability properties and will formulate as a result the best 
way of integrating raw materials in the cement and concrete industry. Additionally, within this task the characteristics of 
additional residues such as ashes from different processes, including the plastics valorisation process from PLASTICE, 
will be included in these studies  for their integration in the production process within Task 6.6 . Finally, this task 
includes the analysis of additional waste resources and feasibility studies for the ir integration into new products to be 
tested along WP6. In particular, resources already identified at proposal level include glass fibre and flame -retardant 
plastics to be reutilised by ACC and FIN. 
Task 4. 4. Recycling route for textiles based on IL -based, glycolysis, polymerization, post-condensation and 
spinning (M9-M32). Leader: AITEX / Partners: BRI, NTT, ACC, PRA, AMS 
In this task, post-consumption textile waste based on polyester (> 90% purity) will be chemically recycled through a two-step 
depolymerization-polymerization process. In a first stage, 500 kg of textile waste will be depolymerised by glycolysis, using 
IL as catalysts, to obtain the BHET monomer in a 20 L batch reactor. The yield and purity wil l be stablished using 
characterization techniques as NMR and DSC. In the second step, 450 kg of recycled PET chips will be obtained through a 
polymerization process from the BHET monomer. In parallel, CIRCE will perform the glycolysis of post-consumption textile 
waste under MW-assisted heating in a 1 L reactor. The resulting monomers will be isolated and sent to AITEX for further 
characterization. Properties of recycled PET resin, regarding the HT fibre manufacturing, will be evaluated using capillary 
viscometry, Gel Permeation Chromatography, and ICP-OES. Each production batch of recycled PET will be individually 
tested and post -condensed on a pilot plant to arrive the minimum required viscosity t o ensure the quality and 
performance of the yarn. A GLE 2200dtex type yarn will be spined at the VB -SIAT plant, joint in a Galan to be 
converted on 4400dtex yarn and twisted 100s. This product will be used as weft with an original PET yarn as warp to 
knit the TenCate Geolon PET100S. The final fabric will be tested in both directions, warp and weft, to check the 
properties are the same on both directions, what would mean the recycled yarn can substitute the original PET. 
Task 4.5. Recovery of metals from WEEE-derived PCB using DES (M9-M32). Leader: RINA / Partners: CIRCE, 
TAT, UZ 
Within this task chemical analysis of the starting mix to evaluate quantity and type of metals will be performed to select the of 
target metals to be recover ed. Different PCB samples derived from WEEE  will be provided by TAT for preliminary 
characterization and further treatment tests with DES (≈5 samples of 10 kg each ). A series of DES formulations will be 
selected for the subsequent treatment of PCB based on literature available data and on collected experience. Activities will 
include: tests of metal recovery without pre -treatment, optimisation of operation conditions ( time, temperature, step of 
extraction, use of oxidant, etc.), efficiency analysis in term of target metals, influence of prethermal treatment and selection of 
the most suitable process evaluating mass and energy balances. Finally, based on the activity carried out at lab scale a flow 
sheet of the use case will be defined to analyse future scale-up under T6.5. This activity is carried out jointly with TAT. 
Table 16. REDOL Work Package 5 description. 
Work package Number  WP5 
Work package title Digital tools enabling and optimizing symbiotic and circular value chains: REDOL platform 
Main Objective: To develop and put in place am ad -hoc platform for the management, monitoring and optimization of 
REDOL value chains and the interaction among key players directly involved and/or engaged in the project. 
Specific objectives: 
• To establish standard and secure data collection, management and sharing mechanisms 
• To generate the digital twin of the urban-industrial interactions of REDOL 
• To provide the tools for transforming waste into a predictable and marketable resource 
• To ensure the traceability of resources and the planning of optimal logistic routes  
• To put in place the tools for monitoring and assessing the life cycle impact of REDOL value chains 
• To integrate the project tools in the development of the I-US REDOL platform 
Task 5.1 Interoperability for data sharing and confidentiality (M9-M24). Leader: SUIT/ Partners: CIRCE 
This task aims at offering a horizontal solution for addressing data-related requirements of the REDOL value chain, spanning 
data collection and management, data interoperability and data sharing. This task will primarily focus on the investigation of 
relevant standards-based data models in the area of SUW, the scrutinization of the relevant concepts and attributes against 
their relevance to REDOL and the delivery of a fine-grained data model that will enable the effective management of data 
available in the value chains, both at technical and semantic levels. Subsequently, the task will proceed with the configuration 
of a data management solution that will enable the collection of data from various sources and data assets through the 
provision of a variety of ingestion methods, their effective pre-processing and the attribution of appropriate access policies to 
ensure confidentiality and trust. Finally, the task will develop appropriate data exploration and retrieval mechanisms that will 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 36 
be complemented by an innovative data sharing me chanism, effectively exploiting the capabilities offered by DLT 
(Distributed Ledger Technologies/blockchain) to ensure transparent data sharing and data transactions under formalized 
contracts, while facilitating continuous monitoring of such contracts’ performance and compliance. To perform the acquisition 
process of the necessary data from the field systems, CIRCE will provide an edge computing gateway called Energy Box. It 
will provide the necessary abstraction layer to the upstream platforms and solutions  and will adapt its communication 
capabilities to gather information from field devices and local control systems, taking into account the requirements of each 
use case and using standard communication protocols, and upload the information to the platform. 
Task 5.2 Development of REDOL urban-industrial models (M13-M48). Leader: CIRCE / Partners: SUIT 
The different processes independent of the circular economy will be modelled by CIRCE making use of the data monitored 
during T2.3, as well as the new design considerations (WP3+WP4+WP6) for each of them. These models will allow 
better understanding of each system’s behaviour making possible to analyse them and design the necessary process 
changes (process design and retrofitting WP6) through the study o f existing data and the identification of the key 
parameters involved in the operation of waste streams. It will allow a higher degree of understanding and interoperability 
of the processes, as well as of the limitations and requirements for the developmen t of sustainable business models for 
the secondary raw materials. CIRCE will validate the model's development with commercial software based on both 
agent-based simulations with a focus on the energy supply chain and discrete -event simulation. The aim is t o model 
material flows to estimate how changes in the production volume can affect consumptions (e.g., Anylogic) in the search 
of the most optimal energy and material workflow scenarios. The models will be integrated in a common platform (T5.6) 
in M32 and will be updated and executed until the end of the project to properly address value chains interactions 
implemented through T6.6. 
Task 5.3 Applications for forecasting and pricing on waste resources (M13-M48). Leader: CIRCE / Partners: - 
This task will be focussed on the forecasting models to provide partners with better information about the availability and 
variation of the different waste streams (i.e. quantity, quality, and location), and decision-making tools for the design of 
contingency measures that might be needed to implement for the adaption of the production process to the secondary raw 
material offtaking. CIRCE will develop state -of-the-art deep learning forecasting models and optimization algorit hms 
from both publicly available and historical partners’ data for waste availability and allocation, energy prices and 
logistics. These models will lead to an increased symbiosis performance and sustainability, as well as a better pricing of 
the waste resources, and to increase the fair practices for the implementation of I -US. The models will be provided by 
M32 to T5.6 and will be further trained until M48. 
Task 5.4 Algorithms for managing and optimizing logistics including traceability (M 13-M48). Leader: RINA / 
Partners: CIRCE, LTU, ZAR 
This task will be dedicated to the design and implementation of software algorithms and traceability technologies to 
optimize logistics operations. To this end, different optimization algorithms (heuristics/genetics) will be evaluated. The 
model will consider all the required parameters for logistic operations  including static and dynamic data, such as the 
positions of waste bins, road network and its related traffic. In addition, waste collection schedules, truck capacities and 
their characteristics will be taken into consideration.  Evaluated algorithms will be designed  and tuned by using 
commercial software able to combine system dynamics, agent -based models, and discrete event elements within one 
simulation and model the complete REDOL value chain. Starting from the activities performed in previous WP, event-
based mode ls dedicated to the logistics will be developed and simulated to test different optimization algorithms 
approaches in a dynamic context in terms of costs, times and waste streams. Regarding the traceability, main topics will 
be based on analysis of vehicle  routing, waste selection, and waste production scheduling problems within REDOL 
value chain by using GIS based application and GPS/RFID sensors on waste bins to realize dynamic routes instead of 
fixed routes or give the possibility of immediate waste collection services for high- priority waste bins, so that the 
economy and efficiency of waste collection and transportation will be improved.  The output of the task will be 
integrated in T5.6 by M32, whereas optimization algorithms will be fine-tuned until the end of the project. 
Task 5.5 Databases and tools for life cycle assessment and life cycle cost analysis (M 13-M48). Leader: CIRCE / 
Partners: AIT, NTT, VDZ 
The KPIs and monitoring methodology developed in previous tasks will be applied for the environmental, economic and 
social impact assessment of the baselines and innovations. To this aim, Life Cycle Assessment of the value chains will be 
conducted. CIRCE will be the responsible partner in collaboration with all partners who will provide feedback based on 
their value chain results. Among the main results to be provided in this task are a set of environmental, economic and 
social indicators that will be considered for the definition of Multicriteria hierarchy of the new value chains. The database will 
be integrated in T5.6 by M32. Additionally, information gathered along WP6 execution will fulfil the LCA tool until the end of 
the project to support the impact calculations. 
Task 5.6 Development of the Industrial -Urban Symbiosis Virtual Assessment Platform (M 25-M48). Leader: 
CIRCE / Partners: SUIT 
The objective of this platform is to enable the evaluation, simulation, and operation of the waste resources streams in 
order to achieve a progressive circular economy through Industrial Urban Symbiosis. The industrial process modelling 
carried out in T5.2 allows simulation of scenarios including extra -variable additions, enabling optimization the raw 
materials and energy flows of the I-US systems according to the requirements of the different parties. The platform will 
play the role of a decision- making to ol, used to operate efficiently the Industrial Urban Symbiosis System and to 
evaluate the interaction between the different actors of the Systems in a near -optimal way. Subtask 5.6.1 will focus on 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 37 
obtaining/conditioning models from WP5 for their use as the  platform’s backend. In this perspective, the Virtual 
Assessment Platform acts as a intermediary between partners of the systems, replicating the characteristics of a real 
system while ensuring a secure communication and a proper data sharing channel. The platform will gather 3 different 
aspects: waste streams data, logistic and industrial parameters, and will include the work carried out in T5.1-T5.5. Subtask 
5.6.2 will oversee platform development, including data structures, data management and secure channel communication. 
Table 17. REDOL Work Package 6 description. 
Work package Number  WP6 
Work package title Optimization and Implementation of circular product value chains 
Main Objective: To demonstrate REDOL technical, organisational and financial innovations at TRL7 by transforming 
the addressed value chains into circular, symbiotic and interacting material flows. 
Specific objectives: 
• To deploy and demonstrate REDOL technologies at the premises of waste managers and end-users. 
• To demonstrate the performance of the new value chains in terms of resource efficiency and cost-effectiveness 
• To establish links between REDOL key players and final users of the recovered raw materials  / alternative products 
to deliver viable business models at the end of the project 
• To exploit the synergies among value chains to maximise the recovery and valorisation of waste resources  
Within all WP6 tasks, the technical developments performed at WP3 and WP4 will be implemented and demonstrated 
together with the organisational and economic arrangements defined in WP2, thus ensuring that each value chain is able to 
reach SRL of 7 by the end of the project. This WP will interact as well with REDOL platform in order to test the exchange of 
data and optimization of REDOL processes, logistics and symbiotic interactions among the key players of each value chain, 
and with WPs 7 and 8 to engage end-users of the value chain and finalise the definition of the business models for the whole 
value chain. Finally, along WP6 the main task responsible partners (i.e. main RTD partners and waste manager of the value 
chain) will carry out eco-design studies and will count with the support of CIRCE as coordinator and WP leader to supervise 
and contribute when needed to the engineering activities, process design and purchasing for the uptake of new secondary raw 
materials. In addition, CIRCE will monitor KPIs and execute a techno-economic analysis. 
Task 6. 1 Redesign of new circular packaging value chains (M 25-M48). Leader: ITE / Partners: CIRCE , LTU, 
IRIS, SUIT, TEC, SAI, RINA, BOFA, HUSA, ACT, AMB 
Following the approach described at the beginning of WP6, this task will count with HUSA as waste manager, ITE and 
CIRCE as main RTD, IRIS and AMB  as technology provider s and SAI and TEC as industries involved in the 
valorisation processes. Technologies from Tasks T3.2, T3.5 and T4.2 will be implemented for valorising diverse type of 
multilayer materials. 
Task 6.2 Redesign of new circular plastic value chains (M25-M48). Leader: AIT/ Partners: CIRCE, ICCS, LTU, 
MOS, SUIT, TEC, ACC, RINA, ZAR, AMS 
Following the approach described at the beginning of WP6, this task relies on ZAR as both public authority and waste 
manager, AIT, ICCS and CIRCE as main RTD and MOS and TEC as industrial partners. The systems developed in T3.1 
and T4.1 will be demonstrated, while synergies with PLASTICE will be exploited for taking advantage of by- products 
like ashes and pyrolysis oil together with end-users within the region 
Task 6.3 Redesign of new circular CDW value chains (M25- M48). Leader: ACC/ Partners: CIRCE, ICCS, LTU, 
VDZ, CAS, SUIT, CEM, RINA, ZAR, BOFA 
Following the approach described at the beginning of WP6, this task counts with CAS as waste manager, ICCS and 
VDZ as main RTD and CEM and ACC as end- users by generating new products from CDW. The implementation and 
demonstration of this value chain will be possible by implementing results from T3.3 & T4.3. 
Task 6. 4 Redesign of new circular textiles value chains (M25- M48). Leader: AITEX/ Partners: CIRCE , NTT,  
LTU, BRI, SUIT, ACC, RINA, ZAR, PRA, AMS, ALIA 
Following the approach described at the beginning of WP6, this task relies on ALIA  as waste manager, AITEX and 
NTT as main RTD and BRI as industry involved in the textiles valorisation process  to demonstrate the developments 
from T3.4 and T4.4 . Whereas the demonstration of this value chain will be performed partially in Italy and Spain, a 
complete design for Zaragoza will be performed together with ZAR in order to deploy it along with the new regulation 
for 2025 counting with the entire network of key players and end- users already engaged and ready in every dimension  
(organisational, economic, social, technical). 
Task 6.5 Redesign of new circular WEEE value chains (M25-M48). Leader: CIRCE / Partners: LTU, TAT, SUIT, 
ACC, RINA, PRA, AMB 
Following the approach described at the beginning of WP6, this task counts with TAT as waste manager, CIRCE as 
main RTD and RINA and AMB  as engineering and technology provider s. Developments from T 3.5 and T4.5 will be 
demonstrated. CIRCE will contribute when needed to the process design, engineering and purchasing of auxiliaries for 
implementing the validated solutions under RINA direction. The interconnection between the sorting section (task 3.5), 
the valorisation section (task 4.5) and the rest of the plant, will be done in this activity and CIRCE will support with the 
validation of the whole system.     
Task 6.6 Deployment of synergies across industrial sectors (M37-M48). Leader: CIRCE/ Partners: AITEX, ITA, LTU, 
VDZ, NTT, CAS, SUIT, SAI, ACC, CEM, FIN, RINA, ZAR, PRA, BOFA, AMS, ACT, AMB, ALIA 
Once the configuration of the new value chains is ready , linkages among them will be analysed in detail and exploited 
by analysing the impact of using alternative raw materials in existing processes of local industries or by testing new 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 38 
production methods. Synergies already identified at proposal level and detailed in Section 1.2 will be explored within 
this task. Moreover, new synergies will be identified and assessed along the execution of this task, so together with T8.3 
the most relevant end -users will be engaged and trial for the exploitation of these synergies and alternative resources 
will be performed whenever possible. 
Table 18. REDOL Work Package 7 description. 
Work package Number  WP7 
Work package title Plan actions, Societal Awareness and Replication 
Main Objective: To provide guidelines and recommendations for the creation of circular hubs across Europe to a wide 
audience of stakeholders involved through the execution of REDOL. 
Specific objectives: 
• To deliver a circular strategy for Zaragoza and a handbook for building hubs of circularity 
• To develop regulatory recommendations for advancing on I-US across the EU 
• To analyse, quantify and build a roadmap for the replication of REDOL 
• To identify and take advantage of synergies with ECoP, other initiatives and funding opportunities 
• To share the knowledge and benefits of REDOL through social innovation activities and training programmes  
Task 7.1 Development of the guidelines and strategy for building hubs of circularity (M 10-M48). Leader: ICL/ 
Partners: CIRCE, AIT, ITE, UZ, LTU, TAT, CAS, BRI, STRA, SAI, ZAR, PRA, BOFA, AMS, AMB, ALIA 
Subtask 7.1.1. Developing a strategy for Zaragoza’s Circular Hub (UZ): Based on the framework provided by D2.1, 
the development of a circular strategy in Zaragoza’s will be performed together with a series of workshops. Participants 
involved include partners, staff from ZAR  and other relevant public authorities  and identified stakeholders. Needs and 
barriers that hinder circularity will be identified, before setting up the ambition, the objectives and the timeframe of the 
strategy. A series of 8 online working sessions (M24- M30) will then be held to develop an action plan. Those working 
sessions will be facilitated b y ICL, with the participation of experts from the project or potentially outside. In between 
sessions, partners and in particular local authorities will develop the Zaragoza ’s Hub for Circularity strategy and will 
benefit from support and mentoring from a Circular Hub Helpdesk, constituted of ICL and project experts (M24 to 
M32). In M32 a provisional version of the strategy will be submitted, while the final version will be submitted in M46.  
Subtask 7.1.2. Guidelines for Hubs for Circularity in Europe  (ICL): Based on both the approach and the strategy 
itself, ICL will develop guidelines targeting local authorities aiming to set up other I-US hubs in Europe (M38), in close 
collaboration with the European Community of Practice (ECoP) and the Process4Planet Partnership. The document will 
detail the different steps followed to develop Zaragoza’s strategy, drawing on ICL’s Integrated Management cycle and 
considering contextual factors to ensure a broader exploitation of results. Guidelines will be updated to include feedback 
from replication cities (M46). 
Task 7.2 Analysis of regulations and barriers, and development of recommendations (M33-M48). Leader: CIRCE / 
Partners: ITE, UZ, TAT, CAS, BRI, GEO, SAI, CEM, ICL, EEIP, ZAR, PRA, BOFA, AMS, ALIA 
This task aims at providing a mapping and analysis of existing EU policies and regulations that have a relevance, are 
related and/or apply to  the addressed value chains, focusing also on the processes and products obtained in WP6. The 
analysis aims at establishing a solid knowledge base for the replication of REDOL results, building on the regional analysis 
performed at T2.4. The scanning of relevant policies and regulations will be based on desk-based research, which could be 
complemented by targeted interviews with key stakeholders. It will include a follow up in the policy targets of at least: the 
European Green Deal, CE Action Plan, EU Bioeconomy Strategy and other possible future regulations. A second analysis 
will be carried out to assess the implementation within the countries where the project replication take place. Regulatory 
bottlenecks to innovation in the process should be identified to ensure that innovative processes and circular products can 
be introduced on the market as a real solution. This analysis will include those barriers, such as the lack of EU regulation 
on a particular issue, the existence of contradictive regulation, problems with the transpositi on of EU regulations, 
overregulation on a specific topic, etc. The information gathered will be analysed to provide an overview of the regulatory 
framework at European level, and in particular the feasibility of implementing the different solutions. 
Task 7 .3 Social innovation activities and building  human capital and job profiles (M 10-M48). Leader: UZ / 
Partners: CIRCE, ITE, GEO, CEM, ICL, ZAR, PRA, BOFA, AMS 
This task will implement the strategy developed in T2.2 to engage citizens from the very beginning in REDOL activities 
and implement a design thinking approa ch. Accordingly, a series of information sessions, co- creation workshops, 
awareness raising campaigns, surveys, events, etc. will be performed exploiting synergies with existing initiatives such 
as Aragon Circular or “R que erre” initiatives. Additionally, an analysis of which knowledge and skills are lacking for 
the successful implementation of hubs for circularity will be performed, and training materials and sessions will be 
developed and implemented accordingly. CIRCE will add the knowledge gathered in SPIRE -SAIS project, about the 
identification of key job profiles for the symbiotic management of resources and energy efficiency in industrial sectors. 
Task 7.4 Understanding the potential of I-US around Europe: REDOL impact quantification (M25-M48). Leader: 
EEIP/ Partners: CIRCE, AIT, ITE, STRA, ICL, PRA, BOFA, AMS, ALIA 
This task has the objective of analysing the potential for REDOL replication. Starting with an analysis of  the existing 
market for both REDOL technological results and for the replication of the overall REDOL concept building on hubs for 
circularity, qualitative and quantitative data about envisaged market size, hot spots for the incubation of I -US initiatives 
and user and customer needs as wel l as existing competition and competitive advantages of the technologies to be 
developed will be provided and used as input for a questionnaire survey. The survey will be carried out among potential 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 39 
users and customers of REDOL solutions. A final  analysis will be carried out considering present situations, 
technological trends, market barriers and drivers and future trends of sensitive factors. T his information together with 
the data gathered in WP6, T7.2 and T7.6 will enable the evaluation of replication potential mainly among SPIRE sectors 
but also considering the most important I -US hot spots, environmental and economic performances, applied business 
and contractual models and managerial procedures. As a result, a replication potential report will be delivered. Based on 
its conclusions, the exploitation strategy and the D&C plan under development in Task 8.1 and Task 8.4 will be adapted. 
Task 7.5 Interaction and contribution to major EU bodies on I-US: ECoP (M25-M48). Leader: CIRCE/ Partners: 
ITE, STRA, CEM, ICL, EEIP, PRA, BOFA, AMS, ACT 
The objective of this task is to set up synergies between different projects and funding sources and technology roadmaps 
along the innovation chain, considering results coming from previous WPs. In the first place a connection will be made 
with the ECoP platform (H4C Europe project, where CIRCE , STRA and ICL are partners). REDOL will also link to 
SIMSITES network of waste associations and ecosites and will potentially participate in dissemination events.  
Moreover, ICL will anchor REDOL within the European I-US ecosystem to benefit from potential synergies, disseminate 
knowledge and make the REDOL results exploitable for the stakeholders. Connections will be made with European-wide 
initiatives, including the EC CCRI, the Circular Cities Declaration or the Circular City Centre. Similar actions will be 
carried out towards research networks on I -US and professional associations. ICL will organise a workshop per year to 
engage the above-mentioned stakeholders. The funding mechanisms for the value -chains will be assessed and refined, 
making a detailed assessment of the fund’s availability, at EU, regional, and national level, as the leverage of additional 
funding will contribute to achieve the expected impacts. The RIS3 strategy will play a key role in this respect. 
Nevertheless, not only public funds will be analysed, but also private ones. CIRCE will be in charge of networking 
activities with related SPIRE and I-US projects, in previous and future calls at HE or other relevant programmes to link 
the project results and conclusions with available or under development roadmaps. All project partners will be 
encouraged to contribute to international events to integrate regional and national programs and initiatives and to allow 
other organizations, not directly participating in REDOL, to know about its objectives, evolution and conclusions. 
Task 7.6 Roadmap for replicability of solid urban waste value chains across EU (M 25-M48). Leader: ICL/ 
Partners: CIRCE, ICCS, ITE, NTT, SUIT, STRA, GEO, PRA, BOFA, AMS, ACT, ALIA 
Cities of Prato (IT), Bornholm (DK) and Amsterdam (NL) will follow developments within the project to build capacity 
on I-US and setting up their own Hub for Circularity. By M25, each city will set up the governance structure, including 
the project manager, officers from various services, as well as external stakeholders (local businesses and industries, 
logistic companies, community groups). Replicators will attend a two -day visit of Zaragoza’s Hub for Circularity  and 
will meet partners in charge of the different value chains  (M26-27). Cities will then  carry out a baseline assessment 
using methodologies and tools developed within the project, notably characterising local value cha ins and mapping 
waste resources (T2.2 and 2.3). 3 full -day workshops  in replicator cities  will be organised to develop a replication 
strategy, based on D7.1. Cities will then have to develop strategies to set up their own Hub for Circularity, those will be 
integrated in D7.3 (M32-M44), being part of -and drawing on insights from- the ECoP platform. Cities will benefit from 
support and mentoring from the Hub for Circularity  Helpdesk, constituted of ICL and project experts. Drawing  on both 
Zaragoza’s and repl ication cities experience, ICL will develop a roadmap for replicability, including a set of 
recommendations targeting EU policymakers and aiming to facilitate the set-up of Hubs for Circularity in Europe, again 
in close alignment with related I-US activities at European level (D7.3, M48). 
Table 19. REDOL Work Package 8 description. 
Work package Number  WP8 
Work package title Dissemination, Communication and Exploitation 
Main Objective: To define and implement C&D&E activities throughout (and after) the project to ensure that REDOL 
results will effectively benefit the EU CE and reach the market. These activities will be also useful to identify a roadmap 
towards spreading the I-US concepts and results that would be promoted to a commonly agreed business strategy. 
Specific objectives: 
• To define the dissemination, exploitation and communication strategies. 
• To monitor and execute the C&D activities with a continuous penetration in the main target groups. 
• To identify KERs and develop the most suitable IPR and exploitation strategies. 
• To study business models for REDOL outcomes marketability and promotion. 
• To reach agreements for fairly conducting the exploitation of results and ensuring a fast market uptake. 
• To develop learning resources and capacity building programmes supporting the use of the project outcomes. 
Task 8.1 Design of dissemination and communication strategy (M1-M48). Leader: GEO/ Partners: CIRCE, ICL, ZAR 
A detailed, comprehensive and agile C&D strategy and plan will be developed at the beginning of the project, being 
periodically updated to maximise  its impact throughout the project and beyond. GEO will develop the roadmap to 
coordinate all the partners’ communication activities aligning them to the target groups and objectives to achieve. The 
plan will identify: WHO (target audiences) will receive W HAT (key messages), HOW (communication channels) and 
WHEN (implementation and schedule) and include: (i) i dentification and classification of key stakeholders, project 
values, target groups, messages, actions, channels, timing, etc., (ii) the communication channels and their associated 
activities to reach the expected impact, (iii) dissemination procedures according to the EC GA and the CA, (iv) Roles & 
Responsibilities & Conditions of the C&D among the partners, (v) process to ensure proper dissemination of the results, 
confidentiality, publication and use of the knowledge . All partners will play a key role in the dissemination of the 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 40 
results. Monitoring of individual C&D activities will take place on a regular basis through the collection of  feedbacks. 
The generated impacts will be measured through an integrated analysis of outreach data and key indicators. 
Task 8.2 Dissemination and communication actions (M1-M48). Leader: GEO/ Partners: All 
Project visual identity and branding. The project identity will be developed in the first months. A logo and graphic 
elements will be designed to create a unique identity following HE visual guidelines, and project’s values and key messages. 
Communication and dissemination material. Online and offline materials will be developed, aligned to the project identity, 
and used for C&D purposes, both online and offline (e.g., events, conference, trade fairs). C&D materials include leaflets, 
posters and roll-ups, factsheets and document templates, and success cases videos. An e -newsletter every 6 months will 
provide relevant up-to-date information and disseminate best practices among readers. Additional, dissemination materials 
will include: (i) info-packs, using infographics and (ii) publications in technical journals, conference papers and presentations. 
Social media and innovative channels. The C&D strategy and plan will include the exploitation of dedicated existing and 
new social network channels. These social experiences will include the use of gamification techniques. 
Project website devoted to the project will be developed by CIRCE, being in charge of its regular update as well as of its 
overall visual identity. This tool is aimed at disseminating the project details and results to a wider audience. The website will 
provide information including objectives, links to related sites, materials and information on exploitable results for industry 
and investors. It will also promote upcoming project events.  
Public communication addressing the general public and the media will include: (i) Press and news releases will be 
produced and distributed; (ii) Four journalistic articles, (iii) a final video. A press kit will be developed to support partners and 
journalists. The approach to the distribution of news releases, articles and videos to information multipliers and dedicated 
portals is targeted at achieving maximum value for money by spreading communication materials among the pre-defined 
target groups on one side, and a broader public on the other. 
Task 8.3 Stakeholder engagement and regional networking: REDOL Circular Community  (M16-M48). Leader: 
CIRCE/ Partners: AIT, ITE, ITA, UZ, TAT, CAS, GEO, SAI, CEM, FIN, RINA, ICL, EEIP, ZAR, PRA, BOFA, 
AMS, HUSA, AMB 
This task will create REDOL C ircular Community at regional level, thus its main objective is to maintain a continuous 
flow of information to engage and interact with local partners that will be key for the implementation of REDOL value 
chain, making the link between REDOL products and the end-users and closing the loop in every value chain. Accordingly, 
this task will implement the methodologies for the implementation of the governance structure established in T2.1 and will 
support the evolution of the project and its circular value chains to ensure a proper interaction within all the key actors 
required for their proper operation. ICL will oversee providing the guidelines for disseminating at regional level REDOL 
main findings and objectives in the creation of the Circular Community, while CIRCE will be responsible for supporting 
interactions among key partners of each value chain.  
Task 8.4 IPR review and exploi tation strategy approach (M1- M48). Leader: STRA/ Partners: CIRCE, AIT, 
AITEX, ICCS, ITE, ITA, UZ, NTT, LTU, VDZ, TAT, CAS, IRIS, MOS, BRI, SUIT, TEC, GEO, SAI, ACC, 
CEM, FIN, RINA, PRA, BOFA, AMS, AMB 
The IPR strategy goal is to study what project results should be protected, to explore the best ways to protect them and 
support those interested partners. Exploitation activities will have a twofold objective. A comprehensive exploitation 
strategy will be elaborated into an exploitation plan, and  actions toward relevant stakeholders will be defined to set the 
basis for future market deployment. This task will be active throughout the project by proactive dialogue, ensuring that 
agreements are achieved and thus the development of the market uptake strategy can start as soon as possible. To reach 
consensus on exploitation issues and draw up a final exploitation plan 3 exploitation phases are envisaged with specific 
workshops: (1) Definition of the exploitable results;  (2) IPRs management and protection; (3) Development of the 
exploitation and business strategies. The aim of these workshops is to reach a collective agreement on: (i)  
characterisation of KER s; (ii) identification of business opportunities; (iii)  continuous update about competition and 
end-users’ requirement; (iv) assess risks and barriers; (v) tuning and validation of the exploitation plan, IP  management 
and the business models; (vi) creating new businesses (start-ups) for the more mature KERs.  
Task 8.5 Assessment of business models for REDOL KER (M 25-M48). Leader: STRA/ Partners: CIRCE, AIT, 
AITEX, ICCS, ITE, UZ, NTT, LTU, VDZ, TAT, CAS, IRIS, BRI, SUIT, TEC, CEM, FIN, RINA, EEIP, PRA, 
BOFA, AMS, AMB 
Based on the outcomes of WP6, T 7.4 and T8.4, a circular business model methodology consisting of a two- step scan 
process, aimed to facilitate the transition from a linear to a circular business model, will be implemented  for each KER 
and partner in charge of its exploitation. Outcomes include: (i) Revenues and activities based on linear business models; 
(ii) Revenues and activities based on circular business models (insofar already present);  (iii) Focus areas for revenue 
generation and cost reductions; (iv) Stakeholder analysis; (v) Investment Profitability  Analysis: Economic parameters 
will be used (Net Present Value, Internal Rate of Return). 
Task 8.6 Definition and implementation of I-US business models within Zaragoza (M 25-M48). Leader: STRA/ 
Partners: CIRCE, ITE, UZ, TAT, CAS, BRI, SAI, CEM, FIN, ZAR, ACT, AMB 
In parallel to the set-up and demonstration of the circular value chains, within this task CIRCE will interact with the key 
players engaged through the project in order to advance in the definition of the business models, collaboration agreements 
and financial arrangements for the successful future exploitation of the generated circular flows. To this end, STRA will 
make use of their expertise on the implementation of symbiotic business models to provide recommendations and ad-hoc 
documentation to establish shared business models along the value chains. As a result, key players crucial in the future 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 41 
operation of the generated circular value chains within the region will advance significantly in the business perspective of 
the Symbiosis Readiness Level, which will be crucial to reach SRL7 by the end of project execution. 
3.1.2. List of deliverables 
Table 20. List of deliverables 
Nº Deliverable name WP Participant Type Level* Date 
D1.1 Project Handbook   1 CIRCE R SEN 3 
An internal document that will set the basis for the governance structure, the communication channels and methods, the periodicity of 
reporting, as well as gender and ethics issues to be followed during the whole project. 
D1.2 Data Management Plan 1 CIRCE R SEN 6 
Document including: 1) Data set reference and name. 2) Data set descriptions, 3) Standards and metadata, 4) Data sharing, 5) 
Archiving and 6) The 'ethics requirements' that the project must comply with. 
D1.3 RRI First report and Progress Report 1 CIRCE R PU 12,30,48 
Report containing REDOL RRI principles and the overall status of the project. 
D2.1 REDOL organisational, social and regulatory framework 2 AIT R PU 9 
REDOL framework at the beginning of the project including a description of the I-US readiness level (SRL), barriers to tackle, 
opportunities to exploit and strategies for ensuring REDOL to achieve maturity in SRL. 
D2.2 REDOL value chains and waste resources characterisation 2 AIT R SEN 12 
Detailed description of REDOL value chains including  a map of waste resources and the protocols to share this information 
with REDOL I-US platform for the development of the urban-industrial models. 
D2.3 Evaluation methodology 2 CIRCE R PU 12 
Description of KPIs to be monitored, which includes the definition of each KPI and how it must be measured in order to follow 
a common monitoring and evaluation methodology for REDOL demonstration activities. 
D2.4 REDOL governance structure across key actors and value chains 2 CIRCE R SEN 15 
Report containing the comprehensive characterization of stakeholders, the identified scope of cooperation/cross -fertilization 
matrix, and the methodologies for the implementation of the governance structure. 
D3.1 REDOL prototypes for automated sorting and classification 3 ICCS DEM SEN 32 
Evidence coming from all WP3 tasks that the automated sorting and classification prototypes have passed the initial testing 
phase and the detailed engineering of the final systems is ready for its implementation in WP6.  
D3.2 Advances of REDOL automated sorting and classification technologies 3 ICCS R PU 32 
Document summarizing main advances achieved by REDOL on automated sorting and classification technologies, whose 
objective is to be disseminated among key scientific and professional stakeholders. 
D4.1 REDOL prototypes for SUW valorisation 4 ITE DEM SEN 32 
Evidence coming from all WP4 tasks that the S UW valorisation prototypes have passed the initial testing phase and the 
detailed engineering of the final systems is ready for its implementation in WP6. 
D4.2 Advances of REDOL SUW valorisation technologies 4 ITE R PU 32 
Document summarizing main advances achieved by REDOL on S UW valorisation, whose objective is to be disseminated 
among key scientific and professional stakeholders. 
D5.1 Standardized data collection, management and sharing mechanisms 5 SUIT R SEN 24 
Report describing the policies and mechanisms that must be complied with to exchange data with the platform. 
D5.2 Models and tools underpinning REDOL I-US platform 5 CIRCE DEM SEN 32 
Evidence ( datasets and software) on the finalisation of the urban-industrial models and tools forecasting and pricing waste 
resources, optimizing logistics, ensuring traceability and performing life cycle analysis. 
D5.3 I-US REDOL platform 5 CIRCE DEM PU 48 
I-US REDOL platform accessible for its use by all available stakeholders at regional level. 
D6.1 New value chains configuration implemented 6 CIRCE DEM PU 36 
Technologies developed within WP3 and WP4, already deployed at the value chains and ready to be demonstrated during the 
last year of REDOL execution. 
D6.2 Guidelines for the design of process and products towards circularity 6 CIRCE R PU 42 
Document including lessons learned and best practices  for the redesign of waste management processes into circular and 
symbiotic value chains based on the experience of REDOL demonstration. 
D6.3 SWOT analysis & techno-economic assessment of REDOL value chains 6 CIRCE R SEN 42 
Report detailing the overall assessment of the performance of REDOL value chain form a technical and economic perspective, 
including a SWOT analysis as well for each value chain. 
D6.4 REDOL impact and catalogue of I-US solutions for the establishment 
of circular and symbiotic value chains 6 CIRCE R PU 48 
Description of main figures and results of REDOL project, including a brief description of the solutions impl emented in order 
to ease their replication and introduction in the market after the project’s end. 
D7.1 Guidelines for Circular Hubs in Europe 7 ICL R PU 46 
Handbook on how to develop a Circular Hub in any European city by leveraging on the urban-industrial nexus. 
D7.2 REDOL learning materials 7 UZ R PU 48 
Training materials on circular economy, urban -industrial symbiosis, bu siness models and related training topics identified of 
relevance during T7.3 execution. 
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 42 
D7.3 Roadmap for replicability and European recommendations 7 ICL R PU 48 
Document including main WP7 outputs. It includes main regulatory recommendations, hot spots and market size of Urban-
Industrial symbiosis on SUW, recommended governance structures and a roadmap for REDOL replication. 
D8.1 Dissemination and Communication Plan 8 GEO R PU 4, 20, 36 
1) Identification of REDOL stakeholders/profiling; 2) dissemination methods, channels, associated activities and tools to reach 
the expected impacts; 3) dissemination procedures; 4) the DEC activities’ schedule and complementarities among partners. 
D8.2 REDOL Exploitation strategy and IPR manual 8 STRA R SEN 14, 30, 48 
Document including the definition of the exploitation strategy and pathways, IPR review and management and final IPR 
manual including agreements among the partners. 
D8.3 Business models for the exploitation of REDOL value chains 8 CIRCE R PU 48 
Document summarizing the business models and agreements reached among the key players of the value chains. 
3.1.3. Lists of milestones 
Table 21. List of milestones 
No Milestone (Ms) name WP Date Means of verification 
Ms1 Project KoM 1 M1 Minutes of the meetings approved by the GA 
Ms2 REDOL initial documentation ready 1 M4 Project Handbook and D8.1 approved by the PC and the GA. 
Ms3 Value chains characterized and methodology 
for KPIs and impact evaluation available 2 M12 KPIs list and monitoring procedures defined and checked by 
WP leaders and PC 
Ms4 REDOL governance structure across key actors 
and value chains already in place 2 M15 D2.4 checked by WP leader and approved by the PC 
Ms5 REDOL solutions mature enough to start the 
demonstration activities in WP6 6 M24 Layouts for waste managers and end users presented and 
approved by the PC 
Ms6 Final REDOL prototypes for SUW automated 
sorting, classification and valorisation ready 3,4 M32 Prototypes (D3.1 and D4.1) checked by WP leaders and 
approved by the PC 
Ms7 I-US REDOL platform operative 5 M38 D5.3 approved by WP leader and the PC 
Ms8 Zaragoza symbiotic readiness level (SRL) of 7 
achieved  6 M42 WP6 activities executed for a sufficient period of time to 
obtain best-practices (D6.2) 
Ms9 
Finalisation of REDOL: Final Report validated, 
REDOL partners implementing exploitation and 
replication activities out of the project scope 
1 M48 WP4 DLVs issued and approved by the GA. All deliverables 
checked and approved by the WP leaders and the PC. 
3.1.4. Critical risks for implementation 
The preliminary risks identified are shown with quantification on the severity (S = 1 [low] to 3 [high]) in case of 
occurrence, their likelihood of arising during the project (L = 1 [low] to 3 [high]), the WP they are related to, and a 
preliminary mitigation actions and contingency plan (MA/CP): 
Table 22. Critical risks for implementation 
Risk description WP L* I* Responsible 
Management 
1 
Closing the activity of one company or partner leaving the consortium  1 1 3 GA 
MA/CP: The consortium is highly qualified and would assume tasks from a partner leaving the project. Otherwise, 
they would find within their large contact network the best partner for assuming the role lost.  
2 
Lack of financial resources 1 1 2 PC 
MA/CP: Solvency of project partners has been assessed, ensuring their financial resources for project execution. Most 
partners have already participated in national/EU projects, having wide experience and history, which reduces this risk. 
3 
Quality, scope and delay of partners work  1 2 2 PC 
MA/CP: A compulsory Work plan is established with operative plan to be prepared by WP leaders to avoid low 
quality, loss of direction or too overload actions. In case this is detected, PC will enter in contact with WP leader to 
revise. Key DLV will always go through a review process including CIRCE and TPs.   
Technical risks  
4 
Delays in the value chain uses cases due to the process’s complexity 3, 4 1 2 WP Leader 
MA/CP: Efforts allocated , and Gantt Chart have been designed avoiding possible delays in the deliveries. If some 
delay occurred, the task/WP leader will engage all necessary efforts to deliver the solution as soon as possible. Also, 
the necessary capabilities are involved in the consortium so that no big delays occur. 
5 
REDOL platform alpha release without enough functionalities working properly 5 2 2 WP Leader 
MA/CP: Possible delays were contemplated in the Gantt chart (Tasks 5.2-5.5) to fine tune tools and algorithms until the 
end of the project making use of real data from demo-sites, thus delivering a functional platform in the beta-release. 
6 
Data sharing hampered between Urban-Industrial Symbiosis Systems actors 5 2 2 WP Leader 
MA/CP: The aim of the platform is to provide a virtual intermediary to preserve data confidentiality, and protocols for 
data sharing will be addressed during WP5 and dedicated workshops between the main actors.  
7 
Technologies upscaling does not achieve expected performance thresholds 6 2 2 PC 
MA/CP: The GA will decide on alternative designs which can achieve a valid compromise between performance and 
costs targets. While exploring synergies among stakeholders, alternatives will be considered in case of need.  
8 
Conflict of interest with current waste managers in the region 7 1 2 All partners 
MA/CP: The consortium counts with the support of URBASER and FCC, as both presented letter of support and 
commitment to provide SUW for the project’s activities. ZAR can act as an intermediary in case of discrepancies.  
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 43 
C&D&E 10 
Ineffective exploitation strategy and/or business models 8 2 2 WP Leader 
MA/CP: REDOL counts with industrial and research partners with experience in developing, implementing and 
managing similar solutions, as well as business experts like STRA with a large portfolio of clients covering the entire 
value chain of the use cases, which ensures enough expertise to modify and adapt the exploitation strategy. 
11 
Weak internal communication 8 2 3 PC 
MA/CP. Weak communication among partners makes it difficult to disseminate and promote the developments of the 
project. CIRCE will set bi -monthly teleconferences with the WP leaders to strengthen internal communication and to 
ensure the flow of information that will be then transformed into news bits, press releases, website content and so on.  
3.1.5. Resources to be committed 
Table 23. Summary of staff effort. 
Participant WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 WP8 Total PMs 
CIRCE 30 25 48 43 109 49,5 23 24 351,5 
AIT 2 33 - 18 5 16 4 6 84 
AITEX 3 - - 53 - 20 - 3 79 
ICCS 1 - 78 - - 15 1 3 98 
ITE 2 - - 55 - 16 6 6 85 
ITA 1 - - - - 15 - 4 20 
UZ 4 32 - 6 - - 27,75 18 87,75 
NTT 3 - 29 - 5 1 2 3 43 
LTU 1 8 - - 15 6 2 3 35 
VDZ 4 - 1 10 5 5 - 3 28 
AMS 2 3 2 2 - 3 12 5 29 
TAT 4 8 - 12 - 20 2 9 55 
CAS 4 8 12 12 - 20 2 9 67 
IRIS 2 3 26 - - 6 - 6 43 
MOS 1 1 - 35 - 6 - 2 45 
BRI 3 6 - 24 - 18 4 5 60 
SUIT 1 6 - - 36 8 5 7 63 
TEC 1 - - - - 30 - 3 34 
STRA 2 3 - - - 30 8 46 59 
GEO 3 1 - - - - 5 24,5 33.5 
RINA 2 - - 12 14 26 - 4 58 
ACT 1 2 - 3 - 15 2 2 25 
AMB 2 6 25 - - 7 1 7 48 
SAI 2 7 5 - - 10 2 5 31 
ACC 1 - - 10 - 36 - 2 49 
CEM 2 5 - 10 - 12 5 4 38 
CEMCH 1,2 - - - - - - - 1,2 
FIN 3 6 - 1 - 15 - 5 30 
ICL 4 4 - - - - 34 17 59 
EEIP 3 - - - - - 14 20 37 
ZAR 1,5 8 2 - 2 3 8 8 32,5 
PRA 2 3 3 3 - 5 15 8 39 
ALIA 0,5 5 12 - - 6 5 3 31,5 
BOFA 2 3 3 3 - 5 15 5 36 
HUSA 2 2 12 - - 6 - 2 24 
Total PMs 103,2 188 258 312 191 400,5 204,75 278,5 1938,95 
Table 24. Subcontracting costs 
Participant Cost (€) Description of task and justification 
ICCS 60,000 Technical/mechanical works for the assembly of smart urban bins components (20k€ x 3 bins). 
HUSA 20,000 Integration of the developed sorting system with already in use TOMRA separators. 
Table 25. Purchase cost’ items (travel and subsistence, equipment and other goods, works and services) 
 
CIRCE Cost (€) Justification ICCS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  17,000 9 Consort. & 6 tech. meetings  16,000 9 Consort. & 5 tech. meetings. 
Equipment 345,000 
1 L stirred reactor assisted with 
MW (90k€), HSI cameras with 
ultrahigh resolution (150k€), 
470,000 
3xbins (70k€): Plastic shredders (20k€), Al 
box (8k €), camera (8k€), sensors (7k€), 
robotic (15k€), PLCs, CPU and electronics 
Risk description WP L* I* Responsible 
9 
Low number of attendees in replication workshops 7 1 2 All partners 
MA/CP: Setting up a governance structure will be aligned with the needs of the workshops to address to main required 
stakeholders. The consortium will leverage on its extensive network, described in section 2.2.2.  
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 44 
Remaining 
(<15%) 95,000 
sensors (20k), PCU (20k€), 
Conveyor belt (50k€), mechanical 
input separator (15k€) 
41,000 
(11k€). CDW sorting systems: HSI cameras 
(140k€), 3 robotics arms (70k€), Industrial 
camera (10k€), illumination (10k€), PCU 
(10k€), Conveyor belt (30k€) Total 457,000  527,000 
AIT Cost (€) Justification MOS Cost (€) Justification 
Travels 9,600  9 Consortium meetings 6,400 9 Consortium meetings 
OG&S 133,000 Materials for trials (78k€), green 
solvents (35k€), sensors and 
peripherals (20k€). 
250,000 200L green solvents (100k€), prototype vases 
≈800 L (65k€), sensors (40k€), heating 
system (25k€), connexions (20k€). 
Remaining 
(<15%) 30,500 10,000 
Total 173,100  266,400  
AITEX Cost (€) Justification ITA Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  16,000 9 Consort. & 5 tech. meetings. 9,600 9 Consortium meetings 
OG&S 105,000 IL solvents (60k€), charac. 
analysis (25k€), reactants for 
depolymerization (20k€)  
25,000 Software licenses (20k€), microscopy 
services (5k€). Remaining 
(<15%) 12,500 4,000 
Total 133,500  38,600  
TEC Cost (€) Justification VDZ Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  6,400 9 Consortium meetings 18,000 9 Consort. & 6 tech. meetings. 
OG&S 142,000 
Materials for trials (70k€), pre-
treatment systems (50k€), 
validation tests (18k€), IPR (4k€) 
23,000 
Lab services for material characterization 
(15k€), IPR expenses (4k€), dissemination 
material (4k€) 
Total 148,400  41,000  
ITE Cost (€) Justification IRIS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  13,500 9 Consort. & 4 tech. meetings. 18,000 9 Consort. & 6 tech. meetings. 
OG&S 15,000 Reactants (6k€), Prototyping 
(5k€), mechanical/electric 
components (4k€). 
122,000 Hardware for prototyping (58k€); electronics 
and mechanical parts (25k€), SW licenses 
(10k€); IT (15k€), charac. analysis (14k€). 
Remaining 
(<15%) 30,000 10,000 
Total 58,500  150,000  
NTT Cost (€) Justification CAS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  9,600 9 Consortium meetings 14,000 9 Consort. & 5 tech. meetings. 
Equipment 34,000 Reactor (25k€), condenser(9k€)  18,000 Endless belt (8k€), storage silo (10k€) 
OG&S 14,800 
Solvents (6k€), filtration media 
(8k€), IPR expenses (4k€), 
Dissem. mat (4k€) 
221,000  
Waste mill (100k€ rent), installation costs 
(75k€), charac. anal. (25k€), tech. services 
(17 k€), IPR expenses (4k€). 
Total 58,400  253,000   
TAT Cost (€) Justification FIN Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  14,000 9 Consort. & 5 tech. meetings. 9,000 9 Consortium meetings 
OG&S 75,000 Lab.serv. (25k€) solvents(50k€). 41,000 Wood/resin consumables (37 k€), IPR (4k€) 
Total 89,000    50,000  
BRI Cost (€) Justification CEM Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  12,000 9 Consort. & 3 tech. meetings. 9,000 9 Consortium meetings 
OG&S 42,000 Consumables (8k€), 
characterization anal. (4k€), 
geotextile (8k€), tests (22k€)  
70,000 Characterization analysis (600€x100), 
consumables for industrial tests (100€x100) Remaining 
(<15%) 9,300 4,000 
Total 63,300  83,000  
RINA Cost (€) Justification ACT Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  18,000 9 Consortium & 3 tech. meetings  12,400 9 Consortium meetings 
Equipment 8,000 Scale (3k€), workstation (5k€) 168,867 Shredding and washing plastic plant (131k€), 
Supercritical CO2 installation (1.3k€), film 
extruder (36k€) 
OG&S 163,000 Consumables (85k€), SW licences 
(40k€), charac. analysis (38k€)  
- 
Rem. (<15%) 4,000 27,100 
Total 193,000  208,367  
ACC Cost (€) Justification AMB Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  12,600 9 Consortium & 3 tech. meetings 9,000 9 Consortium meetings 
OG&S 30,000 Workforce resources (8k€), 
Consumables like resins, additives 
(14k€), fire tests (8k€)  
140,000 Robots and grippers x2 (110 k€), conveyor 
belt (12 k€), Electric box (9 k€), support 
structure (7 k€), vacuum pump (2 k€) 
Remaining 
(<15%) 4,000 4,000 
Total 46,600  1453,000  
ZAR Cost (€) Justification HUSA Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  5,000 Consort & tech meetings outside Zar 9,000 9 Consortium meetings 
OG&S 30,000 Dissemination material (10k€) and 
meetings organization (20k€) 25,000 Charac. analysis (15k€), consumables and 
raw material (10k€) 
Total 35,000  34,000  
 
  
HORIZON-CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10  Innovation Action – REDOL 
 45 
 
3.2. Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole 
REDOL will be executed by a well -balanced and multi -
disciplinary consortium composed by 35 partners from 12 
European countries, particularly 5 large companies, 12 
SMEs, 11 research organisations, 5 public institutions and 2 
non-profit organisations. CIRCE will act as coordinator , its 
wide experience in EU projects of relevance for REDOL 
ensures the correct execution of the project. The consortium 
is a high-quality partnership fully capable to attain the 
targeted objectives  and ha s been selected to include  key 
actors essential to create synergies, ensuring that project 
results will maximize I -US symbiosis in the region and 
replication of the solutions  across Europe . In this sense, 
ZAR is the main public body  occupying the central 
hierarchical position of the hub for circularity  and counts 
with the signed commitment of waste managers such as 
URBASER and FCC (currently in charge of waste 
collection and management in the city through public 
contracts) to support REDOL execution . The nexus with 
local industry and stakeholders is performed through 5 
public and private waste managers and a total of 8 
industrial facilities/end -users. Their distribution along 
REDOL value chains is as follows: 
Packaging Waste manager RTO and Technology providers Use Cases End Users 
HUSA ICCS, IRIS, ITE, AMB, CIRCE SAI ACC, TEC 
Plastic Waste manager RTO and Technology providers Use Cases End-users 
ZAR ICCS, AIT, CIRCE ACT, MOS TEC, CEM 
CDW Waste manager RTO and Technology providers Use Cases End Users 
CAS ICCS, VDZ CEM FIN, ACC, CEM 
Textiles Waste manager RTO and Technology providers Use Cases End-Users 
ALIA NTT, AITEX BRI ACC 
WEEE Waste manager RTO and Technology providers End users 
TAT CIRCE, RINA, AMB ACC 
Additionally, REDOL will be supported during the whole project by a set of  horizontal partners with the objective 
of digitalising the whole value chains and waste management procedures, put in place the governance structure and 
business models needed for a successful I -US initiative, create a circular community and ensure citizens 
involvement in the transition to a CE  by means of deploying social innovation and training actions . Together with 
these activities, coherent replication, exploitation, dissemination and communication strategies will be put in place 
by partners of high relevance in the field of hubs for circularity, I-US and the transition of cities towards a CE. 
Horizontal activities 
Digitalization Circular community creation Dissemination and exploitation Replication 
CIRCE, SUITE5, 
LTU, RINA CIRCE, ZAR, ITA, UZ GEO, STRA PRA, ALIA, AMS, BOFA, 
ICL, EEIP 
To ensure a fluid coordination of the project REDOL will 
propose a coherent management structure for the activities 
monitoring and the decision -making processes. A tentative 
management structure is provided in Figure 5. The General 
Assembly is the highest-level decision-making body and will be 
composed by one representative of each project partner. The 
Steering Committee, consisting of the Coordinator and WPs 
leaders, executes the day -to-day management of the project, 
being the main execution body. Finally, REDOL Circular 
Community will be in direct contact with the project coordinator 
and will interact with REDOL consortium along the project life 
cycle according to T8.3 description. In any case, the management 
structure and the main bodies and their responsibilities, as well as 
the management processes will be agreed by all project partners 
and reflected within the CA prior to the project start. 
Figure 4: REDOL geographical distribution 
 
  
     
Figure 5. REDOL management structure 
This proposal version was submitted by David RODRÍGUEZ on 30/03/2022 15:57:56 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public -private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Funding & Tenders Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integr ity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can b e verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Funding & Tenders 
Portal.  
(https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/support/faq)