3.3 Consortium as a whole ........................................................................................................................................... 50 
3.3.1 Description of the consortium ............................................................................................................................... 50 
3.3.2 Industrial/commercial involvement in the project ................................................................................................... 52 
3.3.3 Other countries ..................................................................................................................................................... 52
3.4 Resources ............................................................................................................................................................... 53 
4 Members of the Consortium ........................................................................................................................................... 56
4.1 Participants ............................................................................................................................................................. 56
4.2 Third parties involved in the project ...................................................................................................................... 97 
5 Ethics and Security ....................................................................................................................................................... 100
5.1 Ethics ..................................................................................................................................................................... 100
5.2 Security ................................................................................................................................................................. 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
1 Excellence
1.1 Objectives 
Past decades, millions of tons of PVC (polyvinylchloride) were additivated with substances which are nowadays classified as hazardous and hence called ‘legacy substances’ (LS) such as low molecular weight phthalate plasticisers1 (mainly di(2- ethylhexyl)phthalate - DEHP) to improve their flexibility and heavy metals2 (mainly lead-based stabilizers, like lead-stearates ) to improve the thermal stability of the PVC material. This so-called ‘old PVC’ is what currently constitutes most of both the hard (e.g. window frames, tubes) and soft (e.g. flooring or cables) PVC post- consumer waste, e.g. from construction. Recycling of 'old PVC' is seriously hindered because re-use of LS are very restricted by REACH. 
The aim of the REMADYL project is to ‘rejuvenate’ this ‘old PVC’. The term ‘rejuvenate’ refers to removing 
the hazardous LS and performing re-additivation to stabilise the cleaned PVC. For this, we will develop a novel breakthrough extraction technology based on an integrated multi-step continuous extrusion process, see figure. This way we will upcycle the ‘old PVC’ into a new generation of fully REACH-compliant ‘new PVC’ at an estimated cost of ca. €570/ton for both phthalate and heavy metal removal. 
To reach our ambitious overall goal and to maximise REMADYL impact, we define the following key objectives (KO): KO1 – Lab-scale processes for rejuvenating PVC: develop an extraction method to remove LS out of a PVC matrix. The extraction method will be based on a combination of extractive extrusion, complexation and melt filtration. Result: lab scale process (ca 0.5-2.0 kg/hour) and processing window to remove heavy metal stabilisers (focus on Pb < 0.1w%) and non-REACH compatible phthalates (focus on DEHP < 0.1w%)3 while controlling the PVC stability and viscosity via additivation. Target: TRL4 level. 
KO2 - Detection and sorting process for PVC containing legacy substances. Analysis of online separation of PVC material containing hazardous LS, based on Pb and DEHP-content. Result: selection of suitable screening technologies, ability to detect shredded PVC parts with >1.5w% Pb content, demo of online sorting. Target: TRL5 level. 
KO3 – Pilot line: continuous extractive extrusion process for rejuvenating PVC – upgrade equipment by integration of the extraction techniques into existing pilot line. Result: semi-industrial scale pilot (ca. 20-25 kg/hour) with optimised processing conditions for reaching KO1 defined levels and at energy consumption < 1kWh/kg PVC. Target: TRL5 level. 
KO4 – Demo of re-use of rejuvenated PVC material streams & design for recycling. Show the circularity of the materials flows by safe re-use of the rejuvenated PVC from technical and economic point of view. Key element will be to ensure the quality of the recycled materials and REACH compliance as well as a uniform and homogeneous output. Result: demo of use of rejuvenated PVC resin, with varying flexibility fulfilling industrial quality requirements for hard and soft PVC extrusion and for PVC injection moulding. Safety & quality control procedure set up. Target: TRL5-6. 
KO5 – Safe handling and re-use of by-products. Research re-use of the lead salt residue for manufacturing automotive batteries (or other applications) and study on the revalorization of a mixture of phthalate plasticizers to new plasticizers. Result: protocol for purification and safe disposal of phthalate plasticizer; hydrometallurgical and green chemical routes to obtain lead ingots (desirable purity 95-99%) from the lead salt residue (desirable purity > 75%). 
KO6 – Environmental & safety aspects: LCA, social-LCA and LCC and safety and risk assessment. Result: public report on environmental impact (including energy needs), social aspects and safety and risk of the rejuvenating process. 
KO7 - Policy contribution: review of existing legislation/guidelines concerning (re-use and recycling of) PVC waste; mapping of European PVC waste streams; best practice of PVC waste handling. Result: policy & standardisation input documents, including suggestions for defining EoW (End of Waste) requirements for PVC and safety aspects of the retained hazardous 
 
1 Also DBP, DIBP, and BBP are considered LS and under restriction. They will be dealt with in REMADYL, in a similar way as DEHP. In this proposal text 
we use for simplicity ‘phthalates’ but actually it should be ‘low molecular weight phthalates’ as only those are hazardous. 
2 Also Cadmium (Cd) is of concern but its presence in PVC waste is less frequent. It will also be dealt with in REMADYL, in a similar way as Pb. 
3ECHA submitted a report proposing to restrict articles containing lead compounds some phthalates plasticizers in concentrations larger than 0.1wt%, 
although derogations exists/are being negotiated for PVC products. REMADYL aims for these minimum values, although in practice temporary exceptions 
might be allowed (see section 2.1.3). 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
components; white paper on rejuvenating PVC and on re-use of lead salts. 
KO8 - Innovation management: exploitation & business plans, IP management, dissemination & communication. Result: tailored business plans for (company) partners to ensure exploitation beyond the project; public roadmap and strategy to further exploit the generic results; raise awareness, engage for collaboration to leverage REMADYL project outcome.
1.2 Relation to the work programme 
The REMADYL project will develop a new innovative extraction technology based on a continuous extrusion process to recycle PVC material containing additives of high concern in such a way that the recycled material is REACH conform and can be re- used again as raw material for manufacturing both soft and rigid PVC products (e.g. waterproof PVC sheets and rigid windows profiles). In this fashion, REMADYL will directly respond to the objectives put forth in the call scope. 
 
SC5-01-2018 call - challenge & scope REMADYL response and contribution 
 uptake and recyclability of secondary raw materials can be hampered by the presence of undesirable contaminants, 
PVC containing phthalates and stabilizers with heavy metals are currently hampering recycling of relevant PVC fractions because of non-compatibility with REACH regulation. After appropriate sorting of PVC waste, REMADYL aims to develop a single-step, continuous, low energy consumption and relatively low-cost technology to remove non-REACH compliant substances 
of ‘old PVC’. 
additives and even substances of concern … posing health or environmental risks … or adversely affecting the quality of the secondary 
raw material 
REMADYL focus is on legacy substances such as heavy metals (mainly Pb) and low molecular weight phthalates (mainly DEHP). Those substances are subjected to strict regulations due to their health and environmental risks. 
 increase the range of potential recycling and reuse applications 
According to ECHA data only 22% of PVC waste was (mechanically) recycled in 2016. REMADYL will expand the range of PVC material that can be recycled making it available on the market as secondary raw material of good quality or application in building & construction, flooring, insulation and 
others. 
 
innovative solutions for removing undesirable substances 
Eutectic solvents, extractive extrusion and use of MoS4-LDH (Layered Double Hydroxides) as inorganic lead scavenger and melt filtration will be evaluated. Technologies will be integrated in a standard plastic extruder to 
have a single step and continuous process. 
 
safe utilisation or disposal of substances thus removed 
Heavy metals-based salt residues will be evaluated for re-use, eg for automotive batteries. Protocols for safe recovery of low molecular weight phthalates and purifications of plasticizers mixture extracted. Safe disposal 
and/or purification of DEHP plasticizer, see Tasks 4.1 & 4.3. 
evidence of the potential market impact Data on the availability of LS containing PVC waste and the expected 
REMADYL market impact are given in section 1.4.2 and section 2. 
economic feasibility and overall environmental 
performance of the proposed solution 
Explicitly integrated: calculation of process cost (section 1.4.2), business 
plans development (KO7) and environmental assessment via LCA (KO6) 
 
recommendations on the design and manufacturing of materials for recyclability and for standardisation 
To have REMADYL results and approach included in future standardization documents, specific activities are included (KO7-standardisation input). Design and manufacturing aspects of rejuvenated PVC will be summarised (KO7- white book) and spread with the support of the relevant sector 
associations (like VinylPlus and TEPPFA). 
multidisciplinary consortium, with significant participation of industry partners and recyclers. Participation of SMEs is desirable 
Consortium covers all PVC expertise needed along the value chain: additivation and processing, products manufacturing, recycling (PVC and heavy metals); also safety, LCA and exploitation expertise. Of the 15 REMADYL partners 6 are SMEs and 3 are LARGE industry. 
achieve TRL 5-6 by the end of the project The technologies covered in our proposal have initial TRLs around 3 and will 
be brought to TRL5-6, see also section 1.3(a). 
contribution from the EU of between EUR 3 
million and EUR 5 million 
EC contribution asked for is €4.8million, providing high value for money in 
view of the expected technical breakthrough and generated impacts. 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
The Voluntary Commitment of the European PVC industry is: 
 To reach recycling of 800,000 tonnes/year of PVC by 2020, including 100,000 tonnes/year of difficult-to- recycle PVC material. 
 Develop and exploit innovative technology to recycle 100,000 tonnes/year of difficult-to-recycle PVC material (within the overall 800,000 tonnes/year recycling target). 
The extractive extrusion technologies described in the REMADYL project aim directly fit in and provide the tools to actually implement this goal of the European PVC industry.
1.3 Concept and approach 
(a) Overall concept 
Overall concept underpinning the project 
The playing field: PVC is one of the most widely used polymers in the world and Europe's third most popular plastic. Today, about 37 million tonnes of PVC are annually produced worldwide, of which 5.5 million tons are made in Europe4. PVC is very versatile: light, strong, fire resistant, excellent insulating properties and low gas permeability. By varying the use of additives in the manufacturing of PVC products, further features such as strength, rigidity, colour and transparency can be tuned to meet a wide range of applications, both rigid (e.g. tubes, window frames, bank cards) and soft (wall paper, packaging, cables, floor covering, blood bags). 
Further, PVC products are durable: they need minimal maintenance and their life-span can range from 30 to even 100 years in the case of cables, pipes and window profiles. This lead to the disadvantage that current PVC waste was made decades ago and the fact that this so called ‘old PVC’ thus contains legacy additives, the main ones are lead (compounds) for preventing degradation under influence of heat or UV light and DEHP as phthalate plasticizer for flexibility. Although today they are replaced by alternatives in ‘new PVC’, these LS will be abundant in PVC waste for at least another 30 - 50 years given the long lifetime of PVC and their use until circa 2008 for Pb and circa 2015 for DEHP5. 
The identified need: to circularise PVC materials streams that contain LS it is needed to upcycle the ‘old PVC’ with LS into ‘new PVC’ that is fully REACH compliant. The above situation indeed poses a serious challenge for the PVC industry to meet the recommendations published in the European Strategy for Plastics in a Circular Economy. To increase further the PVC recycling rates, also post-consumer ‘old PVC’ will need to be recycled. But, this is being hampered, and even threatened, as no methods to remove these LS from PVC are available: ‘At the moment there is no commercially viable process that can remove DEHP from PVC adequately’5 and ‘None of the explored technologies or projects is able to contribute sufficient recycling quantities by 2020 to achieve this objective (= 100.000 tons/year of difficult-to-recycle PVC)’ 6. 
The main methods for dealing with EoL PVC are (see also section 1.4.2 for specific advantages/disadvantages): 
 Mechanical recycling. This consists in reducing and processing PVC. Depending on the application, mechanical recycling can take place up to ten times as it does not result in a shortening of the molecule chains. This option has been used in PVC production and processing for many decades. This process does not remove any of the toxins from PVC, but adding new material can dilute the existing toxicity. 
 Chemical recycling (feedstock recycling). Chemical recycling methods break down plastics at a molecular level. It requires elaborate, dedicated facilities and is more costly than mechanical recycling. For this reason, the process is less preferred for general PVC waste, but it stands as an option for many materials that are too impure or contaminated for mechanical recycling. 
 Energy recovery (incineration). This can be used for non-sortable contaminated plastics. PVC is a useful contribution as a fuel for power generation through waste incineration. The chemicals added to PVC create additional concerns when incinerated, but large amounts of PVC are handled by municipal and hospital waste incinerators each year. When burned, PVC releases the gas form of highly corrosive hydrochloric acid. Incineration regulations state that this and other resultant toxins must be contained and neutralized. Ash from PVC incineration also contains toxic elements, most often cadmium and lead. The presence of these two heavy metals means that the ash must be sent to controlled landfills, where space and groundwater contamination are eventual concerns. 
 Landfilling. This can be used for non-recoverable products and residual materials. Many countries have already banned landfilling of untreated organic wastes, e.g. Germany. The additives in PVC plastic create further landfill problems by their potential for leaching toxic chemicals into the soil and air, e.g. CMR (carcinogenic, mutagenic, or toxic for reproduction) substances. These chemicals contaminate groundwater and air quality, harmfully affecting humans and the environment. 
 
4 www.plasticseurope.org/documents/document/20161014113313-plastics_the_facts_2016_final_version.pdf 
5 RIVM Letter report 2016-0025: ‘Plastics that contain hazardous substances: recycle or incinerate?’ 
6 VinylPlus Progress Report 2017 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
Currently, of all PVC waste disposed in Europe 23 % is recycled, 48 % goes to energy recovery and still 29 % is landfilled. Landfilling is decreasing for the EU27 and is expected to be ended by 2050. The reduction of landfilling is mainly counterbalanced by an increase in incineration, which is expected to grow by ca 1 - 1.5 % up to 20307. Currently, a limited fraction of the lead containing PVC waste is mechanically recycled7, which means that the lead content in the PVC remains and is transferred into the new product. This is currently possible because of temporary derogations in the SVHC (Substance of Very High Concern) part of REACH. 
REMADYL proposed solution: radical adaptation of extrusion extraction processes to remove LS and technology transfer to the recycling industry. This breakthrough concept is backed by literature and lab scale results (see also section 1.4) and has the potential to unlock a whole new and large range of PVC waste streams for re-use and recycling. 
Interdisciplinary aspects: the goal of transferring the extractive melt extrusion from polymer technology to recycling industry shows the basic interdisciplinary aspect underpinning REMADYL. The project also requires expertise in synthesis and functionalization of LDH for the design of suitable lead scavengers, and metallurgy expertise because of the revalorization of the removed metal based-salts. Further, the consortium includes specific expertise on economic and environmental aspects as well as on regulation, legislation and standardisation. 
Use of stakeholder knowledge: One group of stakeholders is crucial and agreed to join REMADYL: VinylPlus®, the embodiment of the Voluntary Commitment to Sustainable Development by the European PVC industry. During the 2nd stage proposal preparation we established an Advisory and Support Group (ASG) of relevant stakeholders from the following areas: EUPC (European Plastics Convertors) a PVC-linked industry associations; recyclers (e.g. MatcoPlastics, Casier, Vanheede); sustainability promoters (e.g. GO4CIRCLE) and a plastic manufacturers association (GVK/Tecpart). 
Societal engagement: REMADYL results will create a new market of recycling PVC with LS, which will have a relevant impact for the environment (reduction of CO2 and Pb emissions – section 2.1.2) and the economy (ca 800 jobs – section 1.4.2). 
Positioning of the REMADYL project 
For REMADYL, we will develop two main technologies and bring their TRL to level 5 as summarized in the table below: 
Technology to be developed within REMADYL TRL 
start 
TRL 
end 
Sorting of PVC that contains LS: As explained in section 1.4, LIBS, NIR, Raman (as well as THz, and XRF to a lower extent) have been tested in the literature (or specific cases studies different from ours) for detecting the target LS. The challenge will be using them in complex formulations in a relevant 
configuration to mimic the requirements of industrial EoL PVC sorting 
 3 
 5-6 
Extractive extrusion process for removal of phthalates and heavy metals using eutectic solvents 
((NA)DES) as co-solvents and assisted with scCO2: partners Fh-ICT and CTB have experience with (continuous) extractive extrusion applied to plastics other than PVC components 
 
3 
 
5-6 
Synthesis of Layered Double Hydroxides (LDH) as heavy metal scavengers: partner UVEG has experience in the synthesis of MoS4-LDH and the intercalation procedures at lab level. REMADYL will evaluate this LDH as scavengers for lead salts contained in melt PVC and synthesis of the particles in 
pilot reactors at AIMPLAS. 
 3 
 5 
Melt filtration for removal of lead: AIMPLAS has a broad experience in removal hazardous substances 
from recycled plastics using melt extrusion technologies. MoS4-LDH is currently used to remove lead and other metals from contaminated water and soils. 
 
3 
 
5 
For the other elements, we rely on existing processes and technologies to achieve a TRL6 at project end. For example, for the re-use of lead salt for battery applications: partner AZOR has several technologies available to convert sulphate lead salts, lead oxides, lead carbonate or lead sulphur into metallic lead. Also for PVC waste collection and mechanical recycling, we can rely on existing channels and technologies (see also section 1.4.2). 
Linked (inter)national research and innovation actions. 
 
Project Acronym (project type): link with REMADYL Partner (C=Coord) 
Batch and continuous extraction technology using supercritical CO2 (BMBF, DE): Technology development of the extractive extrusion process to remove substances from melt, basis for REMADYL 
Fh-ICT (C) 
POCOBUILD – Post Consumer PVC for the BUILDing industry (private R&D project, BE): investment project for establishing a modular and upgradable PVC recycling plant 
DECEUNINCK (C), CTB, BULKID 
SDS-R-TOOL Safety Data Sheets for PVC Recyclers (internal project): sheets available for REMADYL VinylPlus (C) 
EXTRUCLEAN (LIFE): hazardous substances removal in packaging using scCO2 AIMPLAS (C) 
New materials valley (ESIF project, BE): use of scCO2 for materials recycling CTB (C) 
 
7 ECHA Annex XV Restriction report Lead compounds-PVC, 2016 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
2
 
 
 
CELFI – Recycled PVC in Wood Plastic Composites (R&D project, BE): alternative for PVC revalorisation 
CTB (C) 
URBANREC – Recycling of bulky waste (H2020): knowledge on management of plastics (PVC) waste AIMPLAS (C), CTB, 
OVAM, Fh-ICT 
WPC4Coat – Use of WPC on aluminium profiles (private R&D project, Be) CTB 
CLIPP - Study of recyclability of printed or laminated plastic packaging films using supercritical C02 technologies (FP7-RS-SME, 2012) 
AIMPLAS, Fh-ICT 
CLIPP+ - Manufacture and commercialization of high quality recycled polyolefin films using an innovative continuous extrusion recycling process assisted by sc-CO2 for printed plastic waste (H2020 
– SME2, 2017) 
AIMPLAS 
OPTIJECT - A novel spectroscopic instrument for in-line monitoring during injection moulding; (FP7, R4SMEs), detection compositional parameters such as degradation products, unwanted traces… 
IRIS 
M4. MOFS and multifunctional molecular materials: Design, Synthesis, Characterization and 
Processing (Spanish Project) 
UVEG 
MULTICYCLE: Advanced and sustainable recycling processes and value chains for plastic-based multi-materials 
CTB, AIMPLAS; VERTECH, IRIS 
SOLVATION – Valorization fully closed circle (SBO project, BE): strategic basic research on the dissolution and safe recovery of brominated flame retardants and phthalates 
CTB 
 
(b) Overall Methodology: 
Given the ambitious goals of REMADYL, a well-structured approach and methodology is needed for efficient implementation of the activities. This applies especially to: the waste material selection, the necessary process R&D, keeping the industrial relevance and accounting for the environmental and safety aspects. 
Material input approach: in principle the input material should be EoL ‘old PVC’. However, this will be a very inhomogeneous and strongly varying waste stream, so not reliable/reproducible when developing processes, e.g. because a precise quantification of the achieved “cleaning-level” will be difficult without knowing the precise initial contamination. Instead, we will use ‘model materials’. This means that we will produce different types of PVC with a well-known amount of LS and other additives– allowing for example a precise quantification of the ‘cleaning-efficiency’. The approach is, logically, to start with PVC with only DEHP or only lead, and then look into the combinations of phthalates and lead and combination with other common additives. The model materials will be used for development of the process, validation and for the development of the inspection technologies. Only afterwards, we will use real EoL waste material (mainly soft PVC material stemming from partners DECEUNINCK and DANOSA – in amounts of several 10s of kilograms) for the pilot line demonstration and use the thus rejuvenated PVC into new products. 
Process R&D approach (see also figure): for the process development, there are two important aspects: (i) batch vs continuous and (ii) basic processes technologies vs their combinations to optimise the LS removal efficiency. Due to the novelty of the REMADYL project, the 3 different basic    process    technologies   (LDH, 
(NA)DES and supercritical CO2 or scCO ) will first be evaluated in lab- scale batch processes. These batch tests will allow performing a first evaluation of the applied techniques and  will determine the  critical process 
parameters. The study of different extrusion technologies in order to extract LS in an efficient way will be on existing equipment (CTB – Belgium (scCO2 batch reaction available + (NA)DES), Fh-ICT – Germany (scCO2 batch and continuous extraction available) and AIMPLAS – Spain (scCO2 batch and continuous extraction available, melt filtration possibilities and tandem extruders available)) that will be slightly modified if needed. The process will be further upscaled to continuous pilot plant level, 
REMADYL Project Scope 
Existing/Emerging 
Extraction Technologies 
Discontinuous 
Batch Extraction 
Continuous Lab 
Scale Extraction 
Continuous Pilot 
Scale Extraction 
Industrial 
Deployment: Cascade Approach 
sc CO2 
Phthalate removal 
Fraunhofer 
ICT 
sc CO2 
Centexbel 
(NA)DES 
Fraunhofer 
ICT Phthalate and 
Lead removal 
sc CO2 
Sc CO2 
+ (NA)DES 
(NA)DES sc CO2 + 
(NA)DES (NA)DES & 
Lead removal 
Centexbel Aimplas 
(NA)DES (NA)DES 
LDH 
+ Melt Filtration 
LDH 
+ Melt Filtration (+ NA(DES) 
LDH Aimplas LDH LDH + Melt 
Filtration (+ (NA)DES) Deceuninck 
State of Art Process 
Development 
Continuous 
Implementation 
Integration, Scale- 
Up Optimization 
Industrial 
Implementation 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 10 of 100 
 
 
 
 
able to provide sufficient amounts of rejuvenated PVC for further evaluation by the industrial partners (Deceuninck - Belgium). An overview of the expected pilot lines, the owner, the location and expected input/output is given in the table below. 
 
Pilot owner Location Objectives Volumes Input materials Output materials 
Centexbel Kortrijk BE 
Discontinuous batch reaction removal phthalates and lead 
1.0-10l 
/batch 
Soft and rigid PVC containing Pb and/ or phthalates 
Purified PVC (phthalates and Pb < 0.1w%) 
Fraunhofer 
ICT 
Pfinztal 
DE 
Discontinuous batch reaction removal phthalates 
1.0-10l 
/batch 
Soft PVC phthalates 
containing Purified PVC (phthalates < 0.1w%) 
Aimplas Valencia 
ES 
Discontinuous batch reaction removal lead 
50-500g 
/batch 
Rigid (and soft) PVC containing Pb 
Purified 
(Pb < 0.1w%) 
PVC 
Fraunhofer Pfinztal Continuous pilot 20 – 30 Soft PVC containing Pb Purified PVC (phthalates and 
ICT DE scale extraction kg/h and/ or phthalates Pb < 0.1w%) 
  removal phthalates    
  and lead    
Aimplas Valencia Continuous pilot 5-15  kg/h Soft and rigid PVC Purified PVC (Pb < 0.1w%) 
 ES scale extraction (single- containing Pb  
  removal lead with screw   
  melt filtration extrusion   
   line)   
   4-12kg/h   
   (counter-   
   rotating   
   twin screw   
   extruder)   
Deceuninck Diksmuide 
BE 
Industrial 
deployment 
400-800 
kg/h 
Mainly rigid PVC containing Pb, with some soft parts 
containing small amounts of phthalates 
Purified PVC (phthalates and Pb < 0.1w%) 
 The RTD partners all have a defined environmental ethics policy and develop their activities always considering compliance with the applicable environmental legislation at national and regional levels. The RTD partners are aware of the potential damage to the environment of the chemical products used and emissions and waste generated during the research and innovation activities performed at their facilities. They are committed to protect the environment by establishing appropriate procedures and measures to mitigate the potential risks derived from the project. An internal procedure for the proper and safe handling of chemicals and waste materials is established at the RTD facilities. 
Pilot plants at RTD facilities are equipped with extraction and filtration systems to retain hazardous contaminants, preventing them from being emitted to the atmosphere but treated as hazardous waste. The equipment of extraction and filtration has been designed following the corresponding legislative rules and approved with the required authorizations. These emission control measures will be applied during the project and tailored and/or strengthened if necessary to avoid any harmful environmental release. 
Next to the 3 basic processes (LDH, (NA)DES and supercritical CO2 or scCO2), we will make combinations to improve the removal efficiency and rate. An overview of the approach that will be followed (see also figure): 
 The extraction of phthalates will initially be examined in parallel using (NA)DES and scCO2. (NA)DES and supercritical CO2 will also be combined on small-scale batch level to research the synergetic effects of the combination. Later, when switching towards a continuous extrusion process based on a co-rotating-twin screw extruder, the scCO2 will be further 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 11 of 100 
 
 
A. Automated inline detection system for LS within PVC 
 
 
investigated both as a stand-alone process and/or in combination with (NA)DES as suitable co-solvents for the extraction of phthalates according to the best results observed in batch extraction. 
 The removal of lead will be examined using two technologies: LDH as lead scavenger and (NA)DES as co-solvent in a CO2 extractive process. Efficiency in the removal of lead will be analysed first al lab level and by separated batch processes in order to optimize strategy in a continuous melt PVC processing technology. During the (NA)DES experiments, a first assessment will be made of its compatibility with scCO2, in order to make the technology transferable to a continuous process. The effect of LDH as lead scavenger will also be tested in a continuous process but incorporating melt filtration in the line for the separation of the LDH particles with the Pb salts. Incorporation of LDH, blending with PVC and melt filtration is planned to be performed in twin-screw extruders and single-screw extrusion tandem line in order to evaluate effect of shear on PVC properties, dispersion of LDH and Pb removal efficiency. 
PVC ‘rejuvenating’. The RTD partners will first research the incorporation of new additives during the extraction technologies used to remove DEHP and Lead. Later, the recycled PVC will be further re-additivated by the end-users in compounding facilities to obtain final properties. 
Focus on industrial relevance, environmental aspects and safety approach: the first aspect here is of course to stick to the proposal objectives as these were defined together with these elements in mind and with the industry partners. During implementation, REMADYL will keep focus on these aspects as they have been built in the project decision making by also accounting for economic, exploitation and LCC findings (see the milestones) and by the strong industrial participation, also in the project steering committee and the REMADYL Advisory and Support Group. 
Gender analysis. For the safety and health analysis we will explicitly take into account potential gender differences. During REMADYL, we will follow the Directive 2002/73/EC on the implementation of equal treatment for men and women as guideline, 
e.g. for access to employment, vocational training and promotion, working conditions.
1.4 Ambition 
The core REMADYL innovation is the use of extractive extrusion technology, assisted by novel solvents (like natural deep eutectic solvents) and combined with melt filtration, to tackle one of the most persistent problems in PVC recycling: the removal of LS (DEHP and lead). This unique combination of techniques will allow removing the LS from PVC in a continuous process. Moreover, it has potential for other plastics applications, e.g. for removal of heavy metals in coloured recycled plastics (like cadmium based red-colour pigments or lead based pigments as Pb-chromate). 
1.4.1 Progress beyond state-of-the-art 
Building further on the available knowledge, expertise and patented IP within the REMADYL consortium, we will research and develop a continuous extraction technique for the removal of legacy additives out of the PVC matrix and this for both soft and rigid PVC. We will investigate two different systems: (i) metal scavengers in combination with melt filtration and (ii) continuous polymer extraction techniques in combination with processing aids such as scCO2. We will try to boost the efficiency of both techniques by use of (NA)DES for easier access to the LS within the matrix. These novel techniques will form the basis for our REMADYL demonstration of circular use of post-consumer PVC. 
In the next paragraphs we describe the concrete progress beyond the state-of-the-art that REMADYL ambitions. First, we want to develop an automated detection system for the LS within PVC. Second, we need to develop the LS removal processes, which comprises: (i) extraction extrusion technologies; (ii) use of LDH as scavenger for lead in PVC melt; 
(iii) melt filtration using LDH and (iv) (NA)DES for improved LS accessibility. Further, we discuss REMADYL research for re-use of legacy substances. Finally, the use of eco-design for developing novel PVC formulations is explained. 
Phthalate plasticiser detection. Various techniques (NMR, DSC, TGA, MS and spectroscopic techniques including Raman, FID, etc.) are reported to identify phthalates plasticizers in PVC8. Near-infrared spectroscopy (NIR) is widely used in waste sorting, and has been used in a laboratory environment to detect various plasticizers in PVC9. TeraHertz spectroscopy was also recently reported as a promising approach for that purpose10. But, the inline implementation of Time Domain Terahertz Spectroscopy (THz-TD) is still at an early stage of development, owing to the challenges of environmental perturbation such as variations to the optical path-length in the sampling arm. 
There are currently no measurement methods that distinguish closely related plasticizer species and that are readily suited for 
 
8 L. Bernard et al. Talanta129(2014)39–54 
9 K. Saeki, et al. Soc. Anal. Chem. 19 (2003) 309–312. 
10 Sommer et al., February 2018, Analytical Chemistry 90(4), DOI 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04548 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 12 of 100 
 
 
 
 
development of an inline tool for characterisation of a complete material flow. Direct methods with the greatest ability to distinguish similar compounds include NMR11 and Mass Spectroscopy12, but these require sample preparation and presentation to the instrument, and require acquisition times of seconds or minutes, which is too slow for commercial material sorting. Mid-IR absorption spectroscopic methods such as FT-IR have the capability to distinguish similar organic molecules without sample preparation and are used as a screening step before GC-MS to identify similar phthalate plasticizers13, although to date they have not been used on their own for this purpose. They require the use of surface contact attenuated total reflection (ATR) probes and acquisition times of seconds to produce the necessary signal to noise ratio (SNR), which makes them unsuitable for inline process sorting. 
Successful separation of different phthalate materials, even those which are banned from those which are not, was obtained by combining NIR absorbance spectroscopy with neural network analysis (NNA)9. NIR spectroscopy is ideal for inline characterisation of a process flow, since it is non-contact, fast and requires no sample preparation. An alternative with larger cost and a more challenging industrial implementation is Raman spectroscopy, especially with Fourrier transform analysis (FT- Raman)14. This technique distinguishes different phthalates used to plasticize PVC items and identifies content as low as 0.5% or below of DEHP in plastic toys15. 
Lead detection. Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) allows the detection of metals in solid or liquid media16 and is used in various industries as a qualitative and quantitative analytical detection technique. Coupled with the right data treatment approach, it allows quantification of the amount of target substance17. To date, it is not widely used in inline configurations, due to a loss of sensitivity when employed without a controlled atmosphere and optical path-length. However, for basic material identification and comparative quantification tasks, where the element of interest comprises a large proportion of the material under test, inline and handheld versions have been used18 and are available commercially19. As this is the case in testing for Pb stabilizers in PVC, LIBS has good potential for inline application. X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF) has also been widely used to detect inorganic elements, including Pb, in polymers. Handheld versions are available for this purpose20. Inline versions of XRF have been applied to slurry analysis21. 
REMADYL novelty: The automatic identification of the LS substances under consideration (DEHP and lead) is highly challenging but a mandatory prerequisite for their actual recycling. Based on existing state of the art, we will optimise the hardware and software for the PVC monitoring to identify target LS using advanced chemometrics analysis. To provide accurate reliable compositional information, we will test, and combine if required, several spectroscopic technologies (e.g. Raman, TeraHertz, NIR, LIBs, XRF etc.). The requirements of inline instrumentation will be addressed, including physical stabilisation and presentation of the sampled object to the sensing device, uniformity of the optical path-length, fluctuations in the atmosphere due to thermal gradients and the presence of dust. An inline system will be developed which maximises the SNR (signal-to-noise ratio) through instrument stability achieved with sensor cooling, and thermal mechanical and electrical stabilisation of the optical path and individual parts, including light source, optomechanics, detector and readout electronics. Neural network analysis will be used to enhance the chemometric discrimination of plasticizers. Because the task of distinguishing related species using NIR absorbance is highly challenging but more promising for industry implementation, a graduated separation methodology will be developed, so that plasticizers which have the largest chemical and spectral differences are first identified and separated from the material to be analysed, followed by more closely related species. The first stage of the development work will be directed at identifying the plasticizers with the most distinct chemometric features. Work will progress to species with larger chemical and spectral similarity. Likewise, a protocol on the type of materials that are suitable to be analysed (e.g. pre- or post-grinding, presence of paints) will be established and the possibility to monitor also the in-melt configuration, i.e. at the end of the extractive extrusion step, to warrant the absence of unwanted LS will be studied. 
 
 
 
11 S. Genay, Anal Bioanal Chem (2017) 409:1271–1280 
12 A. Kuki, International Journal of Mass Spectrometry 303 (2011) 225–228 
13 Agilent Technologies, Application Note, http://www.analytik.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/reliable-phthalate-screening-in-plastics-by-portable-ftir- 
spectroscopy.pdf 
14 Application of ft-raman spectroscopy for analysis of phthalate esters in PVC plastics, Thomas Nørbygaard, Rolf W. Berg 
15 https://www.spectroscopyeurope.com/applications/quantitative-analysis-using-new-generation-raman-spectrometers-and-chemometrics 
16 http://www.arl.army.mil/www/default.cfm?page=250 
17 Deguchi et al. Industrial Applications of Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/61915 
18 Lesther Moreira Osorio et al 2011 J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 274 012093 
19 B&W Tek Europe GmbH, Germany , Application note 410000015-A (2017/01/27), http://solutions.bwtek.com/acton/attachment/8353/f-02a8/1/-/-/-/- 
/410000015-A%20Lithium%20alloy%20measurement%20using%20NanoLIBS-Q.pdf 
20 Olympus Scientific Solutions Americas Inc., Application Note, HHXRF Analyzers for Screening Consumer Goods for Lead (Pb), Cadmium (Cd) and Other 
Metals, https://www.olympus-ims.com/en/applications/hhxrf-analyzers-screening-consumer-goods-lead-cadmium/ 
21 FLSmidth A/S, Vigerslev Allé 77, DK-2500 Valby, Copenhagen, OnStream slurry XRF analyzer, http://www.flsmidth.com/en- 
US/Related+content/Brochures/Automation/OnStreamslurry+XRF+analyzer 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 13 of 100 
 
 
B. Removal of LS (phthalate plasticiser and lead) from the PVC matrix 
 
 
 
(i) Extractive extrusion cleaning technologies for phthalate removal 
Purification processes for contaminated polymers have been studied for a long time. The use of solvents to remove unwanted substances from polymers has been researched in various publications22,23,24 and has been implemented at industrial pilot scale using organic solvents. The use of green solvents like CO2 in industrial scale extraction has been realised in the extraction of flavours from herbs or in the extraction of caffeine in the production of decaffeinated coffee. These discontinuous processes can be extremely effective, with the most important influencing factors being: extraction time, temperature and CO2 pressure. Previous studies25 showed a very high efficiency for removing plasticizers from soft-PVC with supercritical CO2, reaching almost 100 % separation in discontinuous, long term (> 20 minutes) treatments. In comparative studies the use of supercritical CO2 (scCO2) fluid extraction appeared as one of the most promising technologies for removing soluble contaminants from polymers because of its multiple advantages: separation efficiency, a fast extraction process; easy recuperation of solvent; vacuum degassing removes traces of CO2 from the polymer and the feasibility to use it in continuous processes. Main shortcomings for high volume and comparably low value material recycling (like in the case of soft-PVC) are the current rather high operational costs of the discontinuous processes as well as its lengthy processing times. 
Fh-ICT has been working intensively past years on combining the efficiency of CO2 based extraction processes with continuous processing on Twin Screw Extruders (TSE). For the extraction of automobile-fuel from recycled PE-tank-material for example the efficiency of the discontinuous process reached > 99%. The key challenge is the transfer of effective extraction conditions, which are easy to achieve in batch extraction, to continuously operating TSE. This transfer was successful for the removal of small amounts of contaminants (<1% VOC-relevant hydrocarbons) from injection moulding grade polyolefins. This process is available at TRL5 (throughput in the range of 20 kg/h). But these polyolefins show a completely different flow behaviour and diffusion for their additives than PVC. The transfer of that processing concept to the shear sensitive PVC and contamination ratios of up to 50 % (typical amount of plasticizer in soft PVC) requires a complete redesign of the process. 
REMADYL novelty: 
Within REMADYL we will research and develop a continuous melt extraction process for soft-PVC (see figure). According to literature, the continuous extraction of plasticizers could be achieved with high efficiency, provided we realise the following breakthrough progress: 
 Novel screw and barrel designs for the processing of soft-PVC in a co-rotating twin screw extrusion process. Especially new designs for the so called ‘melt sealing function’ will be developed for processing the highly shear and temperature sensitive PVC; 
 Novel processing concept to re-incorporate at least 
a small amount of new environmentally friendly plasticizers to maintain processability (see blue arrow in figure); 
 Concept for the continuous dosing and subsequent cleaning of the retrieved CO2 flow from the extracted plasticizer and concept for the reuse of the cleaned CO2 
 Addition of (NA)DES as co-solvent to the CO2 for improved removal of the phthalate, see also part (iv) 
 Design of screw and barrel for the processing of rigid-PVC in a twin screw extrusion process. Replacing the removed lead with REACH compatible stabilisers like Ca-Zn needed to keep the PVC material stabilised during processing and after the Pb removal with CO2 extraction. 
 (ii) Use of Layered double hydroxides LDH as scavengers for lead in PVC melt 
Various materials such as zeolites, activated carbon, polymers, biomaterials, and sorption resins have been employed for the adsorption of metal ions. Clays are also attractive as natural adsorbents because of their promise of low cost, high surface area, and hydrophilicity, but they suffer from low selectivity and weak affinity for heavy metals. Sulphides form strong covalent bonds with heavy metals, and this can be the basis for designing effective adsorbent materials for their effective capture. 
 
 
22 J. Möller et al. European Polymer Journal, 44, 1583-1593, (2008). 
23 A.R. Berens, G.S. Huvard, R.W. Korsmeyer, F. W. Kunig, Application of Compressed Carbon Dioxide in the 
Incorporation of Additives into Polymers, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 46, 231 (1992). 
24 E.J. Beckman, Supercritical and near-critical CO2 in green chemical synthesis and processing. J. of 
Supercritical Fluids. 28: 121-191 (2003). 
25 M. Marı́na, A. Jiméneza, V.Benguera, J. Lópezb; Optimization of variables on the supercritical fluid extraction of phthalate plasticizers; The Journal of 
Supercritical Fluids; Volume 12, Issue 3, 1 July 1998, Pages 271-277 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 14 of 100 
 
 
 
 
Consequently, many crystalline sulphide-based materials have been well studied for remediation of heavy metal polluted water. 
Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are anionic clays with positively-charged host layers and counter-anions found in the interlayer space. The excellent intercalation and anion-exchange properties allow the LDHs on versatile applications such as catalysts, two-dimensional nanoreactors, adsorbents and scavengers. Inorganic or organic anions can be introduced between the hydroxide layers by ion exchange or precipitation reactions. Introducing polysulfide anions [Sx]2- into the LDH gallery leads to a ‘composite structure’ that was found to be very effective in selective capture for heavy metals. These materials, however, exhibit medium term instabilities associated with the oxidation of the [Sx]2- species to [SO4]2-. 
MoS42- ions intercalated into magnesium-aluminium LDH (MgAl-NO3-LDH) to produce a single phase material has demonstrated highly selective binding of heavy metal ions such as Pb2+. The MoS4-LDH displays a selectivity order of Co2+, Ni2+, Zn2+ < Cd2+ << Pb2+ < Cu2+ < Hg2+< Ag+ for the metal ions. It can rapidly lower the concentrations of Cu2+, Pb2+, Hg2+ and Ag+ from ppm levels to trace levels of ≤ 1 ppb. The ability 
to diminish the heavy metal pollutant concentrations down to < 5 ppb levels makes the MoS4-LDHmaterial attractive for environmental remediation applications. The graphs (side) show the capacity and efficiency of MoS4-LDH for removal of several metal ions (Left: ion concentration change vs contact time; right: metal removal (%) vs contact time26). In the case of water purification, MoS4-LDH achieved ≥ 97% removal of metal ions within 5 min, and ≥99.7% removal within 30min. 
REMADYL novelty: 
We will synthesize new inorganic LDH with sulphide ions able to catch lead salts from melt PVC. This will be possible due to the highly selective binding between MoS42- ions and Pb2+. The advantages of LDH are that they can be customized for compatibility with the polymer, for stabilization (LDH is a well-known thermal stabilizer in PVC27) or for increasing the removal efficiency of a specific metal. The challenge is that so far LDH particles have only been used as adsorbents for water cleaning, not as metal scavengers in melt polymers. So, the PVC melt viscosity, the LDH size, the LDH dispersion within the PVC matrix and the contact time between the PVC molecules and LDH particles will be crucial factors to analyse and optimise for efficient lead removal. To maximise this removal, we will synthesis LDH particles with varying sizes and intercalate thiomolibdate (MoS4) because of its Lead affinity. Further, we will research and optimise the mixing and dispersion of the MoS4-LDH particles into the PVC melt via two extrusion technologies: (i) via a single-screw tandem extrusion line (advantage: long residence time); and (ii) via a counter-rotating twin-screw extruder (advantage: screw can be tuned for increasing residence time and improving dispersion and mixing of LDH particles in the melt). 
 (iii) Melt filtration technology 
Melt filtration is a process by which molten polymer is forced through screens of a fine opening in order to remove foreign contaminants particles of contamination or burnt polymer or additives and fillers or reinforcements. It has been used for years in recycling plastics industry because of high cleaning efficiency Melt filtration is critical for strand pelletizing, as imperfections in the process could cause a strand to break, for conversion processes such as thin film or fibres, or for any product requiring high quality that is free from contaminants. 
The advantages are: 1) Continuous filtration can greatly improve the efficiency of an extrusion line; 2) Higher reclaim use and finer filtration can lower cost and improve product quality; 3) Payback on these systems is typically a few months, based on increased production alone. 
Melt filtration is commercially practiced using two techniques: continuous and non- continuous. The simplest form of discontinuous melt filtration is used where screen changes are rarely needed, and it is not a problem to stop the production when changing screens. Smalls compounders use these manual or hydraulic slide-plate or slide-bolt screen changers because they cost less and are simple to operate. The disadvantage of manual changing is that the process needs to be stopped often to change the screens to prevent contamination. 
Continuous melt filtration allows for filtration of most polymers without interruption during a screen change. The 
 
26 Ma, L et al. Highly Selective and Efficient Removal of Heavy Metals by Layered Double Hydroxide Intercalated with the MoS42- ion, Journal of the 
American Chemical Society, 2016 Mar 2;138(8):2858-66. 
27 Z. Hong-mei, Z.Shu-hua, S. Polite et al Thermal Stability and Thermal Aging of Poly(vinyl chloride)/MgAl Layered Double Hydroxides 
Composites;Chinese Journal of Polymer Science, December 2015 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 15 of 100 
 
 
C. Re-use of LS – focus on lead salt residues 
 
 
continuous screen changers consist of two screen bolts, each containing a filter cavity. When a screen change is required, one of the bolts is moved out of the housing while the other remains in the operating position. 
In compounding recycled resins, screen changers play a key role in removing contaminations, such as paper, wood, aluminium foil, rubber or other unwanted plastics. Several manufacturers of equipment offer in the market steel screens and changers for PVC filtration during extrusion or during mechanical recycling (e.g. High Technology Corp, Gneuss, FIMIC, Ettlinger). 
REMADYL novelty: melt filtering in extrusion has not been investigated so far for removal of heavy metals. New functionalized LDH with sulphide groups (MoS4-LDH) will be added as scavengers of heavy metals during the extrusion process of the lead containing PVC. At the end of the extrusion process, the LDH and absorbed heavy metals will be removed by melt filtration and the cleaned PVC will be pelletized. This will result in a lead salt as residue retained in the meshes that will be reused for purification of Pb (see further). The LDH will be recovered and reused. To maximise the efficiency, we will: i) control the residence time of the LDH particles and their mixing before arriving to the filtering unit; ii) adapt mesh filters to optimally capture the large sized inorganic LDH particles; iii) study different positions of the meshes in the tandem line. 
 (iv) Extraction and Improving Accessibility of the LS in the PVC matrix via (NA)DES 
Although CO2 will penetrate in the matrix, its efficiency will likely be still limited. Therefore, we will research the use of (natural) deep eutectic solvents ((NA)DES) as co-solvents for boosting the removal of LS. (NA)DES are a class of strong hydrogen bonding solvents28. They are a specific type of Deep Eutectic Solvents (DES), which are a subclass of ionic liquids29. While ordinary liquids such as water and gasoline are predominantly made of electrically neutral molecules, ionic liquids are largely made of ions and short-lived ion pairs. These substances are variously called liquid electrolytes, ionic melts, ionic fluids, fused salts, liquid salts, or ionic glasses. They are known as ‘solvents of the future’ as well as ‘designer solvents’. The formation of hydrogen bonds is recognized to be one of the key interactions responsible for the properties of ionic liquids. The hydrogen bonding capacity of the different solvent constituents does not only contribute to the internal solvent structuring, but can also be expected to play a crucial role in determining the solubility of different compounds in the solvent. Also in deep eutectic solvents (DES), a subclass of ionic liquids, hydrogen bonding was found to play an important role30. In DES, three different types of hydrogen bonding can be present: hydrogen bonding between neutral molecules (which can be termed a “normal” hydrogen bond), hydrogen bonding between a neutral molecule and a charged ion (“ionic” hydrogen bonds) and a hydrogen bond between a cation and anion, termed the “double ionic” hydrogen bond31. 
(NA)DES are capable of dissolving polar polymers and metal salts32 in high loadings due to strong hydrogen bonding. Indeed, due to strong molecular interactions, they are proven to dissolve polymers up to high loadings offering a multitude of potential applications. These solvent systems have been mainly explored to process biomass and biomass derived fractions/polymers, but their potential for synthetic polymers, and especially for PVC, remains up to now unexplored. 
REMADYL novelty: A concept for using sc-CO2 in combination with (NA)DES as a co-solvent for the extraction of LS (and other contaminations) from the PVC melt will be worked out. The novel extraction process will be investigated in function of the process conditions: time, temperature, substrate ratio, type and needed concentration of selected (NA)DES. The swelling, dispersion and leaching of LS out of PVC will be evaluated be adding the (NA)DES into the polymer melt as co-solvent during the extractive extrusion process and recuperate the (NA)DES together with the CO2 stream. This will allow to combine the expected beneficial effect of (NA)DES on the LS accessibility in the PVC melt during the extractive extrusion. The dissolving capability of (NA)DES can increase the efficiency of LDH during the Lead scavenging and removal by melt filtration 
 
Recovering lead from lead-acid based batteries is a common practice in Europe due to the high production of batteries waste, their low cost and the reduction in their environmental pollution in case they are not recycled. So recycling and management of waste lead-acid batteries has become a significant challenge and is capturing much public attention. 
The lead acid battery is a complex industrial product, constituted by several different materials. The first step of the recycling process is an effective separation of these battery components, so as to recover further valuable products. Throughout the separation process, crushing, sieving and flotation techniques are used. The second step of the process is to melt and reduce lead compounds into metal, and lead quality is not lowered through secondary smelting, and is of the same high grade as lead from primary smelting33. 
 
28 Arunan et al., Pure and Applied Chemistry 83, 1637-1641 (2011) 
29 Hunt et al., Chem. Soc. Rev. 44, 1257–1288 (2015) 
30 Fumino et al., Phys. Chem. Phys. Phys. 13, 14064-14075 (2011) 
31 Ashworth et al., Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 18, 18145 (2016) 
32 E. L. Smith, A.P. Abbott, K.S. Ryder, Deep Eutectic Solvents (DESs) and Their Applications; | Chem. Rev. 2014, 114, 11060−11082 
33 R.Jolly, C.Rhin, The recycling of lead-acid batteries: production of lead and polypropylene, Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 10, 1–2, 137-143 
(1994) 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 16 of 100 
 
 
D. Design for recycling 
 
 
There are two prevailing techniques for the recovery and recycling of lead and lead-containing compounds: pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy. Notably, for either pyrometallurgy or hydrometallurgy, the goal is to recover the lead and lead-containing compounds from the waste and eliminate their threat to the environment and to humans. Thus, metal recovery efficiency, reliability of the techniques and operational cost are three crucial factors that determine the application of these technologies. 
The combination of hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical techniques creates a new way of treating waste lead acid batteries (WLABs). As a result, great economic benefits can be obtained from the treatment of WLABs. AZOR has a wide expertise in using different lead compounds to reduce metallic Pb for its use as batteries. Main raw materials to recover lead are Pb(Sb), PbO, PbO2, PbSO4, PbCO3. The re-use of phthalates is less evident. There is some research work on-going to catalytic transform them to allow to re-use 
the modified additives safe in new products; or to integrate the reaction products fully integrated in new value chains. CTB is involved in a research project (Solvation – Flemish level)34 in which organic experts will study the catalytic transformation of phthalates to allow the re-use of the modified additives safe in new products; or to integrate the reaction products fully integrated in new value chains. The idea is to convert phthalates catalytically to harmless cyclohexane-1,2-dicarboxylate esters (target yield: > 99%), which can be used for the recompounding of recovered PVC. 
REMADYL novelty: we will focus on the best way to recover lead ions with high purity to enable their future use in batteries manufacturing. The goal is to obtain a purity of over 95% metallic Pb from the residual lead salts with a purity higher than 75% to develop an efficient process. The first step will be to precipitate the Pb2+ ions, captured in the interlayer of LDH, in the form of Pb compounds such as PbCO3. Further, we will build further on the proprietary technology of AZOR to reduce these lead compounds to obtain high purity metallic lead. PbCO3is one of the compounds that can be prepared from spent lead pastes via hydrometallurgical routes or green chemicals, and then applied as active materials for making high- performance lead acid batteries. They are suitable for recycling of spent lead acid battery & secondary lead. This process is simple, pollution-free and highly efficient in the recovery of valuable lead oxide from spent lead acid battery paste, which can replace the traditional smelting method. For the phthalates, we will work out a concept for their purification so that also this byproduct becomes interesting for further processing. The safe DEHP recovered could for example be used in a further step to obtain primary molecules such as phthlatic acid and alcohols. This further processing is a specialty domain in itself and is beyond the REMADYL scope. 
 
Design for recyclability is crucial. If the component design is right, plastics can be recycled many times through a well-structured end of life re-supply chain. PVC windows, pipes and building products are very suitable examples. Examples of design for recycling exist for PVC windows profiles and waterproofing sheets. 
Systems for recycling EoL PVC window frames (up to at least seven cycles) without having any impact on the quality or weather resistance have been put in place. Typically, the inside of the profiles is made from 100 % recycled material and the outer (visible) surfaces are covered with a thin layer of virgin PVC material via co-extrusion methods. Partner DECEUNINCK is using today such approach for its products. Another example is INOUTIC35, another European manufacturer of PVC window profiles. VEKA Recycling36 developed processes to recycle post-industrial and post-consumer PVC window frames into 100% recycled pellets and pulverised PVC. These are suitable for manufacturing a wide range of extruded goods for building applications, e.g. roofline and cabling/ducting products or window frames. They state that PVC is a versatile material that can be readily recycled many times with no loss of performance, making the recycled PVC an ideal choice for use in building products. In all these cases, mechanical recycling is used, so no removal of LS takes place. 
Progress has been also achieved regarding recycling of PVC waterproofing sheets. ROOFCOLLECT37, a private European organization based in Germany, organizes the collection of PVC waterproofing membranes in several European countries. They use mechanical recycling. The VinyLoop process has been tested to separate the useful PVC compound from other materials (other plastics, rubber, metal, textile and others) to obtain a recycled PVC compound that can be re-processed by extrusion, injection or calendaring. However, VinyLoop is no longer in commercial operation, see section 1.4.2. 
REMADYL novelty: 
Although these efforts are going into the right direction for greener PVC manufacturing strategies, none of them deals with the specific objectives of REMADYL, which is obtaining a fully REACH-compliant secondary PVC raw material (=rejuvenated PVC) 
 
34 ‘SOLVATION’ SBO project (BE): strategic basic research on dissolution & safe recovery of brominated FR and phthalates’ D De Vos, KU Leuven, running 
35 www.inoutic.de 
36 http://www.veka-recycling.co.uk/recycling-process/ 
37 www.roofcollect.com 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 17 of 100 
 
 
Existing (emerging) solutions for PVC recycling 
 
 
from ‘old PVC’, i.e. PVC containing LS. In REMADYL the Ecodesign methodology will be implemented for ‘circularisation’ of the following applications: use of ‘rigid PVC’ for window profiles and of ‘soft PVC’ for flooring and waterproofing sheets. An advantage of our process is the ability to tune the rejuvenated material properties by re-additivation during the process. A specific form of ‘re-additvitation’ is the addition of new REACH compliant stabilizer packages. To guarantee a homogenous quality and a certain product performance also virgin PVC can be added. Given the high quality of the rejuvenated PVC, the amounts of virgin PVC needed are expected to be fairly low (order of 20% or less), the motivation why it can also be considered as ‘additivation’. 
These advantages will be exploited to design PVC compositions to maximise future recycling capability. Environmental impacts at each stage of the life-cycle will be considered to optimise the types of rejuvenated PVC materials. So, within REMADYL we will ecodesign the rejuvenated PVC material for actual performance and for next recycling cycles, e.g. by adding HCl scavengers, environmentally friendly stabilizers or specific fillers. 
1.4.2 Innovation potential 
An excellent overview of PVC recycling techniques was published by partner VinylPlus38. Simplified, the current solutions are: mechanical recycling, feedstock/chemical recycling and incineration (‘energy recycling’). Advantages and disadvantages of the End-of-Life scenarios (recycling + landfilling) are given in the table below. 
 
 PVC End-of-Life scenarios 
Method Advantages Disadvantages 
Current solutions Mechanical (shredding/cutting) & Non-conventional mechanical recycling (extra chemical step) 
E.g. AgPR (pure mechanical), VinyLoop39 
Straightforward, well suited for (clean) production waste, several cycles possible Commercially available 
Existing methods are being improved to separate mixed waste streams Value output material: medium to high 
Low added value recycling 
No removal of LS or contaminants Non-conventional mechanical recycling: PVC, plasticisers and additives are dissolved Operating cost: medium to high 
Feedstock recycling (chemical 
treatment) E.g. Creasolv® 40 
High quality material, removal of chlorine 
Non-contaminated material Commercial processes are available 
Expensive process (chemicals) 
Energy intensive Not able to deal with Pb removal56 
Incineration with energy and 
material recovery 
E.g.SOLVAir®, Halosep, MVR 
Better than landfill or simple incineration 
Chemical recuperation like HCl 
Rather material recovery than real 
recycling41 Air emissions 
 Landfilling 
(not a ‘recycling’ solution) 
Still (decreasingly) used as alternative for incineration 
Leaching toxic chemicals into the soil and air, harmfully affecting humans and the environment 
REMADYL solution Rejuvenating ‘old PVC’ by removing the LS from the PVC melt 
Keeping PVC property/processability 
LS removal in single continuous process Suitable for soft and rigid PVC 
Lower cost than feedstock recycl. (-50%) 
Currently at R&D level only, still needed to scale up 
the rejuvenating process 
to higher TRL 
Table: Summary of current PVC recycling techniques and the novel REMADYL approach (bottom row). 
VinyLoop is one of the most extender methods to recycle PVC. It is a physical-based recycling technology, suitable for difficult-to-treat composite PVC waste. The process separates the PVC compound from other materials (other plastics, rubber, metal, textile and others) by selective dissolution and filtration. It precipitates it into micro granules of PVC compound. The VinyLoop process is using a solvent which runs in a closed loop. The regenerated PVC compound can be processed by extrusion, injection or calendering. In VinyLoop PVC is dissolved in an organic solvent. The PVC 
 
38 Vinyl Plus, Report on PVC recycling technologies, 2016 
39 www.agpr.de and www.vinyloop.com/en/ 
40 http://www.creacycle.de/en/the-process.html 
41 Note that this type of material recovery is considered recycling according to the recent BAT in the Waste Incineration BREF 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 18 of 100 
 
 
Market size and potential 
 
 
additives are recovered with a precipitation method by steam injection after removal of large impurities. The used organic solvent is recovered by a salting-out method and reused. In the Vinyloop method removal of lead compounds is difficult because the lead compounds are very fine particles (<2µm). VinyLoop has closed operations after 16 years of operation42,43. This has been driven primarily by tighter regulations for recycled PVC. This shows clearly the need to have a recycling process that can adequately remove LS from ‘old PVC’. 
In 2016, there were ca 2.7 million tons of PVC waste. This waste is mainly landfilled and incinerated, exported out of Europe and only for a small fraction (ca 600 ktons) mechanically recycled. Partner VinylPlus embodies the European Voluntary Commitment of the PVC industry for enhancing the sustainability of PVC during each part of its life cycle44. In various Member States collection schemes are in place to recover high quality PVC for mechanical recycling45. VinylPlus targets 800 ktons of PVC recycled (by 2020). As example: in 2015, in total ca 515 kton of PVC waste was recycled44, only ca. 223 kton of this was post-consumer (rigid & flexible)7. Window profiles made up the largest share, followed by cables and other flexible applications, pipes and fittings. Together, these contained ca 2.5 kton of lead. 
The recycling of PVC is being promoted and accelerated by the VinylPlus initiative and PVC recycling is becoming an economically viable business as the demand for PVC recycling is growing. On the one hand companies with PVC waste need to pay to get rid of the waste. On the other hand, the amount of actual recycled PVC waste for sale on the market is limited and the demand for it is larger than the offer. Thus, recycled PVC with good and uniform quality is relatively high priced. 
Thanks to a moderate but continuous increase in volumes in nearly all European countries, PVC waste recycling within the VinylPlus46 framework reached 639,648 tonnes in 2017 (this result represents almost 80% of the 2020 target). According to a study carried out by the German consulting company Conversio (www.conversio-gmbh.com) on behalf of VinylPlus, 2.5 million tonnes of PVC waste were available in Europe in 2016. The above mentioned recycled amount does represent about 25% of this available waste. Recovinyl47 remained the main contributor, with a registered volume of 633,127 tonnes of recycled PVC waste. In 2017, Recovinyl underwent a significant reorganisation, both in its management structure and its data collection and reporting systems. The systematisation, particularly of audit protocols, will continue in 2018. During 2017, the biggest recycling markets registered different trends: 
volumes increased in France and Italy; the market remained almost stable in Germany; and recyclers reported a shortage of post-consumer window profiles for recycling in the UK. 
With regard to EPPA48, window profiles and related products account for the majority of the recycled PVC, followed by flexible PVC and films, pipes and fittings, and cables. Around 300,000 tonnes of window profiles and related building products were 
 
42 Pipe&Prolfile extrusion, July/August 2018 
43 https://www.plasteurope.com/news/VINYLOOP_t240095/ 
44 VinylPlus website: vinylplus.eu 
45 Examples of recycling schemes: ReWindo (www.rewindo.de), Roofcollect (www.roofcollect.com), Recofloor (www.recofloor.org). 
46 VinylPlus progress report 2018 
47 Recovinyl’s mission (www.recovinyl.com) is to facilitate PVC waste collection and recycling by acting as a mediator between recyclers and converters. 
Recovinyl also registers and certifies volumes of PVC recycled, based on the EUCertPlast (www.eucertplast.eu) protocol. 
48 EPPA: European PVC Window Profile and Related Building Products Association (www.eppa-profiles.eu) 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 19 of 100 
 
 
r.eu) 
 
stoffbahnen e.V., Association of Coated Fabrics and Films – 
Given the amounts of ‘old PVC’ waste, the industry targets for recycling, the EU Circular Economy policy and the current lack of processes to remove LS, it seems fair to assume that within 5 years after project end the REMADYL rejuvenating process will reach ca. 400 kton/year (or ca. 14%) of the total EU PVC waste. This would require ca. 20 PVC recyclers investing in our technology as a typical capacity of a recycler is ca 20 kton/year. On average one employee is needed to recycle 0.5 ktons/year of PVC57, which implies REMADYL has the potential to create ca 800 direct jobs in recycling plants. Based on a sales price for rejuvenated PVC of €700/ton, we estimate an annual turnover of €280 million generated by REMADYL technology. Due to the medium-low CAPEX required, the payback time for the necessary investments is fair (around 3 years). 
Lead in PVC 
 
 
recycled in 2017. Of that total, about 40% of postconsumer and post-industrial windows, shutters and profiles were recycled in Germany, 30% in the UK and 30% in the rest of the EU-28. The Hybrid Project, launched by EPPA in 2016, was aimed at classifying the recyclability of PVC hybrid profiles currently found on the market. It assessed that while post-industrial hybrid waste is easily recognised, it is often quite complex to identify hybrid materials in post-consumer waste. The project will continue in 2018 with a focus on post-consumer waste, to determine how to facilitate the identification and design of hybrid PVC profiles. 
In 2017, TEPPFA49 continued its advocacy and communication activities. These promoted the use of U-PVC recyclates, as well as cooperation with recycling companies and quality certification institutes, focusing on the quality and longevity of pipe systems. The first indications showed an increase in consumption of recycled rigid PVC by TEPPFA’s members over the previous year. Nevertheless, reaching the sector targets will depend on the regulatory environment for legacy additives. It might also be affected by the adoption of quality standards restricting the use of recycled PVC in some countries and some applications. 
ReVinylFloor is the new organisation set up to stimulate sustainable controlled-loop solutions for the recycling and recovery of post-consumer PVC flooring in Europe. It was established following the dissolution of EPFLOOR50. ReVinylFloor collaborates with a network of partners active in fields including the production, collection, sorting, recycling, reprocessing and reuse of recycled materials in various applications. In 2017, 3,051 tonnes of post-consumer flooring were recycled. 
The energy and material recovery trials for PVC flooring waste undertaken by Oreade-Suez51 in France continued in 2017. Oreade uses the SOLVAir® (www.solvairsolutions.com) treatment system for the control of air emissions. The NaCl (salt) recovered through Flue Gas Treatment (FGT) is purified by Resolest (www.resolest.fr) and used in a Solvay plant to produce soda ash, thus replacing virgin NaCl. The process of Purification and Recycling of FGT wastes is being recognised as a Best Available Technique (BAT) in the BAT Reference Document for Waste Treatment. 
9,034 tonnes of coated fabrics were recycled in 2017 within the operation of the EPCOAT52 project and Recovinyl. Film recycling (rigid and flexible) is reported this year in a category flexible PVC and films. 
Attempts have been made to remove lead from the PVC matrix using feedstock recycling53,54,55. In all these cases, the PVC resin and the additives are dissolved in a solvent. Despite their proven efficiency, these methods are not commercially available since current non-mechanical recycling is rather expensive. For example, for Creasolv®, probably the most promising type of feedstock recycling, the expected cost is ca €800-1000/ton and it can currently not cope with lead removal56. At the moment there is no commercially viable process that can remove lead from PVC adequately. 
As a worst-case estimate, the REMADYL rejuvenating process has at least the potential to tap into the 100 ktons of difficult-to-recycle PVC for which VinylPlus had to postpone its target by lack of recycling solutions. 
See also section 2.2 for the assumptions made and a detailed motivation. 
 
 
Lead was a commonly used stabiliser in PVC. Thanks in part to legislation in individual EU member states concerning the use of lead containing drinking water pipes the European industry has agreed, on a voluntary basis, to ban the use of lead as a stabiliser in 
 
49 TEPPFA: The European Plastic Pipes and Fittings Association (www.teppfa.eu) 
50 EPFLOOR: European PVC Floor Manufacturers, an EuPC sector group (www.epfloo 
51 http://www.industriesduhavre.com/industries/oreade.html 
52 EPCOAT is the coated fabrics recycling project of IVK Europe (Industrieverband Kun 
www.ivk-europe.com) 
53 WO 2007060660 A1; Homopolymer PVC resin formulation 
54 Heavy metal assessment of some soft plastic toys imported into Nigeria from China. J. A. Omolaoye, A. Uzairu and C. E. Gimba 
55 European Commission DG ENV. E3, Project ENV.E.3/ETU/2000/0058, Heavy Metals in Waste, Final Report 
56 Private communication with ERFMI 
57 Impact of lead restrictions on the recycling of PVC, J.G. Cuperus, J. Ooms and J.G. Cuperus, project number 4827864, Tauw 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 20 of 100 
 
 
Plasticizers in PVC 
 
 
PVC from 2015 on in all their formulations sold in the EU-28 market. Hence, products made from virgin PVC resin by European converters do no longer contain lead since 2016. In addition, the use of lead in electric and electronic equipment, packaging and new cars is also regulated by law. This has resulted in a large decrease in the use of lead in PVC and in the introduction of calcium-containing stabilisers as replacements. However, as mentioned lead is still present in old PVC products and waste streams. 
ECHA is currently working on the restrictions under consideration for PVC containing lead compounds. ECHA’s initial proposal considered a threshold of 0.1% lead content for articles not containing recycled PVC. For some rigid building and construction articles produced from recycled PVC, there would be a 15-year derogation with a higher limit of lead content for articles using PVC recyclates containing it. A public consultation was open from March to September 2017, and VinylPlus submitted extensive comments and information. These included the ARCHE Consulting risk analysis, the socio-economic study by RDC Environment and additional data based on measurements of lead in waste. ECHA’s Committees for Risk Assessment (RAC) and Socio-economic Analysis (SEAC) met in November 2017 to discuss proposals and comments. A public consultation on the SEAC draft opinion was open from 20 December 2017 to 20 February 2018. The graph shows the decrease in consumption of banned Pb-stabilizers (and the increase in Ca-based stabilizers) in the EU-28. 
 
 
Soft PVC is soft as a result of the plasticisers that are added to it, in percentages by weight that vary from 1 to 30%. Di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) was until recently the most commonly used plasticiser in soft PVC plastics. Because of its toxicity for reproduction DEHP was placed on the candidate list of the REACH regulation as an SVHC in 2008. In 2011 DEHP was included in the so- called authorisation list, Annex XIV, of REACH. The use of DEHP in PVC in the EU is therefore banned from 2015, unless this is authorised for specific situations. In addition, DEHP is regulated by product legislation for toys, food packaging, cosmetics, and electric and electronic equipment. 
The above-mentioned legislation has now resulted in a great decrease in the use of DEHP and replacement by other, safer plasticisers in PVC. The graph on the side shows EU trends for substitution of low molecular weight plasticizer to other high molecular weight phthalates. 
In 2014 and 2015 two authorisations were granted for specific DEHP applications: the manufacture of rotor blades for plane engines and the production of solid propellants and engine fillers for missiles and tactical missiles respectively. ECHA has advised the Commission to grant authorisation for the next four years to three large European DEHP producers (ECHA, 2015). The Commission must shortly make a decision about authorisation on the basis of this advice. Under REACH the maximum permissible DEHP content in new products is 0.3 %. At the moment there is no commercially viable process that can remove DEHP from PVC adequately. This means that the only legal route for contaminated soft PVC waste is that of incineration, possibly with the recovery of heat, or that of the high-temperature decomposition of PVC polymers into new raw material for the chemical industry. This is less favourable from an energy point of view than the direct recycling of PVC into new products. Several European recycling companies have therefore requested authorisation to process collected soft PVC for use in, among other things, construction materials (exterior), floors, mats, shoe soles and garden hoses. 
There is a high interest in removing plasticisers from PVC waste. Some methods are described in articles, but are not yet available commercially. Other sources also indicate that extraction methods are not yet available on a large scale. 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 21 of 100 
 
 
It is generally known that polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is dehydrochlorinated when burnt at temperatures higher than 280°C. Osada et al.58 found a way to selectively hydrolyze/extract dioctyl phthalate (DOP) plasticizer and remove chlorides using high-temperature alkaline solutions by internally heating flexible PVC (made of defined sample components) using microwave heating. The DOP plasticizer present in flexible PVC can be hydrolyzed in high-temperature alkaline solutions yielding phthalic acid and isooctanol that can be extracted from the solution. They studied the optimal reaction conditions to extract phthalic acid from DOP plasticizer. 
 
 
Extraction of phthalate from PVC at high T and alkaline conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 F. Osada and T. Yoshioka, Dechlorination of Polyvinyl Chloride in NaOH and NaOH/Ethylene Glycol Solution by Microwave Heating, InTech 
Openscience, 2012 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 22 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
Market of Pb batteries 
 
 One of the most widely used materials in industry over years is lead, a metal with a low melting point, soft, malleable, ductile, 
flexible and very resistant to corrosion, and also abundant in nature. Besides, lead is easy to obtain and use because it is meltable at low temperatures and can be alloyed with other materials. 
Global consumption of Pb is 11,3 million tons per year, 80% is used for batteries. The end uses of lead have changed sharply so far this century because classical uses such as plumbing, construction, paints and pigments have been reduced. Current uses of lead are lead batteries, cable production, oxides, alloys, gasoline, munitions, optical glasses, radiation equipment, tanks to store corrosive materials and paper industry. 
Lead is one of the most effectively recycled materials in the world and today more lead is produced by recycling than is mined. Only 4,3 million tons are provided from mining, the rest demand is supplied from the battery recycling, 7 million tons. So 62% of Pb consumed is coming from recycling. Recycling lead is relatively simple and in most of the applications where lead is used, such as lead-acid batteries, it is possible to recover it for use over and over again. In fact the quality of recycled lead is often similar to that of metal obtained from mining. The majority of primary lead is effectively used only to ‘top up’ the lead that is already circulating efficiently in the economy. This minimises the pressure on the earth’s natural resources to such an extent that lead is likely to be readily available as a sustainable resource in the future for as long as can be reasonably forecast. Moreover, lead recycling contributes to a sustainable society. Governments around the world are working to create closed loop economies and to ensure that more materials are recycled indefinitely. Battery lead recycling already achieves this closed loop and has other positive environmental impacts. Lead recycling saves energy and reduces carbon emissions since it is far more energy-efficient to recycle than it is to produce lead from mining and processing ores. 
As a result of the wide application of lead-acid batteries to 
be the power supply for vehicles, their demand has rapidly increased owing to their low cost and high availability. The global automotive lead acid batteries market accounted for USD 35.70 billion in 2016 and is projected to grow at a CAGR of 4.5% during the forecast period of 2017 to 2024. In the case of Europe, the market is predicted to prosper with a CAGR of 3.04% over the forecast period of 2018-202659. The graph59 shows the Europe automotive lead acid battery market, by country (in $ millions). 
Lead batteries are not only used in the automotive industry, but can also be found for traction (wheelbarrows, mine locomotives, boats...), industrial (continuous services, load regulation, photovoltaic energy, etc) and domestic uses (drills, lawnmowers, etc). The industry report on the global lead-acid battery market also estimates that the growth of the markets for applications such as forklift trucks, UPS systems, wind power 
plants, solar photovoltaics, rail traction and telecommunications is approximately 8% higher than expected60. 
The recycling of used batteries in secondary lead smelters is becoming increasingly important. The decrease or even disappearance of the use of lead in many applications is causing lead scrap to become scarce, giving the recycling of used batteries a key role in secondary production. Approximately two thirds of the weight of the battery is lead. 
Taking measures to restrain or eliminate the amount of these 
substances can reduce their toxicity in soils, water and humans. These restrictions and waste management are given by the European regulation 2006/66/CE61. The recovery rate of batteries in the West is over 90%, with a recovery rate of 95-97% in Spain, so there is very little lead left unrecovered and recycled. Possibly, as the following figure shows, the recovery efficiency of this metal is the highest with respect to other reusable materials in Spain. In summary, the recycling and management of WLABs must focus on the effective removal of toxic metals so that the pollution they can cause does not become effective. A brief outline of the typically lead recovery is shown in the figure above. 
 
 
59 https://www.inkwoodresearch.com/reports/europe-automotive-lead-acid-battery-market/ 
60 https://www.technavio.com 
61 https://eur-lex.europa.eu 
Uses and reuses of Pb 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 23 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
REMADYL innovation potential is situated in finding a novel way to recycle PVC (see figure), in-between on the one hand grinding/ mechanical recycling which is cost efficient but only suitable for ‘easy-to-recycle’ PVC and on the other hand dissolving / chemical recycling, which is (too) costly. 
Cost of extractive extrusion techniques has been estimated considering 3 different scenarios of treatment: soft PVC with phthalates, rigid PVC with lead, and soft PVC containing both LS:. Extractive extrusion of DEHP combined with melt filtration to remove Lead will be technically realised starting from standard extrusion technology with modifications in the process configuration and parameters and assembling auxiliary equipment to improve the process efficiency. The resulting REMADYL process will be a high output process. By comparing with existing extractive extrusion processes to remove other components, assuming recovery of the processing aids (CO2 and LDH) and adding extra costs for logistics, we aim conservatively for €570/ton rejuvenated PVC, which should be market competitive (virgin PVC: range 
€1200/ton; mechanically recycled PVC: ca €300-540/ton). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Speciality 
additives 
 
 
Materials 
solutions 
 
Landfill & 
Incineration 
 
 
 
Heavy Metals 
 
 
 
REMADYL valorisation 
outside PVC industry 
 
 
REMADYL solution 
 
PVC resin 
 
 
Additivation 
 
 
 
Hard & Soft PVC 
products 
 
 
End-of-Life 
PVC products 
 
 
 
Plasticisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Current 
material 
flow 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘cleaned PVC’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternative 
solutions 
 
Freedom to operate 
The preliminary ‘freedom to operate’ analysis shows no inhibitor at research or exploitation level to apply the novel REMADYL technologies on PVC as none of the patented PVC recycling technologies found is based on extractive extrusion, LDH lead scavengers or (NA)DES use as key technology. We briefly discuss the patents found (table with the overview of the relevant patents further below). 
Patent search PVC recycling: Some specific PVC recycling technologies are patented, e.g. TEXYLOOP and VinylLoop developed by the Solvay Group or Creasolv developed by Fraunhofer IVV. The technologies used by these are different (chemical recycling) and pose no limiting factor for REMADYL. Further, no patents have been found about removal of DEHP or lead by using continuous extraction technologies in melt state. A wider patent search has been done for PVC recycling. The most significant patents refer to three areas of PVC recycling or recovery, which are: 
 Production waste material that is reintroduced as raw material (continuous post-process recovery); 
 Mechanical Recycling of PVC from end-of-life objects, carried out by various methods such as: crushing, spraying and screening, separation from other types of plastics, melting and filtering of contaminating particles (non-metallic); 
 Recycling or recovery of PVC particles dispersed in the water used for condensation polymerisation. In these cases, separation columns are used, water treatment using various compounds, treatment of the sludge obtained, etc 
Clearly, these patents do not endanger the research to take part in REMADYL. A scientific paper by Tsunekawa et al. uses an ion exchange resin to remove the fine lead containing particles from PVC, but they do it in a PVC dissolved solution62. 
Patent search purification / extraction. Partner Fh-ICT filed a patent for the basic extraction technology that we want to use in REMADYL (DE200410002159, also in table below). But, it was not granted as the technological approach did not differ enough from already published State of the Art. So, the use of extractive extrusion in general is not limited by third-party IPR. 
There is a similar (not granted) patent application which was not drawn back, so the basic extraction technology is published state-of-the-art, meaning that the basic technology is free. But specific further improvements, eg to remove DEHP, should still be patentable. 
Patent search (NA)DES. First patents are only recently published and evaluation results in the international search reports are not known yet. As described in section 1.4.1, most prior art is in the field of biomass treatment. Based on our findings, we conclude that no patents were found that could block (IP generation on) the use of (NA)DES as foreseen in REMADYL. 
 
62 Tsunekawa et al. Removal of lead compounds from polyvinylchloride in electric wires and cables using cation-exchange resin, Journal of hazardous 
materials, 191, 388392 (2011) 
Key ambition of REMADYL: cost efficient and safe removal of LS from PVC 
Mechanical grinding REMADYL extrusion process Chemical dissolving 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 24 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
 Publication number Title Comment 
PVC RECYCLING 
CN205272462 (U) (2016) PVC wood plastic foaming building plate recycling Recovery device for a PVC film calender. 
CN104708731 (A); 
CN104708731 (B) (2015) 
Separation and recycling method for PVC (Polyvinyl 
Chloride) in waste mixed plastic 
Crushing, corona charging, charging 
attenuation and electrostatic separation. 
CN104291487 (A); CN104291487 (B) (2015) 
Treatment device and treatment method for treating and recycling PVC mother liquid wastewater Pretreatment by ceramic disc filtration. 
CN205761554 (U) (2016) Novel PVC plastics waste recycling rubbing crusher Novel PVC plastic waste recycling and crushing (pulverized) machine 
CN206899358 (U) (2018) PVC is waste recovery device for sheet Set of waste collection in production line 
PURIFICATION / EXTRACTION 
NL19868600144 (1986) Process for purifying a thermoplastic polymer Earliest patent, single screw extrusion 
US19950005985P (1995) Methods for removing contaminants from polymers Expired 2010 
IN199658 B Methods for removing contaminants from polymers Indish version of above, expired late 2017 
JP7216060 A2 Purification of thermoplastic polymer Expired 2014, focussed on special polymer 
KR20030067449 (2003) Black spot removal from waste plastic using 
supercritical fluids Focussing on particles, not on volatiles 
DE200410002159 (2004) Removal of contamination from polymers involves supercritical carbon dioxide in extruder Fh-ICT patent, not granted 
US20070886162P (2007) Methods for the purification of polymers Limited to dissolved polymers 
(NA)DES 
US 2007/215300 A1 Ion liquids and bio-resource treatment Ion liquids and interaction with matrices 
WO 2011/155829 A1 Extracting materials from biological resources Use of NADES for extraction processes 
US2015094459 (A1) Pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass Description of pretreatment processes to purify materials EP 2 876 202 A1 Use of DES in paper production 
US 8.022.014 B2 Cellulose formulation into a sponge structure for the oil winning industry 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 25 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
2 Impact
2.1 Expected impacts 
 
REMADYL will demonstrate the circular use of PVC for window profiles and waterproofing sheets, especially because we will start from ‘old PVC’ which cannot yet be recycled. The extracted phthalate plasticizers will be safely disposed of (with energy valorisation) and the Lead will be re-used in batteries. REMADYL will deliver a breakthrough support to the Circular Economy Package and resource efficiency targets for Europe as the recovered PVC will reduce incineration and landfilling. 
Assuming we recycle 400 kton/year of the ‘old PVC’ waste within 5 years after REMADYL, this will result in a reduction of ca 
800ktons CO2eq and 8ktons of lead emissions. At an estimated market value of €700/ton ‘rejuvenated PVC’, we will generate a novel market for ‘old PVC’ recycling with a value of ca. €280million, enabling ca 800 new jobs. 
2.1.1 Expected impacts set out in the work programme 
In the subsections below, we list how REMADYL will respond to each of the expected impacts of the call. We focus on the impact within and beyond REMADYL and try to illustrate both aspects. 
 2.1.1.1 Increased purity and/or desirable quality of secondary raw materials 
REMADYL key results: continuous process to rejuvenate old PVC (KO3), detection of LS in coated PVC scrap (KO2). For: PVC (industry) sector in general, REMADYL partners: DECEUNINK, BULKID, IRIS. 
Impact: for the first time, it will be possible to use post-consumer ‘old PVC’ and recycle it so that it fulfils the REACH requirements for maximum LS content (see section 2.1.3). Because of the removal of the LS, and potentially also other contaminants, and as the REMADYL process can be combined with existing cleaning technologies used as preparation for mechanical recycling, the purity of the recycled PVC material will be high, i.e. low amount of contaminants (target <1%). 
The quality of the material will be guaranteed via the additivation that will be integrated in the cleaning and rejuvenating process. In contrast to for example grinding or chemical dissolving, the extrusion process enables to get a ‘feel’ for the PVC melt that is being recycled and allows to obtain a tailor-made recycled PVC grade according to the demand of the application and/or client. This rejuvenated and tuned PVC can then be re-extruded by the end-users. Further, REMADYL will make a material passport63 for the rejuvenated PVC, in which sets of data will be provided describing the characteristics of the materials and components that give the value for use, recovery, and reuse. This is particular relevant for the sustainable construction sector, as it will ensure an optimal use of a product’s value recovery potential through the tracking mechanism which assesses the suitability to be used as a resource in other products and processes. The use of automated online composition monitoring at the entrance and possibly at the exit of the rejuvenating process will enable warrantying the constant quality/purity of the secondary raw materials in spite of the variable input material. 
 2.1.1.2 Increased recycling rate for, and reduced landfill and incineration of, secondary raw materials 
REMADYL Key result: process to rejuvenate ‘old PVC’ and its demo ( KO3, KO4), public report on LCA, social-LCA and safety of rejuvenating process ( KO6), business plans (KO8). 
For: industry players in PVC (recycling) sector, both established waste recyclers and start-ups specialising in PVC recycling. 
Impact: the REMADYL rejuvenating process will enable circular PVC use, see sketch in section 1.4.2. This will be a breakthrough and it is a necessary condition for an increased recycling rate but it is not a sufficient condition. Indeed, to be implemented in industry, the process also has to be economically viable. The pilot line testing will deliver the necessary data to assess the cost efficiency of the process. Estimated cost is given in section 1.4.2. The LS containing PVC is estimated to be up to 80% of the total post-consumer PVC waste for at least 20 years to come. So, REMADYL results are relevant for the majority of the 2.7 million tons of PVC waste (see section 1.4.2), material otherwise going mainly to landfill or incineration. 
Recycling of PVC. Nowadays, recycling of the ‘old PVC’ waste is severely constrained by the legislation that restricts the levels of LS. As such, it is mainly landfilled and incinerated, which actually causes the main emissions of e.g. lead (see below). Using recycled PVC helps meet resource-efficiency targets and allows the preservation of natural resources. Indeed, when PVC is recycled CO2 savings of up to 92% are achieved as the energy demand for recycling is typically around 90% lower than for virgin production57. This means that for each kg of PVC recycled, 2 kg of CO2 are saved. Assuming we prevent landfilling or incineration of 400 ktons of ‘old PVC’ per year (see section 2.2), this translates into a REMADYL enabled savings of ca 
 
63 https://www.bamb2020.eu/topics/materials-passports/ 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 26 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
800.000 tons CO2 eq per year. A further additional benefit is the reduced emission that results from not incinerating or landfilling PVC material. 
Re-use of Lead64. Total lead emissions from PVC articles were estimated around 6.8 tonnes in the EU in 20167. 95% of these lead emissions occur during the disposal phase (the remainder is released during service life). So, the first impact of REMADYL is that it will offer a solution to prevent the emission of ca 6.5tonnes of Pb due to landfilling/incineration of PVC articles as the lead will be collected in the lead salt by-product of the rejuvenating process. But REMADYL will go further and look into the re-use of lead. Using the lead extracted from our rejuvenating process as a source for secondary lead production will further reduce the environmental impact as secondary lead production typically only consumes only one third of primary lead production (which is ca 2.07 kg CO2eq per kg Pb). As of today about 80% of lead is used in lead-acid batteries for cars, so the re-use of lead will be focussed for this application by partner AZOR (an official waste manager for the treatment of dangerous automotive waste and lead waste). 
Safe disposal of non-REACH compliant phthalates65. A second type of by-product from the rejuvenating process will be the low molecular weight phthalates, mainly DEHP (but also other like DBP, DIBP and BBP). Their use in products for the EU market is submitted to strict regulations and subjected to authorisation requirements (under Title VII of REACH). So, re-use is not possible. Also, no state-of-the-art was found about re-using phthalates coming from PVC recycling or other similar products recycling processes. Consequently, the REMADYL contribution will be to prevent non-REACH compliant phthalates from ending up in landfilling or standard incineration, to detect and concentrate them in a residue via the rejuvenating process. Based on an in depth analysis of the composition of the extracted DEHP compound (it is likely that the extraction process will also extract other soluble components from the PVC compound) REMADYL will propose cleaning and purification measures to purify the DEHP for a potential chemical recycling process or to reduce the costs of a safe disposal (controlled incineration with maximised energy valorisation). 
2.1.1.3 Reduced risk of retaining hazardous substances in recycled materials, where relevant Key result: Public documents on safety and, study on EoW criteria for recycled PVC (KO7). 
For: EC waste policy advisors and public authorities, European associations involved in PVC and (plastics) recycling 
Impact: the rejuvenated PVC will still contain a (very) small amount of the hazardous contaminants, see targets given in KO1. Therefore, we will cover the full chain of materials processing (waste collection and handling, processing, residual streams, rejuvenated PVC) and make for all these steps guidelines for safe handling, labelling and use. From these activities, we highlight two aspects REMADYL focuses on: (i) establishing rejuvenated PVC as secondary raw material (EoW definition) and (ii) guidelines for re-use of rejuvenated PVC into new products. 
Establishment of rejuvenated PVC as a secondary raw material66,67. REACH and CLP regulations established communication requirements for the environmental and health risks represented by hazardous substances. The recyclate producer has to clearly mention the contaminants and the risks related to these substances, wherever necessary using actual measurements, also indicating if it is ordinary or hazardous waste. As mentioned, we may have residual amounts of e.g. lead and DEHP in the rejuvenated PVC and will follow the related existing guidelines5. REMADYL will facilitate the reduction in the regulation discrepancy that still exists between wastes and chemicals. As an example, PVC waste containing certain additives is sometimes wrongly classified as non-hazardous although the resulting recovered product will be classified as a hazardous chemical mixture under the CLP Regulation. 
From a legal point of view, a waste substance becomes a raw material again if the EoW (End of Waste) criteria are met. If there are no EoW criteria at EU level, a member state can draw these up itself68. For plastic waste the Commission has recently drawn up EoW criteria but there is no legislation yet and the proposal is to the best of our knowledge shelved. REMADYL intends to contribute to establishing these EoW criteria for PVC waste. Commonly, plastic recyclate is given EoW status if the original plastic waste has not been designated as hazardous waste on the basis of the CLP and the POP (Persistent Organic Pollutants) regulation69 or, if this is the case, (i) the processing method should be recognised under the Basel Convention and (ii) the recyclate should be permitted on the market under the REACH regulation70. We comply with the 
 
64 International Lead Association. www.ila-lead.org: AsianMetal - metalpedia.asianmetal.com; Energy use in metal production. CSIRO, Australia 
65 Life cycle assessment to DEHP, applications and potential alternatives. Yuan Li. 
66 Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. In 2008 the European Commission stated, in response to questions from parliament, that both recyclate and substances, 
as well as mixtures and articles, can be brought onto the market (EC, 2008); Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of 
substances and mixtures, amending and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amending Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 
67 European Commission: Regulation on classification, labelling and packaging (CLP) Regulation 
68 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/framework/end_of_waste.htm 
69 The Waste Framework Directive defines chemical waste but does this on the basis of the CLP and POP regulations. 
70 In 2008 the European Commission stated, in response to questions from parliament, that both recyclate and substances, as well as mixtures and articles, 
can be brought onto the market (EC, 2008). 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 27 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
latter and to cover the former we will aim to have the rejuvenating process recognised under the Basel Convention. 
Guidelines for re-use of rejuvenated PVC into products. In REMADYL, the LS are mainly lead Pb and DEHP phthalates. We discuss here the respective guidelines / restrictions for the residual fractions. 
Phthalates (DEHP). Because of the toxicity for reproduction, DEHP was added to the so-called REACH authorisation list (Annex XIV), which means that as of 2015 the use of DEHP in PVC is banned in the EU, unless it is authorised for specific applications. Under REACH there is an exception to the requirement to obtain authorisation for DEHP when DEHP is used in mixtures containing a maximum of 0.3%71 and therefore in new products that are produced from these mixtures. 
Lead (Pb). Currently, REACH legislation proposes allowing a maximum lead content of 0.1% (SVHC status) but there are no authorisation obligations for lead compounds yet. The PVC sector stated that a limit of 1% lead content is required to guarantee PVC recycling. It is currently under debate if this will be allowed, e.g. in construction materials, but, if so, it will for sure be only a temporary derogation as this value is well above the intended threshold value of 0.1%. So, to prepare the PVC industry for beyond this temporary derogation, we want to establish a process that can reduce the lead content to below 0.1%. 
To check the minimum levels, a safety and quality control procedure will be set-up, supported wherever possible by inline monitoring devices. It will focus on the development of a standardized operation procedure, based on an intelligent testing system approach to support the evaluation of the effectiveness of the removal technologies and to look for different valorisation alternatives. 
2.1.1.4 The implementation of the EU Circular Economy Action Plan and the 7th Environment Action Programme; the Commission Strategy on Plastics in a Circular Economy and to the implementation of the SPIRE PPP Roadmap 
REMADYL as a whole is focussed on making PVC circular and will therefore contribute to implementing several of the circular economy roadmaps and policies as argued in more detail further below. REMADYL results are relevant for all players involved in circularising PVC use (producers, convertors, recyclers, legislators, end-users) as well as the wider plastics community. We will improve uptake of secondary PVC materials, introduce quality standards and feed into existing legislation. 
A concrete example of the circular economy will be showcased at partner DECEUNINCK where old (discarded) PVC window-profiles will be collected and mechanically recycled. Then, the scrap material will be cleaned, rejuvenated and via additivation tuned into the right properties. This output material, potentially with the addition of a small % of virgin PVC, will be re-extruded using normal extrusion equipment and (slightly adapted) processes for making high-level window profiles. This demo (KO4) will be a real breakthrough and a flagship example for closing the loop in the PVC industry. 
Contribution to EU circular economy policies. The Circular Economy Action Plan72 aims at substituting substances of concern (or, where this is not possible, to reduce their presence and improve their tracking) and at improving the uptake of secondary raw materials. REMADYL exactly aims for this by overcoming existing barriers for a non-toxic circular PVC material cycle. Indeed, REMADYL goal is to have rejuvenated PVC with a quality as close as possible to virgin PVC. REMADYL is fully in line with the priority of ‘use of chemicals fitting the circular model’ as we will increase safety and facilitate recycling by removing the LS and substituting with nontoxic materials, as also envisaged in the 7th Environment Action Programme73. REMADYL is also in line with the recently published ‘Roadmap to Resource efficient Europe74’ which aims at promoting the recycling and re-use of waste. 
In its communication on the implementation of the Circular Economy Action Plan, the EC highlights ‘Four identified issues’75. Issue n° 2 is ‘Waste may contain substances that are no longer allowed in new products’ and highlights e.g. the problem of LS to soften PVC as limiting PVC recycling. As should be clear by now from the proposal text, addressing this issue n°2 is the core of the REMADYL activities. Issue n°4 is ‘Rules to decide which wastes and chemicals are hazardous are not well aligned and this affects the uptake of secondary raw materials’ and as example both lead and additives to soften PVC are mentioned. Also this issue n°4 is addressed by REMADYL via KO7-policy contribution and by KO5-handling of residues. So, REMADYL is in line with and will contribute to the EU planned actions to overcome the barriers to the circular economy and will at the same time ensure REACH compliance for recovered substances. 
Contribution to SDG. REMADYL will also contribute to reaching the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals76. The project is going to address the SDG 12 (responsible consumption and production) which is about promoting resource and energy efficiency and SDG 13 (Climate Action) which aims at compliance with the Paris Agreement and reducing emissions. 
 
71 0.3% applies as DEHP is classified as 1B reprotoxic (CLP Regulation). For carcinogenic and mutagenic substances the threshold is 0.1%. Therefore, we 
aim in the KO of REMADYL already for the stronger threshold of 0.1%. 
72 European Commission: Circular economy Action Plan – closing the loop 
73 European Union: Seventh Environment Action Programme 
74 European Commission: Roadmap to a Resource Efficient Europe. 
75 On the implementation of the circular economy package: options to address the interface between chemical, product & waste legislation. SWD 2018 (20) 
76 United Nations. Sustainable Development Goals https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 28 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
REMADYL contributes to the latter via the shift 200ktons of PVC waste from incineration to recycling within 5 years. Contribution to SPIRE roadmap. REMADYL contributes also to the SPIRE Roadmap77, as the presented novel methods of extraction will favor the development of a sustainable value chain and new business opportunities for the PVC (recycling) 
industry. Next to the core REMADYL contribution (removal of LS in PVC), we will contribute to the circular economy also via 
further activities: (i) the extractive extrusion process that will be developed (KO1) can also be used for other plastics cleaning and recycling process, eg for removal of (halogenated) flame retardants or surface contamination; (ii) the recovering of salty lead fractions (KO5) will also be relevant for recuperation of heavy metals (metallurgy) in other applications, e.g. membranes for waste water treatment, infrared absorption in window glasses,… (iii) the online monitoring techniques (KO2) are in line with the digitisation focus within SPIRE. The expected REMADYL project outcomes will contribute to the SPIRE cPPP. As such, we will link in and cooperate with A.SPIRE to maximise mutual impact. The REMADYL coordinator, assisted by the relevant partners, will contribute to the questionnaires sent by A.SPIRE for the annual progress monitoring report of the SPIRE cPPP. Further, we will spread REMADYL (more general) results within the SPIRE community by contribution to ASPIRE events, by dissemination and technology transfer. REMADYL partners who are SPIRE members (VERTECH, ENCO, IRIS) will form the natural bridge. 
The key components of the SPIRE roadmap that REMADYL will address are: 
 3. Applications: New processes and materials for market applications that boost energy and resource efficiency throughout the value chains. 
 4. Waste2Resource: Avoidance, valorisation and re-use of waste streams within and across sectors, including recycling of post-consumer waste streams and new business models with the ambition to closing the loop 
2.1.2 Improving innovation capacity and market creating potential 
Fundamental to achieving the expected impacts of REMADYL project is to enable SMEs and industries to enter the research- development-innovation cycle for safe processing and reuse of PVC, to ensure the project effort takes industry closer to bringing new technologies processes and products onto the market to benefit society and the environment to lead to growth and value added jobs in Europe. To achieve this goal, there is a strong innovation dimension/cycle in the project approach with a view to increase the likelihood of continuity of the established ecosystem, as well as market-uptake of project results for EU industrial sustainability, competitiveness, growth and jobs. 
Strong industries involvement in the consortium - Deceuninck: from hard PVC (for window profiles) to soft PVC (for sealing and flooring); Danosa: ability to use rejuvenated PVC for waterproofing sheets; Azor: processing lead which will come as a cheap side-product from the REMADYL process - backed by robust knowledge management, knowledge transfer and market exploitation plan, will contribute to ensuring that REMADYL project is successful in transitioning knowledge towards the market. 
REMADYL project will create positive impacts for EU industries, as REMADYL is the solution for safe processing and recycling of PVC with LS. This will open up a large novel stream of waste material to be recycled, reducing waste and generating new revenue streams (e.g. lead salts used for batteries). Estimated amounts of recycled ‘old PVC’ within 5 years after the project: 400.000 ton annually, corresponding to an estimated value of ca €280million, see section 2.2. 
This market opportunity is composed of several cross-sectorial areas: 
 Novel equipment: to implement the REMADYL technology, extrusion equipment with specific screw design will be needed. This offers opportunities for partners BulkID who will act as a broker between equipment manufacturers and recyclers 
 Novel recycling activity: REMADYL will open up the field of PVC with LS for recycling. As mentioned above, it is estimated that within 5 years after REMADYL up to half a million ton of such PVC can be recycled. 
 Linked services: technical consulting for ‘old PVC’ recycling, assistance for adapting existing recycling lines; maintenance of the equipment. 
REMADYL results will improve the innovation capacity of (SME) companies involved in PVC and battery recycling, across the whole value chain. Here we mention the key groups: 
 PVC recyclers: A ban on lead in articles produced from PVC is affecting the incorporation of recycled PVC in the manufacturing processes of final products made of rigid and soft PVC, as lead is present in PVC waste. This would severely hamper the recycling of PVC waste and therefore the benefits of recycling which include recuperation of material resources and energy. The results of this project will have a direct positive impact on recyclers. The removal of lead will increase the market for recycled PVC in Europe significantly (estimated increase of 500ktons, i.e. more than 50% compared to the current 800ktons) and this would have a significant financial and social impact on the recycling industry. 
 Plastic recyclers: in general possibility to use REMADYL process for other areas, like removal of other LS like Cadmium or Lead based pigments. 
 
77 Sustainable Process Industry through Resource and Energy Efficiency. SPIRE Roadmap 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 29 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
 Battery recyclers: the worldwide production of Pb from primary sources (mining) has been decreased over the last years and around 7 million tons of Pb consumed in the world is coming from battery recycling (62% of Pb consumed). The global automotive lead acid batteries market accounted for USD 35.70 billion in 2016 and is projected to grow at a CAGR of 4.5% during the forecast period of 2017 to 2024, so new sources of lead salts, like the ones from the REMADYL process, can cover this growing demand. 
 PVC converters: The recycled PVC obtained in REMADYL is expected to have a lower price in comparison with virgin PVC. A reduction of lead in articles would not lead to any direct effects for the convertors who make articles out of virgin PVC. However, this supposes a restriction for the use of recycled of PVC from converters. 
 RTD actors: spread the technology further, also for other materials recycling, eg contaminated plastics. 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 30 of 100 
 
 
 
 
2.1.3 Environmental and social impact – policy framework 
2.1.3.1.-Environmental impact of REMADYL: REMADYL will go well beyond the the-state of the art: on the one hand, there is no commercially viable process that can remove LS adequately, including DEHP and lead from PVC, on the other hand, the state-of-the-art routes to process old-PVC are incineration, landfilling or mechanical recycling. Particular consideration to the latter is that the EC only granted authorization to three organizations in 2016 to recycle PVC containing DEHP, two of them being currently still on the market: Stena recycling and Plastic Planet (both of them using conventional mechanical recycling). 
Environmental implications of DEHP and lead removal from old-PVC: Release of DEHP phthalate might occur during production, transport, storage, formulation and processing of PVC. DEHP enters the environment mainly via direct releases in the air and in waste water. Experimental data indicates a biodegradation half-life time for DEHP in surface water of 50 days and 300 days in aerobic sediment. Anaerobic conditions and low temperature further reduce the degradation rate. DEHP is found to bio-accumulate in aquatic organisms. The PNE Coral (derived from the toxicity data (food basis) applying an assessment factor) for DEHP in fresh food is 3.3 mg/kg for mammalians, 17 mg/kg for birds, and 16 mg/kg for fish. It’s assumed that mammalians eat fish, birds eat mussels, and fish eat invertebrates in the food chain. In the terrestrial food chain mammalians are assumed to eat DEHP exposed earthworms 78. These results indicate that uptake via the food chain might be an important exposure route (secondary poisoning). In conclusion, releases from sites processing polymers containing DEHP and sites formulating printing ink, sealants and/or adhesives containing DEHP, may cause adverse effects in food chains based on aquatic organisms but also on terrestrial organisms. It’s proved that DEHP has a negative impact not only for the environment but also for human health. 
On the other hand, the Lead used in ‘old PVC’ as stabilizer, can have a detrimental effect on human health and the environment. At high levels in the human body lead can damage various organs. Acute lead poisoning and the resulting organ damage is very rare nowadays, due to proper hygienic measures and phase out of lead in the relevant places in society. However, even at low doses lead remains of concern for the developing of the brains of young children as well as for unborn children through pregnant women.79 
REMADYL will enable the separation of non-REACH compliant phthalates mainly DEHP (but also others like DBP, DIBP and BBP) and lead from old-PVC. It is envisaged that its implementation will prevent the emission of ca. 6.5 tonnes of Pb (see section 2.1.1.2). Moreover, REMADYL will also address the safe disposal of the phthalates and the re-use of lead in the context of a circular economy. 
-Environmental implications of Incineration & landfilling: Incineration of PVC causes environmental problems which 
obstruct and hinder the process of energy conversion from PVC waste to electricity. For example, the flue gas from PVC waste incineration contains CO2, NOx, HCl, volatile organic compounds (VOC), polychlorinated dibenzodioxins (PCDDs) and other toxins. Besides, solid waste emissions from this process may cause environmental pollution over a long term 80. The table 81 shows the different negative environmental impacts when treating 100 Kg of PVC waste in an incineration process. 
When landfilling is considered, plasticisers appear to be the most obvious source of landfill gas due to their abundance in flexible PVC compounds. Upon ultimate 
Values of different environmental impact categories for treating 100Kg PVC waste 
impact categories total emissions/KG equivalent factor equivalent mass/(Kg.eq.) 
Incineration  Incineration 
global warming (GWP) CO2 149.01 1.00 149.01 
CO 2.00x10¯³ 2.00 4.00x10-3 
NOx 7.61x10¯³ 3.20x10¯² 2.44 
subtotal   151.45 
acidification (AP) SO2 8.40x10¯ 5 1.00 8.40x10-5 
NOx 7.61x10-3 0.70 5.33x10-3 
HCI 1.76x10 -2 0.88 1.55x10-2 
subtotal   2.09x10-2 
eutrophication (EP) PO ¾ 7.61x10-3 1.35 1.03x10-2 
subtotal   1.03x10-2 
photochemical ozone NMVOC 0.34x10-3 0.60 2.04x10-4 
creation potential (POCP) CO 2.00x10 -3 0.03 6.00x10-5 
subtotal   2.64x10-4 
solid waste and soot (SWS) soot 4.00x10 -3 1.00 4.00x10-3 
solid waste 359.23 1.00 359.23 
biodegradation into biogas, DEHP gives rise to approximately 1400 m3/t landfill gas, composed of 66% methane and 34% carbon dioxide. The equivalent amount of carbon dioxide is about 20,000 m3 CO2 equivalents per tonne of DEHP 82. 
 
 
78 BIS PHTHALATE (DEHP), Summary risk assessment report, JRC European Commission, 2008. 
79 J. Ooms and J.G. Cuperus. Impact of lead restrictions on the recycling of PVC. 2013 
80 Yuehui WU et al. Comparative study on the efficiency and environmental impact of two methods of utilizing PVC waste based on LCA. 2013 
81 Yuehui WU et al. Comparative study on the efficiency and environmental impact of two methods of utilizing PVC waste based on LCA. 2013 
82 I. Mersiowsky / Long-term fate of PVC products and their additives in landfills, Prog. Polym. Sci. 27. 2002. 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 31 of 100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Estimation of possible additional costs as a consequence of complications caused by DEHP exposure. 
 
 
REMADYL will prevent emissions observed during the incineration and landfilling of PVC articles. As stated in section 2.1.1.2, assuming we prevent landfilling or incineration of 400 ktons of ‘old PVC’ per year, this translates into a REMADYL enabled savings of ca 800.000 tons CO2 eq per year. 
 Environmental implications of using recycled PVC versus Virgin PVC: 
When PVC is recycled CO2 savings of up to 92% are achieved as the energy demand for recycling is typically around 90% lower than the energy consumption for the production of virgin PVC material57. This means that for each kg of PVC recycled, 2 kg of CO2 are saved. According to a recent study 83, the mechanical recycling processes of PVC have a much higher positive impact on the environment than the production of primary PVC and this in every environmental indicators analysed. The functional unit defined for the study was 1 ton of PVC. The graph on the side shows the LCA normalised results of primary PVC production and recycled PVC production. 
The impacts in the primary PVC scenario were mainly attributed to human toxicity, terrestrial ecotoxicity, marine ecotoxicity, and fossil depletion. The climate change, human toxicity, and fossil depletion 
count as the dominant environmental impacts for the recycled PVC scenario, whereas the impacts contributing to the rest of the categories are small 84. 
2.1.3.2.- Social impact of REMADYL: Phthalates are very common additives and are still present in a significant number of home products. There are concerns of 
human exposure because these additives are not chemically bound to the plastics in which they are incorporated and thus can leach out readily. Phthalates have been studied in-deep for the last two decades because some of them have been related to some health problems. A study 85 states that emissions of DEHP from PVC flooring and PVC skirting resulted in max concentration of approximately 1 µg/m3 of DEHP after 150 days in exhaust air from controlled chambers. A different research work 86 indicates that the prenatal exposure to phthalates is related with asthma in children from 5 to 11 years-old with an incidence up to 50%. Researchers at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology     have     reported     that  the 
presence of plasticizers in surface materials indoor can increase the risk of bronchial obstructions, asthma, and perhaps the susceptibility to respiratory infections 87. Phthalates have been also linked with attention-deficit, hyperactivity disorder, obesity and type II diabetes88. In the last years, these additives have been removed from all toys and products for children in the EU. 
Human populations exposed to DEHP are: workers, consumers including patients, and indirect exposure of man via the environment. Also, children and babies have been considered. Occupational exposure to DEHP, mainly through inhalation but also via the dermal route, occurs during the production of DEHP, the industrial use of DEHP as an additive, and at industrial end-use of semi-manufactured products and end-products containing DEHP. 
 
83 Liping Ye et al. Life cycle assessment of polyvinyl chloride production and its recyclability in china. 2016 
84 Liping Ye et al. Life cycle assessment of polyvinyl chloride production and its recyclability in china. 2016 
85 A. Afhari et al. Emission of phthalates from PVC and other materials. 2003 
86 Robin M. Whyatt. et. al. Asthma in Inner-city Children at 5-11 years of age and prenatal exposure to phthalates. 2014 
87 Oie, L. et al. Residential exposure to plasticizers and its possible role in the pathogenesis of asthma. 1997 
88 U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission. Chronic hazard advisory panel on phthalates and phthalate alternatives. 2014 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 32 of 100 
 
 
Preliminary PEDR - Plan for Exploitation and Dissemination of Results 
 
 
As an example, some of the health consequences of DEHP have been selected and their additional treatment costs according to reports from the current literature are displayed on the side89. These figures only take into account pure costs for treatment. Not included are any overall economic effects such as loss of labour, gross domestic product, joblessness, etc. 
Nowadays, our society has become aware of the harm to the human health caused by phthalates like DEHP. In this sense, a strong positive social impact is expected due the implementation of REMADYL technologies, since it is aimed to separate DEHP and other LS such as lead that can also have a detrimental effect on human health and the environment, from PVC products, as explained in section 2.1.3.1. 
In addition, a strong jobs increase is expected, up to 400 new jobs could be created 3 or 4 years after REMADYLs ending, as stated in section 1.4.2. With the in REMADYL developed innovative technologies a new path for recycling of old PVC will be created. This means an increase in the requirement recycler workers to start recycling old PVC and turn it into new applications, free of dangerous additives. New business opportunities will arise as this means the opening of an entire new recycling market. 
2.1.4 External conditions influencing the expected impact 
 
 External condition  REMADYL action/strategy 
EU efforts towards Circular Economy and circular use of raw materials 
REMADYL will facilitate the transition towards a Circular Economy model, by providing to relevant actors (regulators; industries; academics) evidence on technically feasible and economically viable processes. The EU efforts should provide a very good environment for uptake of the REMADYL results. The REMADYL partners will disseminate the results of the project to demonstrate their work in circular economy and to reinforce project impact. Delivering proof of an economic feasible 
process is needed to achieve changes. 
Resistance to invest in novel equipment/novel (complex) process adaptation. Companies might be reluctant to make the 
investments, eg for logistics 
REMADYL will demonstrate its cost efficiency through an LCC study. Moreover the EU legislation will support the adaption of the REMADYL technology. The REMADYL process is based on extruder types which are already available in some PVC companies, so only an upgrade/refurbishing will be needed, lowering the investment cost. Moreover, the technology is 
scalable, meaning that equipment with suited throughput (over a wide range) can be chosen. 
Price/Quality ratio of REMADYL rejuvenated PVC is too high, compared to virgin PVC or mechanically recycled material. 
REMADYL proposes a cost-efficient process making it possible to offer recycled PVC at a cost well below the one of virgin PVC material. Rejuvenated PVC will have a higher processing cost compared to mechanically recycling but the REMADYL technology is intended for LS containing PVC and when the gate fee for disposal (i.e. the negative value of the material) is accounted for, REMADYL can compete with the price of mechanically recycled PVC, especially because it will be 
of higher quality /purity and this will be able to be used with less virgin material added. 
Need to fulfil current and future standards. 
Legislation and regulations might become more strict 
REMADYL project will review the legislation applicable to recycled PVC and legacy additives and the used technology and six monthly updates will be organised. 
If regulations become even more strict, REMADYL partners and technology will be at the forefront and will be excellently positioned to deal with the stricter limits. REMADYL will also stimulate efforts from standardisation and policy side, e.g. via partner OVAM, to advocate future standards 
and regulation that promotes the use of ‘recycled PVC’.
2.2 Measures to maximize impact 
Key objectives for the communication, dissemination and exploitation actions in REMADYL are: 
 To pave the way for the continuous uptake of the results across the relevant European (and international) PVC (and) recycling communities, ensuring that our R&D results will be taken further and have a lasting impact beyond REMADYL. 
 To establish synergies and boost new collaboration with external parties and existing networks to give REMADYL a multiplier effect for PVC and plastics recycling, thus contributing to knowledge building and best practices diffusion. 
 
(a) Dissemination and exploitation of results 
To ensure successful exploitation of the REMADYL results, dissemination and exploitation activities will run for the whole 
project lifetime. Integrity and consistency of all dissemination and exploitation efforts will be supervised by the Dissemination and Exploitation Manager (see section 3.2.1.1b), who is also the leader of WP7. This WP is devoted to planning and implementing the dissemination, exploitation and communication (see further) activities. The dissemination plan aims to maximize the impact and visibility of the project among all relevant stakeholders not only at European level but also at international, national, regional and local levels. Targeted dissemination actions will ensure the engagement of researchers, 
 
89 https://www.bbraunforsafety.com/en/dehp-exposure.html#dehp-exposure 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
90 http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/other/grants_manual/amga/soc-med-guide_en.pdf 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 33 of 100 
 
 
 
 
businesses, policy-makers and end-users during and after REMADYL. The preliminary Plan for Exploitation and Dissemination (PEDR) is introduced below. It will be updated, where needed, to ensure the expected impacts are fulfilled. 
 Dissemination strategy and approach 
The REMADYL dissemination strategy is to setup a comprehensive series of actions to diffuse the non-confidential results to an as wide and relevant audience as possible. We will heighten awareness about the results, contributing to knowledge building in Europe, reaching out to both experts and citizens. For protecting the commercial opportunities, a confidentiality policy will underpin REMADYL dissemination activities. As such the Exploitation and Dissemination Manager will work closely with all partners to manage the identification of non-confidential publishable-disclosable information that could be useful for dissemination activities. The dissemination should pave the way and support future exploitation. 
Key elements of the preliminary dissemination plan are presented below. The plan is embedded in the wider communication plan. The Exploitation and Dissemination Manager will lead the consortium in extending, implementing and evaluating this plan (see dedicated Task 7.3). 
A. Identification of target audience and key messages: 
 
Target Audience Project Activities Key Messages to disseminate Indicators 
All target groups, incl. general public 
Project website – Project events Social and environmental benefits of using REMADYL 
10000 hits from 40 countries 
Policy makers & public 
bodies 
Capacity Building Programme - 
project events 
Policy briefs and roadmap to foster EU 
implementation of the REMADYL “concept” 
50 representatives 
involved 
PVC recyclers & converters; Stabilizer producers 
Marketing videos – project events 
Economic benefits of using REMADYL Results from the demo sites 
3 videos and 3 project events organized 
R&D actors, academics Articles and publications - 
project events 
Research published in scientific articles At least 15 
articles/publications 
H2020, national & internat. 
Projects 
Networking events Best practices from a portfolio of thematic 
projects, showing complementary results 
At least 2 events 
organized/attended 
EU Standardization Committees 
Capacity Building Programme Suggestions for defining EoW (End of Waste) requirements for PVC; safe handling of LS 
50 representatives involved 
 B. REMADYL dissemination channels: will cover traditional channels such as dissemination at conferences (papers and posters), publications in peer-reviewed journals, dissemination in industry magazines, newsletters and on-line platforms, as well as social media platforms and videos, etc. We will follow and implement as much as possible the guidelines as recently published by the EC on social media: ‘Social media guide for EU funded R&I projects’90. A project website will be built (see Task 7.3), which will serve as a lasting spot for promoting the project and for housing the downloadable public deliverables and other public REMADYL outputs. It will be widely promoted across Europe and worldwide to attract visitors. 
C. Collaboration with Technical Associations and networks: REMADYL consortium participates in broad networks of potential stakeholders of the proposed technology. We want to link with the broader dissemination strategies of such existing European networks as this will contribute to efficient dissemination of REMADYL outputs across the relevant European and international communities. These networks are listed for each partner in Section 4. ALL PARTNERS will actively use its networks and platforms to promote REMADYL in order to maximize the impact of the results. Some of the most relevant platforms and networks that will be used to leverage REMADYL are: SPIRE (via ENCO, VERTECH and (the founder of) IRIS), Circular Economy Club - International network of > 2,600 circular economy professionals and organizations (via SIE), SUSCHEM - European Technology Platform for Sustainable Chemistry (via AIMPLAS), ECP4 - European Composites, Plastics & Polymer Processing Platform (via CTB, AIMPLAS and FhG) and ACR+ - network of cities and regions sharing the aim of promoting a sustainable resource management and accelerating the transition towards a circular economy (via OVAM). And of course, we have our own REMADYL Advisory and Support Group (see also section 3.2.1.1f). 
D. Organisation of Brokerage event and Final conference: Two events will be organized by REMADYL consortium with the aim to present REMADYL results and to meet industry partners and possible investors. The Brokerage Event – organized in M42 will be a matchmaking event between industry partners in the field of PVC, construction and chemical sectors. Active participation will be sought through specific dissemination activities (e.g. leaflet focused on the conference, specific newsletter issue, strong communication campaign with contacts, press releases, advertising, etc.).The final conference – organized in M46 
- will include presentations of REMADYL results to relevant stakeholders by consortium members, bringing as well members of 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] 
 
 
 
 
the Advisory and Support Group and other relevant speakers which might strengthen the consortium message (e.g. experts on legislation, Circular Economy and PVC). 
E. Participation in European, local and international events (forums, fairs, conferences, workshops, meetings): The consortium will have an active participation in seminars, fairs conferences, relevant events, etc. in order to increase the network of contacts and disseminate the project results (via oral presentation, posters, distribution of leaflets, etc.). A first search of the international forums and fairs where the consortium plans to disseminate REMADYL is shown in the table below. 
International events Year Location Sector 
Vinyl Sustainability Forum 2020,’22 TBD European PVC (recycling) industry, organized by VinylPlus 
Chemplast 2021 Madrid, ES Chemicals and plastics fair 
Ecofira 2022 Valencia, ES Fair for environmental solutions 
Plastic Recycling Show Europe 2020,‘22 Amsterdam (NL) Plastics Recycling 
K-fair 2022 Dusseldorf (DE) Plastics and rubber industry 
CONAMA 2020 Madrid (ES) Environment Congress 
Ami Conferences 2021,’22 Within DE Waterproofing membranes, PVC formulations 
European lead battery congress 2022 TBD Lead batteries conference 
Fakuma 2021,‘23 Friedrichshafen, DE Polymers, injection moulding, extrusion 
Achema 2021 Frankfurt, DE Chemical industry 
BATIBOUW Fair 2022 Brussels, BE Construction & Renovation, for professionals & general public 
Kunststoffen Fair 2019,’21 Veldhoven, NL Trade fair and networking event for Benelux plastics chain 
Ecomondo 2021 Rimini, IT Euro-Mediterranean green & circular economy expo 
 Exploitation strategy and approach 
The main goal of the exploitation is to ensure the impact and further take-up of the processes and materials developed in REMADYL. Each partner will be involved in defining exploitation plans for its key exploitable results (KER). Further, the Exploitation and Dissemination Manager will ensure that all REMADYL partners have a joint understanding of which knowledge protection measures will have to be taken. 
Key elements of the preliminary dissemination plan are presented below. 
A. Identification of KER – Key Exploitable Results 
The table below (pag. 33-34) shows the overview of the Key Exploitable Results, which are along our partner’s value chain. This Foreground list provided here will be further extended and updated in subsequent versions of the PEDR. It will also be enlarged with input from the IPR management. Initial exploitation activities as well as linked dissemination actions are already identified. 
Although all these KERs have their value, we will focus for the draft PEDR on the main result (the so-called ‘REMADYL Technology’): the technology and process development for removal of LS from PVC. For these, a draft exploitation plan has been worked out and is presented in the next sections. 
B. Potential Market for REMADYL Technology 
In 2016 in total 2.500.000 tons of PVC waste was available in Europe91, ca 1million of it being soft PVC waste. We estimate that REMADYL can lead to an extra 300-500 kton per year. For the following calculations of the potential markets and investments, we assume 400 ktons annually (as estimated in section 1.4.2). For recyclers to be a relevant activity, the expected capacity will need to be around 20 ktons/year, so a market of ca. 20 players. The capacity of 20 kton/year cannot be reached with one unit, we assume here that an interested PVC recycler will need to invest in 4 units of 5 kton. So, for making a first estimate of the market, we simply assume that there is a market for installing ca. 80 units of 5 ktons. 
According to the study carried out by the German consulting company Conversio91, on behalf of partner VinylPlus, Germany, UK, Italy, France and Poland represent the largest PVC recycling markets. Thus, these 5 countries represent the primary REMADYL target market. 
C. Estimation of the investment (CAPEX) and operational cost (OPEX) for REMADYL Technology. 
In order to verify the feasibility of the end-users investment as well as to assess the main advantages of REMADYL technology (low costs and high quality products), the CAPEX/OPEX has been estimated. We consider the scenario where both lead and phthalates need to be removed from EoL PVC waste. We have assumed to sell a “full package technology”, where not only the LS removal process, but also the sorting system to automatically identify types of contaminants is included (with a cost of 
 
91 www.conversio-gmbh.com 
Investment breakdown for 2.5kton unit 
Extruder 350.000,00 € 
Dosing 150.000,00 € 
Pelletizing 150.000,00 € 
Peripherie 300.000,00 € 
CO2-Dosing & Recovery 500.000,00 € 
Melt filter (Screenchanger) 75.000,00 € 
Degassing device (after screen 80.000,00 € 
Centrifuge & reactor for LDH r 50.000,00 € 
Monitoring system 150.000,00 € 
Installation costPage 34 of 1 00 160.000,00 € 
Total investment 1.965.000,00 € 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 35 of 100 
 
 
 
 
€150k). For calculating investment (CAPEX) and operational costs (OPEX), a depreciation time of 10 years is assumed and a plant with a throughput of 300kg/h or ca. 2.5kton/year (assuming 24/24h operation for 350 days a year). That size of unit is expected to be a good start for market entry (semi-industrial) and for (smaller) PVC convertors. Extruders with such capacity are available. It is more over a scale for which REMADYL partners feel confident to make a rough estimate of the costs.The table (above) shows the data taken into account and add up to an investment cost of almost €2mio for removal of both lead and DEHP. This results in a depreciation cost of ca €80/ton92 (25ktons processed in 10 years). The calculation of the operational costs (data shown in the 2 tables below) results in an operational cost of ca €270/ton for DEHP removal and of ca €220/ton for lead removal. The combined process will require operational costs of ca €490/ton or taking into account the depreciation a total cost of €570/ton for going from ‘old PVC’ with LS to rejuvenated PVC. 
Note that in the market estimate, it is mentioned that required capacity will be ca 20kton/year. Therefore, we assumed 4 units of 5 kton/year. That is no problem as the required type of extruders are available at this larger scale. It is fair to state that the total cost per ton for running such a larger plant will not be higher than for the small scale plant of ca 2.5kton/year, which was used to estimate the CAPEX and OPEX. Indeed, this is a conservative approach, 
because upscaling normally leads to a substantially higher 
efficiency/lower costs. 
D. Competitor analysis and maximum market value of ‘rejuvenated PVC’. 
PVC can be recycled done via mechanical and feedstock recycling, see Section 1.4.2. Only mechanical recycling is commercially exploited, cost is ca €400-500/ton. But, no 
 
 
1200 
 
1000 
 
800 
 
600 
Chemical recycled PVC 
 
 
 
Virgin material cost 
 
 
Maximum market value of recycled PVC 
 
 
REMADYL 
removal of hazardous components (LS) takes place. Chemical recycling can in principle give a quality with purity like virgin material, but the cost for this type of to recycling is (too) high, so that price per ton is similar to virgin material. 
 
400 
 
200 
 
0 
rejuvenated PVC  
 
Mechanical recycled PVC 
Mixing cost higher as benefit of adding cheaper recycled PVC 
So, this option is currently not viable commercially. 
Based on this market situation, and the need for processing 
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 
 
Fraction of virgin material needed 
‘old PVC’ in REMADYL we made an estimate of the market value for ‘rejuvenated PVC’. The borders are well-defined: as the quality will be much better than mechanically recycled PVC, but perhaps not as valuable as virgin material, the price will therefore be somewhere between €500/ton and Pvirgin = €1200/ton. Basically, the maximum market value of recycled PVC is determined by the fraction of virgin material (Fvirgin) that needs to be added to it. As a first estimate, this maximum price can be expressed by the following formula: Pmax= ( (Pvirgin – Pcomp) – Fvirgin x Pvirgin) / (1-Fvirgin) with: Pcomp the cost for the extra costs that are needed to mix the recycled and virgin PVC. This extra cost can vary, but here we take it at 
€250/ton, which is the typical step for compounding. Using this assumption, Pmax has been plotted, see graph. Important is the ‘zero value’ point (in the graph around 80% virgin material fraction), which occurs when the cost of adding the recycled material is higher than the benefit of the small amounts of recycled PVC added. 
Given that the REMADYL Technology will include re-additivation, it will be able to replace at least 50% of virgin material, even up to 80%. So, we expect a market value for rejuvenated PVC of around €650-750/ton. On the plot, the areas where mechanical recycling and chemical recycling are situated are indicated. This shows the difficulty for chemical recycling: it only aims at fully replacing virgin material. And it also shows why rejuvenated PVC, although higher in cost than mechanical recycled PVC can exist very well: becauseng it will allow replac higher amounts of virgin PVC for several application areas. 
 
 
92 Depreciation is only calculated for the combined process as it is only marginally less if one considers removal of only one type of LS. 
Cost (€/ton) 
Base Data Amount Unit 
Throughput 300 kg/h 
Melting Energie 0,1  kWh/kg 
Electricity Costs per kwh 0,06  €/kWh 
Costs CO2 1  €/kg 
CO2-Polymer-Ratio 500  % 
Wear Costs 0,01  €/kg 
CO2-Loss-Factor 5  % 
Energie Peripherie 0,05 kWh/kg 
(Cooling) Water need/loss? 0,1 L/kg 
(Cooling) Water costs? 0,001 €/L 
Labor costs 30 €/h 
Evaporation heat CO2 573  kJ/kg 
Evaporation heat CO2 0,16  kWh/kg 
Loss-Factor Recompression 0,5  
Compression Energy 0,32 kWh/kg 
 
Processing Costs per h (at 
throughput of 300kg/h) 
 
 
Amount 
 
 
Unit 
OPEX 
DEHP 
(€/hour) 
OPEX 
Lead 
(€/hour) 
Melting Energie 30 kWh/h   
Melting Energie Costs   1,8  
CO2-loss 15 kg/h   
CO2-loss-costs   15  
CO2-recompression 1500 kg/h   
CO2-recompression energy 480 kWh/h   
CO2-recompression costs   28,8  
Cooling costs   0,03  
Labor costs   30  
Wear-Costs   3  
Peripherie Energy 15 kWh/h   
Peripherie Energy Costs   0,9  
LDH Dosing 12 kg/h   
LDH Loss per h 1,2 kg/h   
LDH Loss costs per h    3,6 
LDH recovery costs    16,2 
Filter material costs    45 
Total cost per 300kg   80 € 65 € 
Total cost per ton   270 € 220 € 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 36 of 100 
 
 
 
 
E. REMADYL expected revenue streams 
First, we calculate the net cost for obtaining 1 ton of rejuvenated PVC. This is the result from combining the CAPEX and OPEX (see part C), an extra cost for 
transport and sorting and we need to take into account the negative value of the PVC with LS, i.e. normally to dispose of it, one needs to pay gate fee of ca €200/ton. This brings the net cost to produce rejuvenated PVC to €470/ton, see table. 
Benefit of using rejuvenated PVC for DECEUNINCK and DANOSA. We consider two scenarios: a positive and a moderate one, assumptions shown in the two tables below. For the positive one, we assume that 80% of the virgin material can be replaced by rejuvenated PVC and both companies each invest in a recycling capacity of 15ktons. For the latter we assume an investment cost of ca €12mio, based on the investment cost of ca €2mio for a 2.5kton unit93. This leads to a net cost for the mixed novel raw material of ca €866/ton or a net benefit of €334/ton (by comparison to the current pure virgin of €1200/ton) which translates to a benefit of ca €5mio/year for each of the companies and a payback time for the investment of ca 2.4 years. Second, assuming a more moderate case of 65% of virgin material replacement and a consequently smaller investment in a unit of 10kton capacity (investment cost: €8mio), we find a benefit €2.25mio/year and a payback time of ca 3.6 years, which would still be considered a profitable investment94. 
 
REMADYL impact - Positive scenario    REMADYL impact - Moderate scenario    
REMADYL cost for 1 ton mixed raw material (80% rejuvenated, 20% virgin)   REMADYL cost for 1 ton mixed raw material (65% rejuvenated, 35% virgin)   
Expected fraction of virgin material replacement 80 % Expected fraction of virgin material replacement 65 % 
Virgin PVC cost (20% of €1200/ton)  240 €/ton Virgin PVC cost (35% of €1200/ton)  420 €/ton 
Rejuvenated PVC cost (80% of €470/ton)  376 €/ton Rejuvenated PVC cost (65% of €470/ton)  305,5 €/ton 
Extra compounding step for mixing and extra additivation 250 €/ton Extra compounding step for mixing and extra additivation 250 €/ton 
REMADYL cost for 1 ton of 'mixed raw material' 866 €/ton REMADYL cost for 1 ton of 'mixed raw material' 975,5 €/ton 
Net benefit of REMADYL   334 €/ton Net benefit of REMADYL   224,5 €/ton 
PVC convertor case (DECEUNINCK, DANOSA)   PVC convertor case (DECEUNINCK, DANOSA)   
processed amounts    15000 tons processed amounts    10000 tons 
benefit     5,01 mio € /year benefit     2,25 mio € /year 
investment needed    12 mio € investment needed    8 mio € 
Earn back time of inv estment   2,4 year Earn back time of inv estment   3,6 year 
Benefit for PVC recyclers using REMADYL technology. Another situation exists for a PVC recycler who uses REMADYL technology to recycle ‘old PVC’ and to sell the rejuvenated PVC. In this case the resulting material costs for rejuvenated PVC is as before (€470/ton), but the ‘real’ market value needs to be estimated. Based on argumentation in part D, we consider €700/ton as a fair value of the rejuvenated 
PVC. Further, as mentioned in the discussion of the market size, we assume a capacity for the PVC recycler of 20kton/year. This leads for the PVC recycler annually to ca. €14 mio turnover and ca. €4.6 mio revenue and a payback of the investment of ca 3.5 years (see table). 
Given the expected market size of 400 kton/year, this means that REMADYL has the potential to create a novel market for recycling of PVC with LS with a turnover of ca €280mio (20 x €14mio/unit) within ca 5 years after the project end. 
Exploitation via standardization activities: Successful exploitation will only occur if the market is receptive to the products and processes developed in the REMADYL. Standardization activities are considered a valuable tool for supporting the exploitation of the project outcomes, facilitating future replicability and reducing market acceptance risks. The uptake of REMADYL research results in standardisation activities, and ultimately in future standards, will facilitate REMADYL market uptake and foster knowledge transfer. Moreover, collaboration with standardization committees will also help reducing any existing or future standardisation barriers that could affect REMADYL project impacts. The specific standardisation activities are given in Task 7.4. Some of the REMADYL partners are active in standardisation on national, European (CEN) and International (ISO) level. Some REMADYL partners have a strong link with standardisation bodies such as AIMPLAS, CTB, DANOSA and DECEUNINK. For example, very relevant for REMADYL are that CTB participates in ‘Plastic recycling’ (CEN/TC249/WG11 - European) and 'Sustainable chemicals' (EN-CLC/BT/WG11 - European); AIMPLAS in ‘PVC profiles for doors, windows, blinds and fittings’ (AEN / CTN 53 / SC1 - Spain) or ‘Recycled Materials’ (AEN / CTN 53 / SC8 - Spain). 
 
 
 
 
93 A linear scaling of the investment cost is assumed. This is a very conservative estimate as normally there exist scale up benefits. 
94 Note this is meant to be an economic feasibility study, not a detailed investment plan. For the latter also other elements would need to be integrated (e.g. 
capital cost, housing cost, maintenance). That is beyond the current scope. 
REMADYL cost for producing 'rejuvenated PVC'   
Income from 'gate fee' (received for taking the waste) -200 €/ton 
Cost for removing the LS (phthalate & lead)  570 €/Ton 
Other processing costs (transport, sorting,…)  100 €/ton 
Net cost for obtaining 1 ton of 'rejuvenated PVC' as secondary raw material 470 €/ton 
PVC Recycler - extra turnover from investing in REMADYL technology  
Net cost for 1 ton rejuvenated PVC  470 €/ton 
Expected market value 'rejuvenated PVC'  700 €/ton 
Net benefit REMADYL per ton sold rejuvenated PVC 230 €/ton 
Processed amount of PVC containing LS EoL waste 20000 ton/yr 
REMADYL created turnover   14 mio€/yr 
REMADYL created revenu   4,6 mio€/yr 
Investment needed    16 mio € 
Earn back time of investment   3,5 year 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 37 of 100 
 
 
Full commercialisation 
 
First sales of small 
units (2.5kton/yr) 
Exploitation 
development Open Pilot Plant via 
Start-up or Joint venture 
TRL 
development 
Further scale up to semi- 
industrial  scale (TRL7-8) 
2026 2025 2024 2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 
Full industrial 
scale validation 
(TRL9) 
Technology R&D towards TRL 5-6 
REMADYL H2020 project 
 
 
SWOT for REMADYL project as a whole: 
REMADYL’s unique value proposition is an integrated cost-effective solution, fully compliant with REACH Regulation, that aims to close the loop on PVC recycling, transforming ‘old PVC’ with LS into REACH-conform rejuvenated PVC (Pb and DEHP levels below 0.1%) by pushing the processing boundaries of existing extrusion technology. 
 
Strengths 
Truly novel patentable technique for removal of LS from PVC Unique mix of interdisciplinary skills and expertise 
Creating market for recycling of ‘old PVC’ Environmental and economic advantages 
Consortium partners experienced in removing hazardous substances research (e.g. via URBANREC; POCOBUILD) 
Support of the European PVC industry via VinylPlus 
Weaknesses 
Some parts of the proposed REMADYL technology have been limitedly researched, eg LDH use only used so far for scavenging heavy metals in water, not yet in melt state → might require extra effort 
Opportunities Threats 
Answer the unmet demand for recycling of PVC with LS Competing process might appear, market might not be open for 
Grab potential of melt filtration, a proven technology the REMADYL process → careful scan of other solutions 
Contribution to EU Plastics Strategy and Circular Economy performed, known (potential) alternatives are too expensive 
Solutions are transferable to other applications, e.g. removal Difficulty to find external resources for further investments → 
of hazardous (FR) components from other plastics (eg PVB) take-up beyond REMADYL will be prepared during REMADYL 
Increasing social awareness about green products implementation 
Legal framework (REACH) pushing to ban contaminants  
Different possible strategies, depending on the SWOT analysis components that dominate: Offensive strategies (if S-O dominates), Reorientation strategies (if W-O dominates), Defensive strategies (if S-T dominates) and Survival strategies (if W-T dominates). Currently, we expect to be in a S-O situation, so REMADYL will apply an ‘offensive strategy’, i.e. with strong promotion pointing out the added value of the technology and its environmental and economic advantages (via the REMADYL dissemination activities). If the situation changes, the strategy will be adapted. 
 Roadmap to industrial take-up and commercialisation REMADYL results need proper exploitation to achieve the full potential impact of our R&D work. Post-project actions are needed  to  ensure  REMADYL  results reach TRL9 and commercialisation. The REMADYL partners are committed to realising the exploitation towards industrialisation and commercialisation beyond the project. The material passport for the rejuvenated PVC will help in reaching this objective. 
Also, a first roadmap was developed to identify and evaluate possible actions and scenarios beyond REMADYL, see sketch on the side. This work will be continued in the project (see Task 7.2.2). After project end, the goal is to include the REMADYL Technology 
in the European Network for Pilot Production Facilities95 (EPPN) to facilitate and accelerate the development of REMADYL assuring a faster market entry. Joining the platform will also support the implementation of harmonized conditions for testing and up-scaling to improve market accessibility. This could be done by a single partner or, preferably by a joint venture set up by (some of) the REMADYL partners (a ‘coalition of the willing’). Coordinator CTB has experience with this via a previous FP7 project ‘AT~Sea’ which was transformed into At~Sea Technologies which now already exists for several years96. Alternatively, the consortium could opt to build a start-up. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
95 https://www.eppnetwork.com/ 
96 http://www.atsea-project.eu 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 38 of 100 
 
 
Table with an overview of the KER – Key Exploitable Results 
 
Exploitable Result Owner (s) Exploitation route Envisaged IPR Tools Potential users and time to market Activities to reach users 
Monitoring systems for sorting relevant materials for REMADYL recycling process 
IRIS, BulkID Direct commercialization/licensing and related consultancy services 
Special conditions for REMADYL partners buying User rights for the system 
Patent or industrial secret 
- Existing waste managing companies, recyclers or new established structures that collect the newly recyclable materials. 
- 2-4 years after the project to provide a system for a larger plant. 
Pilot line results presented during conferences and events 
Purification method and technology to remove LS from PVC, based on extractive extrusion and (NA)DES solvents 
 
 Fh-ICT, CTB 
 
Unique Technological know how & IP, used for offering consulting or licensing 
 
 Patenting 
 - Companies active in plastics recycling, as a service or for internal use 
- 2-3 years after project end 
Pilot line results presented during conferences and events 
Removal and Recovering of lead salts from filters for further revalorization and use for lead batteries 
AIMPLAS, UVEG, AZOR 
Commercialization/licensing (AIMPLAS), Direct use internally (AZOR) 
Patent or industrial secret 
- Recycling companies Participation in fairs, conferences and seminars 
Obtaining high purity lead from salts 
AZOR Direct use in AZOR for its customers Patent or industrial secret 
Manufacturers of batteries. Current AZOR customers. 
- Participation in fairs, conferences and seminars. 
-Meetings with customers 
Strategy for Synthesis of inorganic particles efficient for lead scavenging in melt PVC. Recovering lead salts from filters for further revalorization 
UVEG, AIMPLAS Exploitation through licensing. Industrial scale up in spin-off. 
Patent or industrial secret 
Companies producing inorganic particles. 
2-3 years to stablish a procedure to remove Pb at pilot scale 
Participation in fairs, conferences and seminars 
Rejuvenated PVC for flexible PVC (waterproofing membranes) 
DANOSA, Fh-ICT, AIMPLAS 
Selling price competitive membranes. Via Danosa subsidiary (Renovacion Sostenible S.L.) company dedicated to the recycling of plastics (polyolefins, polystyrene) for self-consumption and selling outside 
Industrial secret - Constructors, platforms for selling building materials 
Participation in fairs. 
Rejuvenated PVC for rigid PVC 
(window profiles) 
DECEUNINCK, CTB Direct internal use via (i) production of PVC window profiles and (ii) selling rejuvenated PVC to other companies 
Balance between patent or industrial secret 
Producers of soft flooring and sealings Direct presentation to potential clients, fairs, B2B events 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 39 of 100 
 
 
 Exploitable Result Owner (s) Exploitation route Envisaged IPR Tools Potential users and time to market Activities to reach users 
Policy recommendations OVAM Report and guidelines Ownership Producers of plastic products and virgin polymers; collectors and recycling companies; general public 
Administrators revising the legal framework to optimise PVC collection and recycling process 
PVC advisor for legal and commercial aspects 
ENCO, SIE To extend client portfolio and improve position within the ecologically and economically rational waste management sector as well as increase competitiveness in medium and long- term offering a wider range of consultancy services. 
Ownership Recyclers; Municipalities; Industrial partners involved 
Participation in fairs, conferences, seminars 
Workshops with stakeholders to compare their current situation to new possibilities results using REMADYL 
One step process for continuous extraction to remove plasticisers from PVC 
Fh-ICT, AIMPLAS, CTB 
Development and research services offered to industries 
Patent Suppliers to PVC industries; PVC processors; Plastic processing companies; PVC recycling industry; polymer purification industry 
Use of existing Fh-ICT network and dissemination channels Availabe pilot line installation at Fraunhofer ICT for customer trials 
Old PVC recycling system BulkID, Fh-ICT, AIMPLAS, CTB 
Licensing & consulting: together with client specific type of equipment (e.g. throughput) will be discussed and equipment will be assembled, consultancy service for start-up 
Patent Recyclers and PVC convertors - Events and conferences 
Environmental Modelling for PVC rejuvenate to estimate the environmental impact as a function of various parameters. 
VERTECH Models used for commercialization in future similar recycling projects or consultancy works. 
Ownership Plastic and polymers industries, constructions industries, industrial recyclers. 1 year 
Informative talks in REMADYL’s workshops and disseminations events. 
Knowledge on mixing rejuvenated & virgin PVC for injection moulding 
PROMOLDING, 
Fh-ICT 
Licensing & consulting services Patent/Ownership Clients that perform PVC injection moulding Publications in journals 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 40 of 100 
 
 
 
Management of research data 
The following table summarises main aspects related to data management. Further information about the rules for the use of these data is discussed in the subsection “Strategy for knowledge protection and management”. 
 
Type of data to be 
generated/collected 
Technical data about the removal of legacy substances from PVC via extrusion processes and linked supply chains; information from technology providers, contact data from stakeholders; information about public waste regional strategies, etc… 
 
 
 
 Standards to be used 
European Regulation on Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals 
REACH Regulations 
Defining hazardous waste Directive 91/689 
Assessment of the risk to the health and safety of workers from the presence of chemical agents 
Decree 52/97 defining hazardous substance 
 To ensure compliance of the developed products 
Environmental impact assessment (EIA) Strategic impact assessment (SIA) Legislative Decree 152/2006 
Decision 2000/532/EC, etc 
Data exploitation and accessibility for verification and re- use 
Those data that are confidential (such as contact data for stakeholder or confidential information from all the partners linked to REMADYL) will be preserved with access restricted only by project partners. Non-confidential data will be published as part of the different reports foreseen in the project 
 
Data preservation 
Data will be curated and preserved in a special repository allocated to the project, which will be stored in project coordinator servers and accessible only to project partners through the private section of project website. 
 
Knowledge management and IP protection 
To pave the way forward for commercial exploitation and dissemination of the project results, the consortium will implement an integral strategy for the effective management of this knowledge as outlined in the sketch. The general strategy outlined in this section has been already agreed by all consortium partners. 
 
Results definition, protection, ownership and access rights: 
To exploit the results in the most effective way and to give them a marketable competitive advantage and the opportunity to continue to develop them also after the project ends, a first plan for the protection of REMADYL results has been drafted. IPR is considered a valuable asset, thus its protection is a priority for REMADYL consortium. A comprehensive review of “prior art” and patents (Section 1.4.2) has revealed that to date there is no relevant protected Background 
held by third parties needed for implementing the research or using the project results (Freedom to Operate). In order to ensure that the intended REMADYL R&D effort does not trespass into the owned knowledge space of a third party, and to mitigate against expensive infringement claims, within Task 7.2 up-to-date patent reviews will be performed periodically to confirm the novelty; patentability and protection of the proposed research and the freedom to exploit the results. The expected Key Exploitable Results from the project are listed (table on pag 33-34); they shall be owned by the participant(s) generating them. 
To avoid doubt or confusion over ownership, the following protocol of procedures will be considered: 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 41 of 100 
 
 
 
Background: information and knowledge (including inventions, databases, patents, etc.) held by the participants prior to their accession to the EC grant agreement, as well as any intellectual property rights which are needed for carrying out the project or for using foreground held by the consortium, or indeed by third parties- is defined in the proposal preparation phase (pre-Grant Agreement).The current status of the Background being brought to the project by the consortium is listed in the table below. Access to Background that is, or will be found to be, necessary for the implementation of the project will be granted royalty free and background needed to use the results of the project will be royalty free or under fair & reasonable conditions. 
 
Partner Background per partner 
CTB Knowledge and experience to fully characterize and process both virgin materials and recyclate, including PVC. 
Fh-ICT Discontinuous lab extraction and continuous extraction in twin screw extrusion. Freedom of operation verified for basic processing concept of extractive extrusion 
AIMPLAS PVC compounding and processing technologies, Melt filtration technology of solid particles and removal or hazardous 
substances by CO2 extraction 
UVEG Synthesis of inorganic particles, specifically layered double hydroxides with special interlayer anions 
DECEUNINCK As a fully integrated compounding, tooling, extrusion, finishing & recycling company: 
- knowhow and experience with Soft & Rigid PVC and the related TPE-materials for gaskets & Seals. 
- integration of post-industrial and post-fabricator materials as basic material for extrusion (recycling) and as part in compounding process. The formulations in the compounds are enhanced with the knowhow of integrating these recycled materials. 
- build up the experience to integrate also post-consumer PVC 
DANOSA Development of tailor made PVC formulations for soft applications (dry blending and compounding). Waterproofing membranes by calendaring. Innovative system, based on extrusion techniques, for the usage of re-used tire rubber. 
PROMOLDING Testing and processing thermoplastics using injection moulding 
BulkID BULK .ID is specialized in high-quality solutions for separating and transporting bulk goods. Supplying high-quality solutions for sorting and treating various material flows for many years. Experience with engineering, construction work, assembly and service guarantee. 
AZOR Recycling lead batteries and recovering Pb of high purity from different salts. Pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy technologies 
IRIS Manufacture and integration of Process Analytical Technology (PAT)-based real-time quality monitoring solutions for the 
process industries and IoT systems for smart manufacturing. 
 IP due diligence: the Innovation Manager will identify IP assets resulted from the project; assess their value and risks for potential investors. IP assets will be included in REMADYL business plan to be developed during the project; IP assets will have an important role also in the identification of possible investors to further develop REMADYL technology. 
Dissemination according to the protection measures: the Innovation Manager will also monitor the way dissemination activities will take place, checking and verifying that dissemination occurs only once the results are protected. Adequate balance will be defined between dissemination activities and IP in order to support in the right way REMADYL market penetration. 
Exploitable results, ownership and protection measures: the results generated during the project are owned by the participant generating them. In case results are generated jointly (i.e. where the separate parts of some result cannot be attributed to different participants), they will be jointly owned. In any case, the results produced during the project will be managed (see Subtask 7.2.4). However, an overriding principal will be that the participating industry partners are always provided with the access that they need to the results to exploit them in keeping with the needs and strategy of their business. As such, access rights to results for implementing the project will be granted on a royalty-free basis. Access rights for use purposes will be granted either royalty free, or on fair and reasonable conditions to be agreed in the REMADYL Exploitation Agreement. All the further necessary conditions will be agreed in the Consortium Agreement. During the project execution, the consortium will, where needed, tap into external assistance and support from entities like the IPR-Helpdesk97, furthermore an experienced patent attorney will also be approached. 
Open access to peer-reviewed scientific publications 
In line with The Europe 2020 strategy for a smart, sustainable and inclusive economy, REMADYL project underlines the central role of knowledge and innovation in generating growth, guaranteeing the broader access to scientific publications and data. The consortium will guarantee open access to its publications, as stated in Art. 29.2 of the Model Grant Agreement. The Exploitation and Dissemination Manager (EDM) will always check that every publication does not infringe IPR rights. REMADYL beneficiaries will provide online free access to scientific research articles resulting from the project. Green open access (self- archiving articles and publications in an open repository) option to scientific information will be preferred. In case of Gold open 
 
97 http://www.ipr-helpdesk.org 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 42 of 100 
 
 
 
access (open access publishing) the articles will also be made accessible through a repository upon publication. The project website will be directly link to the OpenAIRE platform. 
For Green open access, researchers will deposit the final peer-reviewed manuscript in a public repository of their choice ensuring open access to the publication within the embargo period of maximum six months. The project will ensure the implementation of the open access strategy described above for its scientific publications by: i) As soon as possible and at the latest upon publication, authors will deposit a machine-readable electronic copy of the published version or final peer-reviewed manuscript accepted for publication in a repository for scientific publications; ii) Authors will ensure open access to the deposited publication (via the repository) on publication (if an electronic version is available for free via the publisher) or latest within six months of publication; iii) Associated costs of “gold open access” (e.g. article processing charges) will be shifted away from readers and are included in the project financial provisions (see also Section 3.4). 
The EDM is responsible to inform all REMADYL partners about the open access rules and will ensure that all the provisions are fulfilled for each publication. Researchers, who do not have access to an institutional or discipline-specific repository, will use Zenodo98 repository facility. Authors will retain their copyright of publications but as far as possible, they must take all measures to enable third parties to access, mine, exploit, reproduce and disseminate this research data (free of charge). Thus, the Creative Commons Licences99 (CC BY or CC0) to the data deposited will be granted. Open access will be also provided to  the bibliographic metadata that identify the deposited publication, ensuring that EU funding is acknowledge. 
REMADYL partners are well placed to publishing their results and activities. In the partner descriptions (section 4) a special section is added with the publication channels partners typically use. Here we list some of the more well-known Journals and Magazines: Journal of Polymers and the Environment, International Polymer Processing, Journal of Polymer Science, Waste Management & Research, Journal of Near Infrared spectroscopy, Inorganic Chemistry and Recycling today newsletter. Further, some of our partners have well-spread newsletters (eg FhG, AIMPLAS, CTB) and especially relevant is the annual ‘Progress Report’ report of partner VinylPlus, the reference for PVC recycling in Europe. 
 (b) Communication activities 
In line with EU guidelines on the Communication of EU Funded Projects, communication activities focus on the promotion of the project and its results as well as on linking to the societal values and demonstrating EU added value. REMADYL seeks to engage the identified target audience groups in a strategic and effective manner. The communication activities will start at project start and continue throughout its entire duration. The communication strategy has the key objective to show the benefits of REMADYL results to the European plastics and recycling community and to the wider stakeholders, including policy makers and the general public. A more detailed description of our communication strategy: 
 Goal: firstly to reach out to the general public to create positive momentum for (recycling of) PVC materials (especially as their collaboration will be needed to collect EoL PVC waste) and, secondly, make them aware of the impact of EU collaborative projects; 
 Method: using story-telling to make the matter easier accessible and to show the human face of the involved people 
 Audience: wider public as PVC products are relevant for all people. As such the developments on the window profiles will be used as an example close to public. 
 Key messages: PVC (and plastics) can be recycled and remaining hazardous substances are being taken care of 
 Channels: use of press release in combination with popular media is seen as the most effective to reach a larger public. This will be backed up by use of social media (YouTube, Twitter,…) and the project website and available public material, accessible for an (interested) layman. These outreach activities will be carried out at EU, national, regional and local level, under the responsibility of the local partners, but coordinated by the Dissemination and Exploitation Manager. 
Example of two core communication activities: 
 Establishing dialogue with policy makers: REMADYL partners will approach local, national and European authorities and policy makers to explain the political, economic, social and environmental benefits of the REMADYL approach in the Circular Economy context. Policy makers are a specific target group for dissemination due to their role in overcoming legal barriers and facilitating framework conditions for exploitation. REMADYL will participate in special activities such as the material passport for the rejuvenated PVC to contribute to the reuse of high quality secondary raw materials. 
 Social awareness campaign: will be designed to increase social acceptance of recycled products by end users. The campaign will address civil society organizations, environmental and PVC associations, NGOs and citizens (in their role as consumers). We will ensure to translate the typical REMADYL technical vocabulary into a simple and accessible language 
 
 
98 https://zenodo.org/ 
99 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/?lang=en 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 43 of 100 
 
 
 
following recommendations from the Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI) Approach100. Social awareness will be realized via active participation in social media and online channels to reach a wider audience. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100 https://www.rri-tools.eu/about-rri 
 
 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018  
Table: Overview of dissemination actions 
Communication tools & channels (How) 
Description When Indicators Responsible Partner 
Graphic identity & logo including QR code, PPT and 
deliverables templates 
Consortium partners will promote the project, its objectives and results by way of written publications, such as blogs, articles in 
the popular and specialist press 
 
Ready by M1 Imagery included in all communication materials 
 
ENCO 
Project website Interactive, dynamic permanent online hub for wide scale dissemination of project objectives and public results. Online at M3 30.000 hits ENCO 
Promotional materials (leaflet and gadgets) 
Production of toolkits to support communication activities 
including: generic project presentation and posters; leaflets and roll-up banner 
 
Available from M6 1000 visualizations – 600 downloads 
CTB, ENCO & input from ALL PARTNERS 
E-newsletter At least 5 e-newsletters in project branding to be issued to the 
REMADYL network. M6 – M12 – M24 –M36 – M48 500 subscribers CTB, SIE & input from ALL 
PARTNERS 
Social Media (Twitter – Slideshare – YouTube) and project videos 
 
Develop social media stories and videos 
 
Launched by M1 2500 posts – 5000 follower – 
3000 visualizations 
 
ENCO 
Press release Press release on important newspaper to promote REMADYL 
results As first results will be attained At least 3 OVAM 
Advisory and Support Group 
Meetings 
Meetings with experts to provide supporting information and to 
spread the project results among REMADYL consortium. Starting from M6 At least 6 CTB 
 
Brokerage event + final event 
 
To present REMADYL activities and results. 
 
M42 - M46 
Brokerage event 50 
participants– at least 150 for the final event 
 
VINYLPLUS 
 External events 
REMADYL partners will actively promote the project, its objectives and results at relevant external events and workshops through oral and poster presentations, distribution of project leaflets, 
exhibition stands. 
 As first results will be attained 
 
Attendance of at least 15 events 
 All 
TV/radio/magazines Interviews to project partners presenting benefits of using 
REMADYL solutions M46 At least 2 interviews CTB 
Publications Green and gold open access papers on scientific journals As first results will be attained At least 15 CTB 
Coordination meeting organized by the EC 
REMADYL will contribute to the creation of a cluster together with 
other related projects and initiatives funded under the same call to create a multiplier effect and exchange of best practices. 
 
Upon request 
 
Upon request 
 
CTB 
Announcements on partners’ websites 
Consortium partners will actively promote the project, its 
objectives and results on their own website to create a multiplier effect. 
 
From M1 
 
150 newsfeed published 
 
All 
 
 
 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 44 of 100 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 45 of 100 
 
 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
3 Implementation
3.1 Work plan 
3.1.1 Overall structure of the work plan and graphical representation of components and their interrelations 
The key development of REMADYL is the development of a new innovative extractive extrusion process able to remove LS out of the PVC matrix. The work plan is basically centred around this novel technology, both for the technical R&D work and for the supporting activities. 
On technical level, we first need to develop a sorting system able to separate LS containing PVC waste from non-LS containing (WP1). In order to develop the sorting system and the further extraction processes model samples with known composition will be prepared. 
The removal of lead and phthalates out of the PVC matrix will be evaluated through innovative extraction methods performed starting from discontinuous batch extraction processes (1 to 10 liter reactors) (WP2) up to continuous lab-scale (3-7 kg/h) and pilot extraction (20-30 kg/h) (WP3). Like this the extraction process will be scaled-up building of an actual pilot line, and performing test runs on post-consumer PVC waste for its validation. 
“Rejuvenated”   PVC   will   be   processed  in 
standard ways: profile extrusion, sheet extrusion and PVC injection moulding (WP5). When preparing the material for re-use, stabilisation and additivation will be performed to improve the material properties and the recyclability in the next recycling step (design-for-recycling). 
The separated by-products, in this case the extracted LS, will be considered for re-use or safe disposal (WP4). 
For the transversal activities, we will perform a detailed assessment of the environmental aspects (full LCA), including legislation, standardisation and EoW aspects, and of the costs (LCC, market evaluation of all input and output materials streams) (WP6). 
Emphasis is put on the implementation of innovation management: economic assessment (incl. preliminary business plans), dissemination to raise awareness from early on to maximise wide uptake of REMADYL results; communication for interaction with wider stakeholders and promote public awareness of circular economy values (WP7). 
All these technical and supporting activities will be efficiently coordinated (WP8), which also includes reporting, updating the work plan, data and risk management and interaction with the REMADYL Advisory and Support Group (ASG). 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 46 of 100 
 
 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
3.1.2 Timing of the Work Packages and main tasks - Gantt Chart 
Legend: low activity  intense activity  
 Task 1  3   6   9   12   15   18   21   24   27   30  33   36   39  42   45  48
1 - Recyclate characterization and sorting                                                 
Task 1.1 – Model samples and characterization PVC waste streams    1.1
1.2                        
Task 1.2 – Evaluation detection techniques                                                 
Task 1.3 – Development monitoring system
1.3               
Task 1.4 – Recommendations upscaling sorting                                    1.4            
2 - Batch extraction of PVC containing LS                                                 
Task 2.1 - CO2 extraction process - removal phtalates
2.1                                 
Task 2.2 - Extraction + (NA)DES - removal phtalates + Pb            2.2  .3                                 
Task 2.3 - MoS4-LDG process - removal Pb                     .4                           
3 - Continuous Lab-scale and Pilot extraction                                                 
Task 3.1 - Transfer to continuous lab scale
3.1                     
Task 3.2 - Transfer to contunuous pilot scale
3.2         
Task 3.3 - Complexing heavy metals by melt filtration
3.3         
Task 3.4 - Rejuvenated PVC on continuous pilot scale                                                 
Task 3.5 - Concept industrial extraction line                                              3.4  
4 - Recycling/reuse of byproducts and their safe handling                                                 
Task 4.1 - Safe recovery byproducts
4.1            
Task 4.2 - Recovery metallic Pb                                    4.2
4.3      
Task 4.3 - Contaminant assessment + safe handling guidelines                                          4.4      
5 - Demonstration of re-use of rejuvenated PVC                                                 
Task 5.1 - Formulating recycled PVC
5.1      
Task 5.2 - Demo re-use soft PVC
5.2   
Task 5.3 - Re-use rigid PVC                                                5.3Task 5.4 - Evaluation & Guidelines integration                                                5.46- Health, Safety and Environment                                                 
Task 6.1 - Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) & Ecodesign
6.2  
Task 6.2 - Life Cycle Costing (LCC)
6.1                        
Task 6.3 - Social LCA
6.3  
Task 6.4 - Circularity assessment                                    6.4            
7 - Dissemination, Exploitation and Business Planning                                                 
Task 7.1 - Market Analysis            7.1                                    7.2Task 7.2 - IPR, exploitation, BP      7.3            7.4                  7.6          7.57.7Task 7.3 - Dissemination & communication      7.8            7.9                              7.10Task 7.4 - Standardisation & legislation      7.11                             7.12           7.138 - Coordination                                                 
Task 8.1 - Efficient management at the administrative level GA  GA   GA    GA      GA      GA     GA     GA      GA    GATask 8.2 - Day-to-day coordination
8.1                                             
Task 8.3 - Detailed activity reporting and updating the planning         8.2
8.3                     
Task 8.4 - Data management      8.4                                          8.5Task 8.5 - Innovation management                                                 
       Milestones M1 Model materials available 
M2 GO for continuous lab-scale development - DEHP M3 GO for continuous lab-scale development - Lead 
M4 Availability of the LS monitoring system for EoL PVC sorting M5 GO' for continuous pilot line development 
M6 Pilot line validated 
M7 Demonstration of ‘circular use’ 
M7 
M6 
M5 
M4 
M3 
M2 
M1 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 47 of 100
3.2 Management structure and procedures 
3.2.1 Organisational structure and the decision-making 
Since the overall consortium is not too large (16 partners) the organisational structures and the decision making process are kept as straightforward as possible. Both aspects are described in the next sections. It is of high importance not to neglect the necessary management elements to avoid conflicts or uncertainty about responsibilities and obligations. 
3.2.1.1 Organisational structure 
The sketch shows the structure of the project organisation with the arrows indicating the lines of communication. The coordinator will report directly to the EC Project Officer. The Project Steering Committee or PSC will interact with the coordinator who maintains an overview of the project. The workpackage leaders will oversee the workpackages and report progress to coordinator and PSC. 
The main goals of the project coordination are: (i) organize the information flow in timely manner and accurately inside the consortium to meet project objectives; (ii) take the appropriate decisions to reach the project objectives; (iii) provide the EU with reports and organize reviews for the suitable tracking of the project progress. 
a. The Coordinator 
The project will be coordinated by CTB which has participated in several European projects in FP5, FP6 and FP7 and coordinated several of them. There is thus extensive 
expertise in the management of EU projects and the PSC members are also experienced with project management, be it European or national projects. 
The coordinator will rely on the WP leaders for monitoring the technical implementation of the project. He can take urgent low level decisions, if necessary and after discussion with the WP leaders. He can propose to the partners solutions and contingency plans in case of delay, discrepancies or when a technical choice has to be made. 
 
b. The Project Steering Committee (PSC) 
The Project Steering Committee will have a double responsibility: 
 It is the governing body that prepares the decision for the General Assembly. It is responsible for proposing redistributions of funds if needed and for the management of the joint funds. Other tasks include approving the continuously updating and assuring agreement on the exploitation and dissemination actions (see WP7), as well as settling potential conflicts among partners. 
 It will assess the work within the WPs and ensure alignment of the individual WPs with the general REMADYL objectives. This means that the PSC is responsible for the overall management of the project. The PSC will meet at least every six months. Its members can vary as the project needs, but will at least consist of the coordinator and the following managers: 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 48 of 100 
 
 
 
 
Research & Technology Manager (RTM) – Ms Pilar Villanueva - representative of AIMPLAS (CV in Part 4) 
The Research & Technology Manager (RTM) will have an advisory role on the R&D decisions within REMADYL and will ensure that the project milestones and goals are achieved. The responsibilities of RTM will include: determining, implementing and monitoring research and development strategies, policies and plans. 
Demonstration and Innovation Manager (DIM) – Mr Johan Pauwels - representative of DECEUNINK (CV in Part 4) 
The Demonstration Manager will be the member of the PSC who reports on the demonstration activities. For this goal, the DM is also the WP leader of WP5-Demonstration. The goal of the DM is to ensure that REMADYL will remain focussed on the demonstration of circular use by AND integrating this new developed technology in the existing recycling & granulation lines AND by re-using these materials back into new window- & door profiles. Mr Johan Pauwels is ideally placed for that. He is NPI ( New Product Introduction) project Manager of DECEUNINCK, being involved in development and industrialization of new technologies combined with existing and new products. As such he is familiar with taking novel developments a stage further to their successful demonstration as preparation for the later full integration in production. Moreover he has his technical background in recycling, granulation, (mono- and co-)extrusion, tool-tuning and technological Project Management. 
Exploitation & Dissemination Manager (EDM) – Mr Marco de la Feld - representative of ENCO (CV in Part 4) 
The Exploitation & Dissemination Manager will together with the other partners involved in WP8, work out a multifaceted dissemination & exploitation strategy. The tasks of the EDM include supervising and coordinating the actions and the tools (web-site, interactive presentations, social media; IPR; identifying market risk and opportunities) which will be realised in this framework. The EDM will watch over the contents, timing and routes of the dissemination and communication actions to avoid conflict with confidentiality rules or IPR and the protection of it. 
Quality Manager (QM) – Dr Jan Diemert - Representative of Fh-ICT (CV in Part 4). 
The quality manager will be in charge of disseminating the quality procedures, stimulating their use and monitoring, with appropriate metrics, the implementation. This role will include: embody the quality policy and quality objectives (with appropriate metrics); identify appropriate assessment, verification and validation activities; provide for effective controls; control quality of deliverables by setting up a review process in collaboration with the Coordinator; specify responsibility for preparation for external review; verify performances indicators; approve the quality manual and ensure best practice is used throughout the project. 
c. Work Package leaders 
The work package leaders, identified in Table 3.1b, are responsible for the day-to-day coordination and management of the individual WPs. This task involves: 
 Keep up to date with the technical state of the art and passing on this information to the partners where necessary 
 Provide guidelines to the different partners regarding their specific tasks and timing 
 Ensure work is carried out according to planning, minor deviations can be settled within a WP or among the concerned WP leaders and partners, larger deviations need to be reported to the PSC 
 Collect the data for the review reports to be sent to the coordinator and all relevant partners 
 Prepare the progress reports in due time for the PSC and especially to the coordinator who edits and passes these on to the EC Project Officer 
 Report any other important issues to the coordinator 
 d. The General Assembly (GA) 
The General Assembly consists of one representative from each partner, the first person mentioned in the partner description (section 4). A second, proxy representative, will be designated from each organization in the case of absence of the first representative. The General Assembly will represent the highest level of decision making within the project and will decide the overall project strategy, including contractual matters and exploitation matters. Critical REMADYL decisions will be taken by the GA. In summary, the mission of the GA is: assessment of the work done; decisions about the strategy of the project; major decisions on technical issues; analysing technical conflicts between partners and proposing agreements; defaulting party management; studying the evaluation reports on all activities of all partners; deciding by confidential vote about allocation of finances, adding new members to the consortium, reviewing or amending the EU contract, change or exchange of WPs. The GA will meet 10 times: roughly every 6 months but with higher frequency in the first year of REMADYL as these is the critical period to get the project going and the partners aligned (see also Gannt Chart – section 3.1.2). 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 49 of 100 
 
 
 
 
e. The Collaborative Work Platform (CWP) 
A dedicated internet based Collaborative Work Platform will be set up. It will provide the partners with all the necessary information on the project (reports, results, technical choices, publications, conferences). The Coordinator will be responsible for updating and dissemination of the information. The CWP dedicated to the project will have a public part serving the dissemination activities (‘the website’, see also WP7) but will also have a protected part restricted to consortium members. The platform will contain for example the following functions: document centre, partners information, administrative documents. 
f. Advisory and Support Group (ASG) 
In order to ensure quality and industrial relevance beyond the consortium, REMADYL established a small Advisory and Support Group (ASG). It consists of external expert(s) who will participate as non-funded partners by giving advice for technical developments, innovation and exploitation (in other value chains) and to evaluate the REMADYL main results (recycling old PVC with LS) and prepare their wider take up. Therefore, the ASG will also act as a bridge from the actual REMADYL (funded) project to the next phases of the development, via continuation projects and industrial take up. The ASG will interact with the consortium on a six-monthly basis and, where and when relevant, selected members of it can be asked to participate in the GA meetings. Travel costs for the ASG will be covered by the travel budget of the coordinator. The role of the ASG members will be to: (i) give their evaluation of the work undertaken; (ii) ensure that the consortium is exposed to divergent alternative views; (iii) introduce industrial requirements from other sectors; (iv) bring intelligence on already existing solutions in the broader scientific and technical communities. 
The ASG consists of 6 members and includes a wider range of stakeholders. It contains the European plastics convertors associations (EUPC) and several recycling companies. That is important because it are PVC recyclers and convertors that are our main target group for take-up and implementation of the REMADYL technology. If needed, and with the approval of all REMADYL partners, the ASG can be further extended. 
3.2.1.2 Decision making 
The basis for all decision-making within the consortium is the Consortium Agreement (CA). As model for the CA, the DESCA model for companies is selected101. This Consortium Agreement model was specifically developed to fit the H2020 and is recommended by the European Commission. It describes in detail all procedures related to project management, dissemination and IPR (see also section 2.2.1). It will be tailored to the specific REMADYL needs once the project is approved. It will describe the bodies related to the project organisation and will detail the procedures for decision making outlined below. 
a. The General Assembly (GA) – top level 
During the General Assembly the representatives of the partners decide on important project management issues (see also 3.2.1.1). Before each GA meeting, partners will have to prepare a short report to be uploaded on the collaborative work platform. These reports should include the main results achieved by the partners, the main difficulties encountered and the publications and/or conference participations during the reporting period. These points will be discussed during the GA. Financial issues will be discussed as needed. When exploitable results have been obtained, the GA will decide on IPR and exploitation routes. 
b. Technical Meetings – day-to-day decision within a WP/task 
Besides the GA there will also be interim meetings attended by a limited number of partners to address particular WPs, as deemed necessary. Additionally, contact among partners will be maintained by email or telephone, with regular written progress reports circulated to all partners. Technical (telco) meetings with a reduced number of partners will be strongly encouraged to promote technical exchange and multidisciplinary cross training among partners. This will allow decision making at practical day-to-day level. Depending on the scope, they will be shared by the task leader or WP leader. 
c. Conflict management 
The REMADYL coordinator, assisted by the PSC, will propose corrective actions if necessary, following consultation with the members of the GA. If, for any reason the coordinator and PSC cannot resolve the conflict, the GA will come to a conclusion on the conflict by majority vote (in case of draw, the coordinator has the decisive vote). For serious and urgent matters, an extraordinary GA can be called. 
3.2.2 Motivation for the proposed structure and decision-making process 
The WP leaders will take the lead in their respective WP and closely work together with the WP partners. In addition, they will not only be the contact point for the WP partners, but also for partners active in the other WPs. Regular contacts in between the WP leaders will therefore be organised to assure good flow of materials and project information. 
 
 
101 Source: http://www.desca-2020.eu/ 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
Besides the obvious roles for the coordinator and the WP leaders, the project steering committee (see section 3.2.1.1b) with different managers with extensive expertise in research and development management, has been established for the REMADYL project, which will allow a close follow-up of all crucial steps needed for a successful H2020 project. The people selected for the PSC are experienced and well placed to take up their role and will closely cooperate within the PSC. They will also be the main sparring partner for the ASG. 
The well-structured decision making process as described above (see section 3.2.1.2) will aid and stimulate the project progress as scheduled and avoid delays. The coordinator, in consultation with the respective WP leader, can take low level decisions with no or a minor impact on the other WPs and overall project progress. The PSC, completed with the required WP leaders, can take medium level decisions with the agreement of General Assembly. The General Assembly itself is responsible for all important management issues and thus takes the high level decisions. 
This overall decision-making structure is supported by well-defined deliverables and clear milestones, which will be closely tracked during the proposal and serve as the basis for decision points. 
3.2.3 Innovation management 
REMADYL will adopt and establish a well-structured innovative environment to accelerate collaborative knowledge generation and integration, technology customization, and validation against real market and end-user needs, as well as end product definition and go-to-market strategy creation. 
This environment will allow for re-conceiving the interaction among industry needs, policy, society and project performance, finding win-win outcomes and mutual benefits by tackling key challenges and problems. REMADYL will bring together all value-chain stakeholders in an effort to leverage their multidisciplinary expertise towards setting the foundation for the efficient co-creation of market-ready, cutting-edge, innovative solutions. 
Within the REMADYL innovative environment, a collaborative problem-solving process will be established, through the deployment of a variety of networking and collaboration instruments (as further described in Section 2.2), involving relevant stakeholders from the whole value chain as standardization bodies and other key stakeholders (mentioned in Section 2.2), and other key organizations for REMADYL success but also associated communities, together constituting an Innovation Quadruple Helix (society, business, academia and government), in integrated collaboration activities for creation and exploitation of added value solutions directly addressing an existing environmental, societal and market need, i.e. the recycling of ‘old PVC’. 
We will promote and ensure new knowledge integration through the fusion of several diverse disciplines and domains. To create an innovative product/service significantly enhancing end-users’ utility and benefits, it will promote the cross-fertilization of ideas by: a) liaising and setting up a collaboration framework with scientific, technology, business and standardization initiatives related to project activities (as explained in Section 2.2) and, b) properly utilizing and exploiting knowledge and results of past (private and public funded) projects, while building upon technologies already validated in real-life conditions, towards enhancing their cost-efficiency, added value for end users and impact with respect to key societal and environmental challenges. Indeed, the innovation process is only complete when new innovative knowledge is put to industrial use. The innovative potential of REMADYL is enhanced by the strong company composition of the REMADYL consortium (9 partners out of 15; 6 SMEs and 3 large). Industrial partners are integrated into the project decision-making structure to ensure that the involved industrial sectors drive project activities and benefit from the project results. The success of REMADYL will be mainly based on the strong interaction and partnership of SMEs/industry and research organizations, all highly skilled in complementary fields as shown in the consortium table in Section 3.3.1.
3.3 Consortium as a whole 
3.3.1 Description of the consortium 
In order to achieve the set objectives, REMADYL has built a multidisciplinary and complementary consortium. Each one of the technical partners has proven and strong R&I experience related to circular economy, as well as the non-technical partners count on experience in environmental projects (VERTECH, SIE, ENCO). The project itself has the capacity to achieve the set objectives and milestones, and to deliver the activities with the expected success. As mentioned, the consortium is made up of 15 partners distributed across the EU which are 3 RTD Centres, 1 university, 1 Public Waste Agency, 1 association, 6 SMEs, 3 Large Enterprises (of which 6 are the project’s end users, driving the wider commercialization of the results). The 
 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] 
 Page 50 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 51 of 100 
 
 
Consortium  &  resources:  REMADYL  has  15  partners,  of  which  9  companies.  The  expected  resources  are   ca. 590 personmonths, leading to a total budget of ca. €4.8 million, of which over 35 % will go to the SMEs. 
 
 
consortium matches perfectly and ideally for the proposed Removal of Legacy Substances from polyvinylchloride (PVC) via a continuous and sustainable extrusion process. REMADYL has a strong and strategical consortium with a wide knowhow and expertise in the different areas covered in the project starting from a public waste authority, which is essential to maximize the impact of each technology (OVAM). The core of this proposal is the great expertise shown by our scientific partners in circular economy applied to the removal of legacy substances from PVC via a continuous and sustainable extrusion process (FhG, CTB & AMPLAS) Finally, partners with expertise in assessments (VERTECH, SIE, CTB & AIMPLAS) are essential to ensure the project’s outcomes are aligned with the expected environmental, economic, social, technical and legislative performance. 
One of our targets is also the potential impact of our technologies at societal level within the EU legislative framework. It is also essential for the development of the project itself and to ensure the future commercialization and deployment of the technologies. Finally, our dissemination, communication and exploitation partner (ENCO) is fully committed to protect and exploit in the best manner our partners’ exploitable promising results, as well as to reach the maximum audience to spread the project’s non-confidential outcomes. Also, VinyPlus will support the exploitation results as expert knowledge of PVC market and industry. As represented in Section 4, the consortium is well-structured and balanced among different experimented organisations and researchers, scientists, engineers, etc., who will bring the best expertise for each single and combined technology and demo activity in the technical and non-technical WPs and for the objectives achievement throughout the rest of the WPs, including the potential future commercialisation and integration of the technology at different levels. This will ensure the future impact, at least in Europe where the project is applied, on the innovative solutions (new byproducts from waste and the rejuvenated PVC). Demonstration and validation of the upscaled promising solutions (DECEUNINCK, DANOSA, PROMOLDING, BUILKID, AZOR and IRIS) will guarantee the project technologies are reaching TRL5. 
The presence of KEY research organisations (FRAUNHOFER, AIMPLAS, UVEG and CTB), as well as SMEs (PROMOLDING, BUILKID, IRIS, VERTECH, ENCO, SIE) will ensure and speed up the success of the project development and the achievement of objectives and the technology development from TRL3 to TRL5, with demonstrations on field. As represented in Section 4, all of them have an unbeatable resume and background in the covered areas of the project. Likewise, there is no overlapping of activities in the execution of the project since each partner has a well-defined activity, and subsequently in their correspondent applications according to its background and according to the assigned tasks. This will ensure on the one hand the proper achievement of the requested TRL, and on the other hand, the strengths of the consortium in case one partner will leave the project (other partner might perfectly be in charge of the tasks due to the broad expertise of the consortium and application area). 
On the other hand, in lesser extent, there is a very important presence of a large (industrial) organisation, who has a broad and prestigious experience (DECEUNINCK, DANOSA & AZOR). Their participation in the project is highly important and strategic, since it will be part of the future success of the project once it is finished in order to speed up the development of the solutions and contribute to the final results. 
As shown below in section 3.4, the budget is adequate according to the project size and requirements, allocated mainly among research partners and pilot activities which will guarantee the achievement of the project objectives and the future implementation of this project solutions at demonstration and then, commercial scale. Other countries: 
 
Expertise and capacity required to implement REMADYL methodology. 
 
Partner (short, country) Expertise & capacity Role 
INDUSTRY PARTNERS 
DECEUNINCK (BE) IND End user window frames PVC recycler 
Recycling of post-consumer PVC material and reuse in new developed window frames 
DANOSA (ES) IND Producer waterproof PVC sheets Reuse recycled PVC for soft extrusion applications 
PROMOLDING (NL) SME Injection moulding, product 
development & polymer R&D 
Evaluate the re-use of recycled soft PVC via injection 
moulding process 
BulkID (BE) SME Process engineering Commercialise PVC cleaning process 
AZOR Ambiental (ES) IND Heavy metal applications Reuse of Pb-based salts for automotive batteries 
IRIS (ES) SME Automation, detection & sorting Detection of LS containing PVC 
RTD PARTNERS 
Fh-ICT – Fraunhofer ICT (DE) PVC processing & extrusion, online extraction 
Extractive extrusion to remove plasticisers 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 52 of 100 
 
 
 
 
 
Fh-ITEM -Fraunhofer ICT (DE) Evaluation of risks of chemicals to human health & environment 
Quantitative determination of amounts of LS (phthalates, heavy metals, other potentially harmful organic/inorganic additives); related risk assessment 
concerning environmental and human health 
CTB – Centexbel (BE) PVC processing, offline extraction 
Extraction techniques based on supercritical CO2 and co-solvents for LS removal 
AIMPLAS (ES) PVC recycling, extrusion & 
compounding, characterisation. 
Extraction of heavy metals via MoS4-LDH inorganic adsorbents & melt filtration; characterisation. 
UVEG (ES) Preparation of LDH systems with divalent and trivalent metals and intercalation of anionic species. 
Characterization 
Defining methodologies and synthesis of tailor made LDH for heavy metal scavenger and separation of lead salts from the internal structure of LDH 
SUPPORTING ACTIVITIES 
VERTECH (FR) SME LCA, LCC and social-LCA according to standards 
Perform LCA and social-LCA for the rejuvenating and revalorisation routes 
ENCO (IT) SME Exploitation of R&D results Business plans, market intelligence 
SIE (ES) SME EU Legislation for safety, health and environmental risks 
Safety & health aspects during manufacturing, use & disposal 
OVAM (BE) OTHER Public authority - waste Waste stream mapping, legislation, regulation, policy. 
STAKEHOLDER REPRESENTATION 
VinylPlus (EU) OTHER Expert knowledge of PVC market 
and industry 
Dissemination towards (European) PVC sector and 
policy makers, leverage REMADYL impact 
3.3.2 Industrial/commercial involvement in the project 
The company partners form the majority in the consortium: 9 organisations out of 15 partners. In particular 6 SMEs and 3 large enterprises that cover the crucial steps along the value chain, including technical, environmental, legislation, innovation and IPR expertise. The company partners have been carefully selected in order to facilitate exploitation of REMADYL results. In fact, aiming to ensure the industrial relevance in the REMADYL project, we have 5 companies leading a WP (WP1-IRIS, WP4- AZOR, WP5-DECEUNINCK, WP6-VERTECH, WP7-ENCO) and we have 2 companies (DECEUNINCK and ENCO) 
represented in the Project Steering Committee. From the total budget, almost 55% goes to the company partners, and more than 35% goes to the SMEs (see also section 3.4). 
AZOR and DECEUNINCK are newcomers to European collaborative projects; other industrial partners have good experience from the framework, e.g. SME partners PROMOLDING and IRIS, the latter even as coordinator of projects itself. As described in 2.2, REMADYL industrial partners will also be actively involved in the dissemination of results, with the end users focusing on their distributors and clients and technology providers on potential markets and customers. The industrial partners will also have a key role in the exploitation of results. 
Apart from the industrial partners within the project, more recycling companies have expressed their interest in REMADYL either directly or through their associations (see support letters in Part 4) and will support the spreading and take up of REMADYL results to and by the industry via participation in the ASG (see section 3.2.1.1f). REMADYL goal is to give those members of the ASG that are interested samples of our rejuvenated PVC (and processes guidelines) for evaluation, as well as (parts of) the LCA/LCC studies. The goal is that the ASG acts also as a sound board, providing feedback and recommendations to the consortium to ensure that REMADYL results are relevant for applications by other users/markets, extending their exploitation beyond the actual duration and scope of the REMADYL project. 
3.3.3 Other countries 
All participants in the project are based in European Countries. 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 53 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
The REMADYL consortium consists of 15 partners and further a group of 6 partners who expressed their support to the consortium via a Letter of Support. The latter group forms the Advisory and Support Group or ASG. Both groups are described below; the Letters of Support are included behind the actual REMADYL partners. 
 
 
 
 
4 Members of the Consortium
4.1 Participants 
 
Participant 
no. 
Short name Participant organisation name Country Organisation 
Type 
1 
coordinator 
CTB Centexbel BE RTD 
2 AIMPLAS Asociacion De Investigacion De Materiales Plasticos Y Conexas 
ES RTD 
3 FhG Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft e.V. DE RTD 
3a Fh-ICT Fraunhofer Institute for Chemical Technology ICT DE RTD 
3b Fh-ITEM Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine ITEM 
DE RTD 
4 UVEG Universitat de Valencia Estudi General ES RTD 
5 DECEUNINCK Deceuninck N.V. BE IND 
6 DANOSA Derivados Asfálticos Normalizados ES IND 
7 PROMOLDING Promolding B.V. NL SME 
8 BULKID Lybover Recycling BulkID BE SME 
9 AZOR Azor Ambiental ES IND 
10 IRIS IRIS ES SME 
11 VERTECH VERTECH GROUP FR SME 
12 ENCO ENCO Srl IT SME 
13 SIE Sustainable Innovations Europe ES SME 
14 OVAM Public Waste Agency of Flanders BE OTHER 
15 VINYLPLUS VinylPlus EU OTHER 
  Advisory and Support Group (ASG)   
 EUPC European Plastics Converters EU Assoc. 
 GVK/TECPART German association of manufacturers of technical plastic products 
DE Assoc. 
 GO4CIRCLE Business federation of circular economy BE Assoc. 
 MATCOPLASTICS Plastics raw material distributor BE IND 
 CASIER 
RECYCLING 
Belgian waste collecting/recycling company BE IND 
 VANHEEDE 
ENVIRONMENT 
GROUP 
Belgian waste collection/recycling company BE IND 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 54 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
REMADYL CONSORTIUM PARTICIPANTS 
 
 
 
 
Partner 1 – CTB – Centexbel 
 
Country BE 
Core Competence: textile coating, finishing and extrusion, plastic characterization, processing and recycling, formulating, application on lab and semi-industrial scale and testing 
Brief description of legal entity: 
Centexbel is the Belgian scientific and technical centre for the textile and plastics industry. The centre, a non-profit organization, has strong links to the majority of the textile and plastics companies in Belgium, of which more than 80 % are SME, as well as to the related companies (producers of chemicals, machinery, etc.). As a collective research centre, Centexbel helps the companies to reinforce their market position by promoting and supporting innovation. Centexbel closely involves the industry, the authorities and its staff in its operation. To fulfil its mission, Centexbel offers an extensive range of activities and services to the textile and plastics industry, including Testing, Certification, Consultancy and Research & Development while guaranteeing independent and objective advice, the expertise of highly educated collaborators, trans-sectorial and international networking, focus on sustainable development, practice-oriented support, partnership and an open approach. 
Research is a very important activity within CENTEXBEL (~40% of its turnover). The research focus of CTB is on applied research, funded by private contract as well as national and international agencies (e.g. H2020, Eranet, Interreg). The research areas exploited are: 
 Functional Thermoplastic Textiles (FTT): polymer formulation, extrusion processes and thermoplastic composites 
 Textile Functionalisation & Surface Modification (TF&SM) covering environmental friendly finishing and coating formulations, energy saving processes, new applications like smart textiles and thermoset composites 
 Health, Safety and Security (HSS) including medical textiles and smart textiles 
 Plastics processing: polymer formulation, plastic processing and property evaluation, recycling of polymers 
Centexbel CTB also offers a complete range of standardized testing, it is a notified body and can deliver CE marking and testing. CTB is involved in standardization committees and offers technological advice and training to companies in Belgium and abroad. 
REMADYL role and main tasks: 
Centexbel will be project coordinator; leader of WP8 (coordination) and leader of WP2 (development of a batch extraction process based on the use of innovative new solvents that could be used as co-solvents during the extraction process). 
Furthermore Centexbel will further follow up the use (NA)DES in WP3. 
REMADYL specific competences and experiences: 
Centexbel has a rich expertise in recycling of polymeric materials. It has an extended plastic processing and testing lab in order to perform all necessary quality tests on the materials. 
Key staff members undertaking the work: 
Dr Isabel De Schrijver (Female): R&D Manager Plastic Characterization, Processing and Recycling. Isabel holds a Masters and PhD in Analytical Chemistry. Since her start at CTB she was focussed on research in textile and plastic processing techniques, being involved in the set-up and the management of new research projects (private, regional, international). 
Dr Elke Van de Walle (female): researcher Plastic Characterization, Processing and Recycling. Elke holds a Masters and PhD in Polymer Chemistry. At CTB she is performing different research projects focussing on plastic recycling and circular economy. 
Ir. Tom Vercoutere (Male) is a researcher within the “Plastic Characterization, Processing and Recycling” group at CTB. He is working on a research project together with Deceuninck with the aim to optimize the newly installed recycling plant at Deceuninck. Tom has thus the relevant experience in mechanical recycling of PVC and the material properties. 
Dr. Ir. Guy Buyle (Male): Manager EU research of CTB. Guy holds a Masters of Engineering degree and obtained his PhD in Physics on the subject of plasma treatment of surfaces. Since his start at CTB he has mainly been working on European projects, under FP6, FP7 and H2020, being strongly involved in activities like dissemination, exploitation and coordination. 
REMADYL relevant achievements: 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 55 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
 
  Processing and recycling in the textile and plastics industry, Isabel De Schrijver , Centexbel, EFRA Newsletter, 10/2016, p. 3 
  Recycling of polymer blends: the strength of compatibilization, Elke Van De Walle, PMI (International Conference on Polymers and Moulds Innovations ), Gent (BE), 22/09/2016 
 Valorising thermoplastic waste streams in new fibre applications by compatibilisation, Isabel De Schrijver, Dries Parmentier, Elke Van de Walle, Luc Ruys, Dornbirn Man-Made Fibers Congress, Dornbirn (AT), 13/09/2017 
  Developments for better recycling, Jo Wynendaele, Myriam Vanneste, Ine De Vilder, Pieter Heyse, Isabel De Schrijver, CIRFS meeting (Brussel), 11/10/2016 
 Impact of regulation on processing and recycling in the textile and plastic industry, Isabel De Schrijver, EFRA 
– general assembly meeting, Gent (BE), 22/06/2016 
REMADYL relevant previous projects or activities: 
 RECYCOAT – Recycling of coated materials (National collective research project, HBC.2017.0686, 2018-2020) 
 URBANREC New approaches for the valorisation of URBAN bulky waste into high added value RECycled products (H2020, GA N° 690103) 
 PLAST-i-COM – Recycling of polymer blends (National collective research project, IWT 135100, 2014-2018) 
 RECYCOMPOSITE – Recycling of composite materials (Interreg France-Wallonia- Flanders, 2017-2021) 
 PoCoBUILD – Recycling of post-consumer PVC material for the building industry (National private ICON project, HBV.2017.0680, 2018-2020) 
 CIRCULARITY IN & WITH NEW MATERIALS – expanding the possibilities of recycled materials (EU EFRO project, P1168, 2017-2020) 
REMADYL relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment: 
Centexbel has a fully equipped testing and processing lab available with all the relevant machines. Specific for processing: twin screw compounders, extrusion line, injection moulding machines, compression moulding, thermoforming,.. starting from lab scale up to pilot scale machines. New investments in purification machines (extraction, mixing, better processing,..) are considered creating an open innovation platform on circular economy. 
 
  
Participant’s dissemination channels: 
Fairs and congresses 
 Techtextil fair 2021, 2023 
 K-messe fair, 2019, 2022 
 Kunststofbeurs Veldhoven, September annual, The Netherlands 
 Dornbirn conference, Austria 
 Newsletter CTB – reaches virtually all textile companies in BE 
 CTB workshops and conferences – CTB organizes on a monthly basis workshops for its members, mainly textile, plastic and composite related companies from BE, FR, NL. Further, CTB organizes yearly a major European conference. In the past, such conferences were already organized on themes like functional coated textiles or recycling. In the frame of REMADYL again such a conference will be organized. Every year an INFO happening is organised for informing companies about the latest coating developments at CTB. 
Networks: 
 EURATEX: CTB is active member, taking part in the lead of the Textile Flagships for Europe Initiative 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 56 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 TEXTRANET: European Network of Textile Research Organisations 
 ECP4: European Composites, Plastics and Polymer Processing Platform. It is an industry-driven collaboration that unites the top-level European research institutions, regional plastic clusters and EU-level industrial organizations of plastics and composites converters. 
 SUSCHEM: the European Plastics Converters Association 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 60 of 100 
 
 
Partner 2 – Aimplas – Asociacion De Investigacion De Materiales Plasticos Y Conexas 
 
Country ES 
Core Competence: AIMPLAS, Plastics Technology Centre, offers solutions to companies of the plastics industry: R&D projects, analysis and testing, technical assistance, competitive intelligence and training. 
Brief description of legal entity: 
AIMPLAS, Technological Institute of Plastics located in Valencia, is a private, non-profit association of over 500 companies. AIMPLAS consists of +120 highly skilled professional, of which 65% have a Masters, Engineering or equivalent degree in Chemistry, polymer engineering, materials engineering, including 15 PhD. 
AIMPLAS’ fields of work are related to technological research and development on thermoplastic and thermosetting plastic materials & products, its transformation processes and their recyclability and sustainability. AIMPLAS generates new knowledge and technologies that can be transferred to companies in order to help them increase their effectiveness and competitiveness. To this end, Aimplas has more than 20 pilot plants at its disposal, representing the most relevant polymer/plastics/composites production technologies present in the industry. Furthermore Aimplas has state-of-the art test facilities for chemical, optical, morphological, mechanical and physical characterisation. These pilot lines and laboratories allow our customers to test new materials, optimize production processes and launch new products to the market, resulting in more than 5000 assays, 170 technical assessments and 120 skills training actions to more than 1500 clients per year. AIMPLAS has state-of-the-art 8500 m2 facilities, including thermoplastics and thermoset pilot plants, analysis and testing laboratories (physical-mechanical, chemical, packaging, automotive and construction) and training areas 
Currently, AIMPLAS has participated in 100 EU projects in FP5, FP6, FP7, LIFE+, CIP-EcoInnovation, H2020, among others, coordinating more than 30 of them. In H2020, AIMPLAS is participating in more than 18 projects, coordinating most of them. Outstanding LIFE projects were celebrated at the Green Awards ceremony in Brussels on 30 May 2017, BREAD4PLA – with AIMPLAS as a coordinator - was honoured as one of the two most exceptional LIFE projects of the programme's 25-year history. At National and Regional levels AIMPLAS participates in around 100 projects yearly. 
REMADYL role and main tasks: 
The main role of AIMPLAS in REMADYL is to remove lead salts from PVC, first by using discontinuous lab blenders (WP2) and later through a continuous pilot plant extrusion processes, single-screw tandem extrusion line and counter-rotating twin-screw extrusion line (WP3). In both cases, lead salts will be removed using LDH as heavy metals scavengers and after their separation from the melt flow by melt filtration. 
It is important to highlight that although the synthesis of LDH at lab level will be done by partner UV, AIMPLAS will be involved in the preparation of modified LDH at pilot plant level. AIMPLAS will act as leader of WP4 ( ‘Recycling/reuse of byproducts’, dealing with the safe recovery and re-use of heavy metals and phthalates removed from old PVC). Furthermore, Aimplas will work on Subtask 6.5.2., designing the safety protocols for the handling of the extracted substances. 
REMADYL specific competences and experiences: 
AIMPLAS has an extensive experience in recycling polymeric materials, extrusion & compounding technologies and dealing with special plastics such as PVC. AIMPLAS has the experience and equipment for the synthesis of LDH particles, to process PVC resins, to remove particles by melt filtration and to optimize efficiency of the processes by the defining design and processing parameters of pilot plant lines. 
Key staff members undertaking the work: 
Pilar Villanueva (Female): PhD in chemical engineering. Pilar has more than 13 years of experience in researching the processability and characterisation of polymeric and plastic materials. Her expertise lies in the use of different extrusion technologies, more specifically with flexible products extrusion (filaments and layers), medium rigidity extrusion (tubes, bottles, profiles,…) and auxiliary processes, such as thermoforming. Furthermore, she also has experience in fundamental research and has worked on the development of new biodegradable compounds and their processability by extrusion. 
Luis Iranzo (Male): Degree in Business Administration by the University of Valencia. Luis has been a project manager at AIMPLAS since March 2018. He has more than 10 years of experience working in the management and control of Regional, National and European projects. At National level he has experience in IVEX, PCEV, IVACE, PCCP, AEI, PROFIT and CDTI, while at European level he has experience in: FP7, Leonardo Lifelong Learning Programme, Creative Europe, Erasmus+ and H2020. In addition to his management positions he has been evaluator of Vocational Education Training proposals in Erasmus+. He started as project manager in ASEPRI, Spanish Association of Children Products, working with companies in the promotion 
and management of collaborative projects. In addition, he has been working in the R&D Projects Promotion Office at the 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 61 of 100 
 
 
Polytechnic University of Valencia. 
Mrs. Rosa González (Female): Degree in Chemistry by the University of Valencia, working as a senior researcher in the Extrusion Department at AIMPLAS since 2000. She has participated in several national and European projects related to the development and use of new biodegradable and compostable plastic materials for packaging, agricultural and automotive applications (MULTIBIO, TRIGGER, ECOPLAST), the development of active packaging (NATAL, ENVAFUNG, NATENVAS) and the valorisation of different types of waste for packaging applications (LIFE BREAD4PLA, LIFE EXTRUCLEAN). Furthermore, she delivered different contributions in international conferences and is a co-inventor in a national patent. 
Raquel Llorens (Female): Master in Engineering of Materials. She works at AIMPLAS as a Researcher for 13 years. She has got a wide experience in the Research of new thermoplastics compounds with different materials, especially PVC compounds. She has also worked as PI in multiple National and European Collaborative projects. 
Belen Monge (Female): PhD in Chemistry. Belen is the Head of Synthesis Department at AIMPLAS, and has over 14 years of experience in the polymer research. She is specialized in the identification of plastic materials, the characterization of polymeric waste, polymer synthesis and REACH legislation. 
Vicent Martinez (Male): Chemical Engineer by the Universitat Politècnica de València, Vincent works in AIMPLAS as Senior Technician in the Extrusion Department since 2007. He has participated in several FP7 Projects focused in biotechnologies, materials from renewable resources and sustainability (T2SME CUSTOM-IMD, NMP NATEX, R4SME HYDRUS, R4SME REFRESH, R4SME CLIPP, and DEMO-SME XXLREFRESH). He is also a specialist in laminating and printing technologies for flexible packaging in the converting Industry. 
REMADYL relevant achievements: 
 Garrain D, Vidal R, Martinez P, Franco V. Environmental Impact of Plastic Moulding in Spanish Industries Using Life Cycle Assessment Methodology. Ingenieria Quimica 2009, 29-35. 
 Vidal R, Martinez P, Mulet E, Gonzalez R, Lopez-Mesa B, Fowler P, Fang JM. Environmental Assessment of Biodegradable Multilayer Film Derived From Carbohydrate Polymers. Journal of Polymers and the Environment 2007, 15:159-168. 
 Martí-Ferrer F, Vilaplana F, Ribes-Greus A, Benedito-Borrás A, Sanz-Box C. Flour rice husk as filler in block copolymer polypropylene: Effect of different coupling agents. Journal of Applied Polymer Science 2006, 99:1823-1831. 
 Vidal R, Moliner E, Martínez G, Rubio MC. Life cycle assessment of hot mix asphalt and zeolite-based warm mix asphalt with reclaimed asphalt pavement. Resources, Conservation and Recycling 2013, 74:101-114. 
 Moliner E, Muñoz C, Garraín D, Franco V, Vidal R. The ecological footprint of transporting waste in the province of Castellon. Selected Proceedings from the 15th International Congress on Project Engineering 2012, 103-115. ISBN: 978-84-615-7674-6… 
 Vicent Martínez. Innovative extrusion process with SC – CO2 injection and vacuum degasification to improve the quality of recycled plastic from printed polyolefin films. Futurenviro. Diciembre 2017 – Enero 2018, 1-2 
 Vicent Martínez. Clipp+ project tackles printed film scrap. Plastic Recycling World January – February 2018, 21 – 23. 
REMADYL relevant previous projects or activities: 
 CLIPP: Study of recyclability of printed or laminated plastic packaging films using supercritical C02 technologies (FP7- RS-SME, 2012) 
 CLIPP+: Manufacture and commercialization of high quality recycled polyolefin films using an innovative continuous extrusion recycling process assisted by sc-CO2 for printed plastic waste (H2020 – SME2, 2017) 
 LIFE -EXTRUCLEAN: Demonstrative Project for the removal of hazardous substances during the recycling process of polyethylene hazardous waste (LIFE12 ENV/ES/000067, 2017) 
 URBANREC: Recycling of bulky waste (H2020): knowledge on management of plastics (PVC) waste (H2020-WASTE- 2015, 2020) 
 C-SERVEES: Activating Circular Services in the Electrical and Electronic Sector (C-SERVEES) (H2020 - CIRC-01- 2016-2017, 2022) 
 RECYTUBE: Recycling of industrial plastic waste containing carbon nanotubes for E&E industry (Eco-innovation, 2013) 
REMADYL relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment: 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 62 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
 
Aimplas has a large variety of technical equipment and expert personnel at their disposal: 
Equipment for cleaning recycled materials: drying facilities, washing facilities, grinding facilities, tandem extrusion system with scCO2 injection & intermediate melt filter, 
Equipment for processing recycled materials: Compression moulding, Discontinuous mixing system with heated rolls adjusting speed and shear stress, Brabender, Platen press test specimens manufacture. 
Laboratory equipment: Reactors from 0.1 to 10-50 kg (glass and stainless steel) for synthesis, Equipment for mechanical, thermal, rheological, electrical and physical tests (i.e.Universal Testing Machine, FTIR equipment, Rotational rheometer, DSC, Melt Flow Index, dart impact machine, Electronic microscopy, etc 
Pilot plant profile extrusion line, pilot plant cast-sheet extrusion line and equipment for formulation of dry blends and twin-screw extruder for PVC compounding 
 
   
Participant’s dissemination channels: 
Conferences and fairs: 
Equiplast Fair, Barcelona. Amagua Fair, Zaragoza. Ponencia Congreso ICCG12, Würzburg. 
General Meeting ECP4. JEC World 2018, Paris. EMPACK, Madrid. Interpack Fair, Dusseldorf. Hispack. Barcelona. JPI Congress, Lisboa. K, Düsseldorf. Chemplast, Madrid. Ecofira, Valencia, PRS, Amsterdam. CONAMA, Madrid. Publications: 
Waste Management & Research; Journal of Cleaner Production; Journal of Industrial Ecology; The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment; Waste Management; Resources, Conservation and Recycling; Journal of Environmental Management; Journal of Polymers and the Environment; and broader audience journals (Science, Nature, etc.). 
Networks: 
We take part in following international and national research networks and technological platforms, with the objective to support the research and competitiveness of enterprises in their use with plastic materials: 
European Plastic Converters Association (EuPC), Spanish Association of Additive Manufacturing Technologies and 3D (ADDIMAT), Spanish Technology Platform "Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, New Materials and New Industrial Processes" (3NEO), European Technology Platform for Sustainable Chemistry (SUSCHEM), European Composites, Plastics & Polymer Processing Platform (ECP4), Bio-Based Industries Joint Undertaking (BBI Bio-Based Industries), Spanish Technological Platform for Advanced Manufacturing (MANU-KET), ANARPLA (Spanish association of Plastic Recyclers), ANAIP (Spanish association of Plastic Industries), PLASTIVAL (Valencia Region Cluster for the Plastic Industry), MATERPLAT (Spanish Technological Platform for Nano materials and advanced materials) 
AIMPLAS is also participating in the following committees of standardization: 
AEN / CTN 53 / GT1 "PVC profiles for doors, windows, blinds and fittings"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC 4 "Containers and Packaging"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC 8 "Recycled Materials"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC1 "Elastomers"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC2 "Plastic pipes and fittings"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC5 "Reinforced materials"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC6 "Raw material specifications and test methods". 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 63 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
Partner 3 – FhG – Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft e.V. 
 
Country DE 
Core Competence: 
FhG-ICT: Extractive extrusion 
FhG-ITEM: Analytical chemistry, Toxicological risk assessment 
Brief description of legal entity: 
The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft is the leading organization for applied research in Europe. Its research activities are conducted by 72 institutes and research units at locations throughout Germany. FhG employs a staff of more than 25,000, who work with an annual research budget totaling 2.3 billion euros. FhG carries out internationally networked applied research which is both of direct use to industry and of benefit to society. Note that ‘Fh-ICT’ and ‘Fh-ITEM’ are departments of partner FhG. 
The Fraunhofer Institute for Chemical Technology (Fh-ICT) carries out contract research for industry, and also works together with commercial companies on research projects. The department of Polymer Engineering works in the whole process chain of thermoplastic and thermoset processing developing new processes and products. A special focus is set on the processes being available in pilot scale for industrial applications. In the team of compounding and extrusion the main focus are modifications of continuous processes based on extrusion on specific applications, like extractive extrusion, reactive extrusion, use of additional energy sources (ultrasound and microwave) or unconventional liquids like scf and gases. Additionally, these processes are used for functionalization of polymeric materials. 
The Division Chemical Risk Assessment, Databases and Expert Systems of the FhG (Fh-ITEM) has a long-term experience in assessing possible risks of chemicals to human health and the environment and to register these substances for the intended use. This includes industrial chemicals, biocides, food additives, and human and veterinary medicinal products. With self-initiated research projects, e.g. elucidation of structure-activity relationships ((Q)SAR), category approaches such as read across, setting up of databases, and further development of the TTC concept, the division contributes to the development of novel assessment strategies to help improve and refine existing risk assessment methods and ultimately to minimize the need for experimental studies, in particular animal studies. 
REMADYL role and main tasks: 
Fh-ICT is WP leader of WP3. WP3 consists of the process and material development for recycling of PVC and for the removal of hazardous plasticisers and stabilization agents. These technologies will first be evaluated in discontinuous processes in WP2; hereafter Fh-ICT will develop the continuous process for the plasticiser removal up to a pilot plant level at TRL5 and characterize the obtained materials together with the partners (WP4). Additionally Fh-ICT will contribute to the exploitation and dissemination of the project results. 
Fh-ITEM will be contributing to WP4, i.e. performing and/or development of analytical methods to quantitatively determine the amount of legacy substances, such as phthalates and heavy metals, present in treated PVC material; quantification of other potentially harmful organic and/or inorganic additives introduced during the treatment process and where applicable for degradation products; as well as performing corresponding risk assessments concerning environmental and human health endpoints to ensure health and safety standards for the final products developed by REMADYL. 
REMADYL specific competences and experiences: 
The Fh-ICT, Department of Polymer Engineering has major experience in the formulation and continuous processing of thermoplastic materials and their conversion. It has a long term experience in the use of PVC for applications, such as window profiles (hard PVC) or flooring applications (soft PVC). 
One of the main foci is the implementation of additional processes to the extrusion process, such as extraction or additional energy sources. 
Fh-ITEM: The department of Bio- and Environmental Analytics has more than 20 years of experience in the development of analytical methods and implementation of guideline methods to address analytical questions at hand. Phthalate analysis has been successfully applied in the past on solid and liquid samples. Metal(loid) analysis in various matrices, whether in solids, liquids or air, is one of the key expertise of the department. The Division Chemical Risk Assessment, Databases and Expert Systems has more than 30 years experience in the risk assessment of chemicals to human health and the environment. 
Key staff members undertaking the work: 
Andrei Holzer (male): After having finished his apprenticeship as physics laboratory assistant in 1989, Andrei Holzer studied chemical engineering (specialisation in food process engineering) at the University of Karlsruhe (KIT). He has now 14 years of experience in compounding and profile extrusion of thermoplastic materials. 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 64 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
Dr. Jan Diemert (male): Jan studied mechanical engineering at the Technical University of Aachen and specialized in polymer processing. He achieved his doctoral degree (Dr.-Ing.) at the University of Stuttgart with his work on "Fundamentals of plasticizing polyvinylchloride with microwaves". He has 15 years of experience in the extrusion and the compounding of thermoplastic materials. 
Dr. Thorsten Jänisch (male): Thorsten chemist, is a researcher at the Fh-ICT in the department of environmental engineering since June 2016. He is responsible for the acquisition and realization of national and international research projects in the area of catalyst and process development and optimization, especially in the field of environmental chemistry. He finished his diploma at the University of Stuttgart in 2010 and his PhD-work at Fraunhofer UMSICHT in 2015. 
Irma Mikonsaari (female): studied process engineering at the Technical University of Karlsruhe. She specialised in particle technology. During her work at Fh-ICT she has acquired 17 years of experience in the field of particle and nanoparticle processing and characterisation as well as on interphase phenomena. She supports her colleagues in setting up new funded projects as well in their coordination. 
Susanne Gerling (female): is a laboratory chemist by training, who has joined the analytical team at Fh-ITEM in 1994. Here, her main responsibilities are the independent and hands-on development and validation of GC-MS and LC-MS/MS based analytical methods. In that line of work, Susanne was actively involved in the sample preparation and analysis of phthalates in solid and liquid matrices in the past. 
Heiko Kock (male): is a chemical engineer. After successful completion of his studies as varnish chemist at the University-GH Siegen, Heiko joined the analytical department at Fh- ITEM. Here, he has gathered an extensive suite of competencies over the past 35 years; with his main interest being ICP-MS analysis. 
Dr. Katharina Blümlein (female): analytical chemist, obtained her diploma from the University of Braunschweig and specialized in environmental analytical chemistry during her PhD at the University of Aberdeen. During the past 10 years Katharina has acquired extensive knowledge in the LC-MS/MS based analysis of small molecules. Since joining Fh-ITEM in 2013 she is has continuously improved her soft-skills with respect to project management and customer relation. 
Dr. Axel Wibbertmann (male), Veterinarian/Toxicologist with about 30 years experiences in toxicology and human health. 
REMADYL relevant achievements: 
 J. Diemert; R. Emmerich; P. Eyerer: Fundamentals of plasticizing Polyvinylchloride (PVC) with microwaves. PPS-21 - 21st Annual Meeting of the Polymer Processing Society; Leipzig; 2005 
 Diemert, J.: Emissions- und geruchsoptimierte (Recycling-)Compounds mittels extraktiver Compoundierprozesse. Würzburger Compoundiertage; SKZ; Würzburg; 16-17.5.2017 
 Just, D; Diemert, J: Eine dufte Technik. Plastverarbeiter, Verlag: Hüthig GmbH, Heidelberg, 65 Jahrgang (2014) Ausgabe 2, ISSN 0032-1338, S. 30-34 
 Diemert, J.; Just, D.; Weiss, P.: Erweitertes Einsatzspektrum von Aufbereitungsextrudern durch neue Prozesstechniken 
- Mikrowellen, Überkritische Fluide, Ultraschall. 38. Jahrestagung Aufbereitungstechnik 2012; VDI Wissensforum GmbH; Düsseldorf; 2012 
 Jänisch, Th.: Use of supercritical CO2 (scCO2) as extracting agent and reaction solvent, Annual World Congress of Smart Materials WCSM 2018, Osaka, Japan, 6.-8.3.2018 
REMADYL relevant previous projects or activities: 
 EU-SlipSafe (FP7, R4SMEAssociations): development of anti-slippery PVC flooring 
 EU-Clipp (FP7, R4SME): continuous removal of contaminants from recycled plastics 
 EU-Urbanrec (H2020): PU recycling 
 Industrial projects for the removal of emission/smell relevant components 
 Molecular Sorting (FhG-internal research project): Advanced sorting and recovery technologies on molecular level 
REMADYL relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment: 
 Co-rotational twin screw extruders (screw diameter: 18-32 mm; 0,5-200 kg/h) 
 Gravimetric feeding units for bulk materials, liquid and gas (0,1-200 kg/h) 
 CO2 extraction equipment (discontinuous and continuous) 
 Chemical batch synthesis lab (0,1-15 liter, pressure up to 1000 bar) 
 Chemical distillation, rectification and extraction equipment 
 PVC profile extrusion line (twin-screw, counter rotating) 
 Pelletizing units: water bath, hot die face pelletizing unit, underwater pelletizing unit 
 Dryer equipment 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 65 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 Injection molding equipment 27 t -700 t clamping force 
 Mechanical and chemical material characterisation 
Participant’s dissemination channels: 
Conferences and fairs: 
FhG ICT booths on K-2019, K-2022, Fakuma 2020, Fakuma 2021, Composite Europe on yearly basis, Achema on yearly basis, JEC on yearly basis 
Publications: 
KM Kunststoffmagazin, Kunststoffe, Plastverarbeiter, Fraunhofer publications which are directly send to all Fraunhofer Institutes’ customers, International Polymer Processing. 
Networks: 
ECP4 (An industry-driven collaboration that unites 25 members from 13 countries amongst the top-level European research institutions, regional plastic clusters, and EU-level industrial organizations of plastics and composites converters.), TecPart, innoNET Horb, SUSCHEM (The European Technology Platform for Sustainable Chemistry) 
Wider stakeholder involvement: 
EUPC, ERFMI, Fraunhofer Alliance BAU, Wissenschaftlicher Arbeitskreis Kunststofftechnik WAK, Chamber of Commerce and Industry Karlsruhe, Education on Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT). 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 66 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
Partner 4 – UVEG – Universitat de Valencia Estudi General 
 
 
Country ES 
Core Competence: Synthesis of lead salts scavengers to be incorporated in melt PVC 
Brief description of legal entity: 
The University of Valencia (UVEG) extends throughout the city of Valencia and its metropolitan area on three university campuses: the campus linked by Blasco Ibáñez Avenue, the Tarongers campus and the Burjassot-Paterna campus. The three campuses contain numerous research institutes, eighteen faculties and the School of Engineering. 
UVEG is generally recognized as one of the most outstanding Spanish universities in both national and international rankings. UV ranks third among Spanish universities in indexed scientific production and according to the Center for World University Rankings (CWUR) ranking, UVEG is the second best university in the world in Inorganic Chemistry. Such a privileged position has been possible thanks to the work developed at the Institute of Molecular Science (ICMol), which has produced more than the 90% of the highly cited papers in Chemistry and Materials Science of the UV. This center publishes over 170 papers per year in top international journals, with an excellent record of citations that results in an overall institutional h-index of 81. ICMol (http://www.icmol.es/), with a surface of ca. 4000 m2 and around 130 researchers and performs top research in chemistry and materials science. It has been certified with the seal of excellence ‘Maria de Maeztu’, as one of the top research centers in Spain since 2016 and currently hosts 6 ERC grantees. 
REMADYL role and main tasks: 
The main role of UVEG in REMADYL will be: 
 To synthesize the layered double hydroxide (LDH) system and modify them with the intercalation of thiomolybdate ions (MoS42-) to act as lead scavengers. This process will be done at lab level (WP2). 
 To do the studies to extract the lead salts captured in the LDH: Extraction of [MoS4PbS4Mo]2– from the LDH system, Precipitation of Pb, and Regeneration of the MgAl–MoS4 adsorbent. This studies will be done at lab level (WP4). 
REMADYL specific competences and experiences: 
The UVEG group has an extended experience in the preparation of LDH systems with several divalent (Mg, Zn, Ca, Co, Ni, Mn) and trivalent (Al, Cr, Fe) metals and even some tetravalent metals like Ti, using different synthetic methods from the classical “coprecipitation at constant pH” to the new ones methods based on the thermal decomposition of Ammonium Releasing Reagents (ARR). 
Apart of the synthesis, the UV group has been working in the intercalation of anionic species in the interlayer space of the LDH systems by direct procedures or via delamination of the LDH systems and the restacking of the layer structure. 
Parallel to the synthesis and intercalation of the LDH systems the UV group has been applying an important number of techniques to characterize the LDH systems, from the classical PXRD to the newer Mössbauer, HRTEM or AFM. 
Finally, the UV group has experience in carrying out the kinetic studies needed to determine the kinetics parameters in the lead adsorption reactions by LDH systems. 
Key staff members undertaking the work: 
Dr. Antonio L. Ribera (Male) performed his Ph.D. in Chemistry at the University of Valencia (1997) based on the intercalation of Molybdenum complexes in LDH systems and studying its kinetic parameters in oxidation reactions. Hereafter he worked at Organic Chemistry and Catalysis in the T.U. Delft (The Netherlands) and at Instituto de Tecnología Química in the Universidad Politécnica de Valencia. In 2004 came back to the UVEG with a Ramón ny Cajal contract and since 2011 is a Lecturer in Chemistry at the Universidad de Valencia working in the synthesis of Layered Double Hydroxides and inorganic nanoparticles. Dr. Ribera is Co–author of 62 publications including leading journals in chemistry and materials science, with more than 1600 citations (h–index= 24). He has co–inventoried of 3 Patents (1 at European extension) and has supervised 1 Ph.D. During the last decade he has participated in more than 10 European, National and Regional projects. 
Dr. Carlos Martí-Gastaldo (Male) has carried out his Ph.D. in Chemistry at the University of Valencia, after which he moved to the Department of Chemistry of the University of Liverpool. In 2014 he returned to the UV, where Carlos Martí is currently the leader of the group FuniMat (www.icmol.es/funimat) and co–author of 70 publications with near 3500 citations (h–index= 28). He has co–inventoried of 2 Patents (1 licensed) and has supervised 6 Ph.D. (2 defended). In the last 4 years, he leads 5 European, National and Regional projects. 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 67 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
REMADYL relevant achievements: 
 G. Abellán, C. Martí-Gastaldo, A. Ribera, E. Coronado. Hybrid Materials Based on Magnetic Layered Double Hydroxides: A Molecular Perspective. Accounts of Chemical Research 2015, 1601-1611. 
 G. Abellán, E. Coronado, C. Martí-Gastaldo, A. Ribera, J.L. Jordá, H. García. Photo-Switching in a Hybrid Material Made of Magnetic Layered Double Hydroxides Intercalated with Azobenzene Molecules. Advanced Materials 2014, 4156-4162. 
 E. Coronado, C. Martí-Gastaldo, E. Navarro-Moratalla, A. Ribera, S. Tatay. Illustrating the Processability of Magnetic Layered Double Hydroxides: Layer-by-Layer Assembly of Magnetic Ultrathin Films. Inorganic Chemistry 2013, 6214- 6222. 
 G. Abellán, E. Coronado, C. Martí-Gastaldo, A. Ribera, J.F. Sánchez-Royo. Layered Double Hydroxide (LDH)– Organic Hybrids as Precursors for Low-Temperature Chemical Synthesis of Carbon Nanoforms. Chemical Science 2012, 1481-1485. 
 E. Coronado, C. Martí-Gastaldo, E. Navarro-Moratalla, A. Ribera, S.J. Blundell, P.J. Baker. Coexistence of Superconductivity and Magnetism by Chemical Design. Nature Chemistry 2010, 1031-1036. 
REMADYL relevant previous projects or activities: 
 Multifuncitonal Molecular Materials and MOFs: design, synthesis, characterization and processing (CTQ2017-87201). 
 Materiales moleculares multifuncionales: hacia el control y la conmutación de las propiedades (PROMETEOII/2014/076) 
 Ingeniería Molecular en Materiales 2D y en Dispositivos espintrónicos híbridos (MAT2014-56143-R). 
 Diseño Químico de Materiales Magnéticos Multifuncionales: de la Coexistencia hacia el Control de las Propiedades (CTQ2011-26507). 
 Next Generation Hybrid Interfaces for Spintronic Applications (NMP3-SL-2011-263104). 
 Electric Field Control over Spin Molecules (ELFOS-270369). 
REMADYL relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment: 
Chemical characterization: 1. Thermogravimetric and Differential Thermal Analyzer operating in the T range 25-1100 ºC with a sensibility of 0.1 micrograms; 2. Attenuated Total Reflection/Reflexion Absorption Infrared Spectroscopy; 3. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance: Bruker DPX300 spectrometer, Bruker DRX500 spectrometer and Bruker DRX500 spectrometer with two RF channels and high power amplifiers for solid-state experiments. 4. Electron Probe Microanalysis (EPMA) Phipils SEM-XL30 equipped with an EDAX microprobe. 
Structural characterization: 1. Single crystal X-Ray Diffractometer (Oxford Diffraction Gemini S Ultra diffractometer) with Mo and Cu co-mounted Enhanced X-ray source Sapphire CCD detector and a four circle Kappa Geometry X-ray Goniometer equipped with a Cryojet temperature controller (variable-temperature data collection from 100 to 400 K); 2. PANalytical Empyrean X-ray powder diffractometer with Cu radiation eqipped with a Oxford Cryostream (temperature range 100 K-500 K) for capillary and flat plate measurements and accessories for SAXS and reflectometry measurements; 3. High-Throughput Stage (HTS) for more efficient data collection from 96 sample plates. 
Particles morphologies and dimensions: 1. Hitachi S-4100 scanning electron microscope at an accelerating voltage of 20 KeV; 2. Nanoscope IVa Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) from Veeco; 3. Dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements will be carried out with a Zetasizer Nano ZS instrument (Malvern Instruments Ltd.); 4. JEM-2010 microscope (JEOL, Japan) operating at 200 kV. 
Gas adsorption: Micromeritics 3Flex surface analyser for improved-throughput micropore analysis of three samples in parallel with vapour sorption capability. 
Participant’s dissemination channels: 
Publications: 
Journal of Material Chemistry A; Chemistry of Materials; Inorganic Chemistry; Applied Clay Science; Chemistry: A European Journal; Clays and Clay Minerals; Dalton; RSC Advances. 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 68 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
Partner 5 – DECEUNINCK – Deceuninck N.V. 
 
Country BE 
Core Competence: PVC compounding, Window & Door extrusion, TPE-extrusion for gaskets & seals, PVC-recycling and re-use in coextrusion profiles. 
Brief description of legal entity: 
Deceuninck is globally active in the design and development of profiles for windows and doors, outdoor flooring and fencing, roofline and cladding and interior applications. We operate in over 90 countries and employ more than 3,600 people. At Deceuninck, we are building a sustainable future for our customers and employees! 
We are vertically integrated with 
 Compounding facilities ( Belgium, Germany, Turkey, Russia, USA ) 
 Tool development and production, tuning & commissioning. 
 Extrusion of PVC-profiles and TPE-gaskets & seals 
 Foiling & coating facilities 
 Recycling departments. 
The newest recycling company is being built on the premises of the compounding factory, because we consider the recycled materials as a second source. We already recycle our own industrial scrap, working together with customers to recycle and re- use the post-fabricator (cut-off) scrap and are investing in a new state of the art line to recycle the post-consumer PVC in order to reuse this in new window and door-profiles. The last 2 years we have invested in the granulation and filtration of post- industrial and post-fabricator scrap and are preparing to also invest in the granulation of the post-consumer scrap. 
REMADYL role and main tasks: 
Deceuninck can provide the post-consumer PVC as it comes from the market and also samples after every purification step. Furthermore Deceuninck has the capabilities to provide model substrates containing DEHP and lead stearate (WP1), and to re- additivate and reuse the rejuvenated PVC (WP5). Additionally Deceuninck will provide business information for the market analysis (WP7). 
REMADYL specific competences and experiences: 
Our competences and experiences follow the full vertical process. We make our own formulations and compounding, along with the necessary lab-tests. We do have a separate testing department to fulfil all required extrusion testing. Through the development of our own tools, we can adapt the process for a broader window in order to re-use recycled materials. All steps of the recycling for post-consumer will be available at the end of 2018 on an industrial level. 
Key staff members undertaking the work: 
Johan Pauwels (Male): New Product introduction project Manager. During his career at Deceuninck, of over 20 years, Johan has built up expertise in all aspects related to the profile extrusion of PVC windows, e.g. coatings, wood-plastic composites, tooling, mono-extrusion, co-extrusion, tri-extrusion, and more importantly the recycling of EOL PVC. 
Tom Driessens (Male): Operations manager Compounding & recycling. Tom not only has an extensive technical knowledge about extrusion processes, but is also very familiar with the logistical and strategical decision making of the purchase of raw material. Under his supervision as operations manager a new state-of-the-art PVC recycling plant is being built. 
Stefaan Marquebreuk (Male): Manager R&D Materials, Stefaan is responsible for the development and implementation of material technology at Deceuninck Extrusion subsidiaries in Europe. Besides his vast knowledge of material science, he is well aware of all quality aspects of the production of PVC, since he is also a certified lead auditor ISO. 
Bram Vandecasteele (Male): Manager testing group, Bram has built an extensive knowledge of quality, tooling, and testing over the years. 
Margot Lannoo (Female) : Strategic project Manager, responsible for sourcing of materials ( post-industrial, post-fabricator & post-consumer ), and overall project follow up. She has an extensive experience in strategic project follow up as wel in logistics, financial and integrated projects. 
REMADYL relevant achievements: 
We are in the full process of building an extra recycling line specifically for post-consumer PVC at Diksmuide (Belgium) and in 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 69 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
parallel we are investing in several new extrusion lines and tools, in order to re-use this material in new product as well in Belgium, France & England. 
The aim is to work “Cradle to Cradle” and re-use this materials back into window & door-profiles. Today we are already producing profiles with post-industrial and post-fabricator scrap, but we want to go the next step towards post-consumer PVC. 
REMADYL relevant previous projects or activities: 
 PoCoBuild: Post Consumer PVC for the BUILDing industry. (National private ICON project, HBV.2017.0680, 2018- 2020) 
In this project we aim to reuse the post-consumer PVC, and build up the know-how to recycle it to its purest form. This also includes the filtration and granulation. We are using the recycled materials not only in rigid PVC, but also in “foamed rigid PVC”, from which we make thermal reinforcements for the window and door profiles. 
 RecyCoat: recycling of foiled & coated materials 
REMADYL relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment: 
We have a full industrial compounding & recycling plant. In the recycling plant, we are building a new recycling line specifically for post-consumer PVC. There, the lab is also integrated and further renewed in order to validate these products. Furthermore, the central lab is certified in order to also validate the end products. 
At our headquarters (Hooglede-Gits), the development of new products, including the full testing of window and doors, is simulated and real conditions can be simulated. 
We have our own tool shop for design, manufacturing, tuning and commissioning. On the different extrusion locations we can produce coex-tools. Furthermore we can apply a decorative foil or coating to the customer’s wishes. 
Participant’s dissemination channels: 
Conferences and fairs: 
K-messe, Kunststof ( Eindhoven ), Materials (Eindhoven ), Polyclose, Batibouw Networks: 
Agoira, essenscia 
Wider stakeholder involvement: 
We work together with : Go4Circle, EPPA, Agoria, Essenscia, OVAM, and also the different certification organisations ( CSTB, ATG,RAL,… ) 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 70 of 100 
 
 
Partner 6 – DANOSA – Derivados Asfálticos Normalizados 
 
Country ES 
Core Competence: Use of rejuvenated PVC in the production of flexible PVC waterproofing membranes 
Brief description of legal entity: 
Derivados Asfálticos Normalizados (DANOSA) is a company founded in 1964 and dedicated to the production and distribution of waterproofing, acoustic, drainage, geotextiles and thermal insulation. It has become the leading manufacturer of building materials in Spain, furthermore it currently maintains a strong exportation activity. Danosa exports more than half of its production to more than 70 countries all around the world. Danosa currently is owner or has a participation in 6 different production plants in Spain, Portugal or India and has subsidiaries in Portugal, France, UK, Morocco, Colombia and Mexico, with nearly 400 employees from different countries,. 
The commitment of Danosa with the environment has led to the incorporation of several production lines of plastic recycling for polyolefins and polystyrenes. Currently more than 80% of the plastic materials used in the product portfolio of Danosa are recycled plastics. Since 2013 Danosa has promoted Research and Development as a fundamental motor for the growth and competitiveness of the company, and its commitment to society and the environment. Since then, the investments in R&D have significantly grown, as 5 new people have joined the R&D department, 3 of them doctors in sciences. The model for research and development of the company is open innovation, which strongly motivates the participation in a European Project, collaborating with different and diverse companies. 
REMADYL role and main tasks: 
The main role of DANOSA will be included in WP5. 
Task 5.1. for the development of tailor-made PVC formulas, new plasticized PVC formulations, to be incorporated during processing and product development using recycled PVC. 
Task 5.2. for a demonstration of the processability of the recycled PVC in a cast-sheet extrusion line and optimization of properties of the recycled PVC by blending with the new PVC formulated in Task 5.1 
Additionally Danosa will provide business information for the market analysis (WP7). 
REMADYL specific competences and experiences: 
Danosa has more than 10 years of experience in the production of flexible PVC waterproofing membranes and is a reference in the construction market. Last year the company did an important investment in a new Dry Blend facility, which allows DANOSA to produce its own tailor made formula for the production of the flexible PVC membrane. 
At the same time Danosa has a wide experience in the use of recycled polymers, which currently represent more than 80% of the plastic material used in its products portfolio. Moreover, five years ago Danosa began producing recycled polyolefins itself, for its own consumption and for external sale. 
Key staff members undertaking the work: 
Javier Escudero (Male): PhD in Physics, his doctoral thesis was focused on the development of new polymeric cellular materials in the frame of a European Project belonging to the 7th Framework Programme. He has experience in the development and characterization of cellular materials based on polymeric nanocomposites on a lab scale. After different research internships in Germany, Poland and USA in his doctoral period, he left academia and joined the private company Danosa in 2013. In Danosa he had the opportunity of passing from the lab to the industrial scale, applying all the skills gained in plastics and extrusion. In Danosa Javier has worked intensely in the production of extruded polystyrene boards for thermal insulation, low density polyehthylene crosslinked foams for acoustic absorption and flexible PVC membranes for waterproofing applications, all of them via extrusion processes. Since September 2017 he is also the R&D Manager of the company. Furthermore, Javier is author and co-author of 11 indexed scientific publications and 2 international patents. 
Alicia Barbas (Female): Degree in Chemical Engineering, she is currently part of the R&D department of Danosa as Process Specialist of Dry Blend and PVC waterproofing membranes. After finishing her degree, Alicia worked as researcher during an internship in Repsol Technological Center, developing high and low density polyethylene copolymers for fibre and pipping applications. After that, she worked as Research Assitant in University Rey Juan Carlos, focussing on the synthesis of mesostructured thermo-responsive polymeric materials for drugs release. She joined the private industry as Development Chemist in IKO PLC (UK) prior to joining Danosa. In IKO she researched the influence of polyolefins in the final properties of bituminous waterproofing membranes, developing new products and improving the existing ones. 
REMADYL relevant achievements: 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 71 of 100 
 
 
Environmental Product Declaration (EPD) for Danopol. Danopol is the trademark of the waterproofing PVC membranes from Danosa. 
As part of Danosa’s commitment to the environment, the company decided to undergo a specific Environmental Product Declaration for its waterproofing PVC membranes portfolio, in 2015 (registration number S-P-00691). 
REMADYL relevant previous projects or activities: 
 Research and development of an innovative system, based on extrusion techniques, for the usage of re-used tire rubber. 
Center: Derivados Asfálticos Normalizados S.A. 
Funding Entity: Centro para el Desarrollo Tecnológico Industrial (CDTI). Period 2007-2008 
 R&D Project on new materials from the recycling of wastes. 
Center: Derivados Asfálticos Normalizados S.A. 
Funding Entity: Centro para el Desarrollo Tecnológico Industrial (CDTI). Period 2004 
 Usage of re-used tire rubber for waterproofing applications. Center: Derivados Asfálticos Normalizados S.A. 
Funding Entity: Centro para el Desarrollo Tecnológico Industrial (CDTI). Period: 2003 
REMADYL relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment: 
Lab equipment for mechanical, thermal, electrical and physical tests: Universal Testing Machine, FTIR equipment, Air Pycnometer, DSC, TGA, Melt Flow Index, Suntest, UV chamber, plasticizer migration test, hot plates press, roll mill, shore hardness and a lab scale extruder for plain sheet and calenders. Furthmore, Danosa also has Dry Blend industrial facilities and PVC membrane calendering facilities. 
 
   
Participant’s dissemination channels: 
Conferences and fairs: 
Waterproofing Membranes. AMI Conferences (Germany), PVC Formulations AMI Conferences (Germany), Global Insulation Conference (Austria) 
Publications: 
Construction and Building Materials, Journal of Polymers and the Environment, Polymer, Journal of Polymer Science, Waste Management & Research. 
Networks: 
European Single Ply Waterproofing Association (ESWA, Association representing the leading producers of thermoplastic roofing membranes in Europe), ANAIP, EuPC (European Plastics Converters Association), Foro Ibérico del PVC, 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 72 of 100 
 
 
Partner 7 – PROMOLDING – Promolding B.V. 
 
Country NL 
Core Competence: Injection moulding, product development, polymer research 
Brief description of legal entity: 
Promolding BV is an innovative company that offers its customers the whole sequence, from product design, via (new) materials, process development and tool development, to manufacturing of components by injection moulding of thermoplastic polymers. 
Around 50 people currently work at Promolding, of which about half in Product Development and Research & Development, and the other half in Manufacturing, Tooling, Process Development and staff functions. 
Promolding serves markets for high performance applications such as aerospace, medical and high-tech systems. In these markets there is always a strong demand for new materials and innovative processes. The high-tech products that are developed and produced are of high added value, and often in relatively small series. 
During the last 15 years Promolding has worked together in many national and EU-funded research programmes. 
REMADYL role and main tasks: 
Evaluation of the re-use of recycled soft PVC via injection moulding. Test in WP5 the processing conditions, create test samples, and test the properties of the upcycled soft PVC compounds (WP5). Assist in dissemination and exploitation (WP7). 
REMADYL specific competences and experiences: 
Experience with processing a wide variety of thermoplastics by injection moulding. Experience with testing of mechanical properties of plastics. 
Key staff members undertaking the work: 
Daniel Vlasveld (Male): At Promolding since November 2006, Manager R&D department, project manager and senior researcher in EU projects, experience with nanocomposites,(bio)polymers, and processing. Previous EU projects: Polycond, iPolycond, Esprit, Contact, Nanomaster Bugworkers, Fabimed, Preview 
Chris de Ruijter (Male): At Promolding since November 2012, Senior Researcher and project manager in EU projects, experience with polymers, adhesives, processing. Previous EU projects: Nanomaster, Bugworkers, Fabimed 
REMADYL relevant achievements: 
 Presentation at Euspen’s 16th International Conference & Exhibition - Fabimed workshop 30 May 2016, Nottingham, UK, Title: “Use of injection moulding in medical device microfabrication: challenges and solutions”. http://www.fabimed.eu/160/successful_presence_of_fabimed_in_the_euspen_conference 
 Production of hollow microneedles by single shot injection molding. http://www.promolding.nl/promolding-realizes- single-shot-production-hollow-microneedles-injection-molding/ 
 Presentation at the 3d Printing Materials Conference – 02 February 2017, Geleen, NL, Title: ”PRIM PRinted Injection 
Molding”. https://www.3dprintingmaterialsconference.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/PRIM-presentation-2017.pdf 
REMADYL relevant previous projects or activities: 
 Esprit – “Resource-Efficient Self-Reinforced Plastic Materials and Processing” - FP7-NMP-2007-SME-1 -01/10/2008 - 31/03/2012 
 Bugworkers – “New tailor-made PHB-based nanocomposites for high performance applications produced from environmentally friendly production routes” - FP7-NMP-2009-SME-3 - 01/07/2010 - 30/06/2014 
 FaBiMed – “Fabrication and Functionalization of BioMedical Microdevices” – FP7-2013-NMP-ICT-FOF – 02/09/2013 - 31/08/2016 – http://www.fabimed.eu/ 
 Preview: - “PREdictiVe system to recommend Injection mold sEtup in Wireless sensor networks” – H2020-FoF-2014 – 01/01/2015 – 31/12/2016 – http://www.preview-project.eu/ 
REMADYL relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment: 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 73 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 Injection molding machines: 15+ Injection molding machines (15T-800T), including two 2K machines 
 Moldflow simulation software (Moldex3D) 
 Many moulds for series production and for test purposes (tensile test bars, test plates, etc.). 
 3D printing of injection moulds 
 Tensile test machine, moisture measurement, GOM 3D metrology 
Participant’s dissemination channels: 
Conferences and fairs: 
Kunststoffen fair, Veldhoven Publications: 
NRK magazine (NRK is the NL plastics converters trade association) Networks: 
NRK (The Netherland plastics converters trade association), Holland Hightech 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 74 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
Partner 8 – BULKID - Lybover Recycling BulkID 
 
 
Country BE 
Core Competence: Supplier of machines and custom made turnkey solutions for the recycling industry 
Brief description of legal entity: 
Lybover Recycling promotes profitable, healthy and safe production sites, through the co-creation of innovative and extremely reliable industrial components and installations in cooperation with the clients. 
In the past, the majority of the Lybover Recycling projects were situated in the metal recycling. This sector has long been the spearhead in recycling, and continues to search for solutions to recycle the greatest amount of material. 
Because of the increased use of plastics in cars, increasing volume of electronic waste, etc…, the installed technology has changed from standard magnetics into complex recycling lines. The last years, we see that the same technologies from the metal recycling can also be used in other, upcoming recycling markets like wood, plastics, incinerated ashes, … 
Lybover Recycling is an expert in recycling technologies and is daily in contact with al kind of customers in the recycling. 
REMADYL role and main tasks: 
Lybover recycling will help to design and deliver different detection systems for the end of life identification to ensure that all lead and phthalates containing PVC will be sorted separately (WP1). Further assistance will be given in de development of a pilot extraction line and the definition of the final outline of an industrial recycling line (WP3 and WP5). 
REMADYL specific competences and experiences: 
 Experience where and how different materials can be sorted in a complete process. 
 Global recycling market knowledge 
Key staff members undertaking the work: 
Filip Speleers (Male): Projects sales engineer. Using his experience with concept engineering of recycling lines according to the market trends, Filip advises clients on the optimal recycling technologies. Through his contact with the industry, Filip has built up a large practical experience in the recycling industry in Belgium, the Netherlands and Germany 
Bart Vanpoucke (Male): Business Unit Manager. Bert has a large experience with concept engineering of recycling lines according to the market trends, and has gained much practical experience in the recycling industry in Europe 
REMADYL relevant achievements: 
 Building of state of the art Recycling lines for clients such as Galloo, Suez environment and Indaver. 
REMADYL relevant previous projects or activities: 
 PoCoBUILD – Recycling of post-consumer PVC material for the building industry (National private ICON project, HBV.2017.0680, 2018-2020) 
REMADYL relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment: 
Connections with several German machine builders, which are specialized in separating, grinding and recycling technology. Through these contacts, Bulk ID is capable of testing many different recycling technologies for various waste streams. This allows Bulk ID to accurately advise its clients on the most optimal setup for their new recycling plants. 
Different test facilities on industrial scale to prepare a custom made flake concentration. 
Participant’s dissemination channels: 
Networks: 
 Go4Circle (Be) 
 Federec (Fr) 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 75 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
Partner 9 – AZOR – Azor Ambiental 
 
Country ES 
Core Competence: recycling and reuse of lead from waste streams (e.g. batteries, oil filters). 
Brief description of legal entity: 
Azor Ambiental, S.A, began its activity in 1960 with the manufacturing of lead shot. Subsequently, Azor expanded their activities to include melting and refining of lead, with the purpose of using it in the manufacturing of finished lead products and to manufacture pure lead in the form of ingots. 
In 1995, the company obtained authorization for the handling of lead batteries, plumbiferous waste and oil filters. The lead containing materials are used as raw material in the fusion process, while the iron separated from the oil filters is used as a flux in said process. In 2008 Azor Ambiental, SA, obtained integrated environmental authorization for the manufacturing of pure, alloyed and processed lead (pellets and posts) from the fusion of leaded materials obtained mainly from the recovery of batteries, as well as the recovery of oil filters (authorization No. 296/06 AAI). On the other hand non-plumb products such as sodium sulphate and polypropylene are also obtained, from the battery treatment process,. 
Part of the leaded materials currently used in the merger process come from the affiliate Company “Andalusian Society of Sustainable Productions, S.L.U” (Sanpros), which is owned by AzorAmbiental, S.A. The main activity of SANPROS, SLU is the treatment of lead batteries used to recover the lead and plastic products contained in the batteries. The process is established in several stages, with the main product desulfurized lead paste. This desulphurized leaded material is used by AzorAmbiental, S.A., as a raw material for the production of pure and elaborated leads. 
REMADYLrole and main tasks: - 
The main contribution of AZOR in REMADYL project is included in WP4, where the extracted lead salts from the old PVC will be analysed using standard technologies in pyrometallurgy and/or hydrometallurgy in order to get high purity Pb that can be incorporated in the manufacturing process of lead-based automotive batteries. Additionally Azor will assist in dissemination and exploitation (WP7). 
REMADYLspecific competences and experiences: 
AZOR has an extensive expertise in using different lead compounds to reduce metallic Pb for its use as batteries. Currently the main raw materials to recover lead are Pb(Sb), PbO, PbO2, PbSO4, PbCO3. PbS and PbO are expected to be the main subproducts obtained after Pb precipitation in subtask 4.1.2, so they will be good chemicals candidates to be evaluated under 
the current technologies developed by AZOR. 
Key staff members undertaking the work: 
Antonio Sola Bernabeu (Male): Industrial engineer and currently production manager of the Azor Ambiental group. He has over 11 years of experience in the recycling and metallurgical sector, always linked to part of the production process. From this extensive experience at Azor Ambiental, he has built up great knowledge in metallurgical processes, more specifically in the process of melting and refining lead derivatives. 
Ascensión Marín Moya (Female): Degree in environmental sciences and currently responsible for Quality of the Azor Ambiental group. She has over 11 years of experience as a technician in environmental control and in management of the activities of Azor Ambiental. Furthermore, she is familiar with the administrative procedures at environmental authorities and with the maintenance of management systems. All these facets require a large knowledge of the environmental control in waste management and lead metallurgical process. 
Maite Mira Galvañ (Female): Degree in environmental sciences and is currently responsible for the environmental department, furthermore she is a coordinator of the management systems at Azor Ambiental S.A. She earned her master’s degree in environmental management and polluted soils, and has acquired over 15 years of experience in environmental management of recovery waste facilities. 
REMADYLrelevant achievements: 
AZOR is expert in the management and reuse of lead being the leader of lead recycling and reuse in Spain. 
REMADYLrelevant previous projects or activities: 
Azor has a longstanding reputation in the recycling and reuse of lead out of batteries or other waste streams. 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 76 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
 
REMADYLrelevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment: 
In the melting stage, the plumbiferous materials are subjected to a reductive melting process in rotary furnaces that allow the production of raw lead and slag with a low lead content. The refining section is constituted by melting pots in which the refining operations are carried out, by stirring and adding various reagents, which form oxides of the present impurities that float and are extracted with mechanical means. The gases produced are aspirated by the purification equipment (bag filters) whose fan automatically regulates its operating mode depending on the pre-set depression value that it is desired to maintain in the furnace atmosphere 
   
 Laboratory equipped with equipments and facilities for testing and analysis any kind of material, specifically lead (Optical emission spectrometers, atomic absorption spectroscopy, gases cabinet, etc) 
Participant’s dissemination channels: 
Conferences and fairs: 
Fairs: 
 IWA outdoor classics. 
 ELBC (European lead battery congress) 
 LWC (Lead world congress) 
 LME week Publications: 
AMIQ news (publication of AMIQ association), press releases, news from platforms associated and presence in different blog news from the industry. 
Networks: 
CONFEMETAL (Spanish Confederation of Metal Business Organizations), ILA (International Lead Association), LEAD REACH CONSORTIUM, CTMETAL (Metal Technological Center), CETENMA (Environment Technological Center), AEMA (Association of Environmental Companies), ANGEREA (National Association of Automotive Waste Managers), CROEM (Regional Confederation of Business Organizations of Murcia), FREEM (Regional Federation of Metal Businessmen), AGRESUR (Association of Waste Managers of Andalucia), AMIQ (Association of Chemical Industries of Murcia). 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 77 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
Partner 10 – IRIS Technology Solutions S.L. – IRIS   
 
Country ES 
Core Competence: Advanced Optical engineering 
Brief description of legal entity: 
IRIS Technology Group (http://www.iristechnologygroup.com/) is an advanced engineering Group that was established in Barcelona in 2007. Since 2011, it also operates from Dublin (Ireland) whereas the Barcelona office is referred to as IRIS Technology Solutions S.L. It specialises in the manufacture and integration of Process Analytical Technology (PAT)-based real-time quality monitoring solutions for the process industries and IoT systems for smart manufacturing, predominantly targeted at the food, pharmaceutical and chemical industries. In particular, our product line comprises proprietary state-of- the-art IR analysers for at-line and in-line process monitoring. 
On the one hand, our solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics in the fields of MEMs, Near Infrared Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral Imaging, and Raman. On the other hand, we leverage ICTs, whereby we apply Machine learning, Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining techniques for predictive and active control, as well as for decision support systems. In addition to photonics-based analysers, we also work with IoT sensors for enabling equipment and machinery for smart manufacturing and transitioning industry to the Industry4.0 paradigm. Our solutions are cloud-based for mobility, remote monitoring and multi-site applications. 
Our Innovation Division which is governed by an Innovation Committee comprising Senior Management, and an Innovation Unit for managing and executing the companies innovation roadmap, has 3 core strategic lines, for shaping the Factory of the Future: 
1. New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process optimisation 
2. ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms) 
3. Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorisation 
In addition to running an internal R&D programme, as well as carrying our various joint private projects with industry partners, our Innovation Division is highly experienced in working in collaborative R&D projects in H2020 (both as coordinators and partners), principally in the SPIRE, FoF, and BBI programmes. The company was established in 2007 and currently employs 60+ staff with a turnover of € 5 M. It is equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified and also is certified under UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i. We are also certified by the local (Catalonian) government as a provider of technological R&D services (Tecnio Certification). IRIS is a member of the following sectorial networks: SPIRE, SPIE and SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial collectives such as Smart Space (association of companies and organisations that specialise in the ‘smartification’ of industry). 
REMADYL role and main tasks: 
IRIS will lead WP1 where they will design and deliver different photonic-based systems for the end of life identification to ensure they can appropriately be handled with the new process but also in WP5 for the integration of the monitoring systems prototypes and their validation in industrial case studies. Finally they will contribute to the project dissemination and plan an outmost exploitation of their results (WP7). 
REMADYL specific competences and experiences: 
IRIS has a matrix of multidisciplinary knowledge groups in the company with strong expertise in engineering and science. With its team and resources, including electronics, mechatronics, mechanical, optical, industrial design engineers, as well as specialists in system engineering, application programming and web development etc. the group can carry out full  system design and engineering, including electronic design and assembly, firmware and software development, electrical harnesses and interconnections, mechanical design for enclosure and prototype integration, as well as installation, validation and industrialisation of prototypes and equipment in production plants. As such they have recently delivered advanced plastic sorting devices. In addition to this broad cross-disciplinary engineering team, IRIS’ research team consists of data scientists, chemiometricians, chemists and physicists, among others, who have the expertise to validate the technologies developed. 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 78 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
Key staff members undertaking the work: 
Dr. Ing. ELODIE BUGNICOURT (female) Project manager and Leader of the innovation unit in IRIS since 2009. Masters in Material Science & Engineering (2002), PhD in Polymers and Composite Materials (2005), both from National Institute of Applied Science (INSA), Lyon, France. Coordinated several European projects in the fields of bio-based packaging materials development, process monitoring, surface treatment. Previous industry experience: Arkema; Wacker Chemie, Ashland. 
Dr. IDOIA MARTÍ ALUJA (female) is a Senior Scientist at IRIS specialised in chemometric analysis. She received her PhD in Chemistry at the Universitat Rovira i Virgili (Spain) and then worked in the Spectroscopic and Kinetics Unit (SKU) at the Institut Català d'Investigació en Química (ICIQ, Spain) and at the Institute of Photonic Sciences (ICFO, Spain), and at Zobele Spain. 
Dr. DAVID NETTLETON. (male) Data Mining Analyst. Has a Ph.D in Artificial Intelligence from the Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, M.Sc. In Computer Software and Systems Design from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K., and B.Sc. (Hons) Computer Science from the University of Wolverhampton, U.K. Has over 20 years experience of applying data mining algorithms (including neural networks, rule induction) and statistical techniques (including ANOVA, regression, principal components) in a diversity of data analysis and modeling projects, such as medical diagnosis/prognosis, fraud detection, customer loyalty and segmentation, online user web search behaviour and data privacy. As well as commercial projects, he has conducted research and lectured at two universities. He has published a diversity of articles in specialised data analysis journals/congresses and three books. He has participated in several competitive multi-partner research projects and has a European patent application for a graph matching algorithm. 
JOSE ANTONIO IBARRA FUSTE (male). Scrum Master. PhD. in Signal Theory and Communications, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Spain (2014), Thesis title: “Design Rules and Optimization of Electro-Optics Modulators Based on Coplanar Waveguides”; the project dealt with the development of new models to design high speed electro-optical modulators based in LiNbO3, where a novel software to design and optimize these modulators was created. Master Degree in Telecommunication Systems from Universidad de Oriente, Cuba (2005).Telecommunication Engineer Degree from Universidad de Oriente, Cuba (2003). Author of several papers in journals of high international impact. Experienced in optical communication softwares as Virtual Photonic (VPI), OptSim, and in electromagnetic structures simulators as High Frequency Structural Simulator (HFSS) and ADS. Experience for more than 5 years in many programming languages. 
DR. TIMOTHY KEHOE (Male): VISUMPalm Product Manager, as well as the Technical Lead at Dublin facilities. PhD in Engineering, University College Cork, Ireland- developed an IR photometric measurement system for thermal diffusivity in anisotropic materials. Masters in Optoelectronics, Queens University Belfast. 
REMADYL relevant achievements: 
 Patent Application No. 1716193.6 "AN INTEGRATED OPTICAL SYSTEM FOR THE EXAMINATION OF SAMPLE MATERIALS" 
 Relevant product lines: Monitoring devices for real-time quality control: 
o VisumPALM: NIR technology for incoming material quality control and detection of adulteration. 
o VisumNIR: In-Line NIR monitoring for product standardization and increase of production efficiency. 
o Hypera: Hyperspectral imaging solutions for the industry 
 Related services: Chemiometrics model development and training 
 B2B contracts in the field of multilayer plastic films sorting 
REMADYL relevant previous projects or activities: 
 Cloud-enabled IR spectroscopy platform for the rapid integration and customisation of affordable, real-time chemical monitoring solutions for food and pharmaceutical industries (SMEI-Phase 2-Grant Agreement number: 731043) 
 OptiNanoPro, Processing and control of novel nanomaterials in packaging, automotive and solar panel processing lines, H2020- NMP-PILOTS, 2015-2018 
 OPTIJECT, A novel spectroscopic instrument for in-line monitoring during injection moulding; Grant agreement; FP7 R4SMEs, 2010-2012 
 Hypera, Affordable hyperspectral Imaging System for on-line foreign body detection and chemical composition analysis, H2020- SMEInst, 2016-2017 
 MULTICYCLE (H2020 SPIRE) Advanced & sustainable recycling processes and value chains for plastic-based multi- materials, 2018-2021 
REMADYL relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment (including those of the 3rd party): 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 79 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
 
Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, a FTIR-ATR (Interspectrum), 2 UV-VIS (PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), an Extended-SWIR (StellarNet) and a NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as well as a SWIR Hyperspectral imager (Specim-Xenics). The associated staff are properly trained and skilled in chemometrics modelling by using a commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non-commercial chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes). 
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up-to-date hardware and tools: signal generators, wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for programming microcontrollers, CNC- milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD software [SolidWorks], among others. 
Our optical engineers work with ZEEMAX software for optimally designing of optical systems and to setup the designs by means of advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and related “opticalware”). 
Food and wet chemistry lab equipped with a DSC, a Surface Energy analyser, an HPLC, a Cobb tester, microbiological equipments, microspcope and microtome for structural analysis, migration cells, colourimeter (for colour and opacity measurement), Ford cup viscometers, water vapour permeation cells, turbidimeter, climatic chambers, manual and automatic coaters, electrospray, different drying technologies, plasma surface activation, etc. 
Participant’s dissemination channels: 
Networks: 
ISPE, SPIRE: partnerships related to sustainable production respectively in pharma and other processing industries (chemicals, plastics, etc.). 
IRIS is a member of the following sectorial networks: SPIRE, SPIE and SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial collectives such as Smart Space (association of companies and organisations that specialise in the ‘smartification’ of industry). 
In the frame of the H2020 SPIRE10-2018 project MultiCycle, coordinated by IRIS, a Circular Plastics Helix will be set up and will be proposed as dissemination channel to all projects of related thematics like REMADYL. 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 80 of 100 
 
 
Partner 11 – VERTECH – VERTECH GROUP 
 
Country FR 
Core Competence: Sustainability and circularity assessments. 
Brief description of legal entity:. 
Vertech-Group is a French research-intensive SME that focuses its business on providing advanced environmental and sustainable solutions for different sectors such as new materials, ICT platforms, waste management, industry and biotechnology. Vertech Group is specialized in sustainability assessments of novel technologies and innovative materials considering the three pillars of sustainability (environmental, economic and social aspects). Vertech is also specialized in circularity analysis and risk management. Vertech has vast experience in several sectors such as advanced materials and high-performance, green components, waste management, green manufacturing, secondary raw materials recovery & recycling, energy efficiency at industrial level, etc. 
Vertech Group not only integrates its highly qualified team of professionals, but also scans its own network of contacts, creating business opportunities for third parties at the same time under a win- win scenario. The company is based in Nice-France. Vertech is also present in Spain and has expansion plans to other markets besides Europe (e.g SouthAmerica). 
REMADYL role and main tasks: 
Vertech will be in charge of the following tasks in WP6: Environmental life cycle analysis and ecodesign (LCA), Life cycle costing (LCC) and cost-feasibility analysis, Social LCA assessment and Circularity assessment. 
REMADYL specific competences and experiences: 
Vertech has seven years of experience performing and providing services in the field of sustainability and circularity for public and private institutions, including a wide variety of industries. Vertech has participated in similar FP7 and Horizon 2020 European projects, most of them including recycling and reusing of polymer-based products and plastics. 
Key staff members undertaking the work: 
Dr. Paola Castrillo (Female): Mrs. Castrillo has a BSc. in food engineering, a BSc. in industrial engineering, a MSc in materials engineering and a Science and Materials Engineering PhD from Carlos III University of Madrid. From 2004 to the present she has been active in the preparation, management and coordination of several European R&D projects in the areas of sustainability, circular economy, high-grade materials, energy and resources efficiency. Her research interests include sustainability and circularity assessments of innovative value chains and capacity building on life cycle thinking. She is the Technical Coordinator of the CLOSEWEEE (H2020) and FFW (FP7) projects. Currently Dr. Castrillo is working as R&D Manager for Vertech Group. Furthermore Dr. Castrillo is member of the Forum for Sustainability through Life Cycle Innovation, the Indian LCA Alliance and she contributes with the Iberoamerican Life Cycle Network. She contributes with the UNEP/SETAC LCA initiative. Mrs. Castrillo also participates in ISO International Workshops Agreements in electronics. 
Dr. Erasmo Cadena (Male): Mr. Cadena has a PhD in Environmental Science from Universitat Autónoma de Barcelona (UAB). He holds a Msc in Enviromental Engineering. Postdoctoral Researcher at University of Cambridge-UK and Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC), BarcelonaTech. He has experience in international research initiatives and his research interests include technical, environmental and economic analysis of new processes and high-performance products, life cycle assessment, life cycle costs analysis. 
Dr. Camilla Tomasetta (female): Mrs. Tomasetta obtained a PhD in Economics and Management of Technology (DREAMT) from the University of Pavia. During her PhD project on Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment, she collaborated with the LCA Working Group from the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia and with the CIRAIG research Centre. She also holds a joint master’s degree in environmental sciences with focus on Sustainable Development released by Ca’ Foscari University and Utrecht University. During and after her studies, she worked on the Life Cycle Assessment and waste field with research centres and private companies, such as Deltares and EcoInnovazione. 
REMADYL relevant achievements: 
Vertech has an impressive track record of delivering sustainability assessments (Environmental Impact Assessments, Life Cycle Costing, Social Life Cycle Assessments, Environmental modelling, Risk management, Circular business models) to companies such as Fiat, Shell, Bosch, Whirlpool and Dow.. 
REMADYL relevant previous projects or activities: 
 ECOXY-H2020: Bio-based recyclable, re-processible and repairable (3R) fibre-reinforced EpOXY composites for 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 81 of 100 
 
 
 
automotive and construction sectors. 13 Partners / 8 countries / 5M€ www.ecoxy.eu 
 CLOSEWEEE-H2020: Integrated solutions for pre-processing electronic equipment, closing the loop of post-consumer high-grade plastics, and advanced recovery of critical raw materials including antimony and graphite. 12 Partners / 6 Countries / 6M€ www.closeweee.eu. 
REMADYL relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment: 
Software SimaPro® 8 (PRé Consultants) and Ecoinvent v.3 databases (Swiss Center for Life-Cycle Inventories, 2010). Analytical tools in accordance with ISO 14040 & 14044 standards (ISO 14042, 2000). 
Participant’s dissemination channels: 
Conferences and fairs: 
 Paper & Plastics Recycling Conference Europe 
 Plastics Recycling 2019 
 RECOUP Plastics Recycling Conference 2018 Publications: 
 The international Journal of life cycle assessment. Title of the publication: “Sustainability assessments of used ‘old PVC’ recycling through chemical extraction technologies for removal of legacy additives” 
Networks: 
 SPIRE Network. In the frame of the H2020 SPIRE10-2018 project MultiCycle, coordinated by partner IRIS, a Circular Plastics Helix will be set up and will be proposed as dissemination channel to all projects of related thematics like REMADYL. 
 Forum for Sustainability through life cycle innovation. 
 French LCA Network. 
 UNEP / SETAC Life Cycle Initiative. Wider stakeholder involvement: 
 Workshops and webinar oriented to different audiences: industries, policy makers, researches. 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 82 of 100 
 
 
Partner 12 – ENCO – ENCO Srl 
 
Country IT 
Core Competence: Business planning, communication and dissemination 
Brief description of legal entity: 
ENCO is an innovation and research-consulting firm based in Naples, active since 1987. The company participates in national and international R&D&I projects as a facilitator for business, product, technology and process innovation in different industrial areas, including raw materials, environmental management, the agro-food sector and logistics. The company has a long track record participating in EU-funded projects as WP leader, task leaders and project coordinator. The company is specialized in the development of market analysis, business plan and exploitation plans for innovative products, technical solutions and systems are focused on market trends, market profitability and distribution channels. ENCO conducts market surveys with potential customers, Desk analysis, SWOT analysis, and identification of economic, legislative and behavioural barriers, customer segments analysis and competitor analysis, market feasibility studies and Risk analysis. Moreover, the company has a long track experience in the development of communication and dissemination strategies; identifying target stakeholders; developing tailor made campaign to raise audience’s awareness on the project rationale, activities and results; identifying and selecting events, workshops and meetings; organizing information and dissemination events; producing promotional and marketing materials. 
REMADYL role and main tasks: In line with ENCO’s mission, the firm will take the lead of Business Model and Exploitation (WP7). Specifically, ENCO will be responsible for conducting a market analysis (T7.1), developing an appropriate IP and knowledge management strategy (T7.2) as well as business and exploitation plan (T7.5). ENCO will also guide and perform Dissemination and Communication activities (T7.3 and T7.4). 
REMADYL specific competences and experiences: As an experienced business consulting company with a long involvement in the management of international and national projects, ENCO has joined the consortium to support the full deployment of the project outputs and results. ENCO will provide its extensive experience in: 1) providing business support with a focus on the European market, analysing both Remadyl market potential and defining business model; 2) carrying out developing and implementing dissemination and communication activities; 3) communicating the project to target audiences by selecting the most appropriate method and channel. As an internationally active consulting company, ENCO’s participation in Remadyl consortium allows the company to extend its business network and once more prove its ability to support emerging technologies in the most critical steps of their development (WP7 and WP8). 
Key staff members undertaking the work: 
Dr. Ing. MARCO DE LA FELD (Male): (Main Responsable) Senior Project Manager, since 2008. He graduated in Mechanical Engineering in 2003 and obtained a PhD in “Engineering of Materials and Production” in 2006. Mr. de le Feld is currently working as IP & Exploitation Manager of SaltGae and has successfully managed more than 8 EU R&I projects including FOODIE, ALGATEC II and OPTISOLV (ETB-2012-26). Furthermore, he was the Project Coordinator of SMART GROUND. Very skilled in delivering business scenarios and plans for internationalization and fast replication of innovative products and services; he works as research advisor in numerous EU projects, Mr. de la Feld has several experiences as EU Project trainer, leading several capacity building workshops. He is now working as an EC External Expert. (in-house consultant) 
Ms. ANTONIETTA PIZZA (Female): Senior Project Manager, graduated in International Relations, she specialized in European Funding and Project Design in 2014 and got a 2nd level Master in Open Innovation and IPR in 2017. In her position at ENCO, she is responsible for developing project proposals and carrying out project activities, having experience in EU project management and operational activities of various funding programmes (H2020, CIP Eco-Innovation; FP7, EuroTrans-Bio), in particular she assisted the Project Coordinator in the management of SMART GROUND project (H2020-GA 641988) and in the planning and execution of exploitation activities. In 2016, Ms. Pizza obtained the ISIPM Certificate in Project Management. (employee) 
Mr. Ing. GIAMPIERO DE LA FELD (Male): Managing Director of ENCO since 1986, Mr. de la Feld has been involved in his company’s projects and has managed and coordinated diverse national and international projects with strong focus on their technical and financial aspects. He was President of Confindustria Campania in 2000/2002 - a non-profit organization uniting different business associations from the Italian region of Campania and representing their interests, needs and demands vis-à- vis political and administrative institutions. Moreover, Mr. de la Feld has sound experience in supporting start-ups in developing their business as well as planning all the actions to undertake to facilitate market penetration of innovative systems, developed under EU-funded projects. (SME owner). 
REMADYL relevant achievements: 
 Rossetti, P., Dino, G. A., de la Feld, M., Pizza A., Coulon, F., Wagland, S., Gomes, D., and the SMART GROUND 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 83 of 100 
 
 
Team (2016). SMART GROUND Project: SMART data collection and integration platform to enhance availability and accessibility of data and information in the EU territory on SecoNDary Raw Materials, Geophysical Research Abstracts Vol. 18, EGU2016-5881-1, 2016 EGU General Assembly 2016 
 Rossetti, P., Dino, G. A., Biglia, G., De La Feld, M., Pizza, A. (2017) Characterization of extractive waste facilities for SRM recovery from mining sites: case studies from the SMART GROUND Project, Associazione Mineraria Sarda, IV SIMPOSIO Attività Minerarie nel Bacino del Mediterraneo 2017. 
 Dino, G. A., Rossetti, P., Biglia, G., Sapino, M. L., Di Mauro, F., Heikki, S., Coulon, F., Gomes, D., Parejo Bravo, L., Zapata Aranda, P., Lorenzo Lopez, A., Lopez, J., Garamvölgyi, E., Stojanovic, S., Pizza, A., De La Feld, M., SMART GROUND Project: A new approach to data accessibility and collection for Raw Materials and Secondary Raw Materials in Europe (2017), Environmental Engineering and Management Journal 2017. 
 Charvát, K., Kepka, M., de la Feld, M., Mincione, S., Šplícha,l M., Šrédl M. (2015) POMODORE – Smart Agri Food Project, ISAF 2015, 15 September 2015 
 de la Feld, M., Lorenzo A., Pizza, A., (2014). ALGATEC II: ottimizzazione delle soluzioni di riciclaggio dell’acqua di lavaggio delle olive, Acta Italus Hortus, Bari 2014 
REMADYL relevant previous projects or activities: 
 SCRREEN (H2020-SC5-15-2016 GA no 730227), Solutions for CRitical Raw materials - a European Expert Network. Aims at gathering European initiatives, associations, clusters, and projects working on CRMs into along lasting Expert Network on CRM, including the stakeholders, public authorities and civil society representatives. www.scrreen.eu ENCO leads Dissemination and Communication activities under WP10 as project partner. 
 SMART GROUND (H2020-WASTE-4C2014 GA no 641988), SMART data collection and integration platform to enhance availability and accessibility of data and information in the EU territory on SecoNDary Raw Materials, intends to foster resource recovery in landfills by improving both the availability and the accessibility of data and information on SRM in the EU and creating synergies among the different stakeholders involved in the SRM value chain. www.smart- ground.eu ENCO is the Project Coordinator and leads the Innovation, Exploitation and Dissemination Management under WP5. 
 Water2REturn (H2020-CIRC-02-2016-2017 GA no 730398), REcovery and REcycling of nutrients TURNing wasteWATER into added-value products for a circular economy in agriculture. It proposes a full-scale demonstration process for integrated nutrients recovery from wastewater from the slaughterhouse industry using biochemical and physical technologies and a positive balance in energy footprint, adopting a Circular Economy approach. https://water2return.eu/ 
 WASTE2FUELS (H2020-LCE-11-2015 GA no 654623) aims at producing biobutanol as a sustainable alternative fuel contributing to decentralised energy production towards EU energy security. The project will enlarge the current biomass feedstock basis by the development of next generation biofuel technologies capable of converting unavoidable agrofood waste streams into high quality biobutanol. www.waste2fuels.eu 
 OPTISOLV – (ETB-2012-26 - 2012-2015) Development, optimization and scale-up of biological solvent production. The process developed includes a reactor system based on a biofilm fixed bed and a butanol recovery system based on integrated downstream processing within the fermentation step. ENCO develops the exploitation, value chain analysis and business plan strategies for the project. It acts as project partner. 
REMADYL relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment: 
As a leading business consultant with extensive experience in business planning and development, communication, dissemination and exploitation of the project results, ENCO possesses the suitable human resource and operational capacity for the tasks to be fulfilled within the project. 
Participant’s dissemination channels: 
Conferences and fairs: 
Ecomondo 2019 Ravenna, Italy 
World Resources Forum 2019, Antwerpen, Belgium Publications: 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 84 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
 
Dossier Europa - SRM Italy - Environmental Engineering and Management Journal Networks: Prometia - SPIRE 
 As member of Unione degli Industriali 
 SPIRE: In the frame of the H2020 SPIRE10-2018 project MultiCycle, coordinated by IRIS a Circular Plastics Helix will be set up and will be proposed as dissemination channel to all projects of related thematics like REMADYL. Other partners like ENCO, VERTECH will strengthen the link to SPIRE. 
 PROMETIA, International non-profit association promoting innovation in mineral processing and extractive metallurgy for mining and recycling of raw materials. The Association aims to strengthen European technical skills and industrial know-how in raw materials processing and support industrial and economic development. 
 CEFIC Italian Platform 
 Federchimica, Italian network of chemical industries Wider stakeholder involvement: 
Organization of workshops/events 
Invitation to project meetings 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 85 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
Partner 13 – SIE – Sustainable Innovations Europe 
 
Country ES 
Core Competence: Market Uptake company from the legal and economic point of view for the faster disruptive commercialization of REMADYL technologies. 
Brief description of legal entity: 
SUSTAINABLE INNOVATIONS EUROPE is a Spanish engineering SME. The team is formed by engineers, lawyers, environmentalist and a business experts focused on the market uptake of innovations. The technical team has more than 10 years of experience in European research collaborative projects. The main goal of Sustainable Innovations is to fill the gap between research activities and market implementation through the legal and the economic point of view. Our job consists of bringing forward sustainable ideas into profitable and environmentally friendly business models. We are experts in research to market, business strategies and sustainable communication methods. We help organizations promote their innovations under a sustainable and circular economy thinking method. 
REMADYL role and main tasks: 
SIE and his team have experience leading the replicability and market uptake in research and commercial projects at European and Global level. The team of SIE has more than 10 years of experience in market uptake of new technologies for the industry with the implementation of industrial projects across the world. The knowledge in legal and economic barriers for the market uptake of new technologies at the European and International level will give the project an extra value to ensure the immersion of the developed technologies during the project and to enhance the replicability of the results (WP6 and WP8). SIE will lead the regulatory framework for the health, safety and environmental risks for all proposed activities. The legal department involved in the project will advise the market uptake and contribute to the new standarization framework to facilitate the Circular Economy in Europe (WP7). 
REMADYL specific competences and experiences: 
SIE provides market research in the forms of: ‘construction of business models for new services’, ‘economic and environmental feasibility studies of business models’, ‘intellectual property management and protection’, ‘risk management analysis’, spinoff generation and entrepreneurial coaching’, ‘profitability analysis’ and ‘corporate performance management’. 
Key staff members undertaking the work: 
Mr. Jesús Serrano (Male): Jesús Serrano is the Innovation & Business Manager of the Sustainable Innovations. He has extensive knowledge and expertise in the area of EU funding and project management both at the national and international level, and relevant expertise in the field of results exploitation. From Sustainable Innovations, he leads the R&D department for the market uptake of innovative solutions which could find a fast market niche. His European collaborative expertise makes him a key role in the dissemination of the results and the definition of the best channels to exploit the project results. He holds an MSc in Sustainable Energy Planning and Management by Aalborg University in (Denmark), he holds a Bs in Energy Civil Engineering in Via University College (Denmark) and another Bs specialization in Sustainable Engineering. 
Mrs. Lorena Bodegas (Female): She is the Communications and Marketing Manager of Sustainable Innovations. She has more than 8 years of experience in relevant Communication Strategy projects in global companies, public organizations and Government entities. She also has a professional background focused in Public Relations. In Sustainable Innovations, she is in charge of exploring the best communication ideas, in order to improve the divulgation of our projects and actions. She holds a master’s degree in Economic Analysis of Law and other in Public Administration and Public Policy plus a B.A in International Relations. 
Santiago Torres Torija (Male): Santiago Torres Torija is the Project Manager at Sustainable Innovations. Santiago has extensive international knowledge working in business development and innovation over the past four years. His experience is well diversified in the fields of commodity trading, health/nutrition, solar energy, and startup ecosystems. Santiago holds a Bs in Business Administration, with a double major in Global Business & Entrepreneurship and minor in Education at Suffolk University (Boston, USA). Santiago is currently perusing a Ms in Management, with a specialisation in Sales & Marketing at IE Business School (Madrid, Spain). 
Mrs. Laura Larriviere (Female): She is the Business Development Manager of Sustainable Innovations. Laura and her team are in charge of exploring the market opportunities and defining an effective and sustainable business model. She has a huge international experience as Business Development and Project Manager, where she has been leading the business plan of several international companies. She holds an MBA in Projects and Global Investment by EENI Global Business School and a 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 86 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
Degree in International Business Management in EDHDC Business School 
REMADYL relevant achievements: 
 Circular Economy Club Member; dealing with circularity initiatives at National and European level. 
 Technical, economic and environmental database of competitor solutions to boost the market uptake and easier analysis of the market and the competitors. 
 Sustainable Innovations Europe has their own platform for market researchers that need to run project-based or ongoing online insight community studies. The platform combines qualitative tools (journal, forum, co-creation) with powerful quantitative data collection methods (surveys & polls). 
REMADYL relevant previous projects or activities: 
Sustainable Innovations, as the enhancer of innovations, has project experience in this field from the research point of view, and from the commercialization perspective, by considering the legal and economic parameters. The European research projects carried out by Sustainable Innovations’ team linked to REMADYL are; 
 ICT-BIOCHAIN- ICT Tools in Efficiency Biomass Supply Chains for Sustainable Chemical Production 
 Be-Smart; Multi-functional BIPV elements; Energy Positive Glazing, cost reduction, real case demonstrators, High reliability, architectural integration, colored active glazing, innovative communication 
 PERFORM - PowerPlatform: Establishment of platform infrastructure for highly selective electrochemical conversions 
 GREENER - InteGRated systems for Effective ENvironmEntal Remediation 
REMADYL relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment: 
SIE has knowledge of the current market trends in the building and recycling industry. This allows SIE to adapt new business models to the recent evolutions and improve the viability of new sustainable innovations. 
Participant’s dissemination channels: 
Networks: 
 CIRCULAR ECONOMY CLUB, The international network of over 2,600 circular economy professionals and organizations from over 60 countries 
Wider stakeholder involvement: 
 Regional, National and European workshops to specific stakeholders 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 87 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
Partner 14 - OVAM - Public Waste Agency of Flanders 
 
 
 
Country BE 
Core Competence: 
Developing a waste and material management for the Flemish region in Belgium. 
Brief description of legal entity: 
The Public Waste Agency of Flanders, better known as OVAM, is a Flemish Government institution that was established in 1981 (Waste decree 1981). 
Over the past 30 years, the way in which Flanders handles waste has fundamentally changed. The policies advocated by OVAM are continuously evolving. Initially the focus was on cleaning up waste and setting up an efficient waste management infrastructure. Today, the focus has shifted to waste prevention and sustainable material use. 
Since 2012, the new Materials Decree (replacing the Waste decree 1981) stands for a new policy direction. Actively, the goal is a transition towards a true green sustainable circular economy in which today’s waste products become tomorrow’s resources. One of the main tasks of OVAM is to develop a policy to reduce and limit the disposal of (waste) materials and to encourage the reuse/recycling of secondary raw materials in a closed loop in a safe way. 
REMADYL role and main tasks: 
Ovam will execute a supporting role in the form of: Waste stream mapping (WP1), assessment of existing legislation and regulations, developing policy recommendations. 
REMADYL specific competences and experiences: 
For the past eight years, our team has been working on developing a policy for plastic waste streams. We made legal frameworks to keep rigid plastics out of bulky waste streams so that they have to be collected separately for recycling purposes, and to encourage/enforce companies to keep their packaging films, rigid plastics and packaging EPS separately for recycling. We are currently working on measures to help raise the use of recycled content in new plastic products. 
Key staff members undertaking the work 
Liesbeth Sneyers (Female): plastics’ policy unit. As our expert on plastics with legacy additives, she will map all the legal issues (Reach, POP, CLP, import/export, ...) which will have to be tackled and will also check the project results against these legal frameworks. She will also assist with the developing of a legal framework to optimise the collection and recycling of these plastics. 
Gwen Dons (female): plastics’ policy unit. Gwen is occupied with developing a legal framework to optimise the collection and recycling of PVC with legacy additives. 
Kris Van Looy (male): international policy unit. Kris has a broad network of contacts in other regions and/or EU member states and has experience with international cooperation. He will deal with general issues concerning the project and will also be the 
back-up to attend project meetings. 
REMADYL relevant achievements: 
 Material scan: results in tailor-made advice for companies on resource efficiency, waste stream optimisation (internal re-use, secondary resources for other companies, …) 
 Ecolizer: design tool to compare the impact of different material options, also offers data for recycled materials 
 Mandatory separate collection of rigid plastics at community recycling centres 
REMADYL relevant previous projects or activities: 
 Urbanrec: New approaches for the valorisation of URBAN bulky waste into high added value RECycled products (H2020, Nr.690103) 
 Fissac: Fostering Industrial Symbiosis for a Sustainable Resource Intensive Industry across the extended Construction Value Chain (H2020, Nr.642154) 
REMADYL relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment: 
Ovam forms the bridge between the government and industry in all waste related matters. In this role OVAM has built up an extensive knowledge of the legislative procedures concerning waste handling. Furthermore, OVAM is constantly in deliberation with the Flemish legislative framework in order to come to a consensus, to allow for the most optimal handling of waste. 

[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 88 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
 
Participant’s dissemination channels: 
Publications: 
OVAM news letter Networks: 
 ACR+, International network of cities and regions sharing the aim of promoting a sustainable resource management and accelerating the transition towards a circular economy on their territories and beyond. 
 OVAM exchanges knowledge and experiences through its platform on CE (FMP) having 1000 representatives from SME’s and the largest companies, knowledge institutes and all Flemish universities. With the engagement in the network of eco-design centers ENEC and our expertise in adapting law to CE, OVAM can guarantee a long-term impact 
and assure a broad dissemination. 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 89 of 100 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
 
 
 
 
 
Partner 15 – VinylPlus - VinylPlus 
 
 
Country BE 
Core Competence: Sustainability of the PVC value chain 
Brief description of legal entity: 
VinylPlus® is the Voluntary Commitment of the European PVC industry. The program establishes a long-term framework for the sustainable development of the PVC industry by tackling a number of critical challenges in the EU-28, Norway and Switzerland. One of the key commitments of VinylPlus is to develop the recycling of PVC. 
REMADYL role and main tasks: 
Providing expert knowledge of PVC market and industry, coordinating with similar ‘legacy additives removal’ initiatives, supporting dissemination towards (European) PVC sector and policy makers (WP7). 
REMADYL specific competences and experiences: 
Technologies and practical organization of PVC recycling in Europe, PVC additives used over the years, PVC markets and industry organization, relevant EU regulations 
Key staff members undertaking the work: 
Dr. Arjen Sevenster (male): graduated in 1971 as chemical engineer and completed a PhD in physical chemistry in 1974. During his 25 years working for Shell, he held various managerial positions dealing with chemical technology and production of various petrochemical products, including PVC. In 2001 he joined the European Council of Vinyl Manufacturers (ECVM). As Technical and Environmental Affairs Senior Manager, he is in charge of issues related to health, safety and environment. This includes active involvement in VinylPlus®, the association managing the sustainability Voluntary Commitment of the PVC Industry. He is also managing the Building and Construction activities of PlasticsEurope, the association of plastic raw materials manufacturers. 
Stefan Eingärtner (male): started his career in the chemical and plastic business of Hoechst AG Frankfurt. After assignments in Japan, France and the US he joined a producer of rigid films for packaging and technical applications as sales director, later Managing Director of the technical films division of Klöckner Pentaplast, a leading global rigid film business. In 2007 he decided to set up his own consultancy business and works for VinylPlus as technical director. 
REMADYL relevant achievements: 
 Increasing PVC recycling from almost nothing in 2001 to 640,000 tons in 2017. 
 Being instrumental in the substitution of cadmium and lead based PVC stabilizers. 
 Developing knowledge on the sustainable use of PVC additives 
REMADYL relevant previous projects or activities: 
 The Vinyl2010 program, which achieved its goal to recycle 200,000 tons of PVC by 2010, replacing Pb stabilizers by 2015 and stimulated the research into new recycling and recovery technologies. 
REMADYL relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment: 
VinylPlus has a large Network of raw material producers, converters and recyclers, which contribute to the predetermined goal of recycling 800,000 ton of PVC by 2020. To see the entire list of companies in our Network, which is still growing, we refer to our website: www.vinylplus.eu 
Participant’s dissemination channels: 
Conferences and fairs: 
Annual Vinyl Sustainability Forum, plastic industry conferences e.g. on plastic pipes, cables. Publications: 
Annual Vinyl Plus Progress Report Networks: 
European PVC industry and more generally plastic industry 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 90 of 100 
 
 
 
 
 
Wider stakeholder involvement: 
VinylPlus commitment to raising awareness of PVC sustainability topics world-wide. Partnership with the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation UNIDO 
Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 91 of 100 
 
 
 
 
 
  
EUPC 
EuPC is the professional representative body of plastics converters in Europe, whose activity embraces all sectors of the plastics converting industry, including recycling. EuPC supports initiatives for the transformation to a more circular economy. 
 
REMADYL ADVISORY and SUPPORT GROUP 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 92 of 100 
 
 
 
 
GKV/TECPART 
GKV/TecPart is the association representative of manufacterers of technical plastic products in Germany. Since recycling is a central theme for the plastic processing industry in Germany, GKV/TecPart has great interest in projects concerning this topic. 
 
 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 93 of 100 
 
 
 
 
GO4CIRCLE 
Go4Circle is the umbrella association for private companies who put the circular economy at the heart of their operations. It represents 220 companies who are helping enterprises across all sectors to fundamentally change their production processes, making the transition towards the circular economy, and also including manufacturing companies who use circular economy principles. 
 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 94 of 100 
 
 
 
 
MATCOPLASTICS 
Matcoplastics has recycling at its core. Since 1993, Matcoplastics has been a reference in the Plastic Recylcing world. Matco is a Belgian based company, setting high standards in the trade and manufacturing of raw plastic materials. 
 
 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 95 of 100 
 
 
 
 
CASIER RECYCLING 
Casier Recycling is Belgian recycling company, which brings together the know-how and the material means to collect and recycle discarded materials in an economic and ecological fashion, thereby inducing the optimal revalorisation of these materials. 
 

Methods to remove hazardous substances and contaminants from secondary raw materials Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)2153268 - 27/03/2019 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-01-2018 
[821136 – REMADYL – Part B] Page 96 of 100 
 
 
 
 
VANHEEDE ENVIRONMENT GROUP 
VANHEEDE ENVIRONMENT GROUP is a Belgain company which offers a sustanaible, efficient and economical solution for waste management. The VANHEEDE ENVIRONMENT GROUP fulfills a central role in the realisation of the circular economy, by transforming each waste stream to a new raw material or through energy valorisation. 

 
 
 
 
5 Ethics and Security
5.1 Ethics 
 
 Protection of personal data. 
REMADYL beneficiaries confirm that they will ensure GDPR compliance for the data they handle in the frame of the REMADYL project. This includes the data storage systems and privacy practices for the internal and public data communication. Where applicable, data agreements with third party data processors for any dissemination action will be kept on file. 
 
Environmental protection and safety. 
The REMADYL beneficiaries confirm that for carrying out REMADYL activities, including the handling with the hazardous substances, their transport and disposal, they will follow the necessary safety procedures according to local and national legislation. Where needed, copies of relevant authorisations will be kept on file.
5.2 Security 
The REMADYL project does not involve any activities or results raising security issues. 
The REMADYL project does not involve “EU-classified information” as background or results.Grant 
Agreement number: 821136 — REMADYL — H2020-SC5-2018-2019-2020/H2020-SC5-2018-2