1.1 AE UNIPD UNIVERSITA DEGLI STUDI DI PADOVA IT 999995602 
2 BEN INESC TEC INESC TEC - INSTITUTO DE ENGENHARIADE 
SISTEMAS E COMPUTADORES, TECNOLOGIA 
E CIENCIA 
PT 999513706 
3 BEN Fraunhofer FRAUNHOFER GESELLSCHAFT ZUR 
FORDERUNG DER ANGEWANDTEN 
FORSCHUNG EV 
DE 999984059 
4 BEN ZLC FUNDACION ZARAGOZA LOGISTICS CENTER ES 999608960 
5 BEN RWI RWI - LEIBNIZ-INSTITUT FUR 
WIRTSCHAFTSFORSCHUNG e.V. 
DE 972715807 
6 BEN UDEUSTO UNIVERSIDAD DE LA IGLESIA DE DEUSTO 
ENTIDAD RELIGIOSA 
ES 999876971 
7 BEN TU/e TECHNISCHE UNIVERSITEIT EINDHOVEN NL 999977269 
3 
 
PARTICIPANTS 
Grant Preparation (Beneficiaries screen) — Enter the info. 
  
Number Role Short name Legal name Country PIC 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
4 
8 BEN IRIS IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD 
LIMITADA 
ES 998993786 
9 AP ASTON U ASTON UNIVERSITY UK 999896953 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
LIST OF WORK PACKAGES 
Work packages 
Grant Preparation (Work Packages screen) — Enter the info. 
    
Work 
Package No 
Work Package name Lead Beneficiary Effort 
(PersonMonths) 
Start 
Month 
 End 
Month 
 Deliverable No(s) 
WP1 Project Coordination 1 - CNR   1  36 D1.3, D1.2, D1.1 
WP2 Global trends and Innovative supply chain 
models 
1 - CNR   1  18 D2.1, D2.2, D2.3, D2.4 
WP3 Impact of new SC models on social indicators 9 - ASTON U   10  33 D3.6, D3.1, D3.5, D3.3, D3.4, 
D3.2 
WP4 Development of policy scenarios 2 - INESC TEC   18  36 D4.2, D4.1, D4.3 
WP5 Dissemination and Communication 4 - ZLC   1  36 D5.1, D5.3, D5.2 
5 

Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
6 
Work package WP1 – Project Coordination 
Work Package Number WP1  Lead Beneficiary 1. CNR 
Work Package Name Project Coordination    
Start Month  1 End Month 36 
Objectives 
Objectives 
To efficiently manage and administrate all project internal and external activities. Therefore, an adequate management 
structure is necessary to handle coordination of work carried out in project, quality control, financial and thematic 
reporting and any communication among the project partners, the associated members and the stakeholders in general.  
Specific objectives are: 
● Manage the communication in the Project Consortium and Decision Board  
● Give overall project management and provide for quality management ensuring the timely achievement of the 
projectgoals as outlined in the work plan. 
● To interface with the European Commission and other partners. 
● Ensure coherence with all legal and EC requirements, rules and regulations and supervise fulfilment of 
ConsortiumAgreement, including financial and legal management. 
● Manage the “Expert Group” and generally the stakeholders to be involved. 
Description 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
7 
T1.1 Consortium and project management (Task leader: CNR; Participants: All) (M01 -M36) 
● Ensure that received funds are correctly distributed and accounted for. 
● Establish a functional management structure for fruitful interaction among the partners, effici ent 
communication andsmooth reporting to the EC, e.g. by implementing project management, work plan, financial and 
activity reporting tools. 
● Provide assistance and advice to the project partners regarding administration and reporting.  
● Monitor budget and expenditure as well as effective and efficient execution of contract and work plan.● 
Represent the consortium towards the European Commission and other institutions, ● Organise regular meetings in the 
Project Consortium and Decision Board. 
● Elaborate periodic management and progress reports to regularly inform the European Commission on the 
activitiesof the project (work progress, financial statements). 
● Moreover, the project coordinator will manage the technical and scientific coordination of the project. In 
particular,it will manage the interrelation between the WPs of the project: 
● Monitor the technical advances of the project in each work packages through a close interaction with all work 
packageleaders. 
● Ensure that the project advances as according to the work plan of the project.  
● Observe external developments and take action for strategic adaptation of the project.  
T1.2-Quality management (Task leader: CNR; Participants: All) (M01-M36) 
The quality management of the project consists in continuously checking that results and achievements are in line with 
the objectives fixed and to ensure that the project orientations, activities and outcomes are efficiently answering the needs 
of the European manufacturing community in the process industry. Also, the objective is to ensure a timely completion 
of all deliverables as according to the work plan and provide quality information. The task leader will be responsible for 
observing the review processes and to propose actions to counter undesirable developments. These will be discussed 
within the consortium and the follow -up will be ensured by the task leader and the coordinator. All partners will be 
incorporated into the reviewing and monitoring work flow within the respective work packages. The work package 
leaders will have a more pronounced role. 
T1.3-Data Management Plan (Task leader: ZLC; Participants: CNR) (M01-M36) 
DMPs will include information about d ata handle, managed, and retrieved by methods, tools, techniques used in the 
project. It will also include a guideline for ethics compliance (for personal data gathering). The DMPs will establish the 
policy regulating collection, management, sharing, archiving, and preservation of outcome data in the ReSChape project 
providing the identification elements and the descriptions of the data sets. As part of making data and metadata FAIR, 
information will include: (a) how data will be handled, curated and preser ved (during and after the end of the project); 
(b) what data will be collected, processed and/or generated; (c) which methodology & standards will be applied; (d) data 
open access procedure; (e) recommendations on fulfilment of FAIR requirements for metada ta flows. 
T1.4. Ethics compliance (Task leader: CNR; Participants: All) (M01-M36) In this task, the consortium will take care of 
possible issues related to ethics compliance which could be mainly related to the involvement of experts from different 
sectors, their participation to workshops, focus groups, and other interactive activities. It is clear that ReSChape project 
activities are mainly related to analyse aggregate data and no personal data are necessary or of interest for the aim of 
our studies. 
Work package WP2 – Global trends and Innovative supply chain models 
Work Package Number WP2 Lead Beneficiary 1. CNR 
Work Package Name Global trends and Innovative supply chain models  
Start Month 1 End Month 18 
Objectives 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
8 
Objectives 
The goal of this WP is to propose innovative models for SCs shaped by various socio -economic, political and 
technological trends and changes. In doing so, challenges and opportunities will be outlined, which will help to define 
how SCs strategies and processes can be improved to make them more social oriented. 
Taking into consideration priorities of social resilience and sustainability, special insight will be given to analyse how 
digital technologies can support this process. The approach applied will be b ased both on the analysis of market needs 
and on the technologies available and to be developed to define paths of innovation.  
Description 
Description of work 
T2.1-Identification of trends, changes and disruptions (Task leader: IML; Participants: CNR , INESC TEC, ZLC, 
RWI, TUE) (M01-M06) 
● Performing a PESTLE analysis to investigate trends, changes, and disruptions with economical, ecological, 
and/orsocial impacts on European SCs 
● Examining NEXT-NET findings with regard to their influence on resilience and sustainability 
● Conducting a structured literature analysis to ensure the inclusion of newest insights into the state of affairs  
● Supplementation and validation of the results together with various stakeholders● Written report on the 
results 
T2.2- Social and sustainability challenges for SC of the future (Task leader: CNR; Participants: INESC TEC, ZLC)  
(M04-M08) 
This task requires input from T2.1, as trends and chang es affecting the design and operations of global SCs will reveal 
what challenges will arise. Challenges will be classified according to dimensions like behavioural, operational, 
economic and technological. Different trends may cause similar challenges and opportunities. In addition, the 
relationships among different challenges further complicate the analysis. In doing so, we will take the complex 
interactions and dependencies amongst several trends and challenges/opportunities into account. This will be bas ed on 
a preliminary analysis made by the partners to transform trends and changes in challenges and will be validated with 
focus groups involving experts from different industrial sectors. Moreover, challenges and opportunities will be 
categorised based on social and sustainability dimensions. 
T2.3-Definition of SC strategies for resilience and sustainability (Task leader: INESC TEC; Participants: CNR, ASTON, 
IML, ZLC, RWI, DEUSTO) (M06-M12) 
Considering the social and sustainability challenges for SCs of th e future resulting from T2.2, in combination with the 
trends, changes and disruptions regarding sustainability aspects and resilience requirements from T2.1, this task has the 
goal to define the SC strategies needed for achieving resilient and sustainable SCs. To achieve this, the methodological 
approach consists of a thorough review of the state of the art regarding SC resilience and sustainability, which 
compromise, amidst others, strategies related to resource efficiency and humanitarian aspects. Afterwa rds, the SC 
strategies are defined according to the scenario transfer phase of the scenario building approach (Gausemeier et al., 
1998), where effects of the identified challenges, trends and disruptions within the SCs concerning sustainability and 
resilience are analyzed. To this end, we apply the Consequence Matrix (Barros et al. 2021) where these characteristics 
and aspects are valued according to their importance and plausibility. Through content analysis and comparison with 
the literature, it is possib le to arrive on a set of SC strategies of the future for resilient and sustainable SCs, such as: 
green 
SCs, closed-loop SCs, resource -efficient SCs, social -responsible SCs and humanitarian SCs, amidst others. Particular 
attention will be given to possible strategies for EU self -reliance and how problems of energy provision can have a 
direct or indirect impa ct on SC strategies also in terms of social impact. The validation of the identified set of SC 
strategies will be done through expert elicitation within workshops, where participants will range from academic 
researchers, industrial practitioners to policy makers. 
T2.4-Innovative ways to organise SCs (Task leader: CNR; Participants: INESC TEC, ASTON, IML, ZLC, RWI, TUE) 
(M08-M16) 
Once the SC strategies are identified it is necessary to understand how they should be developed in terms of processes 
and relationship with actors. It will be necessary to devise the characteristics and requirements for each SC strategies 
based on decision fields. The decision fields can be derived from expert elicitation and literature review, along categories 
like Supplying, Production and distribution. Based on workshops with experts and focus groups, it will be possible to 
identify how companies plan to change these processes to make them more social resilient and sustainable. The role of 
the digital technologies will be studied as a enabler of a new social inclusion (i.e. supporting safety, security, monitoring 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
9 
working conditions). An insight on the threads of digital technologies will allow to consider also their potential risks 
and new ways to solve them to avoid violation of w orkers privacy. The output will represent a list of social indicators 
that will be measured for each model in the WP4. 
Objectives 
The main element of this WP is to assess the effects of the trends identified in the previous WPs and the resulting 
changes in global SCs and trade patterns on socio -economic outcomes, such as GDP, employment, job quality, wages, 
and income inequality. For this purpose, different types of modelling are applied to assess different types of impact both 
at macro and micro level. Most specifically, two models will explore the social impacts of specific strategies in SCs i.e., 
SC risk management strategies and o utsourcing, whereas the other two will take a more holistic view by focusing on 
overall changes in trade and SCs to determine socio-economic impacts. The proposed holistic and granular models that 
will be developed in this WP will increase transparency lea ding to more actionable insights and a better understanding 
of the social impacts, thus helping identify root cause drivers. 
Description 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
10 
T2.5-Skill and employment in logistics and supply chain (Task leader: ASTON; Participants: CNR) (M12 -M18) 
Based on the T2.2 a great challenge recognised in SCs is the skills shortage. The aim of this task is to understand which 
are the most relevant skills  to be developed for the future SCs to assure a positive impact on employment in terms of 
e.g. minimising poverty and income inequality. In order to recognise the future skills needed the output of the T2.4 will 
support this task. In particular, this task will perform a skills gap analysis to identify the gaps between the current skills 
in the logistics/SC sector and the future required skills for supporting 21st century SCs. The first phase of this task will 
involve a comprehensive knowledge review and identification of existing/current (AS IS) SC management and logistics 
skills. Then the next step would be to understand the desired state (TO BE) of the skills which will be informed by the 
different scenarios and megatrends and also by conducting a content analysis of job advertisements. Based on the most 
critical skills that would be identified in the previous stage, a questionnaire will be created and distributed to respective 
employers. This will help to collect the perspectives of business employers on t he importance of specific skills 
competencies so as to provide a holistic understanding of the level and nature of employer demand for specific skills 
and determine the ability of the labour market to meet this demand, particularly in relation to applicants having the skills 
and qualifications employers require. Then gaps will be identified, and certain challenges and implications will be 
discussed with regards to social aspects. The task will conclude with a set of recommendations regarding the most 
important employable soft and hard skills to reduce unemployment rates with equitable opportunities for all.  
Work package WP3 – Impact of new SC models on social indicators 
 
Description of work 
T3.1-Assess impact of covid on supply chain and social indicators (Task leader: ASTON; Participants: CNR, INESC 
TEC, TUE, IRIS) (M10-M16) 
Work Package Number WP3 Lead Beneficiary 9. ASTON U 
Work Package Name Impact of new SC models on social indicators  
Start Month 10 End Month 33 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
11 
The aim of this task is to investigate the effects of COVID -19 on SCs and social performance. More specifically a 
literature review will be conducted to understand the challenges faced by SCs and logistics during pandemic as well as 
the mitigation strategies put in place to overcome these issues. Data will be collected from a variety of relevant sources 
such (e.g. journal articles, expert reports, government and relevant stakeholders’ policy documents, published expert 
interviews and policy feedback literature. Based on the initial phase a framework will be developed which will draw on 
SC risk management strategies and performance. Performance outcomes in this study mainly refer to the social outcomes 
(environmental and economic impacts will also be assessed ) when implementing different SC actions. Social 
performance entails indicators such as diversity, excessive working time, child/forced labour. The next step will be to 
develop a structural equation model to analyse the impact of these SC risk management s trategies on the social 
performance of manufacturing companies. A questionnaire will be developed that will entail the metrics of each 
construct in the model. The survey method will be adopted to collect the data and then test the hypotheses proposed in 
this study. The specific steps to apply the PLS -SEM technique are: (1) the specification of the conceptual structural 
model and hypotheses to be tested, (2) data collection, (3) model validation and (4) estimation and evaluation of the 
results. 
T3.2-Model for evaluating impact of new SCs on social indicators (Task leader: RWI; Participants: CNR, INESC 
TEC, IML, DEUSTO, TUE, IRIS) (M12-M30) 
The aim of this part of the project is to assess and quantify the socio -economic impact of the previously identified 
scenarios of current and future trends and changes in international trade and SCs. To this end, in a first step, data on 
global trade patte rns, such as Global Value Chain data, trade flows and the RWI’s Container Throughput Index, are 
analyzed to provide a quantitative overview of recent developments and the current state of global trade patterns. To 
account for global value chains we have to  disaggregate international trade flows. In addition, to get the appropriate 
level of disaggregation at the sectoral level we have to adjust the supply side of the country models. Moreover, it is 
necessary to modify the labor market module of the model to take into account the different productivities of households 
(taking inspiration from a recent work on minimum wage in Germany). With the help of this model, the effects of the 
changes in global SCs on sectoral value added in the EU countries and important trading partners can be analyzed. From 
this, effects on labor demand by skill level and the income distribution can also be derived. This will provide additional 
insights on the challenges that might result from changing global SCs for different regions a nd parts of the labor force. 
In particular the following steps will be done: 
● Based on WP3 results, develop scenarios to quantify the impact of SC changes on socio -economic variables 
● Collect data for international value chains and country level economic dat a to present descriptive statistics on 
therecent changes in SCs. 
● Use the data about global value chains, sectoral economic variables and labor markets to calibrate our 
models. Wecollect data for EU countries and the important trading partners and competito rs. The data is crucial for the 
choice of the level of aggregation of the model. 
● Quantify the impact of SC changes on socio-economic variables of EU countries we construct a multi-
country modelmulti-sector network model that include EU countries, trading partners and competitors. 
● Implement different scenarios in the model and quantify the impact of SC changes on socio -economic 
variables.● Prepare and interpret the results to draw policy implications. 
T3.3-Social accounting for sustainability (Task leader: DEUSTO; Participants: CNR, ZLC, IRIS) (M14-M30) 
The main objectives of this task are the following: (1) to develop a model that calculate the value generated and 
distributed by a value chain in relation to the different stakeholders; (2) to develop a “self -assessment” tool that allows 
the companies of t he value chain to identify its position regarding the social impact generated. This tool can also be 
used for carrying out prospective analyses about the effects of changes in the value chain; (3) to generate 
recommendations to public administrations regar ding the actions that could be carried out to stimulate the value chain 
promoting a competitive sustainability. 
To this end the research is focused in measuring the aggregated, traction and induced value of the value chain and how 
it impacts into the stakeholders, making possible to identify specifically the impact in areas such as gender, employment 
and well-being. The model and the self -assessment tool will be tested in four different value chains: The commercial 
Port of Algeciras, a Food value chain, a manufacturing value chain and a Public administration. 
T3.4-The role of logistics outsourcing and impact on employment (Task leader: ZLC; Participants: CNR, IRIS) (M20 - 
M30) 
Environmental and social impact are now an important asset in business performance. This is especially true for logistics 
activities, where outsourcing is in place. Indeed, this task will tackle how logistics outsourcing has an impact on 
Corporate Social Responsibility, specifically in terms of employment conditions.  
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
12 
As an example, while  the application of IT services in warehousing increases productivity, it highly depends on the 
degree of flexibility of the workforce. Task 3.4 will thus analyse the trade -off between productivity and flexibility and 
its impact on employment. 
In order to do so, data will be collected from primary and secondary sources (i.e. interviews with trade unions and  
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
13 
managers of companies outsourcing logistics services; newspaper information and reports on the working conditions, 
etc.). A set of KPIs will be defined to measure impact on employment conditions, and recommendations will be derived. 
T3.5- Digital Tool for social indicators visualisation (Task leader: IRIS; Participants: CNR, INESC TEC, ASTON, RWI, 
DEUSTO) (M18-M33) 
The aim of this task is to offer a platform for information sharing and to improve the transparency of SCs with focus on 
the social dimension. I t will serve as a “front end” and to integrate the analytical tools developed in previous tasks in 
WP3. In particular, a framework is designed and implemented to integrate and make available the most important results 
of the analytical tools developed and a web module will give access to selected results for different types of stakeholders. 
Specific profiles of access are created taking into consideration the information needs of different users, such as 
industrial companies, trade and social unions and policy makers. Information will also be made accessible to citizens to 
improve public awareness of how companies and countries are affected by the social impact of trade and for 
disseminating project results. The web module can be considered a prototype with a subset of the indicators to investigate 
the feasibility and usability of this kind of module. It is developed with an appropriate user friendly interface to help the 
user to navigate in an interactive and dynamic way through the selected results.  
Work package WP4 – Development of policy scenarios 
Work Package Number WP4 Lead Beneficiary 2. INESC TEC 
Work Package Name Development of policy scenarios  
Start Month 18 End Month 36 
Objectives 
WP 4 aims at proposing policy recommendations that can support public as well as private organisations not only in 
overcoming the economical, ecological, and social impacts from changes in European value chains, for instance because 
of the European Green Deal delivery, but also in realising the European Pillar of Social Rights Action Plan.  
Description 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
14 
Description of work 
T4.1 Identification of key horizontal issues (Task leader: IML; Participants: Aston, INESC, TUE) (M18 -M24) 
● Transfer of the findings from WP 2 and WP 3 into a preliminary list of key horizontal issues  
● Extension of the preliminary list through consultation with major stakeholders involved in the horizontal 
issues fromindustry, research institutions, associations, and government agencies.  
● Extension of the preliminary list through review of roadmaps, research plans, research agendas, and reports 
fromfederations, national platforms, clusters, etc. referring to economical, ecological, and social impacts of SC 
changes ● Validation and clustering of the results together with various stakeholders  
T4.2 Cross-country policy analysis (Task leader: INESC TEC; Participants: CNR, ASTON, IML, RWI, DEUSTO, TUE, 
IRIS) (M18-M26) 
The identified KHIs from T4.1 are examined within EU and cross-country national policies, such as the European Green 
Deal and the European Pillar of Social Rights Action Plan. The goal of this task is to carry out a pan -European cross 
country analysis of the existing policies concerning SC, logistics policies, standards (e.g. Modern Slavery Act) in order 
to assess the regulatory readiness and the limitations of existing legislation. This is important because we need to explore 
the challenges and opportunities associated with existing legislation and policies. To perform this examination, the KHIs 
will be differentiated through the use of a weighted, static design structure matrix with the categorization of KHIs 
between clusters. In particular, the mapping will focus on aspects that can lead to a level playing field concerning 
European SCs and their synergies with industries, regarding economic, social and environmental concerns, requirements 
and standard practices. 
An additional objective of this task is to design an analytics tool for assessing and monitoring the level playing field 
developments in key policy areas. This will be done by building a dat a driven model/simulation whose inputs will be 
macro-economic indicators (EU wide and country by country) for indicators linked for example to workers' rights (e.g. 
minimum wage, unemployment benefit, ..), competition and state aid (or subsidies for busine ss), taxation, social, 
environmental protection. It will aggregate data from different sources (e.g. publicly available databases/information, 
as well as paywall/registration-wall information and EC online databases). The system can be developed using statistical 
and machine learning (AI) techniques in c++ and in Python notebooks (using libraries such as numpy, scikit, etc.). The  
combined approach will result in the identification of key factors, which, alongside the pairwise relationship between 
KHIs and policies, will serve as the foundation for the Policy scenarios building (T4.3) and the Policy design (T4.4).  
T4.3 Policy scenarios building (Task leader: ASTON; Participants: CNR, INESC TEC) (M24-M30) 
T4.3 uses the results from T4.2 to identify the areas where future policies will need to be developed in order to support 
the resiliency and effectiveness of post Covid 21st century SCs. Scenario development will be utilised to identify how 
policy will be shaped in the next years. Delphi method will be applied that delivers valid valuable, and reliable data for 
scenario building (e.g., Kameokaa et al., 2004, Rikkonen, 2005). Delphi method is multi -stage survey process 
(anonymous, written), where feedback of  group opinion will be provided after each round to help us develop relevant 
policy scenarios. The outcome of this is going to be projections about how future policies can enable and secure 
Objectives 
Dissemination, Communication (D&C) and exploitation aims to implement a multitude of measures to communicate 
the findings of the project for an integrated approach of SC at European level as well as to exploit the ReSChaPe results. 
A sustainable dissemination and exploitation platform based on cluster involvement at a regional, national and European 
level aims to maximize the awareness of the project results and in consequence to facilitate the engagement of 
stakeholders in implementing them. 
More specific objectives are: 
● Create the platform that will enable to share knowledge and expertise gained in this project on how to generate 
andexploit synergy with industries, policy makers and social actors. 
● Raise awareness and inform stakeholders about the project, the objectives, the results, and the relevance of the 
findings.The main effort will be devoted to disseminate the project results and communicate information about its 
objectives and scope across the European process industry community and EC stakeholders.  
● Exploit project results implementing specific actions like dedicated training, consulting, joining other 
initiatives likeobservatories of SCs. 
The dissemination and communication will be jointly developed and implemented with the results of the collaborat ion 
mechanisms with stakeholders and will support the collaboration mechanisms established there. The integration of the 
strategic seminar, the thematic workshop for each of future scenario at European level and the outreach actions on 
national and regional scale guarantee a maximum benefit for the project. 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
15 
companies and its SCs with respect to critical social issues (e.g.  the rights of workers and that supplier wages, benefits 
and working hours are fair and reasonable). More specifically we will develop some probable, extreme and unforeseen 
scenarios. One of the possible scenarios to be studied is related to EU self-reliance when there is a problem of resource 
provision (like energy crisis in Ukraine). For example, the energetic problem could be studied linking it to environmental 
sustainability, recourceefficiency of processes and implementation of circular economy in EU (as policies to put in place 
re-manufacturing of secondary raw materials, or supporting production of technologies for renewable energy), which 
will bring to the need to keep manufacturing here in EU and need new profiles, new type of labour forces, of work ers. 
T4.4 Policy design recommendations (Task leader: TUE; Participants: CNR, INESC TEC, ASTON, IML, IRIS) 
(M26M36) 
For each of the key horizontal issues identified in task 4.1, the most policy-relevant economic, environmental, and social 
indicators will be identified. Each indicator will be mapped to a set of policies which have the potential to address the 
gaps in existing national and regional policies (Task 4.2). We will simulate the impact of policies on each indicator, and 
run sensitivity analyses for the most relevant variables. Simulation "what-if" scenarios will be performed using "Monte 
Carlo" method to find inputs for a given output (KPI) as well as forward -driven models (for a given combination of 
inputs, what resulting KPIs). Furthermore, this c an be used as input to a game -theoretical approach to help identify 
winwin situations, zero-game, and so on. We will design consistent policy packages to address current gaps in economic 
and social policies. A workshop with a representation of all relevant  stakeholders will be conducted to validate the 
potential impact of adopting such policies, and the perceived desirability of each resulting scenario from T4.3.  
Work package WP5 – Dissemination and Communication 
Work Package Number WP5 Lead Beneficiary 4. ZLC 
Work Package Name Dissemination and Communication  
Start Month 1 End Month 36 
 
Description 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
16 
Description of work 
T5.1 Dissemination, Communication and exploitation plan (Task leader: ZLC; Participants: All) (M01 -M03) 
The communication and dissemination strategy and plan will be developed with the aim of achieving the maximum 
involvement of partners, stakeholders, and will include: 
● Definition of communication and dissemination objectives and corresponding target groups;  
● Identification of the communication instruments (e.g. social media, websites) and dissemination tools 
(e.g.,conferences, magazines, online communities) , including the specification of the dissemination and exploitation 
platform. ● Definition of dissemination methodology detailing the content and timing of the various dissemination 
activities, tasks and responsibilities assigned to the different involved 
● Provision of structures for the communication and information actions/materials (structural design of the 
website,template, frequency and content of newsletters, standard lay#out for presentations and reports).  
T5.2-Stakeholder engagement and networking wi th experts (Task leader: INESC TEC; Participants: All) (M03 -M36) 
Specific actions, such as workshops, webinars and participation in the project’s community, will be performed towards 
business stakeholders (e.g. industry practitioners, policy makers, invest ors) to raise awareness on the scouted and 
validated solutions. The objective is to reach out to society in order to demonstrate the project’s framework, results and 
its contribution to sustainable challenges (from the economic, environmental and societal perspectives). The 
communication with stakeholders focuses on the creation and development of joint business opportunities both 
regarding existing solutions and new policies. To this end, the project will integrate a 360º communication strategy that 
combines online and offline methods in order to have a broader reach both in terms of stakeholders and in terms of 
experts’ elicitation activities. All stakeholders will be contacted through related partners and invited to become part of 
the project’s community,  acting as “supportive partners” for dissemination purposes in a win -win cooperation mode. 
This means that, at each communication milestone, the project will develop indications and materials required (e.g. e -
mails, newsletters, social media messages, etc. ) for the stakeholders to communicate with their ecosystems. In order to 
enhance stakeholder engagement, the project will offer: a communication platform for sharing their relevant activities 
with targeted audiences, visibility (including logo and website link) and exclusivity (participation in special activities 
for community members). Additionally, the project will offer multiple opportunities for engagement between 
stakeholders and experts in the form of dissemination and activity-related workshops. Their engagement is also of vital 
importance for the project’s success, and will be achieved through constant invitation through related partners to the 
various fields of research and industry regarding the focus points of the project. These experts will be in vited to 
participate in the project’s community, and will have the opportunity to disseminate their knowledge with industrial 
practitioners, researchers, policy makers and other experts and stakeholders participating in the workshops and in the 
community. 
In particular, we plan to organise a half -a-day cluster meeting and/or policy roundtable with your sister projects 
(RETHINK-GSC and TWIN SEEDS) and the EC policy officers in charge by M26.  
The communication and exploitation platform developed in T5.1 will be used, which is going to serve as the main 
communication channel with stakeholders for dissemination of project results, new findings, workshop schedules and 
additional relevant information regarding the project development. The same platform is the foundation to bridge experts 
involved in the empirical activities of the project and the relevant stakeholders, therefore creating synergies that go 
beyond the scope of the project in order to foster increasing innovation and dissemination actions regarding re silient 
SCs. 
T5.3 Dissemination, communication and exploitation actions (Task leader: ZLC; Participants: All) (M01 -M36) 
Dissemination actions related to promoting the project and its results will be implemented through strategic and targeted 
measures, poss ibly engaging in a two -way exchange with the stakeholders. Moreover, scientific communication of 
project results through participation into international conferences, workshops, seminars, and publication in scientific 
journals are planned. 
Continuous dissemination of project achievements through the dissemination channels of sectoral communities and their 
related networks through newsletters, press releases and announcements of results in conferences and events will be 
managed. The task includes the search for opportunities to reach national and regional research policy makers to discuss 
the most relevant challenges of the coming years in a truly European context. A system of national/regional and sectoral 
relays will be set up to disseminate project results during the project and keep the network active after project end. 
Communication actions will include a comprehensive fully public project website will be developed and linked to all 
partners’ websites. It will serve as the reference point for people inter ested in the project itself, and will also contain 
reference material on all covered research fields, subscription functionalities for receipt of regular project publications 
and for participation in public project events, various contact options to the pr oject management as well as selected 
experts. 
Other communication tools will be: (i) the edition of a 6-monthly newsletter, which will include information concerning 
the project’s activities and further related information such as relevant EU research poli cy and programme 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
17 
developments, related events etc. in a concise and easy -to-understand way; (ii) supporting materials like logo, leaflets, 
brochure; (iii) 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
18 
 
use of social media (LinkedIn, twitter, etc) as a way to involve stakeholders and to involve consumers; (iv) a 45 -
second promo video (outlining project objectives) by M6 and a 60-second promo video (summarising key research 
results and key policy recommendations) by M36. 
In particular, it is planned to issue 2 EC policy briefs. Based on the results of WP4, it will be possible to provide 
recommendation on topics like trade, policy supporting new business models, supporting training, creation of 
ecosystems. 
The task includes a final conference with wide participation from European industry, research community, policy 
makers and media will be organised at the end of the project in conjunction with the final General Assembly meeting 
of the project. 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
19 
LIST OF DELIVERABLES 
Deliverables 
Grant Preparation (Deliverables screen) — Enter the info. 
The labels used mean: 
 Public — fully open (  automatically posted online) 
Sensitive — limited under the conditions of the Grant Agreement 
EU classified —RESTREINT-UE/EU-RESTRICTED, CONFIDENTIEL-UE/EU-CONFIDENTIAL, SECRET-UE/EU-SECRET under Decision 2015/444 
 
Deliverable 
No 
Deliverable Name Work 
Package 
No 
Lead Beneficiary Type Dissemination Level Due  Date 
(month) 
D1.1 Project and quality management Plan WP1 1 - CNR R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 3 
D1.2 Data Management Plan and updates WP1 4 - ZLC DMP — Data 
Management Plan 
SEN - Sensitive 36 
D1.3 Progress report WP1 1 - CNR R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 36 
D2.1 Report on trends, changes and challenges for 
SC of the future 
WP2 3 - Fraunhofer R — Document, report PU - Public 8 
D2.2 Report on SC strategies for resilience and 
sustainability 
WP2 2 - INESC TEC R — Document, report PU - Public 12 
D2.3 Report on Innovative ways to organize SCs WP2 1 - CNR R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 15 
D2.4 Report on Identification of gaps in skills 
required 
WP2 9 - ASTON U R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 18 
D3.1 Report on the impacts of COVID-19 on 
Supply Chains and social performance 
WP3 9 - ASTON U R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 15 

Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
20 
D3.2 Report on model design for social impact 
and social accountability 
WP3 5 - RWI R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 18 
D3.3 Report on results of the model Simulation WP3 5 - RWI R — Document, report PU - Public 30 
 
Deliverables 
Grant Preparation (Deliverables screen) — Enter the info. 
The labels used mean: 
 Public — fully open (  automatically posted online) 
Sensitive — limited under the conditions of the Grant Agreement 
EU classified —RESTREINT-UE/EU-RESTRICTED, CONFIDENTIEL-UE/EU-CONFIDENTIAL, SECRET-UE/EU-SECRET under Decision 2015/444 
 
Deliverable 
No 
Deliverable Name Work 
Package 
No 
Lead Beneficiary Type Dissemination Level  Due  Date 
(month) 
D3.4 Report on develop model for social 
accountability and self-assessment tool 
WP3 6 - UDEUSTO R — Document, report PU - Public 30 
D3.5 Report on impact of logistics outsourcing 
on employment 
WP3 4 - ZLC R — Document, report PU - Public 30 
D3.6 Digital Tool for SC analysis with social 
indicators 
WP3 8 - IRIS OTHER SEN - Sensitive 33 
D4.1 Report on key horizontal issues and policy 
analysis 
WP4 3 - Fraunhofer R — Document, report PU - Public 26 
D4.2 Report on Policy scenarios development WP4 9 - ASTON U R — Document, report SEN - Sensitive 30 
D4.3 Report on Policy design WP4 7 - TU/e R — Document, report PU - Public 36 
D5.1 Communication and Dissemination Plan WP5 4 - ZLC R — Document, report PU - Public 3 

Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
21 
D5.2 Report on Dissemination, Communication 
activities 
WP5 4 - ZLC R — Document, report PU - Public 36 
D5.3 EC Policy Brief WP5 4 - ZLC R — Document, report PU - Public 36 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
22 
Deliverable – Project and quality management Plan 
Deliverable Number D1.1 Lead Beneficiary 1. CNR 
Deliverable Name Project and quality management Plan  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 3 Work Package No WP1 
Description 
This report will describe the measures to be carried out in T1.1. and in T1.2  in order to ensure an effective consortium 
coordination and project management. Quality levels and monitoring procedures are also defined.  
Deliverable – Data Management Plan and updates 
Deliverable Number D1.2 Lead Beneficiary 4. ZLC 
Deliverable Name Data Management Plan and updates  
Type DMP — Data Management 
Plan 
Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP1 
Description 
DMP and its updated versions along the project in T1.3. 
Moreover, in this deliverable it will be reported the results of T1.4. 
due dates: M6, 12, 36 
Deliverable – Progress report 
Deliverable Number D1.3  Lead Beneficiary 1. CNR 
Deliverable Name Progress report   
Type R — Document, report  Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month)  36 Work Package No WP1 
Description 
Report with main scientific deviations, generated EU-funded project synergies, remaining technical challenges and final 
policy expectations/scenarios. 
Deliverable – Report on trends, changes and challenges for SC of the future 
Deliverable Number D2.1 Lead Beneficiary 3. Fraunhofer 
Deliverable Name Report on trends, changes and challenges for SC of the future 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 8 Work Package No WP2 
Description 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
23 
This report will present the applied methodology as well as the identified trends, changes, and disruptions in T2.1 and 
the challenges to be faced by SCs identified in T2.2. 
Deliverable – Report on SC strategies for resilience and sustainability 
Deliverable Number D2.2 Lead Beneficiary 2. INESC TEC 
Deliverable Name Report on SC strategies for resilience and sustainability  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 12 Work Package No WP2 
Description 
This report describes the results of T2.3 with a description of the SC strategies  
Deliverable – Report on Innovative ways to organize SCs 
Deliverable Number D2.3 Lead Beneficiary 1. CNR 
Deliverable Name Report on Innovative ways to organize SCs  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 15 Work Package No WP2 
Description 
Results of the T2.4 with details on the SC models 
Deliverable – Report on Identification of gaps in skills required 
Deliverable Number D2.4 Lead Beneficiary 9. ASTON U 
Deliverable Name Report on Identification of gaps in skills required  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 18 Work Package No WP2 
Description 
This report will present the skill set desired for SC professionals 
Deliverable – Report on the impacts of COVID-19 on Supply Chains and social performance 
Deliverable Number D3.1 Lead Beneficiary 9. ASTON U 
Deliverable Name Report on the impacts of COVID-19 on Supply Chains and social performance 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 15 Work Package No WP3 
Description 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
24 
This part will deliver a decision support framework that examines the linkage between SC risk management strategies 
and performance 
Deliverable – Report on model design for social impact and social accountability 
Deliverable Number D3.2 Lead Beneficiary 5. RWI 
Deliverable Name Report on model design for social impact and social accountability 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 18 Work Package No WP3 
Description 
This report includes the preliminary result of T3.2 with design of Macroeconomic multi -county multi sector network 
model and of the T3.3 with designing preliminary data for the model of social accountability.  
Deliverable – Report on results of the model Simulation 
Deliverable Number D3.3 Lead Beneficiary 5. RWI 
Deliverable Name Report on results of the model Simulation  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 30 Work Package No WP3 
Description 
Final results of T3.2 after running and testing the model for the evaluation of the impact of new SC models on social 
indicators 
Deliverable – Report on develop model for social accountability and self-assessment tool 
Deliverable Number D3.4 Lead Beneficiary 6. UDEUSTO 
Deliverable Name Report on develop model for social accountability and self-assessment tool 
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 30 Work Package No WP3 
Description 
Final results of T3.3 with the developed algorithm and the Self-assessment tool. 
Deliverable – Report on impact of logistics outsourcing on employment 
Deliverable Number D3.5 Lead Beneficiary 4. ZLC 
Deliverable Name Report on impact of logistics outsourcing on employment  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 30 Work Package No WP3 
Description 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
25 
Results of T3.4 with results of the model for evaluation of the impact of logistics outsourcing on employment of global 
SCs. 
Deliverable – Digital Tool for SC analysis with social indicators 
Deliverable Number D3.6 Lead Beneficiary 8. IRIS 
Deliverable Name Digital Tool for SC analysis with social indicators  
Type OTHER Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 33 Work Package No WP3 
Description 
Report of the specifications, design, performance and validations of the digital tool for SC analysis.  
Deliverable – Report on key horizontal issues and policy analysis 
Deliverable Number D4.1 Lead Beneficiary 3. Fraunhofer 
Deliverable Name Report on key horizontal issues and policy analysis  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 26 Work Package No WP4 
Description 
This report will describe the identified and clustered Key Horizontal Issues for SCs from T4.1 and provide a review of 
EU cross-country policies from T4.2 considering challenges and opportunities for each KHI, as well as the mapping 
between KHIs and policies. This work will support activities in T4.3 and T4.4. 
Deliverable – Report on Policy scenarios development 
Deliverable Number D4.2 Lead Beneficiary 9. ASTON U 
Deliverable Name Report on Policy scenarios development  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level SEN - Sensitive 
Due Date (month) 30 Work Package No WP4 
Description 
This report will provide the methodology and results for the identification of projections on future policies for 
sustainable and social SCs 
Deliverable – Report on Policy design 
Deliverable Number D4.3 Lead Beneficiary 7. TU/e 
Deliverable Name Report on Policy design   
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP4 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
26 
  
Description  
This report is a policy brief containing a set of consistent policy measures to address current gaps  
Deliverable – Communication and Dissemination Plan 
Deliverable Number D5.1 Lead Beneficiary 4. ZLC 
Deliverable Name Communication and Dissemination Plan  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 3 Work Package No WP5 
Description 
This report will describe the communication and dissemination strategy and plan for the project as from T5.1.  In 
particular, it will include the plan for a 45 -second promo video (outlining project objectives) by M6 and a 60 -second 
promo video (summarising key research results and key policy recommendations) by M36. 
Deliverable – Report on Dissemination, Communication activities 
Deliverable Number D5.2 Lead Beneficiary 4. ZLC 
Deliverable Name Report on Dissemination, Communication activities  
Type R — Document, report Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month) 36 Work Package No WP5 
Description 
Final report of the D&C and exploitation activities of ReSChape results. In particular the results will include a 45-second 
promo video (outlining project objectives) by M6 and a 60 -second promo video (summarising key research results and 
key policy recommendations) by M36. 
Deliverable – EC Policy Brief 
Deliverable Number D5.3  Lead Beneficiary 4. ZLC 
Deliverable Name EC Policy Brief   
Type R — Document, report  Dissemination Level PU - Public 
Due Date (month)  36 Work Package No WP5 
Description 
report with summary of the project findings to be delivered to EC policy services related to topics like supply chain 
strategies (also including EU self -reliance), models for supporting innovative eco -systems, how to enhance positive 
social impact. These EC policy briefs are expected to be issued at M15 and M36 (ZLC). 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
27 
LIST OF MILESTONES 
Milestones 
Grant Preparation (Milestones screen) — Enter the info. 
    
Milestone 
No 
Milestone Name Work Package No Lead Beneficiary Means of Verification Due  Date 
(month) 
1 Collaboration mechanisms established and 
dissemination plan defined 
WP5 4-ZLC Detailed plan of workshops and technical 
meetings defined. Creation of the expert group 
and commitment of most important stakeholders 
and dissemination plan defined (D5.1) 
4 
2 Trends and changes analysis WP2 3-Fraunhofer Main trends and changes influencin g future SC 
scenarios have been identified and challenges in 
D2.1. 
8 
3 Innovative SC models WP2 1-CNR Innovative models are generated and are 
described in D2.3 and D2.4. 
16 
4 Advancement on models for social impact 
assessment 
WP3 1-CNR Verification on the advancement of the models 
expected in WP3, mainly design of the models, 
structuring dataset (D3.1, D3.2). 
18 
5 Check on implementation of D&C plan WP5 4-ZLC Expected dissemination activities have been 
realized, stakeholders, policy makers, external 
organisations have been reached by mean of the 
specific actions of the WP5 (D5.3). 
18 
6 Key horizontal issues for policy scenarios WP4 2-INESC TEC Identification of key horizontal issues and impact 
on policy actions have been defined in D4.1 and 
D4.2 as result of the related tasks. 
24 
7 Finalization of models for social impact 
assessment 
WP3 5-RWI Finalisation of the models expected in WP3. 
Testing and validation with stakeholders (D3.3, 
D3.4, D3.5). digital tools developed (D3.6). 
33 
8 Definition of policy scenarios WP4 2-INESC TEC Policy scenario generated and simulated (D4.2 
and D4.3) 
33 
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
28 
9 Dissemination plan realized WP5 4-ZLC Expected dissemination activities have been 36 
Milestones 
Grant Preparation (Milestones screen) — Enter the info. 
    
Milestone 
No 
Milestone Name Work Package No Lead Beneficiary Means of Verification Due  Date 
(month) 
    realized, stakeholders, policy makers, external 
organisations have been reached by mean of the 
specific actions of the WP5 (D5.2, D5.3). 
 
LIST OF CRITICAL RISKS 
Critical risks & risk management strategy 
Grant Preparation (Critical Risks screen) — Enter the info. 
  
Risk 
number 
Description Work Package 
No(s) 
Proposed Mitigation Measures 
1 One or more partners do not comply with the work 
plan or is unable to provide the required 
contributions (LH = medium; S =high) 
WP1 The Project Coordination team is committed to tightly monitor the progress of each partner 
and quickly react if required. If  required, the consortium will consider transferring some 
activities to another partner or bringing a new partner into the consortium, upon consultation 
with the EU Project Officer. 
2 Difficulties in being sufficiently innovative both 
from the methodological and the results point of 
view (LH=Low; S=high) 
WP2, WP4, WP1, 
WP3, WP5 
The methodology is well defined in the proposal and will be strengthen during the initial 
phases of each WP to have the full commitment of the partners. Partners will be monitored 
and corrective actions will be implemented if needed. 
3 Difficulties in identifying trends and changes and 
extrapolating innovative SC strategies 
(LH=Medium; S=Medium) 
WP2 Intensive brainstorming meetings and enlargement of experts to provide new ideas and to 
foster discussion. Intensive analysis of state-of-the-art reports concerning trends influencing 
SCs. 
4 Delays in the design and development of the 
models, delays in transferring results from one WP 
to another, misunderstanding from one task to 
another (LH=Medium; S=Medium). 
WP2, WP4, WP3 Project coordinato r will monitor the involvement of all the partners according to the WP 
plan. WP leaders will have key role in promoting collaboration and monitoring their specific 
WP. Co-development will be supported by experienced partners from appropriate domains.  
Project: 101061729 — ReSChape — HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
29 
Critical risks & risk management strategy 
Grant Preparation (Critical Risks screen) — Enter the info. 
  
Risk 
number 
Description Work Package 
No(s) 
Proposed Mitigation Measures 
5 Difficulties to address and involve experts, other 
initiatives and public authorities, at European, 
national and regional levels. Stakeholder network 
does not represent all relevant stakeholders. 
(LH=Low; S=MEdium) 
WP5 The project consortium is very well c onnected with a large part of the relevant stakeholder 
network. The completeness of the stakeholder network is checked periodically and adapted 
to the specific WP. 
6 Stakeholders will not reveal information due to 
IPR issues. (LH=Low;S=Medium) 
WP5 All considerations should regard data confidentiality will be taken into consideration at the 
beginning of the project both in the CA, in the DMP and in the privacy document to be 
signed by external participants. 
7 Budget is not spent correctly or contributors do not 
deliver according to the plan (LH=Low; S=Low) 
WP1 For these cases, the  consortium Agreement will provide tools for the coordinator and the 
consortium to react in a timely manner and redistribute work and/or budget. Deviations from 
the work plan and budget will be identified on short term through the work  in Task 5.2. 
8 Delay  propagation  from  technical  WPs 
(LH=MEdium; S=MEdium) 
WP1 Work is stringently and efficiently managed, planned and monitored. This will be done e.g. 
through a close follow-up by the coordinator and the review meetings with the WP leaders. 
The compliance has to be followed up through quality management. 
PROJECT REVIEWS 
Project Reviews 
Grant Preparation (Reviews screen) — Enter the info. 
 
Review 
No 
Timing 
(month) 
Location Comments 
RV1 18 Brussels To be discussed with project officer 
RV2 36 Brussels To be discussed with project officer 

  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape        1  
  
  
Part B: technical description  
  
  
  
ReSChape - RESHAPING SUPPLY CHAINS FOR POSITIVE SOCIAL IMPACT  
List of participants  
Participant No. *  Participant organisation name  Acronym  Country  
1 (Coordinator)  Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche  CNR   Italy   
2  Instituto de Engenharia de Sistemas e Computadores, 
Tecnologia e Ciência   
INESC TEC   Portugal   
3  Fraunhofer Gesellschaft Zur Foerderung Der 
Angewandten Forschung E.V.  
IML  Germany   
4  Zaragoza Logistics Center  ZLC   Spain  
5  RWI – Leibniz Institute for Economic Research  RWI  
  
Germany   
6  Universidad De La Iglesia De Deusto Entidad 
Religiosa  
Deusto   Spain  
7  Technical University of Eindhoven  TUE  The  
Netherlands   
8  Iris Technology Solutions  IRIS  Spain   
  Aston University (associated partner)  Aston   UK  
N.B. based on the letter received from REA-Ref. Ares(2022)2815306 - 08/04/2022, the applicant established in the  
UK, namely Aston university, will participate as an associated partner, in agreement with the rest of the consortium. 
Aston University will fund its tasks without EU funding and the total EU funding to the project will be reduced 
accordingly. According to the communication from REA, Aston University may be later re-established as beneficiary 
through a grant amendment requested by the consortium if (i) the instrument of association with UK becomes 
applicable, (ii) this association agreement provides for its retroactive application prior to the start of the action, (iii) 
there is a corresponding f inancial contribution from the UK to the relevant call. We accept that subject to the 
fulfilment of these conditions, the granting authority may approve reimbursement of the costs incurred from the 

  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape        2  
  
beginning of the action. In its role of associate partners , Aston engages to undertake the activities described and 
agreed in this DOA, and their participation will be ruled in the Consortium Agreement.  
  
History of changes at 29.04.2022  
Pag.   Modifications   
List  of  
participants  
Shift of Aston to last line, as associated partner  
Ch.1.2.1  Added the possibility to study other scenarios related to supply chain autonomy / selfreliance 
as a way to reduce/limit the linksand dependences from other global actors.  
Ch.2.2.   Revision of the chapter to give evidence to dissemination and communication actions and 
add related KPIs   
Fig.3.1  Modification of fig.3.1 to change the Gantt. Anticipation start date of T3.5 (M18 instead of 
M22) to give more time for the development and anticipation of end of T4.2 (M26 instead 
of M28) to release D4.1 to T4.3 and T4.4.    
WP1 description  Added T1.4 for Ethics compliance   
WPs description  To reduce number of deliverables we have decided to merge the following:   
• D1.1 and D1.2 integrating project management plan and quality control plan at the 
same time.    
• D2.1 and D2.2 because the topics are strictly correlated and tasks finishing same 
time.  
• D3.2 and D3.3 because they are related to preliminary results of 2 tool s on social 
impact and they are due at the same time.   
• Shift delivering of D3.6 to M33, since this is the closing date of the related task.  
• D4.1 and D4.2 because topics are complementary each other and preparatory to T4.3 
and 4.4.  
WP5 description  Added 2 policy briefs in WP5 dissemination, at M15 and M36 as from PO request with some 
examples of possible topics to be included.    
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape        3  
  
 Table 3.1j  Change table 3.1j with new distribution of in-kind contributions for the following reasons.  
Updating the t able 3.1j, INESC TEC decided to add IPP’s (Instituto Politénico do Porto) 
contributions in kind. The entities UP and IPP will not be involved in the project, and no 
activities will be carried out by them. INESC TEC envisages the use of contributions in kind 
provided by UP and IPP regarding secondment of persons free of charge (Article 9.2 of the 
General Model Grant Agreement).   
The inclusion of the IPP is due to the addition to the project team of three 
Professors/Researchers of this institute who have recently collaborated with INESC TEC:  
Hélio Cristiano Castro, Nelson Jorge Ribeiro Duarte and Cristóvão Dinis Polido Sousa. 
They have been developing research on the relationship between the adoption of digital 
technologies and sustainability in the context of supply chains and will contribute  to 
activities related to WP2 and WP4. Professor Maria do Rosário Moreira from the Faculty 
of Economics of the University of Porto has researched in areas such as supply chain 
management, logistics and quality management, and has experience in sustainability issues 
in supply chains. She will mainly contribute in WP4.  
Although not contemplated in the proposal phase, INESC TEC believes that the inclusion 
of IPP members in the team will be beneficial due to their experience in project -related 
topics, and because they have the potential and availability to participate in different phases 
throughout the entire project. On the other hand, the participation of University of Porto will 
be reduced compared to the original plan in the proposal, as it will be focused on WP4.  
Finally, as explained in Table 3.1j, INESC TEC reinforces that “the researchers are 
authorized to do their research work for INESC TEC and using its research resources, such 
as offices and laboratories, including a clean room, meeting rooms, communication network  
 and other supporting infrastructures. For all contractual purposes, INESC TEC assumes full 
responsibility for the involvement of these researchers in the project, since they are members 
of its research team.  
Ch.3.2.  Consortium as a whole: shift Aston to last organization in the list as associated partner.   
Annex I  Added annex I explaining collaboration with affiliated partner for CNR. Under the 
framework agreement existing between CNR and Università di Padova, it is planned to have 
a collaboration for the project.   
Annex II  Added annex II with budget for Aston   
Index  
1.  EXCELLENCE ............................................................................................................................. ....................................... 4
1.1  OBJECTIVES AND AMBITION........................................................................................................................................... 4  
 1.1.1  Motivation .................................................................................................................. .............................................. 4  
 1.1.2  Objectives .................................................................................................................. ............................................... 4  
 1.1.3  Progress beyond the state-of-the-art ........................................................................................................................ 6  
 1.1.4  Positioning in terms of research and innovation maturity .................................................................... ................... 9