3.2  CAPACITY OF PARTICIPANTS AND CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE ...................................................................................... 31  
  
  
  
1. Excellence
1.1  Objectives and ambition  
1.1.1  Motivation  
The last year and a half was characterized by a series of sudden changes that heavily affected the economy and the 
whole of society worldwide and that will have serious consequences in the coming years. While the shock and 
emergency of dealing with the immediate health crisis have taken the windward, the entire world had to work on the 
necessary containment measures to save lives and avoid any further overload that health system had with a 
devastating impact on the global economy.   
Moreover, considering to what extent economy and wealth of each state are based on international trade and how 
global the scale of production chains has become, such a large freeze of trade in some goods typologies (such as 
clothes, furniture, cars, etc.) impacted with double -digit loss ratios on the real economy. For Europe, the statistics 
report 16 billion euro loss, of which 2.5 in the automotive sector, 5.2 in the mechanical sector and 2.6 in the chemical 
sector with a need to completely rethink the supply paths.  
According to the OECD, the COVID-19 epidemic will curb the global GDP growth by half a point, halting at 2.4%, 
while the UNCTAD estimates at USD 1 trillion the cost of the global economic slowdown. In the first quarter of the 
year, GDP dropped 5.3%, marking a decrease in value added of 1.9%, 8.1% and 4.4% in the agricultural, industrial 
and services sectors respectively. At European level, GDP is estimated to drop by 7.7%, while in the USA it dropped 
6.5% (ISTAT, 2020).  A study carried out by the European Association of Automobile Manufacturers (ACEA) found 
that the European workers in the automotive sector affected by production stops were about one million, out of a 
total of about 2.6 ( Motore, 2020).  Car sales in EU is expected to drop by more than 3 million units, from 12.8 in 
2019 to around 9.6 million units this year (ACEA, 2020). At global level, the production of light vehicles is expected 
to drop by about 11 million units (from 88.9 million in 2019 to 77.9 million in the current year) (Deloitte, 2020).  
As Europe enters a new decade, progress still needs to be made to reach high levels of employment, skills and 
employability, and robust so cial protection systems. In December 2020, 16 million people were out of work and 
youth unemployment was at 17.8%, considerably higher than general unemployment. Low-skilled, low-paid workers, 
and temporary workers were the first to be laid -off due to the COVID-19 outbreak. Industrial companies, policy 
makers and social actors need to put together their strengths to define a new collaborative model where the 
competitiveness is based not only on technological and economic advancement but also on social cohes ion and 
environmental sustainability.   
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape        5  
  
1.1.2  Objectives  
The recent pandemic has completely changed the globalization paradigm expanding the borders of value and supply 
chains (SC) with a shift in trade patterns and consumer dynamics. On the one hand, the acceleration of digital 
technologies and the reduction of obstacles to international trade facilitate the integration of EU companies in global 
value chains, on the other hand, the profound transformation of global value chains has raised significant social, 
economic and environmental challenges, including incre asing divergence in productivity, labour market effects, 
working conditions in the progress towards resource -efficiency and decarbonisation, with problems of security of 
and access to strategic supplies.  
For this reasons, the aim of the ReSChape project i s to propose new strategies and policies to reshape SCs assuring 
a positive impact on social indicators. Both macro and micro-dimension of the problem will be considered integrating 
approaches from different disciplines. In particular, the objectives of the proposal are:   
● Objective 1: To analyse and identify social, economic and environmental changes and disruptions (including 
coronavirus) and evaluate their impact on SCs, identifying related challenges in terms of relationship between 
countries (taking into consideration level playing field issues), configuration of the network, and impact on 
employment.   
● Objective 2: To study and propose a set of SC models for the evolution of global SC integrating strategies 
like resource efficient, closed-loop and humanitarian as a way to increase EU resilience and sustainability. 
Particular attention will be given to the role of digitalization as a way to establish new paths for social 
inclusion taking into consideration the needs of urban and rural areas. Some important European sectors like 
fashion, automotive, medical and machine tools will be analysed with case studies and survey.   
● Objective 3: To develop Innovative tools for monitoring and assessing sectoral trade patterns and defining 
mechanisms to evaluate relat ionship of disruptions like pandemic and global value chains taking into 
consideration impact on employment, economic growth, incomes etc also in the long term. Moreover, it will 
be analysed the impact of different trade patterns, on the EU value added of sectoral and countries with a 
specific focus on analyzing income inequalities and proposition of decent work and social cohesion taking 
into consideration also gender issues and social disparities.   
● Objective 4: To develop innovative policy scenarios with  recommendations for future global value chains: 
policy scenarios will be based on key horizontal issues impacting on several sectors and will provide 
recommendations for EU, national and sectoral strategies, policy measures and targeted actions aimed at 
shaping fair, inclusive and sustainable trade patterns, value and SCs as well as production networks.   
  
Figure 1.1 ReSChape Project overall concept  
The table below represents the ambition of the project objectives and some key performance indicators (KPIs) are 
reported as measures of success for the short term, after the end of the project activities. Also relevance to the work 
programme is reported while long term indicators are reported in the section 2 of impact.   

  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape        6  
  
Table 1.1 Objectives and ambition  
Objective  Ambition & KPIs  Relevance to the work programme  
Obj1. Trends , 
changes and 
disruptions and  
their impact on  
SCs  
ReSChape project analysed      more 
than 70 global trends, isolates those with 
an impact on social and sustainability 
and derives the related challenges for 
SCs.  
The identification of trends and their impact on global 
SCs forms the essential basis for dev eloping and 
analysing sustainable SC models and making 
recommendations to ensure resilience and sustainability.  
Obj2. Innovative 
SC models for 
social resilience 
and sustainability  
ReSChape project engaged      directly 
100-150 industrial companies, active in 
the European SCs in 6-7 relevant 
sectors, and defined 4-5 SC models.  
“Research should .. conceptualise the actual global and 
sectoral trade patterns, value chains, SCs and production 
networks in light of the EU’s long -term policy priorities 
of social resilience and competitive sustainability”  
Obj3. Assessment 
of impact of trade 
patterns and new 
supply chains on 
social indicators   
Develop 4 models (micro and macro 
level) to analyse social impact. 
Modeling up to 40 countries an 30 
sectors per country. Involve more than 
100 experts. Analysed the 20 EU Pillars 
on Social rights (EU2021) and 
identified 10-20 social indicators to be 
structured for tracking them with the 
project models.   
“then analyse the impacts of different trade patterns, 
value chains and production networks on the EU value 
added, labour market, income inequalities, decent work 
and social cohesion in urban and rural areas, taking into 
account gender differences.”  
Obj4. Policy  Mapped and identified 6-7 Key  “develop a comparative assessment with the main  
scenarios for 
positive social 
impact including 
level playing field 
developments.   
Horizontal Issues related for example 
to trade conditions, taxation, 
international agreements, and defined 
3-4 policy scenarios. Simulation and 
what if analysis should bring to an 
index of consistency of the retained 
scenarios for over 90%.   
Involvement of more than 40 social 
actors, and more than 40 policy makers.   
strategic partners and provide innovative, 
forwardlooking policy scenarios with recommendations 
for future gl obal value chains, trade patterns and trade 
intensities. The policy scenarios should take into 
consideration analytical approaches, which will improve 
the economic and environmental performance of SCs in 
the EU. The policy scenarios and recommendations 
should focus on EU, national and sectoral strategies, 
policy measures and targeted actions aimed at shaping 
fair, inclusive and sustainable trade patterns, value and  
SCs as well as production networks.”  
  
1.1.3  Progress beyond the state-of-the-art  
While the Fourth Industrial Revolution has a high potential to trigger social changes of a variety of natures, the use 
of digital technologies can be used to address social challenges. The concept of Industry 5.0 is not just a chronological 
continuation of existing Industry 4.0 but is conceived to highlight the importance of research and innovation to 
support industry in its long-term service to humanity within planetary boundaries.  Technologies can be used in the 
context of social innovation and the circular economy in a variety of ways and their contribution has been highlighted 
in recent years by managers and researchers. Fig. 1.2 shows a set of technolo gies identified as relevant for Next 
Generation Supply Chains but new research is necessary to study how they can contribute to a positive impact on 
social dimension toward circularity of industrial value chains (Fornasiero et al., 2021).  
  

  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape        7  
  
Figure 1.2 Technologies for Next Generation Supply Chains (Fornasiero et al. 2021)  
In particular we can consider the project has the ambition to propose novel concepts and approaches in the following 
areas:  
Supply chain models for social resilient and sustainability   
Nowadays, Supply Chains (SC) have to be more and more able to adapt and identify possible future evolutions to 
preserve their competitiveness and meet the challenges derived from the complex scenario. ( Ivanov and Dolgui,  
2020; Cannella et al., 2016). Some important drivers of change affecting the global scenario are related to the social 
dimension, like changes in demographic, migration flows, new customer habits and also to the environmental 
dimensions like climate changes and depletion of natural resources. The transformation driven by the growing 
adoption of Industry 4.0 technologies represents at the same time a challenge, due to difficulties in its adoption, 
especially for what concerns requested skills, trust and security, and an opportunity to be leveraged by industry and 
related SCs (Ivanov et al., 2019) to enable social changes both in business and in society. In the last two years, the 
pandemic caused by Covid -19 and related severe measures to contain the contagion ha ve forced the shutdown of 
many sectors of the economy, with severe interruptions into global SCs. In addition to these drivers, European society 
is also pushed, in line with initiatives such as the EU Strategic Agenda 2019-2024 and the European Pillar of Social 
Rights, for a paradigm shift towards the green and digital transitions, leaving no one behind. In this context, Europe 
needs to further strengthen its resilience, in order to be able to face and react to future shocks and assure citizens 
higher social standards and efficient and safe employment.  
From pure automation and connectivity, the evolution towards Industry 5.0 ( EU2021) envisaged in last year by EU 
will have to embrace a synergy between humans and autonomous machines (Nahavandi, 2019, Nair et al., 2021) with 
the possibility to make the difference in approaching social dimensions like employment , decreasing disparities, 
increasing safety. In order to ensure that both companies and people benefit from the digital transition, rethinking 
and redesigning SC is necessary and workers as well as citizens in general should be involved in all the steps of the 
digital transition. Special attention needs to be paid also to the to the creation and consolidation of SCs for the 
enhancement of territorial development in rural areas, assuring the sustainable management of natural resources and 
the creation and ma intenance of employment, according to The EU’s Rural Development Policy 2014 –2020 
(Scaramuzzi et al. 2020).   
  
ReSChape project will study innovative SC models for an advanced pace of technology adoption, where humans 
will play active roles (Reiman et al. 2021). It will study how SC configuration and related processes need to change 
to assure that employees are at the center of the business thanks to new digital solutions for ergonomic systems, 
knowledge management, new human-machine interaction to maximize effortless and safe work, where inequalities 
are left behind thanks also to new training tools (Siemieniuch et al., 2015). The main actors of the new models are 
indeed citizens that will play a leading role, for what concerns the transformation of urban and rural areas, and 
with the collaborative processes enabled by social media they can act as innovators to create the des ired 
environments where to balance working and life time. (Deguchi, A., & Sameshima, 2020). In light of the envisaged 
scenario, the project aims at identifying a set of SC models as promine nt to face the variegate pool of drivers of 
change challenging global SCs and to support the transition towards a digital and sustainable society.   
Methodologies to assess social impact of trade and of new supply chain models  
Assessment of the social imp act will be based on the application of different methodologies in order to analyse 
relationship between several different dimensions both at macro and micro -level taking into consideration point of 
view of SCs and of policy makers as well. In particular:   
● Assess impact of COVID on supply chains and social indicators  
Regarding the impact of Covid-19 and globalisation, on labour markets in terms of social performance indicators (i.e. 
unfair wages, child/forced labour, discrimination, excessive working ti me), in the last decade, a lot of studies have 
been conducting on sustainability in SC management however, socially related aspects are still neglected such as 
labour exploitation. With the advent of the novel coronavirus pandemic, the use of child labour in agriculture, mining 
and other sectors raised and led more children to work as a result of school closures, economic insecurity and 
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape        8  
  
restrictions on trade and movement. However, it has been argued that increased openness and foreign direct 
investment due to globalisation can lead to keep labour costs low and at the same time to have high % of child labour 
(Palley, 2002). Several companies involved in sub-contracting of development, manufacturing of footwear, apparel 
have involved in various scandals in their SCs e.g.  discrimination, excessive working time.   
Thus, in this project we will fill the gap of identifying the impacts  of these megatrends on social performance 
indicators. In particular, the impacts of job satisfaction, commitment (believing and accepting its goals and values 
and investment of effort on its activities), Organizational justice (if the employees have been treated fairly in their 
jobs), CSR attitudes, on SC social performance (i.e. unfair wages, child/forced labour, discrimination, excessive 
working time).  
● Evaluation of social impact of trade and new supply chain models   
COVID crisis has once again highl ighted the importance of international value chains for national economic 
development (OECD 2020). Even before that, the development of global value chains was changing the economies 
of Europe (ECB 2019). A number of studies have already examined the i mportance of SCs for the transmission of 
disruptions. Acemoglu et al. (2012) use an Input-Output model to analyze the propagation of sectoral shocks. They 
find for the US economy that sectoral shocks are able to produce sizable fluctuations in  overall economic activity. 
Using a similar model Acemoglu and Tahbaz-Salehi (2020) show that firm failures and resulting disruptions of SCs 
are also able to amplify shocks. This highlights that changes in SCs can have economic effects that are visible at the 
national level. Huo et al.  (2021) extend this network -model to the international level. These authors constr uct a 
multicountry, multi-sector network propagation model. For all countries each sector is represented by a production 
function that uses capital and labor as well as intermediaries. Intermediaries are a bundle of inputs potentially from 
all sectors and countries. In this model homogeneous households supply labor to each sector separately. The model 
of Huo et al. (2021) will be used to analyze the quantitative effects of SC changes on national economies. However, 
to analyze the questions of interest in this project some modifications are necessary.   
In this project, we are focusing more on EU countries, important trading partners and competitors with regard to 
the location of production sites. To keep the model manageable we will choose a level of aggregation that is simple 
but sufficient to answer th e relevant questions of this project. To analyze the economic effects of changes of 
socioeconomic variables we have to modify the model structure with regard to the household sector and the labor 
market. In particular, we have to distinguish different households that offer different qualities of labor. This allows 
us to analyze the effects of changes in SCs on job qualities and income distribution. There is some evidence, that 
there is an increasing skills mismatch, in particular skills shortages and overqu alification (Vandeplas and Thum-
Thysen 2019). It can be assumed that this is to some extent related to changes in SCs affect the location of jobs 
(Kizu et al. 2019).   
● Social accounting for sustainability    
Three theoretical frameworks are distinguished in the social impact assessment knowledge area: (1) The Social 
Balance, sometimes known as social accounting, with a great development in France and Spain in the 90s of the last 
century. (2) The impact analysis whose main instrument has been the Social Return on Investment (SROI), developed 
for public investments in Great Britain and later generalized in the US in the specific field of non-profit organizations. 
(3) The triple Bottom line and the instruments der ived from it, the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) and the 
Integrated Reports being the most significant. All of them suffer from important limitations. For example, the social 
balance sheet, the GRI and the integrated reports, work with a wide battery of  indicators with the impossibility of 
reducing them to a single unit of measurement and, therefore, the impossibility of integrating the analysis; Also, the 
SROI, which, similar to the ROI, only works well in the analysis of investments, that is, of funds released with 
alternative investment options, producing important imbalances in its application to current spending (Retolaza and 
San-Jose, 2018).  
In this context, the social accounting model is developed, to which the term “Monetary” is sometimes added, precisely 
to differentiate it from the Social Balance, which is considered non-monetary social accounting. Its theoretical origins 
at the first Centre for S ocial and Environmental Accounting Research (CSEAR) ( Gray, 2001 ), consolidating 
methodological proposal through practical application in multiple companies, which have been happening since 2010 
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape        9  
  
(Retolaza, San-Jose and Ruiz -Roqueñi, 2016). At this time, the Spanish Association of Accounting and Business 
Administration (AECA) is integrating Social Monetary Accounting with the Comprehensive Report and proposing 
its use to the EU, through the European Financial Reporting Advisory Group (EFRAG), as a reference for the 
mandatory sustainability report (previous ly Non-Financial Information). At this moment, the application of social 
accounting to different types of value is relatively well solved (Retolaza and San-José, 2021): added value, induced 
value, non-market value, and even emotional value; but it is only possible to apply it to the first le vel of the value 
chain of the analyzed organization.   
ReSChape will face the challenge to enlarge the method to the entire value chain. That is, to include all the 
organisations involved in the SC, identifying its generated social impact into different areas such as gender, urban 
and rural areas, well-being, employment, environment and territory development. Both macro- and microeconomic 
approaches will be considered in developing an analytic and innovative approach for social accountability applied 
to global value chains.  
● The role of logistics outsourcing and impact on employment   
RECOVER project highlighted how, in recent years, there has been a shift in the logistics sector towards higher 
added-value services, as a consequence of automation and digitalization. This ultimately translates into employees 
for warehousing and dist ribution being outsourced. This new situation in the sector impacts collective bargaining 
coverage. Indeed, whereas the majority of in-house logistics manpower is covered by sectoral and company collective 
agreements in manufacturing, wholesale and retail,  only a small share of outsourced workers is covered by them. 
Even though there have been attempts by social partners to organize logistical services as a new sector to negotiate, 
it is difficult to characterize it as a sector as it is a horizontal activity across sectors.  
On top of the above, trade unions are also faced with different challenges around organizing workers, such as a high 
share of temporary workers, periodic expiration of contracts between suppliers and contractors, and fragmentation 
of workers along a service chain. Additionally, as logistics is a low margin sector, if working conditions are improved 
in one company along the SC, the contract risks not being renewed in favour of a cheaper competitor.  
ReSChape will face these challenges by p roposing cross-sectoral cooperation along the SC, as well as targeting 
newly developing sectors, such as logistics as a service and e-commerce.  
Policy scenario building   
Policy scenario analysis comprises a set of methods which aim to predict the impact of policies on a desirable metric, 
such as energy consumption or factor input productivity. By creating functional relationships between policies and 
key parameters in scientific models, scenario analysis does not provide a unique prediction about the futu re, but 
rather offers a set of possibilities about how the world may evolve over a certain time frame (Tourki et al., 2013). In 
recent years, the use of scenario analysis has become widespread in sustainability studies. Scholars have used 
scenario analysis to investigate issues such as waste management (Andreoni et al., 2015 ), the efficacy of feed -in-
tariffs in the energy sector (Kishita et al., 2017), or vehicle pollution control measures. Furthermore, the European 
Commission has actively been using scenario analysis to analyze how to successfully deliver the goals agreed in the 
European Green Deal.  
To become a sustainable society, governments need to pay attention to the three dimensions of the so -called  triple 
bottom line: people, planet, and profit. However, the vast majority of studies using scenario analysis focus only on 
one of the three dimensions, often the environmental one. This simplified view may not represent the true interests 
of all stakeholders. In fact, in some cases, issues related to social sustainability might be a more important decision 
driver than economic or environmental factors (Adaloudis et al., 2021). Hence, to become more realistic, it is critical 
that scenarios incorporate all three dimensions. For this reason, the project w ill also produce a set of policy 
recommendations and policy briefs to design consistent policy packages to tackle economic and social gaps within 
policies.  
1.1.4  Positioning in terms of research and innovation maturity   
According to its objectives, ReSChape R&I maturity is mainly related to develop studies and propose models which 
shall change the theory on SC, on Social Impact assessing and Monitoring, as well as on Policy Scenario Building as 
well as propose methodologies, best practices, recommendations to be applied by industrial companies, social actors, 
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape        10  
  
policy makers to improve the understanding of how trade flows of the new normal can impact on the social 
dimensions. Therefore, R&I maturity is situated in the spectrum from ‘idea to application’ as it starts from existing 
models both developed by partners and found in literature, and will match with identification of industrial approaches 
(idea) to propose innovative ways to deal with these kind of challenges aiming to their application.
1.2  Methodology  
1.2.1  Methodology applied in ReSChape project  
This section explains the methodology the consortium will use in ReSChape project. The project activities are 
structured to integrate different approaches both from organizational studies, management theory, econometrics, 
policy economics, as well as simul ation with analytics and what-if analysis applied to policy scenario building and 
social impact evaluation. Fig.1.3 shows how the ReSChape objectives (light blue boxes) are developed in the project 
and intertwined each other. Methods and tools are also sho rtly summarized (green boxes). In the following 
paragraphs, each of the boxes is explained.    
  
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  11  
  
  
Figure 1.3 Overall methodology of ReSChape project  
Obj.1 Trends, changes and disruptions and their impact on Supply chains   
The definition of innovative models for social resilient and sustainable SCs will be based on an iterative process, 
since it is required back and forward interactions between researc h team and experts in order to achieve consistent 
results. This part of the work will start with the identification of trends, changes, and disruptions that have economical, 
ecological, and/or social impacts on European SCs, e.g. scarcity of natural resources, natural catastrophes like Covid-
19, and demographic change. A PESTLE analysis will be performed to investigate trends, changes, and disruptions 
originating from the following dimensions: Political, Economic, Social, Technological, Legal, and Environme ntal. 
The basis for this analysis is provided by the results of the NEXT -NET project, in which a total of 23 megatrends 
and 72 trends impacting future SCs were identified and will be here updated with a particular focus on their influence 
on social resilience and sustainability.   
Moreover, the current insights into the state of affairs, including but not limited to Covid -19 and the respective 
changes, e. g. to the design and operations of global SCs as well as consumer behaviour, will be included. This 
supplement will be based on a systematic literature review, for instance according to Denyer and Tranfield, and a 
workshop with experts from industry, associations, and policy makers. In this way, findings grounded on the 
contributions from several stakeholders can be integrated and thus enable coherent conclusions o n how trends, 
changes, and disruptions impact and create new challenges to the social resilience and sustainability of European 
SCs. The interaction with experts will be organised to be open -minded, with an undirected atmosphere to facilitate 
the generation of fast -result insights (Zeng et al. 2019 ). Partners will also map digital technologies from literature 
and projects to study how they can trigger a new social resilience through the proposal of novel SC models.   
Thematic analysis will be used as a qualitative researc h method for identifying, analyzing, organizing, describing, 
and reporting themes found within the collected data (Braun et al. 2006). This methodology is also useful for handling 
and summarizing key features of a large data set, helping to produce a clear and organised output (Nowell et al. 2017) 
through: acquaintance with data (identification of challenges through careful reading of the data to familiarise with 
the content); generating initial codes to simplify and focus on specific characteristics of the data to symbolically 
assign a summative and essence -capturing attribute to data ( Saldaña 2009); sorting and collating all the codes to 
extract the summary issues with an inductive approach; proposing of SC strategies.   

  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  12  
  
Obj.2 Supply chain models for social resilience and sustainability   
Development of innovative ways to face social challenges will be based on theories like: Resource -based view 
(Barney, 1991 ), to explain how strategically managed interactions contribute to gaining competitive advantage; 
dynamic capabilities (Teece et al., 1997 ), and contingency theory ( Donaldson, 2001) to study how companies can 
adapt, integrate and reconfigure their organizational skills, resources and competences to match with changing 
environments and to be able to obtain a sustainable competitive advantage; panarchy theory (Gunderson & Holling, 
2002), rooted in ecology, to provide a structure for understanding how a system follows the movements of adaptive 
cycles on scales of time, space, and meaning. Basing on these theories some of the steps to be done to develop 
innovative SC models will work on the following concepts:   
• Social resilience till now has been studied mainly as the adaptive and learning capacity of individuals, groups 
and institutions, or the entire society, to self -organise in a way that maintains system function in the face of 
change or in response to a disturbance (Mclean et al, 2013, Obrist et al., 2010). On the other side, social Supply 
Chain models are mainly focussed on consumer involvement ( Fletcher et al., 2016 ), social sustainabili ty 
practices, as health and well-being of people in the supply chain and impacts on society (Marshall et al., 2014) 
but no link has been yet clearly created with the industrial world and the role business can have to  help social 
resilience. Moreover, little has been investigated on the social risks in which the supply chain may be involved 
(i.e. worker conditions, child labor by large brands) (Cunha et al., 2019). For this reason, Reshape solutions will 
help to pave the way towards novel SC models to support social resilience focusing on specific actions and 
practices at the 3 levels of intervention (readiness, response and recovery) (Han et al., 2020; Krammer, 2021).    
• Proposing innovative SC models. As an example, models like resource -efficient and biointelligent SCs are 
promising to enable not only (self-)adaptive, but also environmental and social sustainable SCs in Europe. At its 
core, this approach uses insigh ts from nature and integrates them into products and processes, such as swarm 
intelligence, circular economy, and bionics. By doing so, not only resources are conserved but also rapid 
responses to disruptions in global SCs, e.g. caused by Covid -19, and cor responding changes in trade and 
consumer behaviour are enabled. Therefore, ReSChape will studySC models like biointelligent from the point of 
view of the major impact on European SC performance in terms of ecology and society. Moreover, it will be 
studied how the identified SC models can contribute to preservation of European competitiveness and the 
associated safeguarding as well as creation of workplaces, and how they can contribute significantly to the 
realisation of the European Pillar of Social Rights Action Plan. Other SC models will be studied considering 
feasible geopolitical scenarios in which the EU aims for supply chain autonomy / self -reliance as a way to 
reduce/limit the links to Russia, China and maybe other global actors.  
• Studying how the shift toward automation could cause a misalignment and shortage of skills needed by companies 
to operate in a more automated, digitally enabled environment. Indeed only 44% of the companies declared that 
their employees were prepared for d igital innovation in the SC ( EY, 2021). In this study, we will explore the 
changes in skills requirements in the logistics and SCM field to deepen the understanding of the sources and 
mechanisms of wage inequality.” In particular, the project will investigate discrimination and skill differences to 
solve these disparities. For example, in England/Northern Ireland and the US, the wages of highskilled workers 
are twice as high as those of low-skilled workers (Broecke, 2016) highlighting the different education background 
can be attributed 83% of the wage gap between workers with different levels of parental education and 72% of 
the wage gap between native - and foreign -born workers. On a similar note, wage ga p derived from skills 
differences account 23% between men and women. Several companies realised that in order to create a more 
equitable and inclusive society, they need to prepare people for the future of work due to expected related changes 
that dramatically impact the employment prospects. For example, Unilever will equip 10 million young people 
with the skills required to protect their livelihoods and prepare them for better job opportunities by 2030.  
• Implementing the principles of Industry 5.0 to help the transition and supporting industry in its long-term service 
to humanity and society. Contributions to Industry 5.0 will address increased need of collaboration between 
humans and smart systems allowing to merge the high-speed accuracy of industrial automation with the cognitive, 
critical thinking skills of humans (Atwell, 2017, EU 2021). Beyond manufacturing boundaries and according to 
the concept of Society5.0, this includes the vision of a new human-centered society, where advanced technologies 
are applied in everyday life, and in different spheres of activity, to provide products and services satisfying 
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  13  
  
various potential needs as well as reducing economic and social gaps, for the benef it and convenience of all 
citizens. (Fukuda, 2019, EU2021). The project will propose a set of SCs to enhance the active role of stakeholders 
such as workers, consumers, citizens and leveraging on digital technologies to enable manufacturing industry 
contribution to this essential change of pace (Fornasiero and Zangiacomi, 2021).   
Obj3. Assessment of Social impact of trade and new supply chain models   
ReSChape proposes a set of modules to assess and monitor social impact of changes in trade and in SC models that 
range from macro-economic analysis where country and sectoral vision is provided to specific SC analysis. This will 
be complemented by the development of an appropriate web interface that will give access to  part of the results to 
facilitate the users (industrial companies, social actors, policy makers, citizens to these information). In particular, 
the following methodologies are applied:   
● Evaluation of social impact of trade and new supply chain models   
The aim of this part of the project is to assess and quantify the socio -economic impact of the previously identified 
scenarios of current and future trends and changes in international trade and SCs. To this end, in a first step, data on 
global trade patterns, such as Global Value Chain data, trade flows and the RWI’s Container Throughput Index, are 
analyzed to provide a quantitative overview of recent developments and the current state of global trade patterns. For 
this analysis, the project team can draw on its long-term experience and ongoing work in analyzing and forecasting 
(macro-) economic developments in Germany, Europe, and the global economy. One focus of the analysis can 
highlight developments during the recent global recession caused by the pand emic and the ongoing economic 
recovery. This will show how the crisis and the economic recovery are characterized by a substantial heterogeneity 
regarding the extent to which different countries, different economic sectors and different parts of the population are 
affected. In addition, an evaluation of world input -output tables gives insights into the importance of specific 
economic sectors in different countries and their global interlinkages. The results of this analysis provide a 
quantitative background for the further steps.  
The main element of this work package is to assess the effects of the trends identified in the other work packages and 
the resulting changes in global SCs and trade patterns on socio-economic outcomes, such as GDP, employment, job 
quality, wages, and income inequality. For this purpose, a macroeconomic multi-country multi-sector network model 
will be set up, that comprises several economic sectors and sector specific trade flows. For each country, the sectors 
are represented by a pr oduction function that uses capital and labor as well as intermediaries as input factors. 
Intermediaries are a bundle of inputs potentially from all other sectors and all countries. The level of aggregation 
depends on the findings of the previous analyses. Moreover, the model includes different groups of households with 
different levels of labor quality, which leads to a variation of productivity. This heterogeneity in the productivity of 
households that lead to differences in labor income allows us to anal yze the effects of SC changes on income 
distribution as well.   
The main source to quantify the international value chains is the World Input -Output database. In addition, we use 
WIOD socio-economic accounts data that include employment, capital stock, gro ss output and value added at the 
industry level to set up the sectoral production functions. A simple way to identify different levels of labor 
productivity is to assume that they are concentrated in different industries. During the project we test differe nt 
strategies to distinguish labor productivities.   
To build this model, we can draw on several elements from existing models at RWI. This includes the RWI’s existing 
macroeconomic multi-country model, which is part of the RWI’s tool set for macroeconomic analysis and considers 
the external economic interde pendencies of 39 countries, which are explicitly modelled, and the rest of the world. 
The core of the model is a trade matrix which maps the bilateral trade flows of the included countries. However, to 
account for global value chains we have to disaggregat e international trade flows. On a macroeconomic level, the 
results from this model will show, how the changes in trade and production patterns will affect the individual 
economies in the different dimensions.  
In addition, to get the appropriate level of disaggregation at the sectoral level we have to adjust the supply side of the 
country models. Moreover, we need to modify the labor market module of our model to take into account the different 
productivities of households. Recently, we have used a similar model to analyze the effects of a minimum wage in 
Germany. With the help of this model, the effects of the changes in global SCs on sectoral value added in the countries 
of the European Union and important trading partners can be analyzed. From this, effec ts on labor demand by skill 
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  14  
  
level and the income distribution can also be derived. This will provide additional insights on the challenges that 
might result from changing global SCs for different regions and parts of the labor force.  
 
   Social accounting for sustainability  
The methodology relies on both analytic and synthetic approaches. The first one is based on the social accountability 
through which the aggregated, traction and induced value are calculated for the whole value chain attending to the 
different stakeholders (customers, suppliers, employees, society…). In order to measure the social impact of the 
global value chain, primary and secondary data (using ORBIS database) will be used for developing a fuzzy logic 
algorithm which integrates the so cial impact of each of its links. This quantitative approach is accompanied by 
qualitative based methods to build a more precise model. The social impact will be therefore analysed in order to 
measure whether the impact is balanced between the different stakeholders. The synthetic approach refers to the aim 
of developing a compounded social impact measure. It also leads to represent all the results using graphs and matrices 
in order to make easier the interpretation of the results. This methodology aims to develop knowledge regarding the 
social accountability for its application in the entire value chains. It will also allow the development of a 
“selfassessment tool” for measuring the social impact of the entire value chain.  
  
Fig. 1.4: Framework for the social accountability modelling  
Obj. 4 Policy scenario building   
The overall objective of the policy scenario building is to propose policy recommendations, whose consideration and 
implementation can support public and private organisat ions in overcoming economical, ecological, and social 
impacts from changing European SCs, e.g. due to the delivery of the European Green Deal, and to realise the      
European Pillar of Social Rights Action Plan. Figure 1 illustrates the methodology towards this objective.   
  
   Figure 1.5: Methodology for Policy scenario building  
First, ReSChape identifies and clusters Key Horizontal Issues (KHIs). This is because the scenario building process 
can be defined in four stages (Kosow et al., 2008): scope definition, key factor identification, key factor analysis, and 
scenario generation. However, the scope of th e scenario is already defined in this proposal, this is, the impact of 
changing SCs and trade flows on economic, environmental, and social sustainability.   

  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  15  
  
KHIs are issues that cut across sectors and confront most companies – both in the production and distribution sectors 
– like policies, education and capabilities, as well as demographic change. Therefore, they can be considered 
"horizontal". For the initial identification of the KHIs, both primary and secondary sources are taken into account.  
On the one hand, the findings from the SC models qualitatively developed in WP 2 and quantitatively evaluated in  
WP 3 serve as primary sources. The respective output on social indicators can be used as input on challenges and 
horizontal issues for this task. On the other hand, primary data will be collected through the consultation of experts 
from industry, research institutions, associations, and government agencies. The experts' consultation will be 
guided by scientifically sound guidelines, for example those of Morgan (2017)1. As secondary sources, roadmaps, 
research plans, research agendas, and reports that relate to KHIs and/or the economical, ecological, and social 
impacts of changes at the SC level will be considered.   
The information collected from primary and secondary sources is then cross-checked and consolidated, resulting in 
a compiled list of validated KHIs. To differentiate between KHIs on a macroeconomic and on microeconomic levels, 
the identified KHIs will also be clustered. The use of a weighted, static design structure matrix according to 
Browning2 is a suitable tool for this purpose.   
In the next step, the key horizontal issues factors will be identified and mapped to the relevant public policies based 
on existing literature and interactions with stakeholders. The analysis of the impact of such policies on the key factors 
will be performed via simulations, using decision analysis methods such as cost -benefit analysis or multi -criteria 
decision models 3. For instance, an analytics tool for asses sing and monitoring the level playing field developments 
in key policy areas will be designed. This will be done by building a data driven model/simulation whose inputs will 
be macro-economic indicators (EU wide and country by country) for indicators linked for example to workers' rights 
(e. g. minimum wage, unemployment benefit), competition and state aid (or subsidies for business), taxation, social, 
and environmental protection. The model will aggregate data from different sources (e. g. publicly available databases 
as well as paywall/registration -wall information and EC online databases). The system can be developed using 
statistical and machine learning (AI) techniques in c++ and in Python notebooks (using libraries such as numpy, 
scikit, etc.).  
The aimed policy scenarios will then preferably be generated in collaboration with all relevant stakeholders     4. For 
this reason we will organize roadmapping workshops     4 to generate possible alternatives for the future. Therefore, 
we will discuss the res ults of our previous analyses in these workshops and will identify the most desirable set of 
policies which may help public and private organisations to overcome the diverse economical, ecological, and social 
impacts from changing European SCs within the respective scenarios. Using these scenarios as a reference, we will 
analyse which policies are best suited to tackle the current gaps in national in regional policies, and propose consistent 
policy mixes to tackle Europe's needs.   
Networking with social, industrial and policy stakeholders   
The implementation of the methodology is grounded on the capability of partners to create appropriate networks with 
social, industrial and policy stakeholders and involved them along the project. Partners have direct contacts from 
previous projects with se veral organisations that can be interested to contribute to the project participating to 
workshops, seminars, focus groups, survey and interviews. A specific mechanism to involve them will be put in place 
to create a network that can be activated along the 3 years of the project according to the specific needs and ongoing 
developments.   
Networking social, industrial and policy stakeholders of the project will bring together a diverse set of actors with a 
collective shared interest in the achievement of value chain-related missions. These actors will give highly valuable 
 
1 Morgan,  G.  (2017):  Theory  and  practice  in policy  analysis  -  including  applications  in  science  and  technology.  
[https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316882665]  
2 Browning, T. R. (2001): Applying the Design Structure Matrix to System Decomposition and Integration Problems: A Review and New  
Directions. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, Vol. 48, No. 3, pp. 292-306  
3 Belton, V., & Stewart, T. (2002). Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis: An Integrated Approach. Springer Science & Business Media. 4 Guaita 
García, N., Martínez Fernández, J., & Fitz, C. (2020). Environmental Scenario Analysis on Natural and Social-Ecological Systems: A Review 
of Methods, Approaches and Applications. Sustainability, 12(18), 7542.  
4 Siebelink, R., Halman, J. I. M., & Hofman, E. (2016). Scenario -Driven Roa dmapping to cope with uncertainty: Its application in the 
construction industry. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 110, 226–238  
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  16  
  
contribution to the development of project results thanks to the many are not willing or able to engage in 
entrepreneurial activities associated with the ongoing development, deployment and scaling of such solutions.  
We plan to create a group with external experts that cover an array of backgrounds: business owners, investors, 
customers, consumers, consultants and tech experts. A chairperson will be established who will undertake the 
management of the group and will involve them according to the planned activities. They will require: i) Motivation 
to create a systemic impact across value chains; ii) Specific knowledge of respective value chains, and of key 
technologies; iii) Knowledge of soci al dimensions and how companies are implementing specific actions; iv) 
knowledge on the role of policy supporting companies in implementing new social solutions.   
Table 1.2 List of current contacts of ReSChape partners  
Community /link  Members’ Profile  # Members  
Aspen Italia  
https://www.aspeninstitute.it/en  
Entrepreneurial, political and social leaders, to promote the 
free exchange of ideas on challenges facing today's 
decision-makers in politics, economics, academia and the 
media, with particular attention to the business world and 
impact on society .  
+300  
Confindustria  
https://www.confindustria.it/en  
National Trade Union in Italy, representing manufacturing 
sector. Ongoing collaboration with the R&D department 
and with several members.  
+10,000  
CILT   (Chartered Institute of  
Logistics and Transport, West  
Midlands)  
https://ciltuk.org.uk/  
CILT is a chartered body for professionals involved in the 
movement of goods and people and their associated SCs.  
over 30,000 
members in over 
30 countries.  
Lantegi Batuak  
https://www.lantegibatuak.eus/  
Lantegi Batuak is a non-profit organisation whose aim is to 
promote and achieve social integration and employment 
for people with disabilities.  
3000 employees  
Siemens Gamesa  
https://www.siemensgamesa.com  
Siemens Gamesa is a leader in the renewable energy 
industry, working to provide the world's best offshore and 
onshore wind turbines and services  
24k employees  
COVAP  
https://www.covap.es/  
Agri-food cooperative  2,500 members  
Provincial council of Bizkaia 
https://web.bizkaia.eus/  
Provincial council of Bizkaia is the government of the 
Historical Territory of Bizkaia  Citizens,  
companies and 
associations of 
the Bizkaia  
region  
CSCMP  
www.cscmp.org  
Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals   500+  
DIHNET.EU: Digital Innovation  
Hubs Community  
https://dihnet.eu/   
  
Research institutions, industrial-technological centers, 
industrial associations, incubators, science and technology 
parks, industrial companies, technology companies, 
training institutions, and government agencies.  
40,000  
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  17  
  
EIT Manufacturing AGORA:   
https://agora-eitmanufacturing.eu/   Social network and open innovation platform for the panEU 
manufacturing community. Manufacturing companies,  
technological companies, start-ups, researchers, 
universities, research and technology organizations.  
500+  
EFFRA - European Factories of the 
Future Research Association 
www.effra.eu   
EU PPP involving companies from discrete Manufacturing 
sector, technology providers, start-ups, RTD organizations.  
500+  
ALICE - European Technology 
Platform in Logistics https://www.etp-
logistics.eu/  
The European Technology Platform ALICE is set-up to 
develop a comprehensive strategy for research, innovation 
and market deployment of logistics and supply chain 
management innovation in Europe.   
150+  
IG Metall (Metal Workers' Industrial 
Union)   
employees from the areas of metals and electricals, iron 
and steel, textiles and clothing, wood and plastics, crafts