2.2 million +  
https://www.igmetall.de/ueberuns/ig-
metall--a-strong-community  
and services and information and communication 
technology  
 
BVL (Federal Logistics Association) 
https://www.bvl.de/en  
Cross-sectoral, international network of experts with 
specialists and managers from industry, trade, services and 
science  
10,500 +  
BVMW (Federal Association of 
Medium-Sized Businesses) 
https://www.bvmw.de/?lang=en  
Cross-professional and cross-sector members of the small 
and medium-sized business community in Germany  
55,000  
  
1.2.2  Synergies with other national and international initiatives   
Table 1.3 presents the synergies and progresses of ReSChape in relation to other projects where partners are currently 
involved or just finished. Cluster activities and cross -projects cooperation are expected based on the synergies 
identified in order to boost the impact of the actions and to make their results feed into ReSChape.   
Table 1.3 Synergies with other projects and initiatives  
Project  Synergies with ReSChape project  
Next-Net (H2020 project-NMPB)   
https://nextnetproject.eu/   
Next Net identified a set of SC strategies to face future challenges and 
related research and innovation priorities. ReSChape will exploit this 
work and further explore some of these strategies (like resource-efficient, 
closed-loop, human centered), analysing the related research and 
innovation priorities to evaluate which can be developed with a social 
perspective taking into consideration SC configuration and processes.   
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  18  
  
Untangled - (H2020-Transformation) 
https://projectuntangled.eu/  
Untangled - Disentangle the effects of technological change, 
globalization and demographic change to promote shared prosperity in 
Europe   
ReSChape will build upon the output of this project giving a specific 
insight on the role of SCs in building a new social impact.  In particular 
we will build upon: comparative analysis of the separate and combined 
effects of technological change, globalization, and demographic change 
on employability, skills, wage and income inequality, and labor mobility 
and migration in the EU; mu lti-faceted scenarios of technological 
progress and globalization and their impact on national, regional, and 
sectoral labor markets and incomes in the EU; policies that are conducive 
to shared prosperity by helping to reap the benefits of these megatrends  
and mitigate their negative effects.   
Circular 4.0 (Alpine space project) 
https://www.alpine- 
space.eu/projects/circular4_0/en/home  
CIRCULAR4.0 will increase the knowledge of Entrepreneurs and 
Intermediaries on the circular economy concepts , develop and test a set 
of tools able to foster the contribute of Industry 4.0 for the transition of 
SMEs to the circular economy. With this project, ReSChape will share 
how to address Policy Makers, Intermediaries and SMEs to raise the 
importance of digi talization processes, focusing mainly on: the 
innovation processes, the business models and the investments needed.    
DigiCirc  DigiCirc is a cluster oriented project designed to meet the targets and 
ambition set out by EU Circular Economy policies and actualise circular 
value chains as a competitive advantage. DigiCirc empowers SMEs to 
leverage digital technology as a key enabler for innovative circular 
products/services, processes and business models. ReSChape will further 
explore new business models and implement a social sustainability plan 
towards fundamentally restructuring value chains to be low -carbon and 
circular.  https://digicirc.eu  
Vanguard initiative  Network of regions focusing in advanced manufacturing and with a 
special  emphasis  in  circular  manufacturing. 
https://www.s3vanguardinitiative.eu/   
SORISMA  In the SORISMA project, tools are developed with which companies can 
manage the risks arising in the three dimensions of people, organisation 
and technology in the context of Industry 4.0 projects. e. g., methods for 
risk analysis or the development of risk strategies enable companies to 
identify the effects and risks of Industry 4.0 and to derive suitable 
measures to minimise risks and this results can be input for ReSChape for 
the analysis of risks due to disruptions.   
Center of Excellence Logistics and IT  The Center of Excellence Logistics and IT forms an ecosystem for 
logistics innovation and supports the transformation into new 
organizational forms such as an inter-company social networked industry 
where focus is on people as an essential element.  
Innovationlab Hybrid Services in  
Logistics  
The focal point of the Innovationlab’s work lies in the question of how to 
design and organise responsible and target-oriented ways for people and 
technology to interact in shared networks. Therefore, innovative 
technologies are being developed and tested in cooperation with 
companies while focusing on the social question of how to design and pay 
for work 4.0  
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  19  
  
Siemens Gamesa's contribution to the  
SDGs  
This project is based on the analysis and monetization of the social value 
that Siemens Gamesa’s social action projects generate for the different 
stakeholders. The value contributed for each SDG in which the company 
operates is quantified. Recommendations are enounced for the selection 
of projects and proposals for optimization in the creation and distribution 
of the value generated, based on equity among stakeholders and their 
contribution to the SDGs.  
Social value generated and distributed 
by the Port of Cartagena   
The objective is the development of a model that allows systematizing 
the social accounting of the Port of Cartagena, identifying and promoting 
the Market, non-Market, induced and emotional value that generates the 
different interest groups and its repercussion on the environment.  
AgriCoopValue. Erasmus K plus  
Proyect (2021-22)  
The aim of the project is the systematization of a methodological process 
that allows social accounting to be scaled to the group of agri -food 
cooperatives of the European Union, based on the experiences developed 
by the Spanish territorial entities of social economy.  
FOODRUS Circular solutions for  
resilient food systems  
The FOODRUS project seeks to create resilient local food systems in 
Europe by developing 23 circular solutions to limit food losses and waste 
along the agri-food value chain. It will pr omote efficiency in the use of 
resources across all the stages of the value chain, through process 
optimisation and sustainable dietary and consumption toolkits.  
  
1.2.3  Interdisciplinary approach   
ReSChape project has a highly interdisciplinary nature, reflected in the composition of the consortium – which 
encompasses institutions of different types involving professionals and researchers with varied backgrounds and from 
different disciplines (such as economists, management engineers, industrial engineers, social policy scientists). Due 
to the complex framework of the project, as well as the comprehensive features related to the need to build a social 
resilient and sustainable Europe, we believe that the involvement of different disciplines is essential to the success of 
the research both with regard to its theoretical contribution and practical range. Moreover, the project is ambitious in 
terms of interdisciplinarity as it will boost the collaboration between different contexts, such as: industry (key value 
chains), policy makers, academics, social entrepreneurs and technology professionals.   
In terms of expertise and methods, the joint effort of partners from different disciplines will enrich the results of the 
project as we understand that, when well-managed, multidisciplinary teams can perform better on tasks that benefit 
from multiple perspectives than homogeneous teams. As creativity is a fundamental part of innovation it will be 
stimulated during all the phases of the project, the collaboration and the sharing of ideas within the group – which 
generate novel associations and can lead to additional ideas – will be continuously encouraged. A social innovation 
approach will be used as it systematica lly addresses two of the main challenges faced by European companies and 
value chains today - their resilience and their sustainability.  
1.2.4  Integration of social sciences and humanities  
Social sciences and humanities play a fundamental role in the Re SChape project, as they are key to understanding 
social issues, such as the balance between economic development and the impact of industry on the social and 
environmental dimensions. As mentioned in section 1.2.3, both the composition of the consortium an d network of 
experts to be created will encompass institutions, professionals and academics from a variety of disciplines, including 
social sciences and humanities. The role of social sciences and humanities in the project starts with the overall 
identification of the social changes and expected impacts that will be addressed along the project and continue in all 
tasks of the project. The definition of the principles of social resilient and sustainable value chains and the principles 
for social SC have a high contribution from social sciences. Professionals and institutions from the following social 
sciences and humanities disciplines are expected to be involved during the different phases of the project: (i) Social 
and behavioural sciences: economics, polit ical science, sociology, human rights; (ii) Journalism and information: 
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  20  
  
journalism, archival sciences; (iii) Business and administration: marketing, management, public and institutional 
administration; (iv) Humanities: ethics.   
1.2.5  Gender dimension    
ReSChape partners understand gender equality as “an essential condition for an innovative, competitive and thriving 
European economy” as outlined in the European Commission Gender Equality Strategy for 2020-2025 - A Union of 
Equality, and are committed to fostering gender equality in research.  
Partners will strive for a gender balance throughout all project phases, starting with partner organizations and staff. 
Among the key staff listed in the participant profiles both male and female key persons are list ed and, during the 
project, active measures will be taken to ensure that women scientists and practitioners are well represented in the 
partners’ organizations and project leadership. Partner organizations will take measures to ensure accessibility of 
meetings and activities for all. Continuous monitoring will be implemented and all period reports will include a 
section mentioning the number of men/women working on the Action per beneficiary.  
Gender equality guidelines and targets will also be implemented during the project phases that include the 
participation of external stakeholders, and gender indicators will be considered when evaluating the impact on social 
dimension of decisions related to SCs and to policy.    
1.2.6  Open science practices   
The project will apply an open and collaborative approach based on systematic sharing of knowledge developed in 
the project. A balanced approach between the adoption of Open Science practices and the assurance of the Intellectual 
Property Rights of all stakeholders will be adopted in the ReSChape project, aligned with the EU data sharing policy 
on the principle “as open as possible, as closed as necessary”. The partners understand intellectual property as a 
crucial aspect when it comes to foster knowledge co-creation and are fully committed to ensure its accomplishment. 
Open science will be implemented as an integral part of the project by means of three main practices that help to 
improve the transparency and accessibility of the scientific research and, as conseq uence, increase both its validity 
and recognition within the academic community and its social contribution:  
● Preregistration – where possible, the hypotheses and objectives that arise from the research in the context of 
the project will be developed and published before their test as a way to assure the transparency of the process. 
Similarly, all the methodological procedures, including the data analysis plan, will be publicly registered 
prior to conducting the study. These practices help to ensure that the objectives and methods are not changed 
along the research. An online platform will be used to preregister the research intentions (e.g. 
https://aspredicted.org/).  
● Open data – open data will be considered an alternative during the project when applicable , assuring the 
Intellectual Property Rights of all stakeholders and considering data ownership issues.  
● Open access – preference will be given to publish the results of research in the context of the project with 
open access. Pre-prints will also be considered as an option to publish results.   
1.2.7  Data management policy  
ReSChape project work is based on data collected from companies, and in general information collected from 
stakeholders like social actors, policy makers, industrial companies. These data are related to business and no personal 
data need to be collected for this project. Moreover, data from public databases (like Eurostat, OCSE, World Bank, 
national statistics, databases with accounting information like AIDA in Italy) will be used along the project for the 
modelling of social impact. The project deliverables related  to project coordination (WP1) will include a detailed 
data management plan (DMP -D1.3) concerning the FAIR principles related to all collected data. In general, data 
collected will be stored under the Project Coordinator’s private database with limited acc ess to the consortium 
members, in line with European GDPR (UE/2016/679). The database will be maintained under supervision of the 
Project Coordinator’s data management officer. Data produced by the demonstrators is either owned by the individual 
applicants of each demonstrator or, collectively, by ReSChape consortium, in which case it will follow the defined 
guidelines of the DMP. A Data Manager will be identified, ensuring that participants are provided with relevant 
guidelines and documentation for data management. Where applicable, metadata structure and formatting will follow 
standard practices to ensure replicability and anonymity, following Intellectual Property Rights and data ownership 
concerns of involved stakeholders.   
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  21  
  
2. Impact  
2.1.  Project’s pathways towards impact   
2.1.1. Outcomes and wider impacts  
Outcome 1 - Develop knowledge on the ongoing and expected changes and disruptions in trade patterns, 
global value chains and production networks  
ReSChape contribution: identify and analyse social, economic and environmental impact of contemporary 
issues on trade patterns (obj.1), global value chains and production networks, including the causes and effects 
of disruptions (obj.2). On the basis of the results, ReSChape wil l propose new SC models for more resilient 
and sustainable value chains.  
Target Groups:  industrial business owners, supply chain managers, technological companies, industrial 
associations, policy makers, researchers.  
Scientific impact: theory building on new models for resilient and sustainable value chains applying different 
framework of analysis like complexity and contingency theory.   
Economic/technological impact: The knowledge developed in ReSCape on the expected changes in global 
value chains and the post pandemic SC models, will create better understanding among industry and policy 
makers on how to push forward the drivers of change to achieve the long -term goal of digital technology 
adoption of at least 20%. Moreover, the human -centric approach is expected to increase human -machine 
interaction level in manufacturing and logistics processes by 30% by 2030.   
Societal impact: ReSChape contributes to enhance employment and social fairness by designing  post 
pandemic adapted SC strategies, such as resource efficient, circular and human centered value chains.   
Requirements and barriers: to accomplish this outcome, ReSChape will need to map the contemporary 
challenges faced by companies and value chains and to develop models that contribute both to theory and 
practice when it comes to more resilient and sustainable value chains. The main bar rier is the complexity 
associated with the analysis of the changes in post pandemic global value chains.  
Scale and significance: ReSChape intends to start from the trends mapped in NEXT-NET and to update them 
with a specific focus on social trends linking to the 20 EU pillar of Social Rights. The project intends to engage 
100-150 companies during the development of 4-5 models for resilient and sustainable value chains.  
Outcome 2 - Identify innovative ways to maximise the potential and mitigate the adverse social, economic 
and environmental impacts of changes in global value chains and international trade patterns in European 
urban and rural areas. Research should take into considera tion impacts on employment, job quality, 
economic growth, income inequalities and on social cohesion and well-being  
ReSChape contribution: definition of innovative SC models (obj.2) that mitigate the adverse social impacts 
of the COVID -19 pandemic, defin ition of innovative systems to assess social impact (obj.3), towards 
supporting informed decisions about configuration of new SC relationships and collaboration across regions  
 
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  22  
  
and countries for new global trade patterns. Moreover, we will provide analys is to link skill gaps with 
employment indicators.                  
Target Groups: industry, academia and government              
Scientific impact : Development of theoretical models for supporting evaluation of social impact in SC 
literature. The results can support also universities wishing to gain an understanding of the related skills 
contributing to the success of its graduates and any skill gaps that may exist in its current curriculum i.e., design 
new education programs, and redesign and upgrade the existing program.   
Economic/technological impact: Enabling companies to value intangible assets to calculate the net social 
value of their SCs. Helping companies to widen the CSR fra mework and to automatise the collection of 
information on impact to save time and increase reputation.   
Societal impact: More transparency on business practices related to employment, job quality, well -being of 
workers. Moreover, for what concerns skills,  this project will propose answer to unemployment issues to 
overcome skill mismatch proposing solutions regarding different sectors taking into consideration urban and 
rural conditions. As an example, the project may impact positively on youth employment w hich was up to 
16.8% in June 2020 in EU, and in some regions the situation was worse e.g.  40.8% in Spain (Kraatz, 2020).     
Requirements and potential barriers : the project will need to engage a set of different stakeholders and  
experts from various fields will need to be able to collect a variety of data. The difficulty to access employers 
to collect the data is a potential barrier. Secondary data e.g., jobs ads could be used.  
Scale and significance:      These outcomes will be a valuable contribution to help companies and governments 
in instantiating the ambitious goals of the 20 EU Pillars on Social rights.  
  
Outcome 3 - Assess the impacts of the coronavirus pandemic and related public health crisis on global 
value chains, production networks and security of supplies, and their short- and longer-term implications 
for employment and social resilience in the EU  
ReSChape contribution: Support the decision making in organisa tions to face the unintended and indirect 
consequences of the COVID-19 outbreak and the related SC strategies and risk management responses of the 
manufacturing companies (obj.3). Support policy makers in the design of policies to overcome the impacts of 
the coronavirus pandemic (obj. 4).   
Target Groups: Manufacturing companies and policy makers  
Scientific impact: Provides new knowledge that can be used by researchers and managers to resolve future 
SC risk challenges and avoid the need to relearn lessons already learned by COVID-19 research when the next 
global disruption comes around.    
Economic/technological impact:      on the models proposed by the project, companies can enhance their 
resilience and achieve competitiveness.  Social accounting facilita tes the identification of the displacements 
that have occurred due to the COVID-19 such as gaps in the generation or distribution of the value generated 
related to the covid data (by years and countries). A social value generated self -assessment tool leads  the 
strategies of the companies to understand the unbalanced impacts depending on the stakeholders that are 
considered. This fact makes companies to re-think their value chain model, thinking on response, reactive and 
recovery      measures.  
Societal impact: Facilitate public bodies in monitoring long-term consequences (e.g. youth unemployment, 
diversity, excessive working time) of disruptions caused by COVID and establishing appropriate corrective 
measures   
     Requirements and potential barriers:       Due to the contingent situation, it might be that managers do 
not share the information about the strategies they are putting in place due to confidentiality and related 
competitive advantage. Difficulties in collecting fresh and updated data on the ongoing situation.   
Scale and significance: The cross -country analysis will provide insights not only on the impacts of the 
coronavirus pandemic, but also on the results from the various policy measures put forward by the European 
governments.     .  
Outcome 4 - Unfold policy scenarios for future value chain developments, production networks and level 
playing field trade relations, which will ensure security of strategic supplies, strengthen the economic 
resilience of societies, foster sustainable employment creation in the EU and mitigate the impacts of future 
trade and value chains disruptions on EU employment  
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  23  
  
ReSChape contribution: Questions asked about the preparedness or even existence of policies and associated 
systems to help individuals and communities in EU in the field to deal with the consequences of COVID -19 
and other key megatrends. Thus, this project will fill this gap by providing policy recommendations for future  
 
value chains.   
Target Groups: policy makers, researchers   
Scientific impact: The scenarios will consider the resilience and sustainability (in all its facets) of European 
SCs in the context of global value chains.  
Economic/technological impact: Testing the possibility of using a comprehensive social accounting of the 
value chain will enable three complementary outcomes; (1) To identify the information (transparency / 
information symmetry) that would be necessary to demand from companies in order to establish value chain  
social accounting; (2) This accounting information, combined with the Morphological Analysis, would allow 
us to establish prospective analysis scenarios for suggesting new or redefined public policies. (3) 
Complementarily, from the mentioned Morphological  Analysis it would be possible to infer the potential 
impact of the various countries (territories) involved in the value chain, allowing progress in cooperation 
models, both public-private, and between countries with complementarity in the value chain.  
Societal impact: Government regulations impact every SC, and companies should adapt their operations to 
overcome any trade barriers in terms of expertise, inputs and technology, which will have negative effects on 
employment, economic growth and sustainability.  
Requirements and potential barriers: From a visionary point of view, partners and stakeholders may have a 
limited vision of the future with little or no capability to see forward the future policies. Secondary data e.g. 
reports also will help us to capture and verify our results.    
Scale and significance: ReSChape will map and identify 6 -7 Key Horizontal Issues related for example to 
trade conditions, taxation, international agreements, and define 3 -4 policy scenarios.  Simulation and what if 
analysis should bring to an index of consistency of the retained scenarios for over 90%.  
Outcome 5 - Produce new, innovative methodologies and ways for assessing and monitoring the level 
playing field developments in trade and value chains in the EU  
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  24  
  
ReSChape contribution: analysing trends and changes will include also monitoring the level playing field, 
and assessing the impact of trade on social indicators, the societal impact through social accounting for 
sustainability method, and the economic and environmental impacts w ithin industrial business concerning 
major issues on cross-country EU policies.     
Target Groups: policy makers, multi-national companies, researchers and academia  
Scientific impact: The innovative methodologies will provide new knowledge on assessing the impact of 
different kinds of trade and value chain disturbances. Policy makers can use them to improve decision making 
processes. Researchers can also employ the ReSChape results to  increase the number of empirical cases for 
continuing developing this knowledge area. These new methodologies will enable practitioners and academics 
to a better understanding about the social value generated and its impact on stakeholders and social well-being.  
Economic/technological impact: Enabling better assessment and monitoring of trade conditions (i.e. taxes, 
partnerships between countries, custom duties, etc.) in order to contribute to facilitating fair competition and 
equal opportunities to countries and companies across different EU sectors. On the technological perspective, 
the faster and easier diffusion of novel methodologies and technological advances throughout different EU 
sectors and countries will enable a “fair play” perspective in terms  of competition and knowledge sharing. In 
the long term this will result in fairer trade conditions, as well as technological competitive advantages, for EU 
compared to non-EU countries.    
Societal impact: Facilitate implementation of rules and standards  to prevent businesses undercutting rivals in 
areas such as workers’ rights and environmental protections.  Companies, non -profit organisations, public 
administration will be provided with feedback on their social impact which will enable them to increase t heir 
legitimacy in the society and as consequence the citizens and the regions will be benefited.   
Requirements and potential barriers: capability to involve EU policy makers and support them to deploy 
the suggestions and indications for new regulations a nd directives on trade rules and new social accounting. 
Non-EU countries do not accept proposals from EU on level playing field. Industrial partners can be refrained 
from sharing knowledge with peers, as well as providing insights into technological diffusion on a sector scale.  
Scale and significance: Potentially the scale is very large with impact on trade (increase of export of EU 
goods, reduce difference in taxation to business among countries) and with ripple effect scaled upstream 
regarding economic and social impacts on the value chains . Increase 20% of export of EU goods in 5 years, 
reduce difference in taxation to business among EU countries, increase diffusion of innovative technologies 
and knowledge sharing for competitive advantages in trade within EU countries.  
Long-term impact for destination: Social and economic resilience and sustainability are strengthened 
through a better understanding of the social, ethical, political and economic impacts of drivers of change 
(such as technology, globalisation, demographics, mobility and migration) and their interplay.  
ReSChaPe pathway to contribute to the targeted expected impact of HEU Strategic Plan:   
ReSChape directly and effectively contributes to this long-term impact fostering the transformation of present 
SCs and production networks towards a new approach where social and economic resilience and sustainability 
are reached using methods and digital tools to allow stakeholders to know which are the drivers of change and 
to have the capability to answer. The developed tools will study the interplay between dimensions (social, 
economic and environmental) both at macro and micro-level. The project will refer to the UN-SDGs as well as 
to the 20 European Pillar for Social Rights and will define how the different involved stakeholders can support 
their implementation.   
2.2.  Measures to maximise impact - Dissemination, exploitation and communication   
2.2.1. Dissemination and Communication (D&C)   
The objectives of the D&C and exploitation strategy are:   
• To network relevant stakeholders for consultation process and to keep them updated on the most important 
findings of the project;   
• To support the validation of project results with involvement of different stakeholders;   
• To organize meetings with policy makers to support European Commission in defining new policy scenarios;   
• To promote knowledge created in the project through actions for a wide audience and to increase the visibility 
and consciousness on the importance of the research on SC topics and policy scenarios towards a wide audience  
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  25  
  
• To exploit project results in the European SC Observatory which would represent a platform where to share 
knowledge with stakeholders about SC.   
In particular, the project partners strongly believe that in order to optimize dissemination and communication actions, 
it is crucial to make concrete showcases of project outcomes and knowledge available to an increasingly expanding 
audience. This includes networking partners and other stakeholders not included in this proj ect. The ReSChape 
project therefore takes an iterative stakeholder expansion strategy. In case of results that cannot be shared due to 
confidentiality issues, they will be presented in an adapted form for all target groups. Relevant project materials will 
be available through the project website and will be published through the project communication channels including 
newsletters and other public material. D&C manager, together with the Project partners will organise the 
dissemination and communication so that maximum reach is obtained, at the same time controlling licensing and IPR 
issues related to content. The Dissemination strategy consist of three phases: a. Dissemination phase 1 – inwards 
oriented  
• Validate the ReSChape knowledge base and solutions in  a contained set of stakeholders, expert groups with a 
limited (e.g. 6-10) industrial and academic organisations in Europe using good practices and tools from previous 
practices from a European wide network of cross -sectorial SCs. In fact in the first phas e of the project, a 
European wide study will be done with 50 – 100 relevant organisations to collect relevant good practices related 
to projects on SC scenarios and that can help to define the future scenarios.   
• In this phase dissemination, focus will be on general communication about the project to the general public (e.g.  
through website) and making knowledge, and good practices available to facilitate the smaller initial group of 
stakeholders.  
b. Dissemination phase 2 – intra-clusters oriented  
• Expand the number of industrial stakeholders involved in the process, and validate the ReSChape Project future 
scenarios for SC and research and innovation priorities on a larger scale, involving (an estimated 30 – 50) 
additional stakeholders in the ReSChape selected sectors.   
• In this phase, dissemination activities will focus on fine -tuning the knowledge base and research needs on the 
results of the project, and making them available in a user friendly way to a wider audience between the different 
clusters.  
c. Exploitation and dissemination phase 3 – externally oriented  
• Expand the audience of the ReSChape project to a much wider audience of related stakeholders (500 – 3000) 
throughout Europe, fostering take -up of ReSChape findings and results for their implementation targeting a 
vibrant interconnected European network of cross-sectorial industry.  
• Dissemination activities will be focused on further professionalising the knowl edge, and making sure a wider 
audience of relevant stakeholders has appropriate knowledge about the ReSChape project and its results, in order 
to stimulate their take-up and accelerate resource efficiency.  
• Exploitation activities will be targeted at developing an “exit strategy” or a “sustainability strategy” for the joint 
ReSChape results, investigating how the ReSChape can be continued and financed beyond the end of the project.  
In order to properly execute and monitor the dissemination and exploitation  activities, a detailed plan will be made 
at month 12 of the ReSChape project. This plan will not only include the more detailed definition of deliverables and 
any additional activity required, but also refine the approach to delivery outlined here. On the  following pages, the 
preliminary dissemination, communication and exploitation activities for ReSChape are reflected.   
Dissemination and communication related to promoting the ReSChape project and its results will be implemented 
through strategic and targeted measures possibly engaging in a two-way exchange with the target groups. The target 
groups will receive easily understandable information on technical project results. The dissemination and 
communication plan will apply diverse information regimes to different stakeholders, based on the importance they 
have for the project and their interest in the outcomes of ReSChape:  
• Players with high interest/high influence: have a high interest in ReSChape and have a high potential influence 
on the project. Thes e players will be engaged closely to build a relationship during and after the project (e.g. 
Industry, policymakers).   
• Players with high interest/low influence: have a high interest in ReSChape, but do not have a high (beneficial) 
influence on the project. These organisations will be regularly informed in order to keep their interest.  
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  26  
  
• Players with low interest/high influence: can have a high influence on the starting of the project (trend setting 
and analysing), but a fairly low interest in ReSChape results. Actions will be aimed at increasing their perceived 
interest in the project without informing them too frequently.  
• Players with low interest/low influence : consumers and citizens shall be involved through specific 
associations, consumer goods association, will receive only specific information and might participate to some 
part of the validation process as they cannot play a decisive role for ReSChape.   
  
2.2.2. Communication activities   
In the beginning of the project, there will be only generic new s to share through the mass media and social media 
platforms, and communication will be focused on making the general public aware of ReSChape and its potential 
role in assessing the needs for the scenario analyses. In this phase, communication activities will create a coherent 
identity for ReSChape, supported with audiovisual content (logo, promotional videos, leaflets,  etc.) and will deploy 
generic communication measures, like the ReSChape website and periodic newsletters with generic information 
about the project and related news. The ReSChape website will include the general information about the project, 
news & events, download section and interactive section, that will offer the opportunity to engage the different 
audiences during the duration of the project. Through the website target audiences will be invited to play an active 
role in the process of collecting, reporting, analysing and disseminating content. Examples of possible interactive 
activities supported are: blog/videoblog, wikis, RSS, taggin g and social bookmarking, music -photo-video sharing, 
and podcasts. Such e-services, will contribute to the involvement of end-users as active participants.   
As ReSChape progresses, project results become available and more insights are obtained in which s takeholders 
should be more closely involved in the project. The information which becomes available provides the opportunity 
to involve external stakeholders into the project by changing their perceived interest and attitude in the project with 
targeted information. Strong media coverage will be another major target and media campaigns will be organized in 
relevant social networks to disseminate the project but also to raise awareness of the general public towards key 
messages of the project.  
The communica tion strategy will be designed by ReSCHAPE communication manager, ZLC communications 
director, in charge of designing and supervising ReSCHAPE audiovisual content creation, graphic design materials, 
as well as communication content in general (such as press releases). She will also manage ReSCHAPE social media 
and organize ReSCHAPE events.   
ReSCHAPE social media will include Twitter, LinkedIn and YouTube, and it will leverage social media allies to 
ensure maximum impact.   
The expected outcome of ReSCHAPE communication strategy is presented in the tables below:  
1) Media coverage and website expected KPIs  
Media coverage  ReSChape  Website  ReSChape  
Number of articles in local, regional and national 
media outlets echoing research work/events 
organised by the project (clippings)  
20  Site bounce rates  8000  
Press cuts' reach  30  Page views  15000  
Tone of articles in local, regional and national 
media outlets echoing research work/events 
organised by the project  
Positive  Unique page 
visitors  6000  
Digital leaflet  1  External website 
links  10  
2) Newstletter, events and videos expected KPIs  
Newsletters  ReSChape  Events  ReSChape  Videos  ReSChape  
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  27  
  
Number and type 
of subscribers  
100 subscribers 
(20 academia, 20 
practitioner, 20 
policymaker, 20 
NGO, 20 other)  
Number and type 
of targetted 
participants  
250 (50 academia, 50 
industry practitioners, 
50 associations, 20 
policymakers, 50 
NGO, 30 other)  
Number of views  200  
Number of 
downloads  350  Media coverage 
targets  
Printed and digital 
mass press, specialized 
magazines, radio, TV, 
Internet podcasts  
Average view 
time     
Number of 
newsletters sent  6        Number of shares  20  
3) Social media expected KPIs  
Twitter  ReSChape  LinkedIn  ReSChape  
Number of non-affiliated independent 
followers versus number of users 
followed  
Up to 150 
followers /up to 
200 followed  
Number of followers  Up to 500  
Impressions (number of times your 
content is displayed, no matter if it was 
clicked or not, and therefore delivered to 
someone's feed)  
Up to 50000  Posts  Up to 80  
Reach (number of unique people who 
see your content) targets  Up to 300  Unique page visitors  Up to 800  
    Page visualization  Up to1500  
  
2.2.3. Dissemination activities  
Dissemination in the context of ReSChape is regarded both as a information process targeting the the scientific 
community, specialist media, peers (e.g. other EU -funded projects), field actors (e.g. agencies, institutes, 
universities), as well as Programme Committee members, EU policy officers, a mong others, also with significant 
marketing initiatives aiming to promote the new SC concepts, future scenarios and business models to the business 
world and policy makers to influence the models of the future.  
Dissemination activities will be implemented through a number of channels and a number of actions has been planned 
to assure the effectiveness of the general dissemination activities. Indeed, dissemination of project results through 
participation at international conferences, workshops, seminars, and publication in scientific journals will take place. 
All publications will be done with an open access status.   
Scientific dissemination will be based on participation to recognized international conferences in the area of Supply 
chain Management, and generally Industrial Engineering, Social science and policy making. Time by time it will be 
evaluated the opportunity to make Special sessions within the conferences where partners participate. Results will be 
periodically published in scientific journals w ith international peer review and in the form of open access. Some 
journals that will be considered are: International Journal of Production Economics, Omega, Technology Forecasting 
and Societal Challenges, International Journal of Production Research. The  partners will also discuss and evaluate 
the possibility to issue an open access Springer book with the most important results of the project.   
Expected outcomes of ReSCHAPE dissemination activities beyond scientific publications include policy 
recommendations (leveraging WP4 deliverables as well issuing EC policy briefs), and industry -academia 
collaborations.  
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  28  
  
The following list in table 2.1 includes events and conferences where project partners usually participate and where 
possible dissemination activities can be realized.  
Table 2.1 List of events for Dissemination   
Event   Type of audience  Type of action   Expected impact   
World  
Manufacturing 
Forum   
high  
level policy makers and 
corporate leaders  
roundtable and workshop  Potential audience: 500 
people   
Future Congress 
Logistics  
3PL, distributors, logistics 
companies, manufacturers, 
research organisations  
roundtable and workshop  Potential audience: around  
300 visitors  
Workshops with 50 people   
CSCMP annual 
conference (Council  
of Supply Chain 
Management  
Professionals)  
SCM professionals (CSCMP 
annual event and/or CSCMP 
roundtables), research 
organisations (European 
Research Seminar organized 
in parallel to annual CSCMP 
event)  
roundtable and workshop, 
scientific papers  
Potential audience: Informed 
200 people (for annual  
events)    
Roundtables with 50 people   
  
Supply Chain  
Meeting 2017 -2019 
(Portuguese Annual  
Logistics Event)  
Manufacturers, 3PL service 
providers, distributors, 
logistics companies, logistics 
equipment, ICT companies, 
research organisations  
Event and roundtable 
discussion  
Informed 1500 participants  
Workshops with 
policy makers  
Policy makers  Project results discussion,  
SRA for next Framework 
Programme  
Potential participants: 100200 
per workshop  
EurOMA (European  
Operations  
Management  
Association)  
Conference  
academics and practitioners  Project outputs, event, 
networking  
Potential audience 400 
participants   
Logistics Research 
Network Conference   
academics and practitioners  Project outputs, event, 
networking  
Potential audience 100 
participants   
ISBEE World  
Congress -  
International Society 
of Business,  
Economics and  
academics and practitioners  Project outputs, event, 
networking  
Participants from more than 
40 countries.  
Potential audience: 300 
participants  
Ethics     
International  
Congress of Spanish  
Accounting and  
Business  
Administration  
Association (AECA)  
academics and practitioners  Project outputs, networking 
event, scientific paper  
Potential audience: more than 
300 participants  
UPV/EHU Summer  
Courses Foundation  
academics and practitioners  Summer course (June 2023)  
  
Potential audience: 100 
participants  
International Supply 
Chain Conference  
academics and practitioners  Project outputs, event and 
roundtable discussions,  
networking  
  
Potential audience: Around  
3,500 conference participants 
from over 40 countries  
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  29  
  
Hamburg  
International  
Conference of  
Logistics  
academics and practitioners  Project outputs, event and 
roundtable discussions, 
networking  
  
  
2.2.4. Exploitation   
Some of the partners of the project are working on a follow up action of the NEXT-NET project which is the creation 
of an European Observatory for SCs. The observatory aims to offer to its stakeholders updated information on the 
status of the SC in Europe by means of best practices, interactive access to indicators and benchmarking, projects. 
The observatory is a knowledge sharing area where academics and professionals as well as policy makers can find 
information and discuss about implementing different SC  strategies for sustainability, resilience, agility, etc. In 
particular, part of the results of the ReSChape project will be exploited merging them in the platform integrating the 
missing dimension of the analysis of social dimension of SCs which is now mi ssing in the overall concept of the 
Observatory (Fig. 2.1).   
  
Figure 2.1 Exploitation towards the European Observatory for Supply Chains  
Moreover, the results of the project will be used by partners for creating new training paths both for undergraduat e 
and graduate students. Moreover, it will be useful for supporting consulting activities with companies and policy 
makers to help the identification of new paths for reaching some of the 20 European social pillars.   
2.2.5. IPR management  
Intellectual property (IP) management in ReSChape project is required to: 1) Protect IP made available by consortium 
partners and tools and methods used and developed during the project; and 2) to protect pre-existing IP made available 
and further developed.  
IP management within the consortium will be defined in the Consortium Agreement (CA), in accordance with 
DESCA 2020 model, primarily, providing for the following:  
• Ownership and protection of foreground: Foreground project assets will be owned and licensed in accordance 
with stipulations in the Consortium Agreement. This includes various project results developed by the 
consortium to be disseminated and exploited, as described in these respective sections.  The project's 
opensource assets will be appropriately licensed as such (e.g. GNU GPL, Creative Commons, FreeBSD, 
Apache License v.2). Ownership will rest with the consortium partner that created or otherwise developed it. 
If more than one consortium partner has contributed and the individual contribution cannot be isolated from 
the rest, the foreground information will be owned jointly by contributing partners. For assets that are not 
open source, the owner will be entitled to grant an exclusive license to  third parties. Procedures for conflict 
resolution management, should the need arise, will be specified in the CA.  
• Confidentiality: Any confidential material provided/produced during the project will remain for the 
information of the project partners. Such information will not be disclosed to any other party without explicit 
authorisation.  

  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  30  
  
• Access rights to foreground: Consortium partners will grant access rights to foreground information that is 
required to achieve the project objectives. The terms of access rights will be specified in the CA.  
• Access rights to background: Consortium partners will grant access rights to background information that is 
required to achieve the project objectives, as detailed in the CA. Background rights will remain with the 
consortium partner that owns the rights.  
For what concerns IP management relating to ReSChape project beneficiaries  is a key focus of the project as a 
key element to unlock and spur exploitation/ market uptake, and directly relates to the project’s Specifi c Objective 
ReSChape. The result of this will be that researchers will be empowered to: (i) take appropriate protection measures 
regarding their data, project results, and other assets (i.e. patents, proper and technical definition of know-how during 
licensing and other agreements); and (ii) gain knowledge of IP issues as they relate to possible negotiations with 
investors, large enterprises, and others to ensure that IP is properly valorised. Any IP generated by the partners shall 
rest with them. External parties involved in the project will sign Non-Disclosure Agreements indicating that they will 
not improperly make use of the information, technical designs, or other sensitive information of beneficiaries, made 
available to them through their involvement in the project. 
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06        
 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022 
2.3. Summary -KEY ELEMENT OF THE IMPACT SECTION  
SPECIFIC NEEDS    EXPECTED RESULTS    D & E & C MEASURES  
Secure autonomy of European value chains to avoid 
supply disruptions of key products, contributing to 
building resilient businesses;  
Improve the sustainability of European Industry, 
considering its environmental, social, and economic 
aspects.  
Need to reinforce the capability to assess social impact of 
business, giving a new meaning to social resilience.  
Need of new policies for busine ss to implement social 
oriented actions.   
  
       
Updated mapping of trends, changes and disruptions.   
Proposing SC models and innovative ways to organize SCs 
for social resilience  
Develop quantitative models for assessing and monitoring 
social indicators at multi-country and multi-sectoral level.  
Assess impact of COVID in the short and long term  
Propose policy scenarios for social resilience and 
sustainability.   
(D) Dedicated initiatives: consortium meetings, 
workshops, public open initiatives to engage 
communities, webinars, scientific conference, final 
conference   
(C) Social channels (Linkedi n, Twitter, Facebook, 
Instagram, and others) to reach broad audience  
(E/D) innovative models for social impact assessment for 
industry, policy makers, social actors for consultancy 
and training.  
(E/D) EU observatory on SC with a session dedicated to 
social impact and related policies   
(E/D) Open Access Positioning Papers       
TARGET GROUPS  OUTCOMES  IMPACTS  
Industrial companies, logistics providers, distributors, 
suppliers of important EUSCs like fashion, automotive, 
aerospace, food and others.  
Social actors including social unions, trade unions, social 
innovators, consumer associations.   
Policy makers both at regional, national and European 
level.   
Awareness on the competitive advantage brought to SCs by 
a new approach to social impact.   
New social indicators used and monitored by companies at 
micro-level with a new system of social accountability  
New aggregated social indicators used and monitored by 
policy makers to evaluate the progress of the EU 20 
targets on social rights and to implement innovative level 
playing field strategies.  
Users can access in interactive way to indicators by means 
of digital tools.  
Scientific:  New breakthrough scientific approaches on 
social impact of trade and SCs, on policy scenarios.  
  
Economic: help EU to reach targets of 75% of  the 
population aged 20 to 64 in employment by 2030. 
Increase competitiveness of EU trade market.   
  
Societal: help implementation of better working 
conditions, decrease job disparities, increase balance in 
policies definition.   
  
    

  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06        
 
ReSChape        28  
  
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  33  
  
3. Quality and efficiency of the implementation  
3.1. Work plan and resources   
ReSChape activities are structured along 3 years along 5WPs which are interrelated each other according to the figure 
3.2. While there is a WP for Project Management and one for Dissemination &Communication, there are 3 WPs with 
scientific activities namely: WP2 covering obj.1 and obj.2 thus identifies and analysing trends and changes and 
proposing related SCs strategies, WP3 covering obj.3 proposing different approaches to analyse impact of trade and 
SCs on social indicators and finally WP4 covering obj.4 developing policy scenarios.   
  
 

  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  34  
  
Figure 3.2 Inter-relationship between ReSChape project work packages  
Table 3.1g:  ‘Subcontracting costs’ item   
No subcontracting  
Table 3.1h: ‘Purchase costs’ items (travel and subsistence, equipment and other goods, works and services)  
No partners over 15%  Table 3.1i:  ‘Other costs categories’ items (e.g. internally invoiced goods and 
services) N/A Table 3.1j:  ‘In-kind contributions’ provided by third parties  
  
Updating the table 3.1j, INESC TEC decided to add IPP’s (Instituto Politénico do Porto) contributions in kind. The 
entities UP and IPP will not be involved in the project, and no activities will be carried out by them. INESC TEC 
envisages the use of contributions in kind provided by UP and IPP regarding secondment of persons free of charge 
(Article 9.2 of the General Model Grant Agreement).   
The inclusion of the IPP is due to the addition to the project team of three Professors/Researchers of this institute 
who have recently collaborated with INESC TEC: Hélio Cristiano Castro, Nelson Jorge Ribeiro Duarte and Cristóvão 
Dinis Polido Sousa. They have been developing research on the relationship between the adoption of digital 
technologies and sustainability in the context of supply chains and w ill contribute to activities related to WP2 and 
WP4. Professor Maria do Rosário Moreira from the Faculty of Economics of the University of Porto has researched 
in areas such as supply chain management, logistics and quality management, and has experience i n sustainability 
issues in supply chains. She will mainly contribute in WP4.  
Although not contemplated in the proposal phase, INESC TEC believes that the inclusion of IPP members in the 
team will be beneficial due to their experience in project -related topics, and because they have the potential and 
availability to participate in different phases throughout the entire project. On the other hand, the participation of 
University of Porto will be reduced compared to the original plan in the proposal, as it will be focused on WP4.  
Finally, as explained in Table 3.1j, INESC TEC reinforces that “the researchers are authorized to do their research 
work for INESC TEC and using its research resources, such as offices and laboratories, including a clean room, 
meeting rooms, communication network and other supporting infrastructures. For all contractual purposes, INESC 
TEC assumes full responsibility for the involvement of these researchers in the project, since they are members of 
its research team.  
  
Participant No. 2 - INESC TEC    
Third party name  Category  Cost (€)  Justification  
Universidade do Porto 
(UP)  
Seconded personnel  11 750 €  The University Researchers have contracts of 
employment with the University or Institute that signed 
an agreement with INESC TEC, whereby the 
researchers are authorized to do their research work for 
INESC TEC and using its research resources, like 
offices and laboratories, including a clean room, 
meeting rooms, communication network and other 
supporting infrastructures. For all contractual 
purposes, INESC TEC assumes full responsibility for 
the involvement of these researchers in the project, 
since they are members of its research team.  
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  35  
  
Instituto Politécnico do 
Porto (IPP)  
Seconded personnel  82 250 €  Same as above
3.2  Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole  
ReSChape consortium joins members from different scientific areas collecting 9 renamed organisations from 6 EU 
countries bringing relevant expertise and assuring connection to related communities. The consortium represents a 
good balance between research o n industrial and technological innovation (INESC TEC, CNR), supply chains and 
production networks (CNR, ZLC, Aston, IML) skills and employment analysis in global trade (Aston, ZLC), models 
on social impact (DEUSTO, RWI, TUE), policy studies (INESC TEC, TUE) as well as software competences (IRIS).  
This consortium allows to merge viewpoints that are usually studied as separate fields of research, integrating both 
micro-and macro-analysis on global trade, value chains, and related impact on humans bringing a perspective on their 
social value. This project represents a follow up of previous initiatives on digitalization, circular economy and social 
factors in new production models developed along the years by partners through different EU and national projects 
and common initiatives like INESC TEC and CNR have been working together in the FOF and ICT areas 
(Netchallenge, CoReNet, NextNet just to name few of them), ZLC and IML are both involved in the ALICE 
initiatives, CNR and IRIS are both involved in AI-CUBE with focus on role or AI also for social and ethical issues.   
ReSChape consortium encompasses all the necessary expertise to achieve the project aims, and includes a wide 
dissemination and communication competences by all partners (in particular ZLC, WP le ader), with experience in 
open science practices and open access publications. Gender balance is assure by the presence of several female 
researchers in the team which is expected to at least equal the male. This situation will be kept under control by each 
partner and by the coordinator. All partners in the consortium have well -defined tasks and responsibilities and their 
technical and non-technical expertise corresponds well to the requirements of the activities planned in the workplan.  
In particular, CNR is the largest research organisation in Italy with more than 5000 researchers covering all science 
disciplines with more than 100 institutes all over Italy. In this project 2 research institutes are involved: CNR-IEIIT 
working on advanced research in ind ustrial and information engineering (AI, Big Data, CPS, IoT, and others) with 
applications to health sector, bioengineering, manufacturing, mobility etc. to increase resilience of the whole society 
and supply chains; CNR -STIIMA activities aim at innovating  products, processes and organisations in several 
research areas as: mechatronics, robotics, microsystems, AR/VR systems with focus on interaction design, new 
models for evaluating impact of digital technologies on organisations and humans. Both the Instit utes are currently 
involved in several EU projects in several programmes (i.e. Health, FOF, ICT) and collaborates with several 
international initiatives (i.e. Vanguard, Made In Europe, KIC -ICT) and with national clusters to promote research. 
In particular, the Cluster of Intelligent Factories will be involved along the project with its more than 200 members 
from manufacturing sectors.  
In this project, CNR will have the project management bringing experience from coordination of several other EU 
projects. In particular, Rosanna Fornasiero will be the project coordinator (previously coordinator of EU NEXTNET 
project-n.768884). Both the institutes will bring to the project their experience in mapping and scouting technologies, 
analysing social, technological and economic trends and will support the definition of new SC strategies where social 
innovation should meet industrial companies. The staff involved in the project has background in economics and 
industrial engineering and has experience in supply chain, technology and innovation management, forecasting and 
roadmapping for R&D policies, and management of digitalization.  
INESC TEC is a private, non -profit association dedicated to scientific research and technological development, 
technology transfer, advanc ed consulting and training, and pre -incubation of new technology -based companies. 
INESC TEC incorporates 13 R&D Centres, structured in four thematic domains - Computer Science, Industry and  
Innovation, Networked Intelligent Systems, and Power and Energy a nd hosts over 750 integrated researchers. The  
Centre for Enterprise Systems Engineering (CESE) from INESC TEC will be involved in the ReSChape, with 
expertise on Operations Management and Enterprise Information Systems applied to industrial companies and 
organizational networks with application to Enterprise Cooperation Networks, Supply Chain Management; Logistic 
Systems; Intelligent Automation and Industry 4.0, Advanced Planning and Scheduling Systems; Big data and 
Business Analytics and Interoperability.  
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  36  
  
INESC TEC will be the leader of WP4, Development of policy scenarios, as well as responsible for the Definition of 
SC strategies for resilience and sustainability (task 2.3). For these, INESC TEC will bring his experience working 
with technological innovati on and supply chain management, focused on Resource -efficient SCs, and on the 
development of policy recommendations. As member of EIT Manufacturing, EFFRA, EU Robotics, and 
PRODUTECH Digital Innovation, INESC TEC will actively engage industrial and technol ogical companies and 
experts in the project (task 5.2).  
Zaragoza Logistics Center (ZLC) is an international center of excellence for research and education in logistics and 
Supply Chain Management (SCM) that actively engages with industry and the public s ector to develop and 
disseminate knowledge. ZLC was established by the Government of Aragon in Spain, in partnership with the MIT 
Center for Transportation and Logistics (CTL -MIT) and the University of Zaragoza. ZLC is founder and active 
collaborator of the European Technology Platform in Logistics, ALICE (Alliance for Logistics Innovation through 
Collaboration in Europe).  Furthermore, ZLC has a strong network of contacts and collaborators that involves relevant 
European and international networks in the l ogistics and supply chain sector, including shippers, logistics service 
providers, infrastructure managers and research organizations.  
ZLC will contribute to technical tasks of the project with its expertise in the supply chain domain, specifically to the 
definition of supply chain strategies towards sustainability and resilience, innovative ways to organize supply chains 
and required skills for supply chain management. Additionally ZLC will lead the task on the role of logistics 
outsourcing and its impact  on employment. Beyond its supply chain expertise, ZLC will also contribute with its 
stakeholder management expertise by coordinating the dissemination and communication WP, as well as the data 
management task.  
The RWI – Leibniz Institute for Economic Res earch is a leading center for scientific research and evidence -based 
policy advice in Germany. RWI work bridges science with practice by applying state-of-the-art methods to economic 
policy consulting. The overarching goals of the RWI are captured through the motto “Research with impact” along 
3 channels: 1) policy impact by influencing political deliberations; 2) meeting the highest scientific standards, as 
evidenced by regular publications in peer-reviewed journals with a high impact factor; 3) robust impact evaluations, 
applied in both our consulting and research. RWI is also service providers to the scientific community through the 
Ruhr-Data Center (FDZ Ruhr), a publicly accessible data repository for non-commercial research.  The spectrum of 
RWI’s work spans the core fields of economics, including labor markets, public finance, and economic growth and 
business cycles.  
RWI is involved in ReSChape for its experience in macroeconomic models to include the impact of short-term shocks, 
e.g. Brexit, on variables such as value added and employment. RWI analyses longer-term developments such as the 
impact of the Chinese economy on the international division of labor and has built various macroeconomic models, 
which are constantly modified and extended. In the ar ea of labor markets, it studies the changing quality 
requirements due to digitalization as well as questions of income distribution.  
With a long and well established tradition, founded in 1886 as a higher education institution, DEUSTO has a mission 
and ed ucational goal grounded in academic excellence and social responsibility, aiming at generating economic 
sustainable growth and making positive contributions towards the construction of fairer and more inclusive and 
human societies. Recognized as an International Excellence Campus, the university has 39 research teams working 
at 6 faculties (Psychology and Education, Social Sciences and Humanities, Engineering, Law, Economic and 
Business Sciences, and Theology). DEUSTO research is articulated around 5 interd isciplinary platforms on Social 
Justice and Inclusion, Ageing and Wellbeing, Creative Industries and Cities (B -Creative), Gender, Strengthening 
Participation, plus 4 interdisciplinary areas on Energy, Health, Territory, and Industry 4.0.  
DEUSTO contributes to this proposal from its knowledge and experience in measuring the social impact of different 
kind of organisations. The methodology will be fitted to the global value chains context in order to analyse the social 
impact into both macro and micro economic indicators, wellbeing and social cohesion.  
As part of the Fraunhofer Society, IML is the top choice for comprehensive logistics research and work in all fields 
of internal and external logistics. Teams, assembled together based on project and customer requirements, create 
cross-industry and customer -specific solutions in the areas of material flow technology, warehouse management, 
business process modelling, simulation -based business and system planning, and transport systems, resource 
logistics, and e-business. The department of »Supply Chain Development & Strategy« offers impulses and specific 
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  37  
  
approaches for future-oriented and strategic supply chain development. In this regard, we develop and implement 
tailor made business models that fit to the company’s goals. Our expertise includes the conceptualization of logical 
structure and process design on all levels of planning, as well as the identification of economic potential and the 
derivation of suitable measures in the context of industry 4.0 and digitalization.  
Within the project, IML will mainly work on global trends and innovative supply chain models (WP 2) as well as on 
the development of policy scenarios (WP 4). Leading the task 2.1, IML will identify trends, changes, and disruptions 
leading to so cial impacts in supply chain models and the European economy. Moreover, IML will work on the 
identification of key horizontal issues, leading task 4.1. In addition, IML will actively support the derivation of 
sustainable supply chain models (Task 2.2 to 2.5) as well as political fields of action (Task 4.2 and 4.3).  
TUE-The department of Industrial Engineering & Innovation Sciences aims at being a European frontrunner in 
research and education on leading responsible and effective technology development and implementation in industry 
and society. TUE mission is to generate high -quality scientific progress and output, offer excellent educational 
programs, and create technology-based impact for society and industry, combining disciplinary and multidisciplinary 
excellence at the interplay of technological sciences, social sciences and the humanities. As a part of Eindhoven 
University of Technology, research and education in the department of Industrial Engineering & Innovation Sciences 
focuses on gaining knowledge on and designing solutions for complex industrial and societal challenges arising from 
the interplay between new key enabling technologies (e.g., robotics, artificial intelligence, green energy and hightech 
systems) and humans, companies and society at large.   
TUE will provide expertise in the area of innovation policy design, decision analysis, and strategic roadmapping. 
TUE will be responsible for policy scenario analysis, and synthetizing research results into a set of policy 
recommendations which balance economic, environmental, and social sustainability aspects.  
IRIS has broad expertise in EU -funded projects and coordination. Being a renamed engineering enterprise, IRIS 
designs, develops and deploys customized digital solutions and tools for industr ies and entities exercising activities 
in a broad variety of kinds, including production, processing, managing and more. IRIS mission is to accompany 
partners and clients thought the new Industry 4.0 paradigm, by providing flexible and adaptable solutions to the 
digital era such as real-time monitoring, digital storage and interfaces, back and front-end tools, etc; all of them able 
to be managed and monitored in association with the so called SMAC technologies environment.   
IRIS will provide AI solutions development and will deliver simulations deployment to the project; as well as will 
be in charge of the design, development and deployment of digital analytic tools for assessing the effect in the 
selected policy areas.    
Aston University is involved as associated partner. It is a public research university located in Birmingham, in the 
UK. Aston is a long-established research-led University with strong links to industry, government and commerce and 
strong track record in EU Funded Research. The Department of Engineering Systems & Supply Chain Management 
(ESSCM) in the College of Engineering and Physical Sciences has been involved also in various projects Horizon 
2020, ERDF projects. ESSCM has a strong focus on building worl d class research capability, partnership with 
business and industry, and advanced learning. It comprises a multidisciplinary team of academic and research staff 
focused on generating and using leading edge knowledge. They have a strong focus particularly i n thematic areas 
like  systems thinking in supply chain design and integration; environmentally sustainable logistics and systems; 
logistics and supply chain data analytics; technology (particularly ICT) enablers; and, project risk assessment and 
analysis.    
Aston is involved in the project for its cross-sectoral competencies especially in the field of skills and employment in 
logistics, supply chain sectors and the realities of supply-chain trade/ cross-border supply chains. It will be mainly 
involved in WP2, WP3 and WP4.     
  
Annex 1. Affiliated partners involved in the project   
Affiliated party of CNR   
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  38  
  
Given the framework agreement between CNR and University of Padua, registered as prot.n. 254212 on  
01/07/2019, where the two parties regulate collaboration between the two institutions for research and 
training activities and reciprocal involvement in res earch projects for specific tasks, CNR envisages the 
implementation of some tasks by the Affiliated party University of Padua through the Department of 
Technologies and Industrial Management (Unipd -DTG) and Department of Economics with particular 
focus on the following tasks:  
• WP2: Global trends and Innovative supply chain models. Unipd will be involved for supporting 
activities in T2.2 - Social and sustainability challenges for supply chains of the future, to help 
classification of challenges for supply cha ins processes derived from social trends and in T2.3 for 
the definition of supply chain strategies to support resilience and sustainability applying 
methodologies of organizational science. Effort estimated for Unipd: 3 MM  
• WP3: Impact of new SC models on social indicators. Unipd will be involved for supporting 
activities in T3.2 - Model for evaluating impact of new SCs on social indicators, where Unipd will 
support the mapping between the SC strategies and the possible social impact and definition of 
related indicators to be used in the models to be developed by project partners in the task. Effort 
estimated for Unipd: 2 MM  
The total budget allocated to Unipd-DTG will be according to the following table.   
Unipd-PD  Costs  
Direct Personnel costs (5MM x 8.000 euro)   40.000 €  
Other Direct Costs (travels)  2.000€  
Indirect Costs   10.500€  
Total costs   52.500 €  
  
Short profile University of Padua   
University of Padua was founded in 1222 and now provides high education to over 70,000 students, with 2,200 
teachers, and support of over 2,400 administrative technicians. There are more than 13,000 graduates each year, 
5,000 scholarships awarded, 32 departments, and an educational offer of excellence and in continuous transformation, 
the University of Padua (www.unipd.it) has long been positioned at the highest levels in the rankings of the main 
national and international rankings for the quality of teaching, research and services.  
In particular the Department of Technologies and Industrial Management (www.gest.unipd.it) is recognized 
for research and training activities on engineering, technological and economic to support development of 
new products, materials, and production processes. The Department is part of the Engineering faculty with 
laboratories where researchers often work with industry in regional and European projects. In particular, 
the research group on operations management and supply chain management will be involved in the project 
with professors and researchers which have been already involved also in other European projects.  
  
Involved Staff  
Prof. Andrea Vinelli, full professor of Supply Chain and Operations Management at University of Padua    
Andrea Vinelli is Full Professor at the Department of Engineering & Managem ent - DTG - University of Padova, Italy, where 
he teaches Smart Operations and Supply Chain Management, Operations and Supply Chain Strategy and Service Operations 
Management at the Engineering & Management Graduate School. Along the years he has been delegate of the Rector in different 
  
  
HORIZON-CL2-2021-TRANSFORMATIONS-01-06     Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)4072706 - 01/06/2022  
ReSChape      
  39  
  
areas. He is author of more than 200 publications in journals such as the MIT Sloan Management Review, Corporate Social 
Responsibility & Environmental Management, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, International Jo urnal of 
Production Economics, International Journal of Operations & Production Management, and others.   
Prof. Laura Macchion, associate professor of Supply Chain Management at University of Padua.     
Laura Macchion is Associate Professor at the Department of Management and Engineering of the University of Padua, where 
she teaches Operations Managment. Her competences are focused on Supply Chain Management and Operations Management.  
Her research deals with the impact of sustainability on the management of complex and international supply networks and with 
the possibilities offered by new technologies for supply chain configurations. Laura Macchion has also a teaching experience in 
Executive and Master programs in Business Schools and is actively involved in national and international research projects.    
  
Recent pubblications:   
• Da Giau, A., Foss, N. J., Furlan, A., & Vinelli, A. (2020). Sustainable development and dynamic capabilities 
in the fashion industry: A multi‐case study. Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental 
Management, 27(3), 1509-1520.   
• Moretto, A., Macchion, L., Lion, A., Caniato, F., Danese, P., & Vinelli, A. (2018). Designing a roadmap 
towards a sustainable supply chain: A focus on the fashion industry. Journal of cleaner production, 193, 
169-184.  
• Galeazzo, A., Furlan, A., & Vinelli, A. (2021). The role of employees' participation and managers' authority 
on continuous improvement and performance. International Journal of Operations & Production 
Management.  
• Furlan, A., & Vinelli, A. (2018). Unpacking the coexistence between improvement and innovation in 
worldclass manufacturing: A dynamic capability approach. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 
133, 168-178.  
• Macchion, L., Marchiori, I., Vinelli, A., & Fornasiero, R. (2019). Proposing a tool for supply chain 
configuration: an application to customised production. In Factories of the Future (pp. 217-231). Springer, 
Cham.  
• Macchion, L., Da Giau, A., Caniato, F., Caridi, M., Danese, P., Rinaldi, R., & Vinelli, A. (2018). Strategic 
approaches to sustainability in fashion supply chain management. Production Planning & Control, 29(1), 
928.  
• Moretto, A., & Macchion, L. (2022). Drivers, barriers and supply chain variables influencing the adoption of 
the blockchain to support traceability along fashion supply chains. Operations Management Research, 120.  
  
Annex II. Budget of Associated partner –Aston   
The budget of Aston is represented in the table below.   
A.  
Personnel 
costs  
B. Sub- 
Contracting  
C.1. Purchase  
Costs - Travel 
and  
Substistense  
C.2.  
Purchase  
Costs - 
Equipments  
C.3. Purchase 
Costs - Other 
goods, works 
and services  
(Consumables 
are here)  
D.  
Internally  
Invoiced 
goods and 
services  
(Unit 
costsusual  
accounting 
practices)  
Indirect 
costs  
0.25*(A+C)  
Total eligible costs  
264.780 €     12.000 €     8.000 €     71.195 €  355.975 €