3.2 Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole   
3.2.1. Description of the consortium  
RETAIN is a strongly industry driven Innovation Action, 
with a consortium composition focused on developing 
and industrial deployment of circular tarpaulins. The 
consortium consists of 12 companies (9 large 
enterprises (LE) and 3 SMEs), 2 industry associations, 
and 2 RTD partners. All of them are considered 
renowned organizations within their respective 
sectors. Together, these 16 complementary partners 
form a multidisciplinary team that covers all parts 
needed for circularity (i.e. from tarp producers over re-
use to applicators of recycled and biobased materials). 
This well -balanced set of competences and 
organizations is brought together from 8 EU countries 
(Belgium, Netherlands, Germany, Austria, France, 
Spain, Italy and Czech Republic).   
The idea for this project was initiated in 2022 by the 
4 largest European tarp producers, SIOEN (BE), SF 
(FR), MEHLER (DE) and SATTLER (AU), 
representing over 90% of the EU tarp production. At that time these large enterprises defined the need 
for a European industrial value chain that enhances the circularity of the 200,000 tons per year of post -
production and end-of-life tarps. Together they decided to join forces to make, what is by now  
called the RETAIN project, a success. They are the core drivers of Figure 8: contribution of 
participants the RETAIN project and their roles are quite diverse: development  
of a digital product passport for tarps, application of recyclates into novel tarps, re-use and reconfectioning 
of post-production and end-of-life tarps to enable a valuable, second life for these materials, ecodesign 
for uptake of recycled and biobased ma terials, market acceptance, uptake and deployment, and 
demonstration of processes.   
These 4 tarp producers carefully selected further companies for completion of the industrial value 
chain needed for circularization, covering the aspects of waste collection, recycling and plastic 
convertors for the uptake of recycled streams as well as fo r developing the digital logistics 
platform.  
For waste collection VEOLIA (FR)  one of Europe’s largest waste management companies is 
included. With subsidiaries all across the EU, VEOLIA is the ideal RETAIN partner to tackle all logistical 
challenges that come with the collection and sorting of post -production and end-of-life tarps. Veolia will 
work in close collaboration with most other partners as they are also coordinating the demonstration work 
package WP5.  
The recycling industry is strongly involved in RETAIN via 3 complementary recycling partners : 
VWERVEN (NL), the largest recycler of hard plastics in Europe, including rigid PVC; EKOTREND (CZ), 
the largest EU recycler of soft PVC plastics; and KKF (DE) a key recycler of rigid and soft PVC. Their 
complementarity is demonstrated by their respective RETAIN tasks: VWERVEN will focus on the gate 
control process, more specifically on (semi)automized deconfectioning and washing of tarps, EKOTREND 
on grinding/shredding, slicing/shaving, granulation and analytical techniques, and KKF on mechanical 
separation techniques. Together they will also execute tasks related to the fast characterization of legacy 
additives.  
From the converters side RETAIN has two strong large industry partners: BIG (BE) world leader in 
the use of plasticized PVC for flooring  applications and RENO (DE) world leader for roofing and 
pool applications. They will test and demonstrate the use of recycled and biobased products in these 
applications. This work will be executed in WP4 (Ecodesign using recycled and biobased materials to 
produce high value products, and related standardization aspects).  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 52 of 44  
For setting up the necessary digital infrastructure and software development the 
companies RINA-C (LE; IT) and IRIS (SME; ES) will work together, bringing together their own specific 
expertise: RINA-C is a leading engineering consulting company, with ample experience in decision 
support tools , IRIS has unique expertise on optical technologies , related monitoring and data 
processing.  
The RETAIN project is strengthened by 2 industry associations: EUPC and VINYLPLUS. Their main 
role is related to the activities in WP7: Market acceptance, uptake and deployment, incl. dissemination, 
communication, exploitation and training & learning. Both associations are strongly integrated in the EU 
plastics industry and as such are the ideal partners for creating awareness about the RETAIN project via 
their members and for ensuring industrial leveraging and uptake of specific RETAIN results. Moreover, 
their participation ensures access of RETAIN to a large number of external experts.  
Although RETAIN is a strongly industry driven project, there is  R&D support from CTB (BE) and 
AIMPLAS (ES). Both research and technology centres are strongly involved in plastics and textiles 
recycling and have a strong track record in EU projects for many years. Within RETAIN, CTB will lead 
WP3 on recycling technologies. Furthermore, CTB will lead the standardization activities and participate 
in various other parts of the RETAIN project. Partner AIMPLAS will be focused on the separation and 
purification of recyclates, participate in the standardization activities, and contribute to the assessment 
studies. Dr. Ir. Bert Groenendaal will coordinate the RETAIN project on behalf of SIOEN . Bert 
obtained his PhD in polymer chemistry at the Eindhoven University of Technology (Netherlands). After a 
postdoctoral fellowship at the University of California at Berkeley he moved to industry (Bayer AG and 
Agfa-Gevaert NV) Since 2008 Bert is active at SIOEN as R&D project coordinator. As such he 
coordinated various (inter)national R&D&I projects over the past 26 years, always with a focus on 
tangible results. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established as responsible for the overall 
management of the project. Its members will consist of SIOEN as coordinator  (and WP2 and WP8 
leader) and the following members: Quality Manager  – Mr Guy Buyle (CTB) – wide experience with 
EU project management & EU plastics communities (internal quality procedures, including organising 
internal deliverables review and reporting, liaiso n activities), Demonstration Manager  – Ms Elsie 
Haertjens (VEOLIA) – experienced project manager and WP5 leader (end -users view, ensure RETAIN 
demonstration is driving market uptake by endusers), Innovation Manager – Mr Albert Torres (IRIS) – 
seasoned project manager and WP1 leader (tech-provider & SME view, focus on marketability of RETAIN 
horizontal (digital) technologies), Uptake Manager – Ms Valeria Masci (EUPC) – expert reaching impact 
with research and innovation projects (supervise and coordinate the  dissemination, communication & 
exploitation strategy, association view).  
Transition Support Group (TSG) members. Next to the actual partners in the consortium, we also put 
together a group of entities, including European associations, public actors, clusters/hubs, that are linked 
to RETAIN objectives and expressed their interest to collaborate, see cover page. The support letters 
have been collected and available for reference here.  
Resources. The total eligible costs of the RETAIN project is 6,538,156 EUR. The requested EU 
contribution to eligible costs is 4,999,379 EUR. From the EU contribution 19.3% goes to SMEs, and 
52.5% to LEs.  
3.2.2. Industrial/commercial involvement in the project  
RETAIN has a strong industrial involvement: 12 out of 16 consortium members are companies, further 
supported by 2 industry associations. The companies consist of 9 large ones and 3 SMEs.  
The industrial and commercial partners cover the necessary domains and expertise, see also their 
description in section 3.2.1. The industrial partners participate to bring RETAIN to a success and to bring 
the anticipated solutions to the market. As such, they are investing a considerable number of resources: 
the RETAIN company partners have together almost 75% of the EU funding and the ‘own funding’ 
brought by the companies is over €1.5mio.  
We also aimed at including ‘exploitation leverage’ in RETAIN: each partner has a unique role in the project 
but in daily business some have overlapping activities. For example, partners VWERVEN, EKOTREND 
and KKF are PVC recyclers and all three have high interest in deploying the sorting, deconfectioning and 
recycling technologies after the project. Such an interest within the partnership will be beneficial for 
realizing the exploitation plans (from section 2.2). Within the TSG we searched for further such ‘leverage’.  
3.2.3. Other countries. Not applicable.  
 
 
Part B - Page 53 of 44  
  
  
4.  Ethics self assesment   
  
SELF-ASSESSMENT  
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
Ethical dimension of the objectives, methodology and likely impact  
2. Humans and 4. Personal data. Within RETAIN we foresee the involvement of human volunteers for workshops 
(WP7). In this case, subjects will be adults participating voluntary according to informed consents and privacy 
regulations. Personal data (name, address, phone number, email) will be collected and handled according to GDPR 
(anonymized and kept in partners’ safe places) and deleted at the end of the project or upon request.  
  
7. Health & Safety. For the materials and processes being developed in WP2 to WP4 and demonstrated in 
WP5, we intend to use chemicals that should be handled with care. By using the necessary precautions, none of 
this handling raises significant concerns about individual security or safety or the protection of public health.  
  
8. AI. Within WP1 and WP4 the software development involves using AI. However, we do not foresee any 
ethical concerns in relation to human rights or values as AI will be applied for pure technical aspects, ie processing 
of spectroscopic data for materials identification (WP1) and optimizing PVC waste channeling to the most 
appropriate recycling method (WP4).  
  
  
Compliance with ethical principles and relevant legislations 2. 
Humans.   
For surveys and workshops conducted with partners and external stakeholders, informed consent will be prepared 
in a language understandable by the volunteers and will include information about the project activities, the 
objectives and the anticipated outcome. Information on data processing methods, data privacy protection, 
handling of personal data and other rights of the participant will also be informed. The participants will be 
informed on their right to participate, decline to participate or withdraw from the project at any time. All partners 
that are involved in processing volunteers’ data will be accountable for the compliance with the applicable 
legislative requirements. The data management plan of RETAIN, including the personal data protection protocols, 
will be described in the DMP related deliverables (part of Task 8.5).  
All personal details and identification obtained from RETAIN activities will be handled according to the legislative 
requirements and the EU GDPR principles. Such data will be kept confidential and not used in any public 
documents that may be produced using the data.  
  
7. Health & Safety.  
For the implementation of RETAIN, the appropriate health and safety procedures conforming to relevant 
local/national guidelines/legislation (17/1996 “Measures for safety and health improvement of employees in the 
workplace, in accordance with 89/391/EU and 91/383/ΕU”, 16/1996 "Minimum safety and health specifications in 
the workplace, in accordance with 89/654/EU) will be followed by the staff involved in the RETAIN project. All 
European health and safety conformities (eg Directive 89/391 - OSH "Framework Directive", ) will be strictly 
adhered. Local laws and standards will be applied to as part of the grant. Staff members are/will be aware of local 
and European standards in the areas of engineering practice, health and safety conformance and in personal 
health and safety aspects. Specifically, we will ensure that all the RETAIN partners comply with the following:  
1. All staff members involved in RETAIN handling potentially hazardous substances will be informed  
2. All laboratory hazards will be properly identified and marked (compliance with health and safety legislation and 
codes of practice)  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 54 of 44  
3. Provisions will be taken for appropriate resources, information, supervision, instruction and 
training  
4. Ensuring that managers and staff are equipped with the knowledge, competence, confidence and capacity to 
deal effectively with health and safety issues, and have access to competent specialist advice  
5. All staff members will be made aware of proper laboratory equipment handling, use of necessary protective 
equipment, first aid and emergency procedures  
6. All chemicals involved in RETAIN research will be handled and used according to Safety Datasheets (SDS)  
7. All laboratory equipment will be accompanied with user manuals and service logbooks  
  
8. AI.  
In RETAIN, we will comply with the EU AI Act (June 2023). Further, we will strive to inform stakeholders that we 
use AI based solutions and what they are used for. In addition, we will strive to develop fair and unbiased AI 
solutions.  
  
DECLARATION:  
The Consortium confirms that compliance with ethical principles and applicable international, EU and national law 
in the implementation of research activities not originally envisaged (or not described in detail) in the DoA will be 
ensured. The Consortium also confirms that any ethical concerns raised by those activities will be handled 
following rigorously the recommendations provided in the European Commission Ethics Self-Assessment 
Guidelines.  
 
 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025HE 
MGA — Multi & Mono: v1.2 
ANNEX 2