4.  ETHICS SELF ASSESMENT ............................................................................................................................. ...................... 
43  
  
     
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 5 of 44  
List of abbreviations  
AI  artificial intelligence  
ALTAI  Assessment List for Trustworthy  AI  
ANNs  Artificial Neural Networks   
API  Application Programming Interface   
appr  approximately  
AU  Austria  
BC  business case  
BE  Belgium  
BENELUX  Belgium, The Netherlands, Luxembourg  
CA  Consortium Agreement   
ca  Circa  
CAGR  compound annual growth rate  
CAPEX  capital expenditure  
CDTI  Centre for the Development of Industrial Technology   
CEAP  circular economy action plan   
CEN TC   European Committee for Standardization Technical Committees  
CEN-
CENELEC  
European Committee for Standardization &European Committee for Electrotechnical 
Standardization   
COMM  Commercialization  
CZ  Czech Republic  
D  deliverable  
DE  Germany  
DEC  dissemination, exploitation and communication   
DEHP  di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate   
DID  Distributed Identity   
DLT  decentralized ledger technology   
DMP  Data Management Plan   
DNSH  Do No Significant Harm   
DPP  digital product passport   
DST  decision support tool   
e.g.  for example  
EC  European Commission  
ECHA  European Chemicals Agency  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 6 of 44  
EIB  European Investment Bank   
EIC  European Innovation Council  
EIT  European Institute of Innovation & Technology  
EOL  end of life  
EP  Exploitation Plan   
eq  equivalent  
ES  Spain  
ESPR  Eco-design for Sustainable Products Regulation   
ESWA  European Waterproofing Association  
etc.  et cetera  
EU  European Union  
FAIR  Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability and Reusability  
FR  flame retardant  
 
FR  France  
FTE  Full Time Equivalent  
GA  General Assembly   
GRC  Governance, Risk, and Compliance  
GS  Global Standards  
HCl  hydrogen chloride  
HEUR  Horizon Europe  
i.e.  that is  
IDP  interoperable data platform   
IoT  internet of things  
IP  Intellectual property  
IPR  Intellectual property rights  
ISO  International Organization for Standardization  
IT  Italy  
IVK  Industrieverband Kunststoffbahnen e.V.  
JSON  JavaScript Object Notation  
KER  Key Exploitable Result  
KG  Knowledge Generation  
KIC  Knowledge and Innovation Community  
KO  key objective  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 7 of 44  
KPI  key performance indicator  
kt  kiloton  
LCA  Life cycle assessment  
LCC  Life-cycle costing  
LE  large enterprises   
LIBS  Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy   
Ltd  limited  
M  month  
Mio  million  
MSE  Mean Squared Error   
NBN  Bureau for Standardization   
NGO  Non-governmental organisation  
NGSI  Next Generation Service Interfaces  
NL  The Netherlands  
PAT  Process Analytical Technologies   
PET  polyethylene terephthalate   
PL  Poland  
PSC  Project Steering Committee   
Pty  Proprietary Limited  
PVC  polyvinyl chloride   
QR  Quick-Response  
R&D  Research and development  
R&I  Research and Innovation   
REACH  registration, evaluation, authorisation and restriction of chemicals  
RFID  Radio-Frequency Identification  
RMSE  Root Mean Squared Error   
rPET  recycled PET  
rPVC  recycled PVC  
RTD  Research and Technological  Development  
SDG  Sustainable Development Goal  
SE  Sweden  
SETAC  Society of Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry  
SLCA  Social Life Cycle Assessment  
SMART  Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-Bound  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 8 of 44  
SME  Small and Medium-sized Enterprises  
SOTA  State-of-the-art   
SSH  Social Sciences and Humanities   
SWOT  Strengths, Weaknesses, Opptunities, Threats  
Tarp  Tarpaulin  
TCH  Tarp Circularisation Hubs   
TRL  Technology readiness level  
TSG  transition support group  
U  end user  
UK  United Kingdom  
UNE  Spanish Association for Standardization  
UNEP  United Nations Environment Programme  
USD  United States Dollar  
VC  Verifiable Credentials   
VisumHSI  Hyperspectral imaging system  
WP  work package  
y  year  
  
    
List of partners  
Participant 
no.  Short name  Participant organization name  Country  
Organization 
Type  
1  SIOEN  SIOEN Industries NV  BE  LE  
2  CTB  
CENTRE SCIENTIFIQUE & TECHNIQUE 
DEL'INDUSTRIE TEXTILE BELGE ASBL  BE  RTO  
3  SATTLER  Sattler PRO-TEX GMBH  AU  LE  
4  RENOLIT  Renolit SE  DE  LE  
5  EKOTREND  Ekotrend Ludky sro  CZ  LE  
6  SF  Serge Ferrar SAS  FR  LE  
7  IRIS  Iris Technology Solutions Sociedad LIMITADA  ES  SME  
8  AIMPLAS  
Asociación de Investigación de Materiales  
Plásticos y Conexas  ES  RTO  
9  VEOLIA  Veolia NV SA  BE  LE  
10  VWERVEN  Kunststof recycling Van Werven BV  NL  SME  
11  VINYLPLUS  VinylPlus  BE  Assoc.  
12  EUPC  European Plastics Converters EUPC AISBL  BE  Assoc.  
13  BIG  Beaulieu Intl. Group NV  BE  LE  
14  KKF  KKF reVinyl GMBH  DE  SME  
15  RINA-C  Rina Consulting SPA  IT  LE  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 9 of 44  
16  MEHLER  Mehler Texnologies GMBH  DE  LE  
  
   
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 10 of 44  
1. Excellence   
Tarpaulins are complex composite-like materials, typically composed of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) 
as reinforcement material and plasticized/soft polyvinyl chloride (PVC) as coating material. These durable 
plastics have a wide range of applications going from trailer curtains to prof essional tents, and from 
advertisement banners to biogas membranes. Each year 200 kton of tarpaulins enter the EU market, 65% 
of this volume, corresponding to ca. 200 Mio m2, being produced in the EU. After their functional lifetime, 
which ranges from a few months up to 30 years, over 99% of tarpaulins currently end up as landfill or are 
being incinerated as today’s recycling technologies are insufficient. The target of RETAIN is to contribute 
to the final ambition of having, by 2036, at least 90% of circular use (repaired, reused, remanufactured or 
recycled) of the tarpaulins produced in EU. To reach our ambition, we will further develop various recycling 
technologies (i.e. mechanical, physical, and selective dissolution) and demonstrate circular business 
practices (advanced collection, monitoring, sorting, repair/reuse/recycling and conversion of 
postproduction and end-of-life tarpaulins) at TRL8 scale at three DEMO locations in the EU. Additionally, 
we will develop and implement an efficient decision-making tool for process and lifecycle optimization such 
as the RETAIN gate control procedure for post -industrial and end -of-life tarpaulins. Finally, we will 
implement a digital product passport (DPP) for tarpaulins to ensure traceability, support certification  and 
quality validation, quantify environmental, social, and economic impacts, incorporate learning and training 
activities, contribute to relevant standards, and connect with other recycling initiatives in the EU and 
abroad.
1.1 Objectives and ambition   
1.1.1. Objectives   
Tarpaulins (short: tarps), composed of a soft polyvinyl chloride (PVC) matrix reinforced with polyethylene 
terephthalate (PET) fibres, are flexible, waterproof plastic sheets that are widely used for numerous 
outdoor applications such as trailer covers, pr ofessional tents, advertisement banners and biogas 
membranes. At their end of life (EOL), 99+% of these PVC tarpaulins end up in landfills or are incinerated, 
by lack of circular solutions at scale. Increased recovery and efficient recycling technologies at scale are 
urgently needed to increase the sustainability of these complex plastic materials. Thus, the overall 
objective of RETAIN is to increase the circularity of PVC tarpaulins by deploying 3 EU demonstration pilots 
for collection, monitoring, sorting , repairing/ reusing/remanufacturing, and recycling. We aim to install 
these demonstration pilots in the Benelux, the southwest of Europe covering France, Spain and Italy, and 
central Europe involving Germany, Austria and Czech Republic because they are ho me to the largest 
European tarp producers and the companies that will be recycling these materials.   
To ensure that these materials are kept in circulation at the highest level of quality, economic and 
environmental value, our circularity model is based on: 1) a strict gate control procedure; 2) repairing/ 
reusing/ remanufacturing tarpaulins that are stil l in good condition; 3) advanced mechanical, physical or 
dissolution recycling of 
post-production and EOL 
tarps that are free of legacy 
additives; 4) 
reprocess/ecodesign the 
recycled products into new, 
high-value products; and 5) 
safe disposal of tarpauli ns 
that still contain legacy 
additives in order to avoid 
toxic components re -
entering the market (figure 
1). An additional target is to 
make tarpaulins more 
sustainable by adding 
biobased PVC and 
biobased and/or recycled 

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 11 of 44  
plasticizers, and to investigate if high tenacity recycled PET fibres can be produced and applied in tarps. 
As such RETAIN is addressing the priorities set in the circular economy action plan (CEAP)1 for achieving 
a sustainable, circular economy.  
Figure 1: retain circularity model  
  
To reach this ambitious overall target and to maximize the RETAIN impact, we define the following 
SMART key objectives (KOs) and key performance indicators (KPIs), and show their link with the 
call requirements and CEAP:  
  
KO1: Setting up an efficient collection, monitoring and sorting gate control process for post -
production and EOL tarpaulins => WP1  
KPI(s): i) Installation of an efficient collection, monitoring and sorting process with a project throughput 
capacity of 10 tons/day, including an AI based spectroscopy inline monitoring quality check for condition 
i.e. physical and colour integrity and presence of l egacy additives by M30. This will generate 3 main 
streams, namely: 1) repair/reuse/remanufacturing: legacy additives free and almost undamaged tarps, 2) 
recycling: legacy additives free, but non reusable tarps and 3) disposing: legacy additives containing tarps. 
ii) Interoperable data platform integrated with circular tarpaulins value chain processes, DPP and software 
services for storage, processing and visualization of data originating from, and related to, the collection, 
monitoring, sorting, repair/reuse/remanufacturing/recycling, and conversion of post -production and EOL 
processes will also be developed. Initial DPP Prototype by Month 18 and optimized DPP with TRL 8 by 
end of the project.  
 
Link to call: i) the project should consider the use of digital solutions (including technologies such as AI, 
robotics, IoT and blockchain) and demonstrate their benefits for increased circularity. ii) Proposals should 
aim to implement traceability solutions in support of recent policy developments, e.g. regarding the digital 
product passport. Link to CEAP: solutions for high-quality sorting and removing contaminants from waste, 
including those resulting from incidental contamination  
KO2: Reconfectioning of EOL tarpaulins to enable a valuable, second life, and (semi)automized 
deconfectioning as pretreatment for recycling => WP2  
KPI(s): i) EOL tarpaulins that still have a sufficient quality, e.g. visually (colour, appearance, a rating of at 
least 4 on the grey change scale), mechanically (tensile strength, adhesion, etc.; >80% remaining), will 
be reconfectioned and prepared for a second life as tarpaulin. During the project, several options will be 
investigated to promote at least 3 novel “recovery and reuse routes” not excluding the possibility of cross-
fertilization among different sectors (e.g. repairing of a trailer curtain or remanufacturing of an 
advertisement banner as a packaging material for wind turbine parts). ii) For tarps that must go to 
recycling, a semi-automated deconfectioning device will be developed to remove all kinds of functionalities 
such as eyelets, buckles, zippers, and seams, at a speed of at least 250 m²/h/person.  
 
Link to call: Proposals should also demonstrate circular business practices, in particular in the uptake of 
repair and reuse, remanufacture, product-service-systems, and in the full lifetime of products or services. 
Link to CEAP: improving product durability, reusability, upgradability and repairability.  
KO3: Identification of optimized cascade recycling routes => WP3  
KPI(s): Recycling technologies will be optimized and brought at scale via the deployment of an AI based 
optimization digital tool, for tarpaulin recycling: i) mechanical recycling to obtain grinded PVC/PET material 
with a project capacity of 10 tons per da y; ii) mechanical recycling process with air treatment, vibration 
and sifting to separate the PVC from the fibres and special exhaust system to prevent release of 
 
1 European Commission: Directorate-General for Communication, Circular economy action plan – For a cleaner and more 
competitive Europe, Publications Office of the European Union, 2020, https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2779/05068  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 12 of 44  
microplastics; iii) mechanical recycling by shaving off the PVC from the PET reinforcement at a speed of 
600m2/hour; iv) physical recycling process which separates PVC from the fibres at 50 kg/day; v) selective 
solvent based recycling to dissolve the PVC and filter the PET fibres (>50 mm length) at a speed of 
300kg/day; vi) selective extraction of plasticizers and  other valuable tarp components (e.g. stabilizers, 
flame retardants and/or fillers) at a capacity of 10 -50kg/day treated tarp with >99% efficiency  for high 
purity extracted fractions.  
 
Link to call: The projects should consider the use of digital solutions (including technologies such as AI, 
robotics, IoT and blockchain) and demonstrate their benefits for increased circularity. ii) Proposals should 
demonstrate increased recycling and upc ycling rates. Link to CEAP: high -quality recycling, avoiding 
unintentionally released microplastics during recycling  
KO4: Maximizing use of recycled and biobased content for high value products => WP4  
KPI(s): i) at least 5 recycled/upcycled products will be prepared to demonstrate potential applications for 
the recycled materials.  
These products are related to profiles, foils, injected moulded parts, PET nonwovens and high tenacity 
multifilament PET yarns. Another expected output is the development of more sustainable tarpaulins 
which contain bio -attributed PVC, recycled and/or biob ased plasticizers, and recycled PET fibres. The 
tarps will contain at least 50% recycled/biobased content. ii) A standardization scenario will be developed 
with the goal of providing valuable results for developing new standards or for using them as input for 
already existing standardization activities to make sure that there is information about the quality of the 
recycled materials.  
 
Link to the call: i) Proposals should demonstrate a higher uptake of secondary materials for high value 
applications, ii) The projects should provide contributions to relevant standards or best practices. Link to 
CEAP: i) call for mandatory recycled content and the controlled use of bio -based materials; ii) enhance 
the role of standardisation based on the on-going assessment of existing standardisation work at national, 
European and international levels.  
KO5: Demonstrate circularity for complex PVC based value chains within 3 EU regions => WP5  
KPI(s): setting up of the complete circularity value chain that covers collectors, sorters, repairers, re-users, 
recyclers, logistics and end users of the recycled products in each of the 3 EU demo sites and show that 
PVC tarpaulins can be recirculated at large scale (>10 kt/year). Deployment and monitoring of the RETAIN 
technologies.  
 
Link to the call: i) Proposals should demonstrate and deploy at large scale innovative solutions and designs 
for increased quality, non-toxicity and durability of secondary materials and increased share of secondary 
materials in new products. ii) Proposals should demonstrate increased recovery, recycling and upcycling 
rates and a higher uptake of secondary materials for high value applications. Link to CEAP: scaling up the 
separate collection of plastic waste and ensuring better infrastructure for sorting and recycling.  
KO6: Sustainability & economic assessment of circular complex PVC based value chains => WP6  
KPI(s): Assessment of environmental, economic, and social impacts via LCA/LCC and SLCA developed 
according to established robust methodologies aligned with existing standards and guidelines (e.g. ISO 
14040 and 14044, UNEP/SETAC guideline (2020)) to proving positiv e RETAIN impact assessment at 
Demonstrators level.   
 
Link to call: Environmental, social and economic impacts should be assessed from a lifecycle perspective 
as product, organization and consumption environmental footprints, using the respective methods 
developed by the European Commission and through costing methods. ii) demonstrate circular business 
practices, in particular in the uptake of repair and reuse, remanufacture, product-service-systems, and in 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 13 of 44  
the full lifetime of products or services. To achieve this, targeted market size, economic feasibility, cost 
efficiency and social acceptance need to be addressed. Link to CEAP: analyse how the impact of circularity 
on climate change mitigation and adaptation can be measured in a systematic way; assess the feasibility 
of establishing a market observatory for key secondary materials  
KO7: Maximizing market acceptance, uptake and deployment, including dissemination, 
exploitation, and training & learning => WP7  
KPI(s): we will contribute to the European PVC industry’s commitment for sustainable development.  A 5-
year roadmap will be prepared to  explore different exploitation routes. Training materials such as 
implementation manuals and tutorial videos will be available to endow workers in this occupational group 
with the right skillset to deploy the innovative technologies developed. Three traini ng workshops will be 
organized at the identified “replicability” sites, engaging (200+) professionals involved in process  
development, to pave the way for faster RETAIN replicability.   
 
Link to the call: i) develop training material to endow workers in this occupational group with the right 
skillset in order to deploy the new technologies developed. ii)  consider the development of learning 
resources for the current and future generations of employees. Link to CEAP: EU -wide market for 
secondary raw materials.  
1.1.2 Ambition & Beyond State-of-the-art (SOTA)  
Current situation: PVC is a thermoplastic polymer made from ethylene (mainly petrol based) and chlorine 
(derived from sea salt) and is one of the most used plastics in the world. In the EU-27 + UK, Norway, and 
Switzerland, about 6.5 million tons of PVC products are manufact ured every year2. PVC is known for its 
durability and resistance to chemicals, weathering, and abrasion. It can be rigid or flexible, clear, or 
coloured, and it can be modified to have different levels of hardness. These versatile properties make that 
PVC has a wide range of applications such as pipes and fittings, cable insulation, profiles, flooring, toys, 
medical devices, banners, packaging, protective clothing, automotive components, furniture and covers. 
When the PVC product is not complex (i.e. homopolymer) it can be readily recycled through established 
and advanced mechanical recycling systems. For example, PVC window profiles can already be made of 
100% recycled PVC or at least contain a high percentage of recycled PVC 3. On the othe r hand, the 
recycling of more complex PVC based materials such as PVC tarpaulins is much more challenging, and 
no large-scale solutions are existing4.   
This is further illustrated by the table on the next page for which the numbers were taken from the 
VINYLPLUS-Progress-Report20245. When looking at the tonnage of coated fabrics, of which tarps are 
part, it can be seen that only 83 ton was recycled in 2023,  and this was all pre -consumer (=post-
production) waste. Post-consumer (=EOL) waste was not recycled.   
  
  
2 https://pvc.org/pvc-applications/  
3 https://vinylplus.eu/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Recycling-PVC-2021-web-Final-1.pdf  
4 https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/e9e7684a-906b-11ec-b4e4-01aa75ed71a1  
5 https://www.vinylplus.eu/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/VinylPlus-Progress-Report-2024-web.pdf  
Table 1: TONNAGES OF PVC RECYCLED IN THE EU-27 PLUS NORWAY, SWITZERLAND AND THE UK  
  
Type of PVC (waste 
origin)  
Tonnage recycled in 2023   
   Total ton  Post-consumer  Pre-
consumer  
Profiles  391093  152585  238508  
Pipes  30471  6983  23488  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 14 of 44  
Cables  97586  88345  9241  
Flexibles  67720  25107  42613  
Rigid film  20399  5140  15259  
Coated fabrics (incl. tarps)  83  0  83  
Flooring  118379  3248  115131  
Other rigid  11913  1250  10663  
Total  737644  282658  454986  
Although tarpaulins are not the largest PVC application, it is still an important market in the EU because 
about 200 Mio m² or ca.120kton (average 600 g/m²) is annually produced in the EU representing €700 
Mio Euro. This volume represents ca. 2/3 of the ta rps that enter the EU market. Considering that the 
average functional lifetime of most of these materials is between 5 and 10 years, a significant amount of 
waste is generated every year that currently goes to landfill or incineration as today’s recycling 
technologies are insufficient.  
Overall Ambition: The overall ambition of RETAIN is to demonstrate circularity chains that will 
enable us to reuse/remanufacture/recycle over 90% of these tarps by 2036. As technologies are 
still at relatively low TRL's (5-6) today, our target is to bring these technologies to TRL 8, which will 
enable us to successfully demonstrate increased recovery, recycling, and upcycling rates (at ton 
scale) and a higher uptake of secondary materials for high value applications during the project. 
After a successful project, the consort ium is committed to further expand these technologies to 
achieve the 2036 objective.  
To reach this general ambition, the overall objectives of RETAIN are to collect, sort, repair/reuse/recycle 
and convert postproduction and post-consumer (EOL) tarpaulins at large scale in 3 different EU regions 
and to achieve this objective, several steps beyond the state of the art in the circularity chain are required 
and this will be described below. Furthermore, another challenge in recycling soft PVC materials is the 
potential presence of legacy additives. Legacy additives in PVC products refer to subs tances that were 
historically used in the production of these products but are now recognized as problematic due to 
environmental and/or health concerns. These additives were commonly incorporated into PVC 
formulations to enhance certain properties or processing characteristics but have since been phased out 
or restricted due to regulations or voluntary industry commitments such as VINYLPLUS 2 . The most 
common legacy additives used in tarpaulins are heavy metal-based stabilizers (e.g. lead), specific short-
chain plasticizers such as di(2 -ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) and heavy metal -based pigments (e.g. 
cadmium, chromium). The presence of DEHP h as led to the closure of the specialised PVC recycling 
business at Ferrara, Italy (Vinyloop, focus on cable recycling) in 2018, because it was not economically 
viable to extract the plasticizer. 3 Also compared to the situation in 2018, the current in use tarpaulins 
contain almost no legacy additives anymore considering 80+% of these tarps have a lifetime between 5-
10 years and knowing that EU tarpaulin manufacturers are not using DEHP anymore as plasticizer.  
Expected steps beyond SOTA (State-of-the-Art) and increase in TRL levels for the core RETAIN 
developments.  
The project is positioned at an advanced stage of Research and Innovation (R&I) maturity. It builds on 
established technologies and methodologies while integrating innovative approaches to address specific 
challenges in the recycling of PVC tarps. This pos itioning reflects a transition from research and 
development to practical application and market integration. By implementing demonstration pilots in 
regions with significant industry presence, the project aims to validate and optimize these innovations in  
real-world conditions, ensuring readiness for wider adoption and scalability. To achieve this, the main 
technology elements that need to be forwarded beyond SOTA and the related TRL progress are 
summarized below.  
Collecting, monitoring, and sorting of the tarpaulins. TRL 5 → 8.  
 
2 https://www.vinylplus.eu/  
3 https://www.plastech.biz/en/news/VinyLoop-closed-PVC-recycling-project-in-Italy-12649  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 15 of 44  
State of the art:  Sector-specific take-back systems and separate collection are successfully applied to 
post-consumer waste from the construction and building sector (e.g. windows, pipes) in most of the EU 
Member States. However, the (limited) available information for complex flexible PVC materials suggests 
that separate collection remains a challenge in practice for these waste streams. Regarding efficient 
sorting, spectroscopic methods are frequently used, being rapid, reliable and often non-destructive  
  
analytical techniques. Process Analytical Technologies (PAT) used for real -time monitoring of critical 
quality parameters, are the next step for the competitive operation of many industries.4 This technology is 
available at non-industrial scale at IRIS (TRL5).  
Beyond SOTA: Setting up a smart collection and gate control procedure. Sensing technologies will be used 
to identify the presence of legacy additives as: Raman Spectroscopy  for identification of DEHP, a 
plasticizer, and certain bromo derivatives (from fire retardants) combined with Laser Induced Breakdown 
Spectroscopy (LIBS) for detection of other tarp components lead derivatives (from pigments) and tin 
derivatives (from thermal stabilizers). Customized algorithms will allow process control for the optimization 
of processes and final product classification. RETAIN will demonstrate the use at pilot scale (TRL8).  
A standard-based approach to Digital Product Passports as an enabler for industry circularity. TRL 
5 → 8.  
State of the art: Today very little is known about end-of-life aspects of tarpaulins apart from the fact that 
36% ends up in landfills and 63% is being incinerated. If we want to efficiently recycle tarpaulins at their 
end-of-life, we must introduce lifetime traceability of these materials. Moreover, the databases on material 
classifications are held by big enterprise resource planning (ERP) system providers. Those systems are 
centrally managed by industry associations or private businesses and provide a st atic source of public 
data which is prone to future data leaks due to the nature of centrally stored data.5  
The concept of a Digital Product Passport (DPP) can be a key enabler of the shift towards circularity as a 
business model by creating transparency over raw materials sourcing, circular design principles, and 
waste stream trajectories, and opening up new op portunities for repairing existing products, giving them 
a second life, as well as creating trust in the secondary market by providing customers with a reliable tool 
to verify a product’s authenticity and history. By prioritising circular design principles and ensuring end-of-
life product recovery, companies can significantly decrease their dependence on virgin materials, bolster 
customer loyalty, enhance brand reputation, and seamlessly adhere to increasingly stringent sustainability 
regulations.   
The technologies upon which a DPP are built are not new, and as Europe moves forward in leading the 
way in DPP developments and deployments, a key focus needs to be on architecting DPPs that are 
designed based on standards, interoperability, scalability, security and trustworthiness and taking 
into consideration currently available data frameworks and how the DPP can access relevant data that 
already exists in industry. This is important as DPPs will not exist in isolation but will complement existing 
tools already deployed along the enterprise value chain. A seamless integration will significantly reduce 
the complexity associated with scaling DPP adoption. Aspects such as access right management for 
transparency and Intellectual Property Rights will also be of paramount importance. A blockchain-based 
approach will enable brands to transparently share accurate information with end consumers and other 
stakeholders within the value chain. This transparency, ensured by the immutable nature of blockchain 
will allow the DPP to serve as a trustworthy Digital Twin of the product.  
Beyond SOTA: RETAIN aims to innovate by aligning with the existing trend in Europe regarding the creation 
of valuable data ecosystems based on the adoption of data space technologies for long -term storage 
through the development of a digital product passport (DPP) for tarpaulins. Such a digital document goes 
with the product through its lifetime. The document contains detailed compositional info that can be used 
once the product has been collected for recycling. RETAIN approach will start from a similar one already 
validated by IRIS in the packaging value chain and which is a good starting point to be scaled and replicated 
 
4 Araujo-Andrade C. et al., ‘Review on the photonic techniques suitable for automatic 
monitoring of the composition of multimaterials wastes in view of their posterior recycling’, 
Waste Manag. Res., 2021, 39:631;  
5 Götz, et al. (2022). Digital Product Passport: The ticket to achieving a climate neutral and circular European economy?  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 16 of 44  
for the circular tarp value chain (TRL8). By implementing the DPP we aim to gradually replace non -
traceable tarpaulins with unknown composition by more sustainable certified and in the EU produced tarps 
containing a digital product passport providing the e nd user information about its fingerprint, e.g., 
composition, how it can be recycled and to assure the safety of these products. This to establish the 
foundations of a global DPP standard for the Plastics sector that can be adopted internationally, making 
the link with standards organisations (e.g. ISO, CEN -CENELEC, NBN) starting already in the project by 
relevant partners like CTB (officially recognised as plastic standardisation sectorial operator in Belgium).   
Cascade recycling of the tarpaulins. TRL4/6→7/8  
State of the art: Mechanical recycling methods based on grinding, milling and fibre separation using air 
treatment, vibration and sifting offer promising options, as explored in feasibilities studies by partners 
VWERF &KKF (TRL6) and also the option of shaving away the PVC by EKOTREND (TRL5).   
Physical recycling using polar solvents, the so -called Polysep process has been tested in batch sizes 
by partner CTB (TRL4). The input material is first shredded, and then soaked with solvent which swells 
the PVC fraction. In the next step, the soaked material comes into co ntact with the catalyst, which is hot 
water or steam. This induces a flash evaporation of the solvent, leading to a popcorning effect. At this 
step, the PVC coating is detached from the PET substrate. Subsequent conventional separation st eps 
(like zig zag air separation) allow to obtain different individual streams (in this case PVC and PET).  
Dissolution. Some small-scale recycling initiatives exist based on dissolution processes such as the 
Creasolv6 process and  
  
Polyloop 7 . Especially The Polyloop process from partner SF (TRL6) is interesting because PVC is 
separated from the fibres by dissolving the PVC in solvents and it is later recovered by a precipitation step 
(see figure 2). 8. The Vinyloop dissolution process, similar to the Polyloop process, turned out not to be 
economically feasible due to the presence of (hazardous) plasticizers 9. This will be less of a problem in 
the future as legacy additives will phase out and promising extraction methods are being developed 14. 
This already recently led to the start -up of two local PVC recycling lines in Belgium launched by INEOS 
Inovyn. The two pilots draw on Vinyloop dissolution technology developed between 2002 and 2018 and 
they will also, if present, extract the legacy additives.10   
 
Figure 2: Polyloop process  
Separation of PVC and PET fibres . A key element for both mechanical and physical recycling is the 
separation of PVC and PET fibres. This technology is industrially available for PVC-textile laminates but is 
 
6 https://www.ivv.fraunhofer.de/en/recycling-environment/recycling-plastics-creasolv.html  
7 https://polyloop.fr/  
8 https://polyloop.fr/strap-recycling/process/?lang=en  
9 
https://www.plasteurope.com/news/Closure_of_operation_in_Italy_Phthalates_issue_under_REACH_b
rings_do_t240095/ 14 https://www.remadyl.eu/downloads-file/public-deliverables/  
10 https://www.recyclingtoday.com/news/ineos-pvc-plastic-recycling-europe-flooring-tarps-pilot-inovyn-plant/  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 17 of 44  
not tested yet for tarps, hence a technology transfer is needed. At the same time, current separation 
efficiency is not sufficient as the PET fibres still contain too much PVC which, because of the Chloride 
leads to HCl formation in the extruder, leading in turn to corrosion. Further, at partner KKF it currently works 
only for short fibres, so an adaptation of the technology is needed for longer fibres (RETAIN goal is 50mm). 
Therefore, we estimate the current status TRL5.  
Extraction of valuable additives such as plasticizers and flame retardants from plastic materials, with 
the aid of solvents and other extraction techniques has been studied in the past at lab scale, using different 
novel techniques, such as microwaveassisted Soxhlet extraction, ionic liquids, or supercritical CO211,12,13,14. 
However, these studies focus on the removal of lowmolecular weight phthalates and bromide flame 
retardants (legacy substances). To recover high molecular weight plasticizers and mineral flame 
retardants, as well as other valuable additives, a cascade ext raction methodology will be performed 15. 
These methodologies are used for the recovery of additives from other types of plastics, have to a certain 
level already been tried on PVC by CTB and AIMPLAS (TRL4 -5) but will need to be further adapted to 
PVC tarps in terms of solvents selection and process conditions, aiming for high purity materials.  
Cascade recycling material flow setup via AI-based decision support tool (DST). As is clear from the 
above, tarp recycling can be executed via various technologies. Depending on the quality of the EOL tarp 
material, and also on the equipment and infrastructure that is locally available, there will be an optimised 
route on how to rec ycle. For example, recycling locally with a technique that is locally available but that 
does not give the most valuable output stream versus shipping it to a location where a mo re optimal 
recycling techniques is available, but at an extra cost logistics cost. For such decision support, a strategy 
for optimal recycling will be worked out and a decision support tool will be developed. For this AI -based 
DST, techniques have already been investigated by RINA -C, but that involved other processes and/or 
parameters in a different environment, so tech transfer will be needed. Estimated current status TRL5-6.  
Beyond SOTA: RETAIN aims to further develop the various complementary recycling technologies which 
are mechanical, physical and dissolution recycling and to show separation of PVC and PET fibres. It is 
also our ambition to further purify these recyclates to recover t he plasticizers and other high value 
components such as the flame retardants, by using selective solvents and extraction methods, so that the 
purified additives and part of the PVC can be reused to obtain new plastisol formulations for tarpaulin 
production in a semi-closed-loop recycling process. RETAIN aims to bring those techniques at a level they 
mature  
  
enough to integrate them in the pilots and show their value (TRL8). An AI-based decision support tool will 
be investigated to optimize the processes into a cascade recycling process that optimizes for the various 
output streams (soft PVC/PET materials, pure PET fibres and a PET-free PVC fraction). A key element will 
be to optimize the required recycling resources in function of value of the output streams.   
Conversion into PVC-based products with recycled content TRL4/6 →7/8.  
State of the art: As can be seen from the recycled PVC tonnages table shown in the beginning of section 
1.1.2, tarps are almost not recycled, meaning that soft PVC recyclates are coming from other waste 
sources such as EOL cable insulation and especially from post-industrial waste, e.g. for roofing and flooring 
for which partners RENO and BIG, respectively, have experience in their re-use (TRL5-6). The applications 
of EOL PVC recyclates are typically still limited, e.g. as filler material in composites or as additive to cement 
 
11 Pérez et al (2022). Improvement of PVC Compound Plasticizer Extraction Process. Ingeniería Industrial. 
10.26439/ing.ind2022.n42.5865.  
12 Wang et al (2024). Environmental-friendly extraction of DEHP from PVC using liquefied dimethyl ether. Waste Management.  
10.1016/j.wasman.2024.04.050.   
13 Lateef et al (2008). Extraction of components of composite materials: ionic liquids in the extraction of flame retardants from 
plastics. Journal of Chemical Technology and Biotechnology. 10.1002/jctb.1829.  
14 Shieh et al (2003). Supercritical CO2 Extraction of Phthalate Plasticizers from PVC. Journal of Applied Polymer Science. 
10.1002/app.13183.  
15 Ügdüler et al (2020). Challenges and opportunities of solvent-based additive extraction methods for plastic recycling. Waste 
Management.  
10.1016/j.wasman.2020.01.003.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 18 of 44  
and bituminous masses16. Regarding the polyester fibres, high quality recycled polyester fibres are mainly 
coming from recycled bottles, but there is also now equipment and process know how available to obtain 
high quality PET fibres from EoL textiles at CTB and SIOEN (TRL4 -5) a nd this opens possibilities to 
develop high tenacity continuous PET multifilament yarns from EOL tarps.17.  
Beyond SOTA: RETAIN will demonstrate the conversion of recycled PVC from EoL tarpaulins into (new) 
high value products (i.e. recycling/upcycling). Recycled PVC, for instance, will be converted into dedicated 
PVC parts by means of injection moulding, will be used for production of PVC roofing and for tarps (both 
via calendaring) and for flooring (ideally via plastisol coating, if PVC quality too low also via calendaring). 
On the other hand, recycled PET material will be used for extrusion of high tenacity continuous PET 
multifilament yarns, recycled PET fibres (>50mm) will be used for high end technical non wovens.   
FREEDOM TO OPERATE (FTO).  
A preliminary freedom to operate analysis was carried out. It was clear that historically already many 
patents in the domain of PVC recycling of PVC coated textiles/tarpaulins were filed. However, most of them 
are now in the public domain and free to use. Especially most of the patents by Solvay related to the 
Vinyloop process are now free to use. These are for example EP0945481, EP1232204 and EP1268628 
and their family members. In the search a limited number of living patent families were discovered.  
These are EP1737904 by Fraunhofer, EP2276801 by Solvay/SF and EP3504037A1 by PVC Separation 
Holdings Pty Ltd. However, the Fraunhofer method will not be used in this project. The Solvay/SF patent 
is transferred to Polyloop, but SF is allowed to further opt imize this recycling process for their products. 
The patent EP3504037A1 refers to the Polysep process which has been developed in Australia. A 
container-based demo line has been installed at the premises of CTB, and CTB is allowed to use it for 
trials at pilot scale within RETAIN. Thus, the active patents are not impeding the project's progress. #§PRJ-
OBJ-PO§#
1.2  Methodology   
1.2.1  Basic concept and assumptions  
The basic concept to create a 
circular PVC tarpaulin value 
chain is based on the 
collection, screening and 
sorting of  end-of-life 
 (EOL)  and 
 postindustrial  waste 
 which  will  be 
‘reconfectioned’  (term 
 used  for indicating 
re-using, repairing and 
remanufacturing)  or 
 recycled  by 
scaling existing technologies.  Within RETAIN we will develop and implement a very strict gate control 
procedure. As shown in the gate control  scheme  (figure  3),  this  
procedure will distinguish between Figure 3: gate control scheme the  various  tarp  qualities, 
 thus guaranteeing minimal value reduction. Also, at manufacturer level, actions will be taken to 
enhance the European industrial sustainability. RETAIN will develop and integrate 1) a digital product 
passport for tarpaulins, and 2) integrate biobased and recycled products. If each EU tarp manufacturer 
integrates a DPP in their products (representing 65% of the EU market), it will ease and cheapen the 
circular tarp value chain because no screening for toxic components would be necessary anymore for 
these tarpaulins.  
  
 
16 Lewandowski, K.; Skórczewska, K. A Brief Review of Poly(Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Recycling. Polymers 2022, 14, 3035. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/polym14153035  
17 https://www.erema.com/us/pet-fibre-inline-recycling/  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 19 of 44  
We will not focus on the recycling of ‘old’ tarpaulins containing legacy additives, there were and are several 
projects to (completely) remove these legacy additives, but it is still challenging to completely remove these 
additives in an economically feasible way. Even a small amount of legacy additive present in the recycled 
materials will pollute the end product making it impossible to sell these products. Therefore, as RETAIN is 
focusing on a toxic free and economically mature circularity chain of PVC ta rps on short term, these 
materials will be sent to specialized waste disposal facilities and will not enter the reconfectioning and 
recycling facilities of the RETAIN. Further the DISSOLV project (with RETAIN partners SIOEN, BIG & CTB) 
is working on soluti ons to recycle soft PVC materials containing legacy additives, so the consortium will 
have state-of-the-art information on best handling of such waste.18   
1.2.2. Overall approach   
  
Figure 4: RETAIN approach  
The RETAIN methodology for establishing tarpaulin circularity is divided into several activity 
blocks, as illustrated figure 4. In the first phase we focus on the innovations and scale up of the EOL 
tarps needed to reach TRL 6. Solutions for sorting and screening need to be further developed to develop 
processes capable of handling end-of-life (EOL) tarpaulins on a large scale. Additionally, a digital product 
passport (DPP) should be created. These elements will lead to the RETAIN gate control process. Further, 
we will develop reconfectioning and deconfectioning techniques for processing the EOL tarps. Next activity 
block will be the optimisation of a set of recycling technologies (mechanical, dissolution, extraction 
methods) leading to a strategy for cascade recycling. Next, existing products and manufacturing processes 
will be investigated and adapted for the uptake of secondary raw materials from EOL tarps, leading to high 
value products made from rPVC. In the second phase which is the demonstration phase,  the entire 
circularity chain of PVC tarps will be showcased . This will involve the integration of each optimized 
component from the innovation and upscaling phase into one of the three demonstration pilots (TRL7). 
Furthermore, the ecological and economic feasibility of these technologies will be assessed to ensure they 
are both profitable and environmentally friendly. Finally, we will ensure that the new materials are of high 
 
18 https://www.catalisti.be/en/projects/dissolv  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 20 of 44  
quality and comply with the proposed standards developed during the project, qualifying the recycled 
products for market entry (TRL8). Below we describe the different activity blocks and mention for each 
activity the most important challenge we intend to overcome.  Logistics, monitoring, and sorting  
  
Challenge: PVC tarps are often large and bulky, making them difficult to handle and transport. Monitoring 
their condition is essential, as they can degrade over time or become contaminated, complicating recycling 
efforts. Sorting PVC tarps by type, colour, and condit ion is labour -intensive and requires specialized 
knowledge to ensure that they are processed appropriately, whether for reuse, recycling, or disposal.  
RETAIN Approach: A drop-off centre will be deployed during demonstration using the facilities of project 
partners. An AI based digital tool will be used to configure the collection stream optimization. The collected 
tarpaulins will be first checked in the presence of a digital product passport. If not available (this will be the 
case during the project phase as currently no DPP exists for tarpaulins), they will be screened for the 
presence of legacy additives and other tarp components using advanced monitor ing techniques such as 
Raman spectroscopy & Laser -induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS). If legacy additives are present, 
the tarpaulins will be safely disposed of as waste. If not, it will be examined by a visual and mechanical 
check if they can be reused /repaired/remanufactured. If ok, they will be transferred to ‘confectioners’ (in 
RETAIN this will be SIOEN, beyond RETAIN this will also be other confectioning companies) which can 
bring these tarpaulins again on the market. If they are too much damaged, t hey will be sent to recycling. 
This concept will first be evaluated at small scale focusing on manual processing, and afterwards upscaled 
to an automated process.   
Digital product passport  
Challenge: The implementation of DPPs across supply chains is a requirement of the ESPR regulation, 
whereby all products sold in the EU (except food and medicines) will have to have a DPP by 2030. This is 
a massive undertaking involving the restructuring of data ma nagement across supply chains, whereby 
each product will require a unique identifier that will have a machine-readable mechanism that tracks the 
product through its lifespan and advises consumers on best practices for recycling, and foster trust 
between consumers and businesses, based on a DPP carrier with an embedded web link to a DPP 
database. IRIS (who will engage with standard’s official bodies and operators like CTB or UNE in Spain, 
who they have an active working relation with) will ensure th at all standards in relation to DPPs are 
understood and that we are in compliance. As part of our DPP architecture we will assess current data 
storing systems to ensure interoperability with what already exists, to make sure that the DPP aligns in as 
much as possible with what the industry is already doing.  
RETAIN Approach: The Digital Product Passport that will be developed in the RETAIN project, will be 
underpinned by a cocreation approach with representative from the industry, from inside and beyond the 
consortium based on a series of participatory workshops and scoping se ssions in an agile process to 
gather feedback in relation to current data management and traceability processes, relevant data and 
information sources (e.g. datasheets, databases, etc.), and connectable enterprise applications, etc. in 
order to map out the interoperability requirements. Throughout this process, an understanding of the 
standardization and regulatory landscape will inform a standards -based and compliance by -design 
approach, as well as ensuring compliance with NGSI, European B lockchain Service Infrastructure, and 
Gaia-X concepts. The core of the DPP concept is to digitize (or use already digitized) information from the 
product journey across the complex PVC tarpaulins value chain in a blockchain -based Digital Product 
Passport, which will be accessible via smartphones for full traceability.   
A high-level architecture of the RETAIN DPP is presented in figure 5, and it provides a robust framework 
for secure, transparent, and traceable product information management, utilizing advanced technologies 
like blockchain distributed ledgers, and secure identity management systems. It is a comprehensive 
integration of various information technology components to ensure secure and efficient data handling 
throughout a product's lifecycle.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 21 of 44  
  
Figure 5: high level architecture of IDP and DPP  
The production line level includes a data carrier management system (QR code, RFID or other tagging 
system), which will be based on the most appropriate tagging or carrier system. Login and production line 
data are transmitted to the DPP cloud server.  Product fingerprinting can also be captured by appropriate 
inline analysers (such as, VisumHSI, VisumLIBS or other process analytical technologies trademarks from 
IRIS) installed in the line (or taken from handheld analysers along the value chain) for capturi ng spectral 
or image data in relation to chemical composition (unique fingerprints) about the material or product. The 
‘Visum Cloud’ collects and processes fingerprinting data related to the products for obtaining DPP 
compatible information that can be sent to the RETAIN DPP or any other DPP in the future (as part of our 
strive for future interoperability across DPPs which will become widespread as regulatory compliance kicks 
in).   
The Company Office component provides a feature for operators for managing credentials and related 
data, adding industry capability keys, and providing product media, which are securely transmitted to the 
DPP cloud server.   
The DPP Cloud Server consists of a series of layers. The Identity Layer uses GS1 Digital Link and ISO 
15459 standards for identity management and data resolution. The Data Layer manages schemas and 
product data, represented as JSON-ID for standardized data exchange, and an Application Programming 
Interface (API) enables data interaction between various components and the cloud server for product 
master and metadata management, lifecycle data management, interfacing with other DPP systems, as 
well as ensuring connectivity with existing enterprise and business information systems (as identified as 
part of the cocreation process). The Trust Layer employed Distributed Identity (DID) and Verifiable 
Credentials (VC) for decentralized ledger technology (DLT) anchor ing, ensuring data integrity and trust. 
Blockchain Security ensures that all data transactions are securely timestamped and stored from all actors 
involved in the product lifecycle, ensuring transparency and immutability.  
A Mobile Application (DPPS App) enables product scanning, whereby users can scan products using QR 
codes, and the app interacts with the DPP cloud server via the GS1 Digital Link to verify and retrieve 
product data stored on the blockchain, and displays information related to process of end-of-life complex 
PVC or tarpaulins, use, and waste management of such product. As described, the goal is to leverage a 
standardized, interoperable, secure and scalable DPP architecture as a replicable template for DPP 
developments, which could also could potentially contribute to a DPP standard in Europe going forward.  
Reconfectioning and deconfectioning  
Challenge: To increase the circularity of PVC tarps, one must avoid that tarps are disposed too early which 
is currently the case and it is important that actions are taken to extend their lifetime. Reconfectioning (i.e. 
repair/reuse/remanufacture) of EoL tarps is hardl y done today as the logistics and sorting of these 
materials is highly underdeveloped. Manual de -confectioning is labourintensive and costly. Automated 

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 22 of 44  
processes for disassembly are not yet widely available or efficient for such complex materials. RETAIN 
Approach: Reconfectioning involves: i) repairing any holes, tears, or damage to ensure its effectiveness 
in providing protection from the elements. As already many repair kits (containing  glues, vinyl cement, 
grommets and even vinyl-coated fabric patches) are on the market, focus will be on informing customers 
that such repair kits exist and can also be ordered from the tarp manufacturers. If customers cannot repair 
the tarps by themselves. They can send it to a company who is doing confectioning such as SIOEN. ii) 
Reusing/remanufacturing: EOL tarpaulins still in good condition will be reused/remanufactured meaning 
they will be sent to confectioners who can  then confection and sell these second -hand tarp materials in 
‘new’ products. Important here is to know the age of the tarpaulin to estimate the remaining lifespan. During 
the project, this info must be provided by the company that disposed the tarpaulin. Later this info will be 
provided by the DPP. De-confectioning: metallic parts such as buckles, zippers and eyelets will be 
removed, as they block/contaminate the recycling process. To be economically viable about 
250m²/hour/person should be de-confectioned. Therefore, a semi-automated deconfectioning workstation 
will be developed.  
Cascade recycling   
Challenge: The recycling infrastructure for PVC tarps is limited, with many facilities not equipped to handle 
such materials because of their complex composition, leading to more waste ending up in landfills.  This 
gap in infrastructure highlights the need for improved recycling systems tailored specifically to PVC 
tarpaulins. Also, especially during mechanical recycling microplastics could be unintentionally released in 
the environment.  
RETAIN Approach: we will further work on different promising recycling technologies. i) mechanical 
recycling. Here the PVC tarpaulins will be shredded, washed and grinded. This material can then be used 
as such in injection moulding to produce PVC parts. Initial tests will be executed on kg scale, but later, it 
will be upscaled to ton scale. To separate the PVC from the PET we will optimize to dry mechanical 
separation processes. The first one is using air treatment, vibration and sifting (KKF), the second one a 
shaving process (EKOTREND). This leads to a PET free PVC fraction which can be used as secondary 
raw material and a PET/PVC fraction that will be further purified by dissolution processes to isolate the 
polyester and the PVC. Special exhaust systems will be used to avoid that potential harmful microplastics 
will be released in the environment.   
ii)  optimizing  soak-
and-separate process (see 
figure 6). The process begins 
by shredding the input material 
followed by a pre-separation of 
light fibres (not-bounded PET 
fraction) by a conventional 
cyclone system (dry process). 
Then, the multilayer material is 
soaked in a solvent and the 
PVC fraction swells. Next, steam (referred to as catalyst) is injected, triggering a rapid evaporation of the 
solvent  
Figure 6: Soak-and-separate process  
(popcorn effect). As a result, the PVC 
coating separates from the PET  
substrate. To obtain different individual streams, the materials will be separated using conventional 
methods like zig zag air separation.   
The solvent is recovered through a distillation process and reused in a closed loop system. This equipment 
is available at CTB, and it is targeted to scale it up from a few kgs/day to 50kg/day by optimizing the 
process parameters. iii) Dissolution. The PVC, including the plasticizer, will be dissolved and the PET fibre 
and other potential fillers such as flame retardants remain as solid. The PET fibres and fillers will be 
separated by a density separation process (see also the schedule shown in the state-of-the-art section of 
the Polyloop process of which SF is allowed to use it for tarp recycling). The PVC will be in a later stage 
precipitated and can be reused.   

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 23 of 44  
iv) Selective dissolution and extraction methods for plasticizers and other high value components. In this 
process, the tarpaulin will be shredded, and then dissolved in a suitable solvent, followed by the filtration 
of the insoluble fractions, that could be composed of flame retardants, fillers and PET fibres, that will be 
later separated by other techniques. The dissolved PVC will be then precipitated with an antisolvent and 
separated from the other solubilized components. Final dissolution will be distilled to recover the plasticizer. 
Each of the recovered fractions will be purified by different secondary extractions, washing and distillation 
processes, as well as with supercritical CO2, to remove volatiles contaminants.  
Initials test will be performed on lab scale and later upscaled to DEMO scale. The quality of all the recycled 
materials will be analysed by determining the exact composition, the purity, viscosity and 
thermomechanical properties of the materials.   
High value rPVC products by uptake of secondary raw materials from EOL tarp  
Challenge: Integrating recycled materials into new products requires careful management to ensure quality 
and performance, as recycled materials can vary in consistency and degrade over time. Designing with 
bio-content materials involves sourcing sustainable inputs a nd ensuring they meet durability and 
functionality standards while balancing environmental benefits. RETAIN Approach: The various recycled 
products (PVC, PET, plasticizers, etc.) coming from the various recycling technologies will subsequently 
be integrated into (new) products with at least 50% recycled content. Examples of such applications are 
PVC/PET fractions that will be used in injection moulding to produce unique fibre reinforced PVC pieces, 
recycled PET fibres will be processed into high tenacity multifilament yarns which can be again used as 
reinforcements in tarps, and recycled PVC that will be converted into roo fing films by means of extrusion 
coating or calendaring. Furthermore, we will also integrate bio content (PVC and plasticizers) into these 
products to further increase the sustainability of these products.   
Demonstration by piloting circularity activities in 3 EU regions  
Challenge: show cost efficient, reproducible and effective circularity processes for EOL tarp at semi -
industrial scale.   
RETAIN Approach: we will demonstrate that post -production and EOL tarpaulins can be recycled at 
multiple tons scale at 3 locations in the EU in an efficient way. By applying technologies and processes 
which were optimized during the innovation and upscaling phase we will  demonstrate every step of the 
RETAIN circularity chain from collection and sorting up to reconfectioning, recycling and conversion into 
new products. As shown in the sketch at the beginning of section 1.2.2, each DEMO site will focus on 
specific aspects related to gate control, reconfectioning, cascade recycling and eco -design of recycled 
products. These specific aspects of the circularity chain for each region were chosen based on the 
expertise of the companies present in these regions.  
Also, we are familiar with local waste collection and transport peculiarities and we will align with 
local regulations. A summary table of the pilot and demonstrations activities is given on the next 
page:  
     
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 24 of 44  
Table 2: summary table of each stage of the pilot and demonstration activities  
Task  Deliv. 
Nr.  
Prototype/ 
Pilot/  
Demo  
Short  
description  
Location  
(facility/ 
city/ 
region)  
Lead  
partner(s)  
Start  
&  
end 
TRL*  
Type and 
volume of 
RETAIN input 
materials/ 
products  
Type and 
volume of 
RETAIN 
output 
materials/ 
products  
T5.2  D5.2  Demo  gate control 
process: logistics 
and process 
monitoring (incl. 
validation of 
identification and 
sorting 
technologies)  
BENELUX  VEOLIA   6   
→ 8  
10 tons of 
collected 
postproduction 
and EOL tarps 
per day  
10 tons of 
sorted post-
production and 
EOL tarps per 
day  
T5.2  D5.2  Demo  gate control 
process: 
deconfectioning & 
sorting   
NL  VWERVEN   6   
→ 8  
1 ton of 
collected 
postproduction 
and EOL tarps 
per day  
700 kg of 
recyclable tarps 
per day  
T5.3  D5.3  Demo  repair/reuse/remanu 
facturing  
BE  SIOEN   6   
→ 8  
to be 
determined 
during project 
in T5.1  
to be 
determined 
during project 
in T5.1  
T5.3  D5.3  Demo  mechanical 
recycling  
DE, CZ  KKF,  
EKOTREN 
D  
 6  
 → 8  
10 tons of 
recyclable 
tarps per day  
6-7 tons of  
recycled  
PVC/plasticizer, 
and 2-3 tons of 
rPET per day  
T5.3  D5.3  Demo  solvent-based 
recycling  
FR  SF   6   
 → 7  
300 kg of 
recyclable 
tarps per day  
100-200 kg of  
recycled  
PVC/plasticizer, 
and 50-100 kg 
of r-PET per 
day  
T5.3  D5.3  Prototype  Soak-and-separate 
process  
BE  CTB  TRL 
5 → 
6  
50kg of 
recycled tarp  
40kg of r-PET 
and PVC  
T5.3  D5.3  Prototype  Extraction process 
for specific tarp 
components (e.g. 
ATO)  
ES  AIMPLAS  TRL 
5 → 
6  
10-50kg of 
recycled tarp  
1-5kg 
depending on 
the specific tarp 
components  
(e.g. ATO)  
T5.4  D5.4  Demonstrat 
or  
Uptake into 
recycled products  
 BE, FR, 
DE  
RENOLIT  TRL6 
→8  
5 tons of 
recycled 
PVC/plasticizer 
, and 2 tons of 
r-PET per day  
Multiple tons of 
roofing and 
nonwoven 
materials per 
day 
*The start and end TRL levels refer to the TRL progress targeted in WP5.   
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 25 of 44  
Supporting activities: Liaison, DEC, Standardization including business models and market 
development, Assessment studies, Industry awareness, Training and Certification  
Challenges: establishing an EU -wide circular tarp value chain will require to educate and convince all 
stakeholders to make the transition. Indeed, raising industrial awareness requires overcoming scepticism 
about the benefits and feasibility of circular practices, wh ich can be difficult given the entrenched norms 
and practices in many industries.  
RETAIN Approach: implementation of several supporting activities to gain evidence for showing the 
environmental and economic benefits of the transition as well as to bring this message to all 
relevant stakeholders. A brief outline of the key elements in the next paragraphs.  
For liaison, we will align with the European PVC industry’s commitment to sustainable development and 
explore if we can find synergies with other projects dealing with circularity of (complex) plastics, thus 
maximizing the exploitation and replication of the RETAIN r esults. Developing and implementing a 
consistent communication strategy  to promote the advantages of circular PVC tarps and educate 
stakeholders on their benefits and usage requires a coordinated approach and effective channels. This will 
be elaborated in the DEC plan, clearly defining specific target groups and related key messages. This way, 
we will create general industrial awareness among stakeholders in the broadest possible way. We will 
select and further define circular business models, commercialization, and partnerships strategies by 
developing a complete overview of the reuse and recycling markets, associated legal and regulatory 
aspects, and financial incentives. Turning innovative circular business models into viable commercial 
opportunities involves navigating market challenges, such as securing investment, scaling operations, and 
proving the economic benefits of circular practices. We will share information about circular business 
models and the benefits of recycled PVC tarps creating  clear, compelling messages that resonate with a 
variety of audiences and overcoming resistance to change. Environmental and socio -economic 
assessment (LCA & LCC & SLCA): accurately measuring and quantifying the environmental impacts of 
products throughout their entire lifecycle, from production to disposal. We will collect comprehensive data 
on resource use, emissions, and waste, which can be difficult to obtain and analyse. During the innovation 
phase of RETAIN, the most appropriate technologies and processes will be identified based on efficiency, 
ecological impact, costs, etc.  
Establishing and aligning industry-wide standards for circularity in PVC tarps involves overcoming the 
complexity of different regulations and practices across regions, which can hinder the creation of uniform 
standards and practices.  We will support and adhere to certifications and standards that promote 
sustainable and circular practices in the PVC industry. Standards on circular plastic products are developed 
in CEN TC 249 (Plastics). We will build on this existing knowledge and exis ting standards for PVC to 
develop the circular tarp value-chain and develop a blueprint for certification.  
Hands-on training programs will be developed to educate employees  on how to increase the 
circularity of PVC tarps.  Employees of waste management companies will be trained on how they can 
efficiently sort and screen tarpaulins and see which are reusable and which must be recycled. Further, we 
will prepare education material for employees at relevant stakeholders. Indeed, during the demonstration 
phase findings will be integrated at the demo sites. tarp confectioning companies and end -users of tarp 
products (e.g. trailer transport companies) will be educated about collection, sorting, reuse, and recycling 
options for postproduction and EOL tarps.  
1.2.3. Additional methodology aspects  
Compliance with ‘do no significant harm’ principle. The “do no significant harm” principle refers to the 
six environmental objectives of the EU Taxonomy Regulation. RETAIN aligns with the Do No Significant 
Harm (DNSH) principles, ensuring that the methodology does not cause significant environmental or social 
damage. Here are key motivations for why our project is beneficial and does not cause significant harm:  
• Waste Reduction: Recovering and Recycling PVC tarps reduces the amount of waste sent to 
landfills, mitigating the environmental impact associated with landfill usage, such as leachate 
production and methane emissions.  
• Resource Conservation : By recycling PVC tarps, valuable raw materials are reclaimed and 
reused, reducing the need for virgin material extraction. This conserves natural resources and 
reduces the environmental degradation associated with mining and production processes.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 26 of 44  
• Energy Savings: Recycling PVC tarps typically requires less energy compared to producing new 
PVC materials from scratch. This leads to lower greenhouse gas emissions, supporting climate 
change mitigation efforts.  
• Pollution Prevention : Proper recycling processes prevent PVC tarps from breaking down in 
landfills, where they can release harmful chemicals into the soil and water. Recycling ensures that 
the materials are handled safely and responsibly. Also, during the recycling process, i t will be 
monitored that no microplastics are released in the environment.  
• Economic Benefits : Recycling creates jobs and stimulates economic activity in the recycling 
industry. It also provides cost savings for businesses by reducing waste disposal fees.  
• Health and Safety: Recycling PVC tarps involves controlled processes that minimize health risks 
to workers and communities. It ensures that harmful chemicals and additives in PVC are managed 
appropriately. Within this aspect, solvents used in the recycling processes will b e recovered and 
reused and will not be discharged into the environment. Also, no toxic solvents will be used in the 
recycling process.  
• Promoting Sustainability: By recycling PVC tarps, companies and consumers contribute to a 
circular economy, promoting sustainable practices and reducing the overall environmental footprint.  
Overall, transitioning to sustainable and circular PVC tarps is a responsible and beneficial practice 
that supports environmental protection, resource conservation, and sustainable development, 
aligning with the DNSH principles.  
Artificial intelligence (AI) based systems and/or techniques.  The proposed AI -based solution 
considered for the implementation of specific calculation methodology, follows the EU framework for 
Trustworthy AI, which defines 3 complementary concepts, Lawful AI, Ethical AI, and Robust AI. The 
Assessment List for Trustw orthy AI (ALTAI) will be used to assess the level of compliance to the key 
principles of Transparency, Traceability, Explainability, Robustness, Safety, Resilience, Accuracy, 
Reliability, Reprodu cibility, Privacy and data governance, Diversity, Non -discrimination and Fairness, 
Accountability and Redress in case of adverse impact. For AI -based algorithms, particularly optimization 
routines (e.g. evolutionary algorithms) and datadriven modelling app roach such as Artificial Neural 
Networks (ANNs) or regression generation used for process optimization with no access to personal data 
or involvement in direct control of recycling processes machineries, adherence to the Trustworthy AI 
principles can be described in terms of: Technical Robustness and safety ensuring the proposed AI solution 
will be reliable, traceable and reproducible, able to report on its behaviour even if not involved in direct 
control of recycling processes machineries. The system will have to be technically robust to handle 
uncertainties in the operative environment; Privacy and Data Governance ensuring that the AI system does 
not have access to personal data: Transparency granting the AI -based algorithms functioning will be 
transparent and understandable even if not involved in direct control of recycling processes machineries; 
Diversity and Fairness: Ensuring the training data used for the data -driven models are diverse and free 
from biases, even if it's not dealing with personal data directly. The validation of the proposed AI solution 
will be performed using specific accuracy metrics relevant to the signal processing task (including metrics 
such as Mean Squared Error (MSE), Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), or any other relevant metric), to 
ensure that the predictions remain reliable and consistent as data evolves and conducing a test campaign 
on relevant scenarios to verify the safety of the provided suggestions. More details in T3.4.  
Linked (inter)national research and innovation actions. The table below gives an overview of research 
projects which have a link to the RETAIN project and also show how RETAIN will benefit from these 
projects.  
Table 3: overview of research projects which have a link to the RETAIN project  
Project Acronym (type of project19) 
+ short description  
Partner 
involved  
Link with retain (related KO)  
CISUFLO (HEUR): Route to circular 
& sustainable floor coverings /  
BIG, CTB,  
RINA-C, 
EuPC  
RETAIN will work out a circular business model 
for tarps (KO7)  
 
19 HE = Horizon Europe; H2020 = Horizon 2020; I3 = Interregional Innovation Investments   
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 27 of 44  
Cisutac (HEUR): Increasing 
Circularity and Sustainability in 
Textiles and Clothing in EU  
CTB,  
AIMPLAS  
RETAIN will rely on knowledge generated for 
high quality rPET multifilament fibre extrusion 
(KO5)  
Digintrace (HEUR) Solutions to 
promote plastics circularity /  
SIOEN, 
IRIS, CTB, 
EuPC  
Input for digital solution development in RETAIN 
(KO1)  
Dissolv (BEL-COO) – recycling PVC 
waste  
from flooring, carpets and tarpaulin 
applications   
SIOEN, 
CTB, BIG  
Recycling solutions for complex PVC waste 
(KO3)  
ECOFACT (H2020) support 
manufacturing  
in optimizing energy performance  
https://ecofact-project.eu/  
RINA-C  Will be used in RETAIN to optimize recycling 
processes (KO3)  
FLEX-ID (VinylPlus project): 
setting up data structure for a DPP 
for soft PVC value chains  
VINYLPLUS,  
SIOEN,  
RENO, BIG  
RETAIN will build on the blueprint for a DPP for 
plasticized PVC products as developed within 
FLEX-ID. As such, DPP development will be able 
to start from the concepts for which data is 
needed for soft PVC value chains (KO1).  
PULPACKTION (H2020) Optimised 
moulded pulp for renewable 
packaging solutions   
IRIS  Build further on the developed integrated 
traceability system (DPP), involving software, QR 
and a vision system and imaging analysis 
software (KO1).  
REMADYL (H2020) &: Removal of 
legacy substances from polyvinyl 
chloride (PVC)   
CTB, IRIS,  
AIMPLAS,  
VINYLPLUS  
RETAIN will build further on the screening 
methods of legacy additives (related to efficient 
monitoring and sorting KO1) and plasticizer 
removal (KO3)  
TARPAULIFE (LIFE) demonstrate 
possibility of POLYOLEFIN tarps  
RINA-C  Input for ecodesign of tarpaulins (KO4)  
CIRPASS (Digital Europe Project): 
Digital  
Product Passports Enabling At-Scale 
and Real-Life Circular Economy in 
several value chains   
No direct 
partner 
involvement   
RETAIN will follow such baseline to comply with 
the existing pilot and standards (KO5)  
Circular Flooring (H2020) – 
recycling of PVC floor coverings   
Potential channel for actual recycling of RETAIN 
preprocessed material (KO4)  
  
Interdisciplinary aspects. A close interaction between scientists and innovators belonging to diverse 
disciplines is essential to reach RETAIN objectives and high impact. To achieve a successful exploitation 
of project results, it is essential to translate project outcomes into mark etable solutions. For this, the 
RETAIN Consortium is composed of partners with different background and competencies, covering the 
whole value chain from design to the manufacturing complemented by other partners providing the 
expertise which is needed to develop and deploy the project. In the consortium we have partners dealing 
with 1) Material Science and Engineering to optimize the monitoring, sorting, recycling and manufacturing 
processes: Veolia, IRIS, VWERVEN, KKF, EKOTREND,  SF, CTB, AIMPLAS, RENO, BIG, SATTLER, 
MEHLER 2) Environmental Science: RINA -C, Economics: RINA -C, industry partners, Policy and 
Regulatory Studies and Sociology and Public Awareness: EUPC, VINYLPLUS 4) Expertise in digitalization, 
data management, cloud d eployments, blockchain technology and application development will be 
leveraged for building the digital product passport: IRIS, RINA-C and 5) Certification: CTB. By integrating 
expertise and methods from these various disciplines, the PVC tarp recycling i nitiative can achieve its 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 28 of 44  
objectives in a holistic, efficient, and sustainable manner, ensuring that the recycling processes are 
environmentally friendly, economically viable, and socially responsible.  
Social Sciences and Humanities (SSH).  An effective contribution will be given at two different stages 
before and after the solution development. In the first stage, an early involvement and engagement of end 
users to obtain their feedback for the novel products design. Different methodologies (questionnaires, 
interviews, participatory workshops, etc.) will be evaluated and considered for stakeholders' engagement. 
Furthermore, open challenges such as cost -effectiveness, environmental sustainability, privacy, security, 
trust, and ethical issues will be addressed to find shared solutions and enhance the societal impact of 
RETAIN. In the second stage, a survey to analyse the stakeholders’ feedback on the developed solutions 
will be carried out. This analysis will allow to evaluate the social impact of the RETAIN developed solutions 
and their replicability potential.   
SSH will be included in the RETAIN project covering a wide portfolio of actions: (a) Sociology and Human 
Behaviour for analysing acceptability of RETAIN solutions through life cycle analyses, life cycle costing 
and social life cycle assessment; (b) Economi c and Business: business strategy for the exploitation and 
future market uptake of the project outcome, including market and competitor research and business 
modelling extending the research frontier. Detailed roadmap for replication in sectors beyond thos e 
targeted by RETAIN use case will be also performed; (c) Media and Communication: a carefully designed 
societal outreach campaign, where effective communication strategies will be implemented to target the 
different stakeholders.   
Gender analysis. RETAIN gender policy supports Article 141(3) of the EC Treaty to protect male/female 
members exercising the rights inherent in fatherhood/motherhood or the combination of professional and 
family lives and ensure that women participate equally and actively  alongside men, while links are 
established with the EU platform of women scientists to promote gender equality in research. The work 
also considers the gendered innovations proposed by EC. Gender aspects are considered and include 
targeted objectives for gender equality in the consortium. The objectives of the project equally address the 
needs of all genders in relation to plastics recycling and new products development via upcycled materials. 
Special attention will be paid to data collecti on from end -users ensuring a balanced representation of 
gender, age and cultural differences, and their needs, since these factors influence acceptance, 
expectations and experience. People react in fact differently based on gender, age, social and economic  
group in regard to degrees of risk aversion that will affect their perception of threats, or in regard to the 
significance of impacts of the various threats. The above will be taken into account in the development of 
interviews, questionnaires, focus grou ps, and also training, that will include both men and women, and 
dissemination, where project’s results are addressed in all genders equally and are adjusted according to 
their profile and needs.   
Open science practices . Open science principles are established as an integral part of RETAIN 
methodology and Management envisaging a Data Management Plan (DMP) produced to guarantee that 
data is ‘as open as possible’ and in line with the FAIR principles. The data/research outputs will be handled 
in fact according to FAIR principles (Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability and Reusability), unless for 
the information classified as sensitive. All data and results are shared, as early as possible, in a systematic 
way between the RETAIN target groups, pilots, third parties, and internationally. From the very beginning 
all stakeholders are involved order to develop better, more innovative and relevant outcomes and to 
increase societal trust in the RETAIN process and outcomes del ivering re-used, recycled and upcycled 
novel products. The consortium will participate to open peer -review with direct exchanges with scientific 
community by means of Open Research Europe. Open access is offered to all results (algorithms, models, 
data, etc.) that are released as open source, public and free. Moreover, RETAIN participates in open peer-
review, the publications of the project will be published in Open Access Journals and Open Access 
Repositories. In addition, all project reports, disseminatio n material and research datasets classified as 
Public will be available on the project website. The project has dedicated part of its budget (under the 
dissemination manager) to cover the fees associated with open -access publications to facilitate 
dissemination and reuse of the project results.   
Management of Research Data and other research output . The preliminary Data Management Plan 
(DMP) addressing FAIR principles has been outlined.  
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 29 of 44  
  
Table 4: FAIR principles outlined  
Type of data   Findability   Accessibility  Interoperability   Reusability  
LCA data 
(materials, scope, 
energy flows, 
processes)  
Project Teams setup, 
interaction among 
partners (e.g. email, 
questionnaire)  
Data owned by 
each Company, 
not public upon 
consensus  
Standard  data 
 files: excel, 
doc  
Results are made 
public, but source data 
are 
confidential   
Technical  data,  
product data  
Teams  environment,  
project  
Specific naming  &  
labelling  
Standard data files: 
txt, doc, xls, csv…  
Offered in appropriate 
format & data sharing 
licenses  
Liaison data (e.g. 
from events)  
Only in restricted MS 
Teams environment   
Restricted to 
organiser  
Audio/video 
recordings, 
registration  
Anonymised form only  
Data  from  
questionnaires  
Only in restricted MS 
Teams environment  
Restricted to 
organiser  
Online survey tool  Anonymised form only  
   
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 30 of 44  
2. Impact