2.1 Project’s pathways towards impact  
2.1.1 Unique contributions to topic outcomes and longer-term wider impact  
The impact of tarpaulin recycling involves several environmental and economic considerations. 
Tarps are widely used for various applications, including covering goods during transportation, 
providing shelter, and protecting materials from the elements. Her e are some key aspects of the 
expected impact of RETAIN tarp recycling:  
Scientific impact: RETAIN will create a strong scientific impact, including via:  
• Successful development of selective solvolysis and extraction techniques to isolate specific 
components from tarps will allow RTD partners to expand and exploit their knowledge to other recycling 
areas.   
• Non-confidential project results will be published such that these results are available to other 
researchers.  
Target group: R&D&I personnel in recycling industry, RTD centres, (non) governmental organizations and 
others involved with sustainability, circularity, recycling, etc.  
Economic/technical impact:  
• Identification and demonstration of successful recycling technologies will enable tarps recycling at 
economic scale, thus contributing to EU’s circularity and sustainability targets, and creating new 
companies and jobs along/in the recycling chain.  
• Development of (new) products based on recycled materials, and corresponding sales. Using recycled 
components from tarps in the manufacturing of new products can result in cost savings for businesses. 
Recycled components are typically more cost -competitive than virgin chemicals, providing economic 
incentives for manufacturers.  
• Recycling of tarps contributes to the development of markets for recycled plastic materials. As demand 
for recycled plastics increases, it stimulates economic activity in the recycling sector and provides 
opportunities for businesses to enter the recycled materials market.  
• Implementing tarp recycling programs aligns with Extended Producer Responsibility initiatives, where 
producers take responsibility for the entire life cycle of their products. This can enhance corporate 
responsibility and compliance with regulatory requirements.  
Target group: companies and organizations along the recycling and circular value chains, including 
recycling companies, process industry, logistical sector, converters of recycled materials, etc.  
Societal and environmental impact:  
• General: The objectives as stated in this RETAIN proposal will strongly support the need for 
sustainability and circularity expressed in the EU Green Deal, the new Circular Economy Action Plan 
(CEAP), and the Eco-design for Sustainable Products Regulation (ESPR).   
• Waste Reduction: Today <1% of post-production and end-of-life tarp materials are being recycled, 36% 
end up in landfills and 63% of these materials are being incinerated. RETAIN targets to bring the 
recycling of tarp materials to over 90% by 2036. As such our project will have a strong impact on the 
reduction of the unsustainable ‘solutions’ of landfill and incineration. Tarps contain durable materials, 
and recycling of these materials allows for the extension of the functional lifetimes, thus contributing to 
circularity of plastics in the EU, and preventing them from becoming a long-term environmental burden.  
• Sustainable Development Goals (SDG’s): The impact of a successful RETAIN project will strongly 
contribute to the UN sustainable development goals. Although this impact will be on multiple SDG’s (4, 
8, 9, 12, 13, etc.) we explicitly mention the following: (i) SDG12 - Responsible Consumption and 
Production: RETAIN will pursue a business model and product development strategy compliant with 
the principles of the circular economy. Waste is avoided through upcycling, recycling and optimized 
production processes, and the life cycles of products are extended through circular services such as 
repair and reuse. Ensuring tarp quality and developing circular materials addresses other aspects of 
this goal; (ii) SDG8 - Decent work and economic growth: the proposed RETAIN circular tarp value chain 
(i.e. from collection, monitoring, sorting and deconfectioning to remanufacturing and manufacturing of 
(new) products from recycled tarp components) will bring (new types of)  jobs and contribute to the 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 31 of 44  
development of the circular economy with a targeted yearly recycling volume of over 100kton of post-
production and end-of-life tarps.  
Target group: environmental organisations, policy makers, all EU citizens  
Below the unique contribution of our project results related to the specified outcomes of this topic 
and the wider impacts, are described.  
1)  Enhance European industrial sustainability  
This is related to KO5 which is the demonstration of circularity for complex PVC value chains at TRL 8 via 
3 dedicated pilots in the EU. This result will demonstrate that solutions at scale are available to increase 
the sustainability of PVC tarps. The related knowledge gain and expertise built-up will give major RETAIN 
companies, e.g. VEOLIA, BIG, RENO, SIOEN, a unique competitive advantage Wider impact: on the 
longer term, the technologies as developed and demonstrated within RETAIN have potential to be 
applicable to other comp lex PVC products such as roofing materials and flooring materials. Successful 
first implementation of circular tarps will strengthen the EU leading role in producing these technical 
products, giving also export leverage to the companies.  
2)  Improve on consumer and citizen benefits  
Although RETAIN is focusing on industrial partnerships, consumers and citizens will also benefit from the 
project. The aim is to avoid potentially hazardous materials re-entering the market (KO1 gate control) and 
via certification consumers and citizens wi ll be informed which products are safe to use (KO4). Wider 
impact: On longer-term making also other applications circular such as consumers good (bags) or small 
tents should be feasible.  
3)  Increased deployment and demonstrated benefits of advanced digital solutions (e.g., through AI, 
robotics, IoT and blockchain) in circular businesses including waste management and recycling;  
Optimization of the use of recycled tarpaulins in RETAIN is based on deploying digital technologies to 
enhance their chemical upgrade. At product and process level, optimization to efficiently valorise the 
materials and consume less energy, by applying novel digital technologies (e.g. data driven optimization, 
sensing, and sorting mechanisms) and chemical innovations for recycling, repair or reuse is to be 
employed. A set of demo -specific sensing and sorting technologies will be applied to ensure material 
suitability to valorisation routes and to contribute directly to the optimization of waste materials, while also 
unlocking economic opportunities (KO1 & KO5). The use of DPPs offers a possibility to examine how 
transparency through digital traceability may assist, not only the improvement of use of the specific waste 
materials, but also the reinforcement and optimization of methodologies for tracking materials and products 
across and within different value chains (KO1). Wider impact:  these developed and demo nstrated 
technologies will also be applicable to other plastic circularity chains.   
4)  Emergence of new value chains using upcycled and/or recycled resources, e.g. through industrial 
symbiosis;  
The obtained recyclates and extracted components (KO3) are available for other sectors such as flooring 
(e.g. cushion vinyl), roofing, injection moulding parts as will be demonstrated via our ecodesign approach 
(KO4). To facilitate such symbiosis, we have included partners from these industries (BIG and RENO) 
in the RETAIN consortium and have the associations ESWA (roofing) and IVK (foils and films) in the 
Transition Support Group. Wider impact: increased use of secondary materials in related sectors, but also 
the tarpaulin manufacturers themselves will reuse  the extracted tarp components (PVC, PET, additives 
and plasticizers), leading to a truly circular value chain.   
5) Increased uptake of recycled material and upcycling to new high value products;  
RETAIN will demonstrate at least 3 recycling technologies to TRL8 level, thereby converting EOL and post-
production tarps at tons scale into recycled products such as PVC, PET, and plasticizers (KO5). These 
resulting products will subsequently be converted into existing and/or new high value products like roofing, 
flooring and in tarps (KO4). Wider impact: By demonstrating the feasibility to obtain large quantities of fair 
quality recycled materials, the conversion of tarp based secondary raw materials int o recycled and 
upcycled products will be accelerated, also reducing the need for non-renewable resources.  
6)  Increased resource efficiency along and across value chains, causing a measurable reduction in GHG 
emissions and other environmental pollution and an increase of carbon removals;  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 32 of 44  
Resource Conservation: Recycling and reusing of tarps mean that raw materials resources are being 
conservated (KO3 & 4). Production of virgin tarp components such as PVC, PET and plasticizers requires 
massive amounts of raw materials (e.g. chlorine, ethylene, etc.) and energy (see below). RETAIN will 
strongly contribute to resource conservation.  
Energy Savings: The recycling process for tarps can potentially save energy compared to the production 
of new tarps. The exact energy reduction will depend on the type of recycling technology that will be 
applied. Manufacturing of e.g. virgin PVC involves energy-intensive processes, and recycling of PVC can, 
as such, be a more energy-efficient alternative. Wider impact: Emission Reduction: The global warming 
potential of producing a 900 g/m2 tarpaulin is 4.65 kg CO2eq/m². When these materials are incinerated at 
their end -of-life an additional 2.13 kg CO 2eq/m² are released. Hence, the disposal of the tarpaulin 
encompasses approximately 30% of its total impact. Considering in EU an annual estimated disposal of 
200 million m² tarpaulins and assuming landfill would be no longer allowed, this tarp incineration would 
encompass an EU -wide impact of over 400kton of CO 2eq. By recycling PVC tarps this will be 
avoided and we will avoid as well greenhouse gas emissions associated with the production of 
virgin PVC as recycling requires less energy and produces fewer emissions than the manufacturing of 
virgin PVC; Avoidance of Hazardous Waste: Proper recycling and disposal of PVC tarps containing legacy 
additives can help avoid the generation of hazardous waste associated with the current incineration or 
landfilling of such materials.   
7)  Increased diffusion of new circular business practices, in particular in the uptake of repair, reuse, and 
remanufacturing, but also practices that form part of the sharing economy.  
RETAIN aims at providing validation of circular business practices via the pilot demonstrations which will 
cover all the stages of the novel circular value chains: collection, screening & sorting, repair, reuse, 
remanufacturing and recycling will be piloted (KO5). These flagship pilot activities are expected to boost 
the adoption of circular business practises for tarps and related products. Moreover, activities as 
replicability assessment, training, stakeholder engagement, are supposed to further boost the deployment 
in real cases of RETAIN approach (KO7). Wider impact: RETAIN will focus on extending the lifecycle via 
repair, reuse, and remanufacturing. That will lead to new circular business practices and a related job 
creation of ca. 800 FTEs (Full Time Equivalents), see also section 2.1.2.   
2.1.2 Scale and significance  
RETAIN markets and scope scale and significance.  
Tarp market. As mentioned above, the total EU production of tarps is appr. 200mio m², representing 
a value of €600-800 mio for a common 600g/m² tarp with a typically materials value of ca €3-4/m². The 
RETAIN tarp manufacturers SIOEN, SATTLER, MEHLER and SF represent together over 90% of the 
EU production capacity. These tarp materials are confectioned into applicable products such as trailer 
curtains (60mio m²), tents (appr. 30mio m²), pool covers (20mio m²) as main applications but also in other 
applications like textile architectures, biogas installations or packaging (wrapping). Confectioning is an 
activity with relevant added value: after confectioning, the tarps application value is typically around 
€10/m², and up to €20/m², depending on the degree of confectioning. The confectioned tarp market thus 
represents ca. €2 -4billion in EU . The global tarpaulin market is valued at approximately €8.0billion 
(2022). The tarp market is projected to expand at ca. 4.5% (CAGR) from 2023 to 2028, reaching worldwide 
ca. €10billion by 2028. The growing adoption of tarpaulin sheets for protecting a wide range of products 
(e.g. industrial equipment) from extreme weather conditions is anticipated to play a crucial role in this 
market expansion.  
PVC Recycling: The global PVC recycling market is valued at ca. €3.0billion (2023) and is expected to 
grow to ca. €4.5 billion by 2028, at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 8.0% . This growth is 
driven by increasing regulatory pressures and demand for sustainable materials across industries like 
construction and packaging ( MarketsandMarkets, GlobeNewswire). Within this global market, Europe 
represents a significant portion of PVC recycling efforts due to the region's strict environmental regulations 
and focus on sustainability, especially in Germany, France, and the UK , where companies like Veolia, 
who is partner in the project, are leading players (MarketsandMarkets).  
Digital solutions (including DPP) for circular economy: EU circular economy market, driven by increasing 
regulatory compliance needs, like DPP , and taken across industries such as textiles, electronics and 
construction, is estimated over €600 billion by 2030 (Textile World, euronews, Worldfavor Sustainability 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 33 of 44  
Blog ). Global market  for digital sustainability solutions expected to surpass USD 1 trillion  by 2030 
(Worldfavor Sustainability Blog ).  
  
RETAIN expected outcome scale and significance.  
As mentioned, today less than 1% of tarps is recycled. RETAIN goal is to have circular use of 90% of the 
EOL tarps that are produced in EU. This means ca. 180mio m2 or ca. 110kton (at 600g/m2). Realising this 
expected outcome will lead to a very meaningful reduction of impact on the environmental, create a novel 
market of circularising tarps which in turn will generate jobs. Environmental benefit. Production of a typical 
tarp requires ca 4.65kg CO2 eq/m², of which ca 4.15kg CO2 eq/m² stems from the raw material production. 
The remaining 0.5kg CO 2 eq/m² is mainly due to the materials processing (energy) and logistics. 
Incineration at EoL of the tarps add another ca. 2.1kg CO2 eq/m². As motivated before (section 2.1.1 item 
6) prevention of tarp incineration corresponds to a reduction of ca 400kton CO2 eq annually. Further, 
if we assume remanufacturing can be applied to 10% of the EOL tarps, remanufacturing will lead to over 
55kton CO2 eq reduction, assuming 18mio m² remanufactured tarp and the reduction being 3.15kg CO2 
eq/m² (i.e. 4.15kg CO2 eq from tarp production minus 1.0kg CO2 eq/m² as estimate for the remanufacturing 
process. Recycling will also reduce the CO2 emission but as it is difficult to assess (the technology still has 
to be scaled up), we do not take it into account here although RETAIN cascade recycling will further 
boost the estimated reduction of CO2 emission.   
Market creation. RETAIN processes will lead to various secondary raw material streams, mainly of rPVC 
and rPET but also e.g. plasticizers and (FR) additives. Because of the mix, it is difficult to estimate the 
exact value, especially because the market value of the secon dary raw materials will largely depend on 
the level of purity we can reach. Indeed, current industrial scale recycling of PVC products is typically 
mechanical recycling, leading to relatively low quality secondary materials that are used for low value (bulk) 
products, e.g. brick-type structures. To give nevertheless an estimate, we assume an average revenue of 
€1000/ton of secondary raw material. As the goal is to process 90% of the EoL tarps by 2036, which is 
estimated to correspond to 110kt on (see above), this translates into a market for secondary raw 
materials from EoL tarp of ca. €100mio (80% share of EOL tarps) and a remanufacturing market 
value of ca. €300mio  (10% share of EOL tarps ) (see ‘ BC #3 – Remanufacturing and repair ’ from 
SIOEN below).  
Job creation: for estimating the number of Full Time Equivalents (FTE), we consider the most labour -
intensive aspect of circularisation of tarp use: the deconfectioning step. We aim to develop semi-automated 
workstations that enable to process 250m2 per hour per perso n (see KO2) which corresponds to ca 
200ton/year. Consequently, ca. 550 FTE will be needed to deconfection 90% of EoL tarps  (estimated 
at 110kton). All the other steps in the circular value chain (collection, transport, screening & sorting, running 
the recycling processes) will of course also require adequate staffing so that we estimate the total job 
creation ca. 50% higher, or ca. 800FTE.  
Socio-economic: The PVC industry and tarp manufacturing industry is strong in EU, with still a high share 
of manufacturing within EU, e.g. for tarp 2/3 of what is yearly put on the market is EU produced , a 
ratio of EU production that many sectors no longer have. But, on the other hand, PVC and PVC -based 
products are under scrutiny, e.g. from ECHA. Often actually the additives pose the main issue from health 
and safety side, not the PVC itself. Therefore,  RETAIN is crucial: its aspects of ecodesign and 
circularisation of tarp use will show that PVC is intrinsically well -fit for recycling and for sustainable 
products. Preventing tarpaulins from ending up in landfills or being incinerated conserves natural resources 
by recovering useful materials, thereby reduc ing the need for new raw materials. As shown above, the 
RETAIN processes will lower CO2 emissions associated with the production of new plastic products, and 
will promote sustainability and social responsibility, enhancing the reputation of companies that adopt 
these circular tarp practices . Additionally, it can lower disposal costs (‘gate fees’) for companies and 
municipalities by reducing the volume of tarpaulins that need to be managed. 2.1.3 Requirements and 
potential barriers  
Requirements and Potential 
barriers  
Mitigation measures  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 34 of 44  
Not enough end-of-life tarpaulin 
available to feed the tarp 
circularisation hubs  
Initially use of post-production waste to optimise circularisation 
technologies. Once RETAIN gate control system in place, extend 
to actual tarp waste.  
There are many different qualities 
(i.e. compositions) of tarps on the 
market  
Apply fast and affordable cost analysis method(s) to differentiate 
among different tarp qualities. Further, introduction of digital 
product passport to monitor and sort post-production and end-of-
life tarps in a cost-efficient way on long(er) term.  
Presence of legacy additives in 
recycled products will limit their 
use   
Within RETAIN we will develop a gate control system that will 
allow us to exclude legacy additives from recycled products  
There are many components in 
tarps, making these materials 
difficult to separate  
We will apply cascade recycling of components from tarps. We will 
first focus on the 3 main constituents of tarps (PVC, PET, 
plasticizer) and then investigate potential separation of stabilizers, 
colorants and/or other components  
The final recycling process(es) 
must be economically feasible  
RETAIN will prioritise cost effective and scalable technologies 
(selection after RETAIN development phase) and will sort out 
qualitative EOL products.
2.2 Measures to maximise impact - Dissemination, exploitation and communication   
This section outlines a credible and realistic path to deliver RETAIN innovations to all multi -actors and 
maximise impact during and after the project. The Plan for Exploitation and Dissemination of Results 
including communications tools (DEC) is drafted at the proposal stage by the consortium and will be 
fully developed in WP7 during the first months of the project and regularly updated and evaluated during 
the full project. In the next subsections, we first outline the whole plan, covering th e aspects of 
dissemination, exploitation and communication (section 2.2.1). Then, we detail more the exploitation part 
(section 2.2.2) given its importance followed by our IPR strategy (section 2.2.3).   
2.2.1 Plan for the dissemination, exploitation and communication (DEC) activities  
Dissemination. A primary objective of the dissemination strategy will be stakeholder engagement tailored 
to a wide and diverse array of relevant actors, including, but not limited to researchers, business operators, 
industry representatives, and European and national au thorities. The activities will be monitored and 
reviewed by using an online tracking tool where all performed and planned dissemination activities will be 
incorporated by the partners. With each DEC update, the various activities and approaches will be modified 
if necessary. A structured approach to identifying and engaging relevant stakeholder groups will be pivotal 
for the purpose of maximising impact and engagement. To this end, the consortium partners will identify 
and agree on the relevant stakeholder groups and their intended level of engagement: identification 
of the parameters aimed at categorising the relevance of the stakeholders, e.g. industry, position 
along the value chain, foreseeable added value for the maximisation of the RETAIN  project’s 
results. This cooperative effort will be initiated through the organisation of workshops involving the entire 
consortium during the first months of the projects to take full advantage of each partner’s network.   
The agreed list of stakeholders will be documented , concurrently detailing how each of them will be 
engaged throughout the project lifecycle.  RETAIN will encourage the dissemination of research results 
by participating in a series of events and publications, creating synergies with other relevant EU projects, 
and exchanging best practices with similar projects funded by the industry. In addition, training materials 
will be created in the form of manuals and will be available via an e -learning platform that will be 
incorporated into the project’s website.   
Exploitation. The Exploitation Plan (EP), as part of the DEC, will be designed to multiply the impact of 
the proposed solutions. The EP will describe the activities to be undertaken (how and by whom) in order 
to ensure the exploitation beyond the project itself. The target users will be precisely identified and 
analysed in terms of specific needs and objectives. The exploitation activities will be coordinated by EUPC. 
A preliminary exploitable results plan of the project is described in the table below.  The Key 
Exploitable Results (KERs) will be regularly revised and updated  to determine the RETAIN 
exploitation priorities based on: (i) degree of innovation, contribution to advancing RETAIN solutions 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 35 of 44  
beyond the state-of-the-art; (ii) exploitability, feasibility for market deployment, including assessment of 
IPR & commercialisation readiness; (iii) (industrial) impact, including assessment of potential to address 
current challenges, meet current needs, and contribute to sustainable development. When applicable, key 
exploitable results will be promoted through the Horizon Results Platform.   
List of preliminary Key Exploitable Results (KERs) foreseen in RETAIN  
*Legend type of exploitation: KG - Knowledge Generation: partner intends to apply the KG to establish consulting services 
and/or to deepen  
understanding; U - End user: partner intends to internally use the project output as competitive advantage and/or to solve 
internal technological issues ; COMM - Commercialization: partner intends the direct industrialization and commercialization of 
the product/process/solution, e.g. via licensing ; IPR - the partner is interested in patenting the result.  
  
Key Exploitable Result / (Responsible 
partner)  Type*  Target end users  
Exploitation plan and time to 
market / y (years after 
project end)  
KER1 – Interoperable data platform (IDP) 
and standards-based digital product 
passport (DPP) (IRIS), linked to KO1  
COMM  Textile 
(coating) 
industry; 
flooring & 
roofing industry  
Offering RETAIN software 
platform, own & offering it as 
module to exiting software 
platforms/ 1y  
KER2 – repair/reuse/remanufacturing 
concepts, technologies and related know-
how (SIOEN, SF), linked with KO2  
KG, U  Companies 
involved in 
confectioning and 
deconfectioning of 
tarps  
Optimise RETAIN tarp 
processing technologies and 
concepts / 2y  
KER3 – Deconfectioning process for 
postproduction and EOL tarpaulins 
(VWERVEN), linked with KO2  
COMM  Plastics recycling 
industry; textiles 
recycling industry  
Scaling up of process; 
communication about process / 
1y  
KER4 – Mechanical recycling 
technologies and related pretreatment 
(EKOTREND, KKF), linked with KO3  
IPR, U,  
COMM  
(SME) companies  
(starting to be) 
active in PVC 
recycling, PVC 
convertors  
Sales of recycled streams after 
scale up /2y; licensing to 
further companies / 1y  
KER5 – dissolution recycling technologies 
(SF, CTB), linked with KO3  
IPR, U,  
COMM  
(Large) companies 
interested in PVC 
recycling  
Sales of recycled streams after 
scale  
up – SF / 2y; Licensing 
technology – AIMPLAS&CTB / 
0y  
KER6 – valuable additives extraction 
(AIMPLAS & CTB); linked with KO3  
IPR, U,  
COMM  
(Large) companies 
interested in PVC 
recycling  
Sales of recycled streams after 
scale  
up – SF / 2y; Licensing 
technology – 
AIMPLAS&CTB/0y  
KER7 – ecodesign solutions for complex 
PVCbased products (tarp: SIOEN, 
MEHLER, SATTLER, SF; other products: 
RENO, BIG), linked with KO4  
U  Producers of 
PVCproducts, e.g. 
tarp, flooring, 
roofing  
Applying hen bringing novel 
circular products to the market 
/ 0y  
KER8 – Tarp circularization hubs, 
including gate control process and first 
processing and separation (VEOLIA), linked 
with KO5  
U,  
COMM  
PVC Waste 
collectors and first 
processing  
Own use – setup in several EU 
regions, consider partnerships 
with other waste collectors  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 36 of 44  
KER9 – Environmental and techno-
economical assessment of the RETAIN 
circular tarp technologies, processes and 
products (RINA-C, EUPC, VINYLPLUS & 
RETAIN companies), linked with KO6  
KG, U  Producers of 
PVCbased complex  
products, e.g. tarp, 
flooring, roofing  
Communication of public 
results (RINA-C & EUPC, 
VINYLPLUS to  
their members)/0y; internal use 
for  
decision making (RETAIN 
companies)/0y  
KER10 – Training and learning materials 
on  
‘circular complex PVC-based products’ 
(EUPC,  
VINYLPLUS), linked with KO7  
KG  Plastics industry & 
users; higher 
education & VET 
providers  
Offering own courses + 
interaction with education & 
training providers to  
integrate in curricula / 0y  
KER11 – Standardization input, e.g. 
workshop agreement (CTB), linked with 
KO4  
KG  EU, (inter)national 
standardisation 
bodies  
Present to standardization 
bodies / 0y, already during 
project  
Communication. The communication activities will include practice-oriented elements covering items from 
clean messages to visual aids, success stories, and feedback mechanisms. These activities will cover the 
following: brand identity, communication kit, project website, social media channels, publications, 
networking activities & synergies as explained below.   
Brand identity. Core elements of RETAIN branding will be a logo, colour palette, typography, project 
description, document and presentation templates. Consortium partners will be provided with style 
guidelines for consistency and coherence. Communication kit. Printable and digital versions of 
dissemination material (leaflet, roll-up banner, poster, general project presentation, etc.) will be designed 
in line with brand identity to present the project objectives, consortium and expected impact. If needed for 
regional actions, materials would be translated into local languages. Project website. The RETAIN 
website will serve as main information source about the project and the latest project updates and news 
and offer the public deliverables, and any other relevant information about the project. Social media 
channels. A LinkedIn account will promote the latest news and updates, with a goal to reach a wider 
audience and drive online trafficking towards the project website. Specific social media campaigns will be 
regularly conducted, e.g. highlighting team members, important realisations & results or key events. 
Publications. RETAIN outputs and results will be considered for publication in technical journals and 
conference proceedings.  
Partners will also be encouraged to present in conferences and innovation fairs. Networking activities 
and synergies. The consortium will pursue networking opportunities in order to build connections and 
create synergies that can strengthen the impact of the project. To this purpose, the project partners will 
collaborate with other Horizon Europe and EU -funded projects as  well as national, local, and industry 
initiatives.   
2.2.2 Business case and exploitation strategy  
Innovations resulting from RETAIN will contribute to market deployment of circular tarps and establishing 
related circular value chains for complex PVC products. For the exploitation strategy, we focus on all 
elements required to establish these circular v alue chains, i.e. from (logistics for) collection over 
pretreatment and recycling to uptake of secondary raw materials into products. A core element for the 
business case are the so -called tarp circularization hubs, which are introduced below, followed by 
highlighting some of the related business cases.  
RETAIN unique value proposition: tarp and complex PVC products circularisation hubs  
Market potential for circular PVC products. For products made from recycled PVC, RETAIN targets the 
same properties as for virgin material, so the current markets are targeted. Different situation for repaired 
and remanufactured tarps where the properties/possibilities will be different as for vir gin materials. 
Nevertheless, various markets are expected to be interested: in agriculture and livestock, farmers use 
tarpaulins to safeguard crops and equipment; the logistics and transportation sector relies on t arpaulins 
for load protection during transit, and a recycling system would align with their sustainability goals; the 
event and exhibition industry, which uses tarpaulins for temporary structures, could enhance its image and 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 37 of 44  
meet sustainability expectations through recycling initiatives; the construction sector, telecommunications 
and renewable energy sectors use tarpaulins to protect outdoor equipment, and recycling these materials 
could support overall sustainability efforts . Governments and the public sector could promote and 
incentivize the use of such tarpaulins. As for sales channels: same as current existing, but also focusing 
more on public procurement.   
Customer Relationships . To build and maintain customer relationships, education and awareness 
initiatives will be carried out, providing information on the benefits of recycled tarpaulins and sustainability 
practices to build trust. Robust customer support services, including product information, recycling program 
details, and after-sales assistance, are essential. We also implement loyalty programs to incentivize repeat 
customers and bulk buyers. Engaging with local communities and businesses through workshops, events, 
and sustainability initiatives further strengthens our customer relationships.  
SWOT Analysis. Strengths: unique combination o f partners representing large share of current tarp 
manufacturing capacity in EU (i.e. 100% of EU and 66% of global tarp production) with logistics and waste 
management infrastructure and expertise. Possibility to develop fitting digital platform according  to the 
specific sector need. Weaknesses: high initial costs are required for infrastructure and technology 
investments, and creating stable demand for recycled materials can be challenging. Ensuring consistent 
quality of recycled products and scaling the recycling process to meet large demand are other hurdles. 
Opportunities: development of new markets and products, using recycled materials to create items like 
bags, sports equipment, and building materials. Investing in recycling technologies can lead to new 
discoveries and advancements, fostering innovative solutions for ot her difficult -to-recycle materials. 
Companies adopting advanced recycling technologies can gain a competitive edge by positioning 
themselves as sustainability leaders. Furthermore, part nerships and collaborations among companies, 
research institutions, and governments can strengthen the sustainability network, while regulatory support 
and financial incentives could facilitate the development and use of sustainable recycling technologies.  
Threats: the presence of cheaper or easier -to-recycle alternative materials, variable legal and regulatory 
frameworks, and fluctuations in raw material prices. Economic uncertainties and risks associated with 
adopting new technologies also need to be addr essed. Conclusion: the tarpaulin market is growing 
significantly, driven by increasing demand across various sectors. While there are challenges and risks 
associated with introducing circular use and recycling, the potential to reduce environmental impact, 
conserve natural resources, and gain competitive advantages makes investing in setting up circular 
tarpaulins strategically attractive for multiple industries.  
  
Business case for tarpaulin circularisation hubs.  
Value Proposition. The sustainable products derived from the recycling process, which include recycled 
tarpaulins and related items such as bags and outdoor gear, cater to the growing consumer demand for 
eco-friendly solutions. By offering effective recycling solutions, the aim is reducing the volume of tarpaulins 
ending up in landfills or being incinerated, thus contributing to environmental protection. This approach 
also translates to cost savings for businesses and municipalities by lowering disposal costs. Furthermore, 
adopting recycling solutions enables businesses to enhance their brand image by showcasing their 
commitment to sustainability, thereby attracting environmentally conscious customers.  
CAPEX for 10kton TCH 
gate control line    1 mio€ 
deconfectioning stations   2 mio€ 
logistics     0,5 mio€ 
      mio€ 
Total core investment   3,5 mio€ 
       
OPEX per ton 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 38 of 44  
Business case financial outline:  
Crucial for realising the RETAIN impact is 
to make tarp EOL waste streams available 
in suitable form, in sufficient amounts and 
in a safe and cost -efficient way . Indeed, 
PVC recycling industry is already well -
established for several products but not for 
tarps. Main bottleneck is the difficulty in 
handling the initial material: large sheets. 
Hence, the focus on the collection, 
screening and first processing, including 
the deconfectioning . Once this step is 
taken, the pre -processed EOL tarp material 
can be further channelled, be it large sheets 
for remanufacturing or smaller pieces for 
various recycling methods. This 
preprocessing will be done in the so -
called Tarp Circularisation Hubs (TCH). In 
the next paragraphs we sketch their 
business case.  
An operational TCH is envisioned as 
covering the collection, screening & sorting 
(RETAIN gate control process),  first 
 tailored  processing  (e.g. 
deconfectioning) and dispatching tarps. 
Typical scale of the operations is estimated 
at ca. 10kton. An exercise has been done to 
outline the simplified investment case for 
these activities assuming a plant with a 
capacity of 10kton /year as shown in the 
table on the side. Assumptions made for 
this calculation: CAPEX: simplified to the 
gate control line (€1mio), the 
deconfectioning workstations  
(€2mio) and extra logistics (€0.5mio); OPEX: main part is the actual deconfectioning (€100/ton, see also 
‘BC #2 – Deconfectioning’ from VWERVEN below) and further the logistics (€50/ton) and the handling for 
sorting (€50/ton); REVENUES: stem from gate fees (€100/ton) and from selling the pre-processed material 
(€150/ton). The table shows that for the given scenario, a payback time within ca. 7 years  can be 
expected.  
Roadmap towards >90% collection and processing of tarps . Partner VEOLIA is the main partner for 
the deployment of the TCH. At the end of RETAIN, the goal is to demonstrate a pilot at semi -industrial 
scale (WP5). In ‘BC4 – Tarp circularisation hubs’ of VEOLIA (see below), an outlook is given how VEOLIA 
can invest in setting up several TCHs, leading to a capacity of 75kton by 2036. In capacity terms (financially 
and operationally) this is feasible for VEOLIA, especially given its current activities (over 600kton plastics 
waste managed) and investments (ca €200mio in 2023). So, to cover 90% of the EOL tarp market (ca 
110kton), the key goal of RETAIN, a further tarp processing capacity of ca 35kton is needed. This is 
expected to be taken by competitors of VEOLIA as the successful demonstration of the RETAIN pilot will 
trigger competitors to move into this field.  
Even though these are simplified calculations, it shows that the pathway to the industrial deployment 
of the RETAIN tarp circularisation hubs to reach over 90% collection and processing by 2036  is 
realistic, can be achieved with investments within reach of the consortium partners and that the 
outlook for the operation is economically feasible, even though it will not be a high profit business.   
  
logistics 50    50 
50 
100 
€/ton 
sorting 50    €/Ton 
deconfecti 100    €/Ton 
     €/ton 
Cost for 1 ton of preprocessed tarp  200 €/ton 
REVENUE per ton 
fee for input material (gate fee)  100 
150 
€/ton 
output matrial streams   €/ton 
     €/ton 
Cost for 1 ton of preprocessed tarp  250 €/ton 
Tarp collector & pre-processor - extra turnover from RETAIN technology 
Cost for 1 ton preprocessed tarp   200 €/ton 
Revenu for 1 ton preprocessed tarp  250 €/ton 
Benefit RETAIN per ton preprocessed tarp  50 €/ton 
Processed amount of tarp waste   10000 ton/yr 
RETAIN created turnover   2,5 mio€/yr 
RETAIN created revenu   0,5 mio€/yr 
Investment needed for the plant   3,5 mio € 
Earn back time of investment   7,0 year 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 39 of 44  
Summary of related RETAIN preliminary business cases and exploitation strategy  
Below, we present a preliminary analysis of RETAIN business cases (BCs) to assess and define the 
business potential that the newly determined technology will have on industries in terms of enhanced 
business opportunities. For this we focus on the preliminary business plans for some core developments, 
namely IRIS, VWERVEN, SIOEN and VEOLIA.  
  
BC #1 – Interoperable data platform (IDP) and standards-based digital product passport (DPP) 
(IRIS – KER1)  
Target 
markets  
The Digital Product Passport (DPP) market in EU due to the Ecodesign for Sustainable 
Products Regulation (ESPR) for tarpaulin circular value chains  and related need for 
the digital tracking.   
Business 
opportunity  
EU circular economy market , driven by increasing regulatory compliance (like DPP) 
needs across industries such as textiles, electronics, and construction, is estimated over 
€600 billion by 2030 (Textile World, euronews, Worldfavor Sustainability Blog ). Global 
market for digital sustainability solutions expected to surpass USD 1 trillion  by 2030 
(Worldfavor Sustainability Blog ).  
Competing 
solutions  
(Competing) solutions for Digital Product Passport (DPP) implementation are 
emerging, e.g. Worldfavor provides a comprehensive sustainability platform to track 
supply chain data and product lifecycle information, ensuring adherence to EU regulations, 
particularly for textiles and electronics (Worldfavor Sustainability Blog). Similarly, Ramboll 
offers tools f or implementing DPPs for high environmental impact products, that enable 
businesses to meet transparency and sustainability requirements across their supply 
chains.  
Value 
proposition  
Offer an interoperable data platform (IDP) tailored specifically for the tarpaulins value 
chain. The unique competitive advantage of IRIS's secure IDP and DPP is its ability to 
provide real-time, end -to-end traceability and secure data exchange across the 
tarpaulins value chain , ensuring regulatory compliance and data transparency while 
facilitating sustainability goals. Unlike its competitors, IRIS's platform is highly adaptable 
to complex material flows and integrates seamlessly into the circular economy, providing 
unparalleled transparency and sustainability benefits to users.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 40 of 44  
Preliminary 
exploitation 
strategy 
and 
business 
plan  
For industrial take -up, IRIS will target early adopters in industries, starting within the 
RETAIN pilot companies followed by other companies in the tarpaulin value chain. Indeed, 
further partnering with established EU-based recyclers  and/or manufacturers to 
implement pilot projects beyond RETAIN will help demonstrate the platform's benefits in 
real-world settings. Next, IRIS will target related sectors where organizations experience 
high regulatory pressure, such as the textile and construction sector. Further also the 
electronics sector. Scaling partnerships with larger industry players will drive broader 
adoption, also as regulations will tighten by 2026-2030.  
IRIS will require an estimated €2-3 million for R&D to further develop and enhance its 
DPP and IDP technologies , focusing on security, scalability, and compliance: €0.5-1 
million for pilot projects  with industry partners to validate the platform in real -world 
scenarios; €200k for regulatory certifications  and compliance audits; €300k for 
marketing and business development. For these investments, IRIS has several options: 
seeking financing through the EIC Accelerator (up to €17.5 million), EIT Climate-KIC 
offers tailored funding, business acceleration, and partnerships focused on circular 
economy solutions, European Investment Bank (EIB) loans and national programs like 
CDTI (Spain) can provide further support. IRIS can also explore private equity or venture 
capital for sustainability innovations.  
For an SME like IRIS, capturing 2-5% of the EU Digital Product Passport (DPP) market 
by 2030 is an ambitious yet realistic goal. Given the projected growth of the circular 
economy and sustainability markets, which could reach €600 billion by 2030, this could 
translate to potential revenues of €12-30 million  for IRIS in DPP -related services, 
corresponding to ca. 20 Full Time Equivalents (FTE).   
For IRIS, trademarking should focus on protecting the name, logo, and specific product 
features of its interoperable data platform (IDP) and Digital Product Passport (DPP) 
solutions. By securing trademarks on distinct product names  and visual branding 
elements, IRIS can build strong brand recognition in the sustainability and recycling 
sectors. IRIS will check to offer certain elements as open source, e.g. the data 
structure and the user interface to further increase uptake. Additionally, IRIS could 
trademark unique data visualization features  within the platform that set it apart from 
competitors. This will help IRIS safeguard its market identity and ensure brand loyalty as 
its platform expands in the EU market. This will give IRIS a strong position while leaving 
open the option to potentially integrate the software into a large existing platform.  
  
 BC #2 – Deconfectioning (VWERVEN, – KER3)  
Target 
markets  
The recycling industry requires more and more specific pretreatment before actual 
recycling. VWERVEN wants to address this for tarps, but results will also be useful for 
other soft PVC markets.   
Business 
opportunity  
Need for post -consumer recycling of tarps : currently virtually no tarp recycling, so, a 
huge need to find ways to process discarded tarps. Need for secondary (mechanical 
recycled) PVC material : VWERVEN currently already pretreats and recycles plastic 
mixtures, mainly PE, PP and rigid PVC. By pre -processing soft PVC materials in the 
RETAIN way, it aims to open up an extra market segment currently not accessible.  
Competing 
solutions  
Currently, post-consumer soft PVC is only limitedly mechanically recycled, and if so in low 
value bulk components, e.g. GRC-Blocks. Alternative recycling methods (e.g. dissolution, 
chemical recycling) could become competitors but in practice focus on other types of PVC 
waste (e.g. non-REACH compliant).  
Value 
proposition  
Soft PVC products include materials that prevent their recycling, like metal buckles. 
RETAIN semi-automated technologies for tarp deconfectioning will remove this hurdle 
and enable preprocessing.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 41 of 44  
Preliminary 
exploitation 
strategy 
and 
business  
KER3 final TRL at RETAIN end will be TRL8. VWERVEN will lead the exploitation by further 
development and industrial scale -up, which will be supported by investments in 
deconfectioning equipment (exact amount will have to be determined but we assume ca 
€50-100k for a semi-automated workstation enabling a throughput of ca 1ton per person 
per day), in collaboration with industrial automation partners. The target is to  
plan  reach a deconfectioning cost of ca. €100/ton material. The development will take approx. 1 
year after project end to reach exploitation phase at a first plant.  
VWERVEN operates in several European countries (NL, BE, PL, SE and UK). It will first 
apply the RETAIN results in 1 plant in The Netherlands, and then spread its use to 
the other plants. That way, VWERVEN aims at reaching a market share within 3 to 5 
years after RETAIN of 7-8% of the European market of discarded tarps, i.e. ca. 15kTons. 
This is estimated to lead ca. 70FTE (Full Time Equivalents). Given the manual labour 
needed for the semi-automated workstations, VWERVEN expects that the majority of these 
FTE will go to people employed at social enterprises, with whom VWERVEN plans to 
collaborate. VWERVEN plans to use the novel deconfectioning principles and 
preprocessing solutions also for the recycling of other types of soft PVC products, like 
resilient flooring. This way, the expected turnover and number of jobs will be further 
increased by ca 20 to 50%.  
VWERVEN will protect its know -how via secrecy but, in case of successful RETAIN 
deconfectioning, it will consider licensing its technology to other mechanical recyclers.  
  
 BC #3 – Remanufacturing and repair (SIOEN – KER2)  
Target 
markets  
Markets for confectioned tarp are trailer curtains (60 Mio m²), tents (appr. 30 Mio m²), 
pool covers (20 Mio m²), etc., which requires confectioning of the tarp materials. That is an 
activity with relevant high added value: the average value of a typical 600g/m² tarp 
materials value is €3 -4/m². After confectioning, the tarps application value is typically 
around €10/m², up to €20/m² depending on the degree of confectioning.  
Business 
opportunity  
RETAIN will enable to develop 1) a remanufacture market  for good quality used tarps 
that can be applied in new applications (e.g. heavy packaging for wind turbine parts, big 
bags, etc.). Assuming 10% of the 200mio m² tarp market replacement by 
deconfectioned/used tarps, the potential remanufacturing business eq uals a sales 
potential of €200-400 Mio for EU tarp confectioning (confectioned tarp value estimated at 
ca. €10-20/m², as above). 2) a repair market for tarps (e.g. tents, trailer curtains). difficult 
to estimate as it is nearly nonexisting today. Roughly: if 10% of the tarp products can be 
repaired and that way extend their lifetime with 25%, that is estimated to represent a market 
value of ca. €50-100mio.  
Competing 
solutions  
Currently there is no commercial scale repair in the sector , remanufacturing is only 
minimal. The real competition is from new tarps, because currently remanufacturing and 
repair is hampered by the following limitations of deconfectioned tarps: limited availability 
of good quality deconfectioned tarps and their sizes; their cost; presence of (leg acy) 
additives in deconfectioned tarps.  
Value 
proposition  
Repair kits for ecodesigned sustainable tarps. Offering in a cost -efficient way 
remanufactured EoL tarps, thereby relying on the capability to sort out high quality EoL 
tarps (KER1) and their efficient semi-automatized deconfectioning (KER3).  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 42 of 44  
Preliminary 
exploitation 
strategy 
and 
business 
plan  
KER2 final TRL at the end of the project will be TRL7 -8. SIOEN will lead the further 
commercial development and industrial scale -up, which will be supported by internal 
investments. The needs for further research and investments is limited but installation of 
the necessary infrastructure and capacity will take s ome time, commercial exploitation is 
expected within 2 years after RETAIN.   
For repair, focus will be on tents and other industrial uses (e.g. in biogas installations, roof 
covers,…). Here, enabling repair will not only lead to extending the lifetime of the product 
but because of the sometimes rather complex installation, repairing the tarp can also 
be cost effective. The anticipated tailored repair kits will  create a novel market . For 
remanufacturing, focus will be on technical applications where already quite some 
confectioning and/or customization is needed, meaning the extra st ep of deconfectioning 
can be more easily integrated. Examples are big bags and custom packaging of large 
industrial equipment (e.g. wind turbine parts, heavy machinery, large machine parts)  
SIOEN currently confections ca. 1mio m² of tarps  per year for various applications, 
corresponding to a turnover of ca €15mio (average of €15/m²) and employing ca. 25 
people. By adopting RETAIN remanufacturing and repair solutions, SIOEN estimates to 
triple its confectioning activities, especially as expected EU legislation will boost circular 
thinking within this industry and within society.   
  
 BC #4 – Tarp circularisation hubs (VEOLIA, – KER8)  
Target 
markets  
Market of waste logistics management, including collection, sorting and dispatching.   
Business 
opportunity  
Pioneering role into systematic handling of EOL tarps, benefit of first mover advantage in 
the market of EOL tarp handling.  
Competing  No comprehensive solutions exist for handling EOL tarps at the moment.  
solutions   
Value 
proposition  
Blueprint for setting up strategic places of tarp circularization hubs. Such a hub will 
cover collection, screening & sorting (RETAIN gate control process), first tailored 
processing (e.g. deconfectioning) and dispatching tarps.   
Preliminary 
exploitation 
strategy 
and 
business 
plan  
VEOLIA will lead the exploitation of KER8 beyond RETAIN as follows: VEOLIA plans 
to test run the  
RETAIN pilot during ca. 1 year, followed by the investment in a first pilot of 10kton, which 
should be built by 2030, i.e. within 2 years after project end. For this pilot plant, a test 
period of 2 years is foreseen. When successful, the goal is then to invest fu rther to have 
by 2036 5 more pilots (estimate: 2 further of 10kton and 3x 15kton) operational, which 
means that in this scenario the total capacity of VEOLIA by 2036 is 75kton (3x10kton + 3x 
15kton).   
From resources point of view, the roadmap for VEOLIA is deemed realistic and feasible: 
for comparison, in 2023 invested ca €200mio. VEOLIA processed ca 610kton of plastics. 
So, the addition of 75kton tarp requiring an investment of ca. €20 -25mio over 5 years is 
absorbable.  
The RETAIN Circularization hub concept and the experience from their piloting will 
strengthen the market position of VEOLIA  by accelerating VEOLIA knowledge and 
expertise in the pioneering field of EOL tarp handling . VEOLIA will get a key market 
advantage as first mover and it will in general reinforce its reputation of leading waste 
management company by setting up these tarp circularization hubs, among others 
because it will do so in partnership with the processing  companies. Indeed, the projected 
EOL tarp management capacity would mean that VEOLIA can cover ca. 60 -65% of the 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 43 of 44  
expected EOL tarps. This will generate a turnover of ca €3-4mio and correspond to several 
hundreds of jobs by 2036. Profitability could increase significantly as it is expected that EU 
environmental targets will further push handling of EOL PVC products to  reduce their 
disposal via landfilling and/or incineration.  
2.2.3 Strategy for the management of intellectual property  
General Principles. The IP management will be described in the RETAIN Consortium Agreement (CA) in 
line with the Grant Agreement. The General Assembly (GA) will be responsible for ensuring implementation 
of the guidelines established within the CA. Mechanisms will be implemen ted to ensure adequate 
communication concerning IP among partners and confidentiality.   
Protection, use and dissemination. The partners will agree on IP ownership and management 
arrangements as part of the CA. The overarching principle will be to manage IP in the most effective way 
towards RETAIN results exploitation. Knowledge will be captured in tangible formats such as tech nical 
reports and patents, when applicable. Where appropriate, IP which is not commercially critical will be 
disseminated to promote continued collaboration beyond RETAIN. All publications will be preliminary peer-
reviewed by relevant partners to ensure that no commercial IP is disseminated without appropriate 
protection.  
IP management strategy. All identified IP will be recorded centrally by EUPC (see also Task 7.2). The 
identified IP shall be maintained as long as it retains value, also beyond RETAIN. Following key elements 
of the strategy: (i) Background IP introduced by RETAIN partners will remain property of the IP owner; (ii) 
Access to another participant’s results or background IP  shall be granted based on conditions stipulated 
in the CA. Access rights for academic research purposes shall be granted royalty -free, also  beyond 
RETAIN; (iii) Improvements or enhancements to background IP that occur as a result of work completed 
in RETAIN will be treated similarly; (iv) Knowledge acquired during the project  shall be considered as a 
property of the partner(s) generating it, and in this sense, the originator is entitled to use and to license 
such right without financial compensation to other partners. If the features of a joint invention are such that 
it is not possible to separate them, the contributors shall agree on joint exploitation.  
   
 
 
Part B - Page 44 of 44  
Table: Overview of RETAIN dissemination and communication plan   
Action - Goal   Audience  Channel – Content  Organization  
Continuous - Ensure that 
‘external stakeholders’ remain 
committed to following RETAIN 
progress and gain increasing 
exposure  
Depending on topic: focus on ‘core’ 
stakeholders (e.g. collectors, recyclers) but 
also on the ‘wider’ stakeholders (e.g. policy 
makers) and potentially the general public.   
Newsletter, social media, 
presentations, popular publications – 
progress updates (small news items) 
and public results.  
EUPC will coordinate. Material collected 
from ALL; set-up a schedule for 
contributions and activities, avoiding 
overlaps  
Create awareness for RETAIN and 
ensure the external stakeholders 
understand our goals and vision 
by sharing objectives and 
consortium composition.  
RETAIN TSG members and various 
stakeholder groups, with focus on reaching 
EC policy makers, tarp users, technical textile 
media & influencers & crosssectoral 
multiplicators.  
Press release linked to kick off 
meeting; RETAIN website; first (digital) 
dissemination material (e.g. common 
presentation), all following a distinct 
project visual identity.  
By M4 - Responsible: SIOEN (as 
coordinator) & EUPC (WP7 leader). KPI: 
>100 subscriptions for newsletter, >100 
followers on social media  
Call for collaboration for pick up 
of RETAIN results that need 
external partners and/or follow up 
projects, focus on use of 
WP1,2,3&4 results outside domain 
of RETAIN pilots.  
RETAIN TSG members and especially 
innovators & entrepreneurs, large enterprises 
with own R&D, innovative SMEs, product 
designers & developers, investors. Also focus 
on other (EU) R&D projects.   
Setup of own (online) events and 
participation in existing fairs and 
conferences, dedicated to a specific 
result/target group. Examples:  
TechTextil, Plastics Recycling Show 
Europe, KFair,… Use of compilation of 
RETAIN results and findings, based on 
public deliverable content.  
Within 3 months after reaching MS5 
(M30).  
Responsible: EUPC (WP7 leader), strong 
support by IRIS, VWERVEN, CTB & 
SIOEN (as WP1,2,3&4 leaders). KPI: > 8 
project offspring activities (e.g.  
meetings with stakeholders, investment 
case, collaboration agreement)  
Final event: promotion of RETAIN 
results for maximizing visibility, 
uptake and impact  
Tarp manufacturers & end-users (in 
construction, mobility & technical 
applications), policy makers, consumers 
(organizations), citizens & influencers.  
Dedicated final event with content 
focus on pilots. Accompanied by press 
release & final media campaign and 
peer-reviewed and techno-commercial 
articles.   
In period M38-42. Responsible: SIOEN, in 
strong interaction with VEOLIA (WP5 
leader) and EUPC (WP7 leader). KPI: > 
150 participants in final event, uptake by at 
least 3 media  
  
Tools and Channels  Description  Timing  KPIs  Responsible Partners  
Logo & graphic 
identity, promotional 
materials  
A consistent, impacting graphic identity to make RETAIN 
easily recognizable   
M4  Imagery included (a must) in 
all communication materials  
EUPC  
Website & Social 
Media (LinkedIn, 
YouTube)  
Interactive, dynamic online presence, showing RETAIN 
objectives & public result   
Online at M4  By project end: > 20.000 
page views; >400 followers 
by M24  
EUPC, contributions to 
items from ALL  
Newsletter  8 e-newsletters with RETAIN progress  6-monthly from 
M6  
 >150 subscribers by M24  EUPC & SIOEN, input by 
ALL  
 
 
Part B - Page 45 of 44  
Press releases  Promote specific activities, events, results  At ‘highlights’  >4, pick up by media  Partners involved in 
‘highlight’  
Webinars  Knowledge transfer & training, based on public results & 
learning material from WP1 to WP6. Go for Circular 
Economy Webinar Series (EU Commission)  
From M24 on  >6, i.e. one per WP  
>100 views per webinar   
WP leaders of WP1 to WP6,  
EUPC support of common 
format  
Visit to pilots  Wider stakeholders & general public   From M36 on  > 40 participants for demo 
visit  
VEOLIA   
Fairs and 
conferences  
Plastics Recycling Show Europe, K-Fair, European 
Coating Show and Conference, Go Circular Summit, 
TechTextil, Waste management Europe, European 
Circular Economy Stakeholder Conference, Ecomondo  
From M12 on, 
most intense in 
M24-42  
>6 participations with 
presentation (oral/poster), 2 
common RETAIN  
booths in a fair  
EUPC & SIOEN, lead 
partners of key exploitable 
results  
Publications  Plastics News Europe, RecyclePRO, Recycling 
Magazine. Go for entry in Sustainability Matters 
Newsletter (EU Commission), Circular Economy 
Newsletter (Ellen MacArthur Foundation),   
From M12 on, 
most intense in 
M36-42  
>5 publications  EUPC, lead partners of key 
exploitable results  
#§COM-DIS-VIS-CDV§#