2.3   Summary  
 
 
Part B - Page 46 of 44  
  
  
  
  

 
 
Part B - Page 47 of 44  
  
#§IMP-ACT-IA§ 

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3876292 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 48 of 44  
3. Quality and efficiency of the implementation #@QUA-LIT-QL@# #@WRK-PLA-WP@#
3.1 Work plan and 
resources  
3.1.1. Overall structure 
of the work plan  
The  RETAIN 
 workplan  is 
composed of 8 work 
packages. WP1-4 
 focus  on 
 specific aspects 
 of  the 
 RETAIN recycling 
chain, being logistics, 
repair/reuse/remanufacture, deconfectioning, recycling, and conversion of recyclates into value added 
products. WP5 is the actual demonstration part of the project, whereas WP6-7 are supporting tasks. 
WP8 finally covers the project management and coordination of RETAIN.  
WP1 (M1-M24) focusses on  
logistics, traceability, monitoring Figure 7: RETAIN work plan and sorting. Lead partner IRIS, partner VEOLIA and 
several other partners will develop and implement a strict gate control procedure that distinguishes 
between various tarp qualities. The development and integration of a digital product passport for tarp will 
be an important part of the gate control procedure. WP2 (M1-M30) deals with repair, reuse and 
remanufacturing, and deconfectioning of post -production and EOL tarps. Lead partner VWERVEN and  
partner EKOTREND will develop a (semi)automized deconfectioning system to remove eyelets, buckets, 
zippers and other functionalities from EOL tarps. Partners SIOEN, SF and several other partners will study 
repair/reuse/remanufacturing practices to increas e the lifetime of tarps. In WP3 (M1-M30) the actual 
recycling of tarps will be studied. Various mechanical recycling (EKOTREND, KKF, VWERVEN) and 
solvent based recycling (SF and CTB) methodologies will be investigated and prepared for demonstration 
in WP5. Furthermore, selective extraction of valuable additives from tarps (AIMPLAS), and strategies 
definition and development of a decision support tool for recycling processes (RINA-C) will be developed. 
Various other partners will be active in this WP under t he leadership of partner CTB. WP4 (M1-M39) 
covers the conversion of recycled and biobased materials into high value products. producing new tarps 
through extrusion coating/calendaring as executed by lead partner SIOEN and partner MEHLER. Various 
other partners such as RENO, BIG, SATTLER and SF will apply plasticizers, PVC and other recyclates 
into their products. Finally, partner CTB and some other partners will focus on standardization aspects 
related to tarp recycling. In WP5 (M19-M42) the actual demonstration of circularity for complex PVC based 
value chains will be executed in three EU regions. Lead partner VEOLIA will coordinate this work. This 
WP covers 3 main activities: demonstration of the gate control process, demonstration of re cycling 
processes and technologies, and uptake of recycled products. In the final stage of the project assessment 
of the RETAIN recycling chain and the demos will conclude on the technical and economic aspects of the 
RETAIN recycling chain. WP6 (M19-M42), led by partner RINA-C, will focus on sustainability assessment 
studies. In WP7 (M1-M42) lead partner EuPC and all other partners will execute all activities related to 
market acceptance, uptake and deployment. This WP includes dissemination, communication, 
exploitation and t raining & learning activities. Finally, in WP8 (M1-M42) all project management and 
coordination activities will take place.  

 
 
3.1.2. Timing of the Work Packages and main tasks - Gantt Chart  
  
 
MS4 - GO for screening demo activities 
MS5 - GO for recycling demo activities, relying on the developed options for remanufacturing, deconfectioning, recycling and ecodesign 
MS6 - End of experimental demo activities, switch focus on evaluation and finalisation of documentation 

 
 
 MS7 - Ready for ‘Handover’, i.e. to start the beyond RETAIN phase    
  
Part B - Page 39 of 44  
  
 
 
Part B - Page 51 of 44