4. A vision system will recognize the 
orientation of the caps which allows 
the robot to pick them up from the 
feeder. With its vacuum end effector 
the robot populates the panel. 
5. The operator flips the panel upside-down, face down.  
6. The assembly process continues with the robot taking components from the automatic kitting warehouse 
and the operator taking components from the manual kitting warehouse (i.e. cables)  
7. The robot switches the ened effector to the screwing head, allowing to fix components like PCB using 
screws. 
8. Once assembly is done the panel is moved to the side where the test area is. The operator connects the 
panel and the robot performs the test by pushing buttons while a vision system monitors the panel’s 
display to confirm proper functioning. 
9. While the test is running the operator can proceed with assembly of the next panel. 
10. When the test is finished, the operator removes the panel and places it on a cart, ready for packaging.  
In the SCHINDLER use case, ROSSINI will demonstrate the features of the Collaborative by Birth Robotic 
Manipulator, delivering a low payload robotic arm for electronic components production, integrated with the 
other platform components (sensing system, controller, etc.). Given the user’s high production variability, the 
promised ROSSINI performance in terms of production reconfiguration cost savings will be tested.  
Use Case #3 – Food Products Packaging (IMA) 
The scenario here proposed is a complex system for flexible, 
collaborative packaging material loading and handling on 
IMA tea machines in industrial shop floors. The operational 
area is around 160 square meters. This scenario is basically 
composed by five components that are interacting within the 
environment by means of several kind of command and 
controls subsystems: Packaging machines; Processing 
workers; Raw materials; Finished products; Mobile 
cooperative robotic platforms.  
The work flow is centered around the machine, able to build 
and package the finished products, when properly feed and 
unloaded. In a conventional shop floor, the processing 
workers are the people that have in charge the tasks to:  
1. Choose the raw materials from the material warehouse. 
2. Bring the chosen materials from the material warehouse to the feeding point on the machine. 3. Load in the right manner the raw materials on the machine. 4. Operate the process requests for loaded materials (manual tape joining, for example). 5. Verify the right parameter and setting of the machine. 6. Verify the unload from the machine and the product delivering. 7. Check the machine status to anticipate the need to load new raw material. 
Figure 13 - Use Case #2 TO BE Situation 
Figure 14 - Demo Case #3: AS-IS Machine load 
 
25 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
8. Assure the work cycle efficacy by providing quick maintenance or rapid solution in case of small failure 
of the process (as example: optical cleaning of photocells by blowing, clogged up bags removal, removal 
of the blocked external envelopes, blocked stacking removal). 
9. Format change by material removal and replacement of mechanical parts. 
In the prospected solution, the previous list of tasks will be cooperatively shared between human workers 
and robot platforms and related technologies. The solution will enable cooperative operation of the material 
feeding process on two or more 
machines, for tea bags packaging 
operations.  The system will enable to 
robustly identify distinct types of 
packaging material, as well as analyze 
and predict the need for several types of 
loading operations on distinct machines 
at the shop floor.  Besides being able of 
conducting pick and place operations, 
the robots will also safely navigate on 
the shop floor environment together with 
humans. The interaction with humans 
will be considered both for safety 
because the environment where the 
transportation of the material is 
performed is in a space shared with 
human operators, and also to enable direct interaction between humans and the robotized platform to make 
some task (and its customization) more efficient. The sharing of task could be devised as follows: 
1. Robot:  Choose the raw materials from the material warehouse. 
2. Robot: Bring the chosen materials from the material warehouse to the feeding point on the machine. 
3. Robot: Load in the right manner the raw materials on the machine. 
4. Robots: Operate the process requests for loaded materials (manual tape joining, for example). 
5. (Worker and Robot): Verify the right parameter and setting of the machine. 
6. (Worker and Robot): Verify the unload from the Machine and the Product delivering. 
7. (Worker and Robot): Check the machine status to anticipate the need to load new raw material. 
8.  (Worker and Robot): Assure the work cycle efficacy by providing quick maintenance or rapid solution 
in case of small failure of the process (as example: optical cleaning of photocells by blowing, clogged up 
bags removal, removal of the blocked external envelopes,  blocked stacking removal). 
9.  Worker and Robot): Format change by material removal and replacement of mechanical parts. 
In the IMA use case, ROSSINI will deploy a medium payload manipulator mounted on an AGV (mobile 
robotic platform). RS4 will concentrate on Safetly Laser Scanners, whereas the Human Layer and the Control 
Architecture will be confronted with the challenge to manage navigation operations as well as other operations 
(screwing, etc.). Being IMA also a robot integrator, the demonstrator will be easily replicated. 
ROSSINI Use Cases Synoptic Table 
Features Domestic Appliances Electronic Components Food Products  
HRC 
Operations Pick & Place, Mounting Pick & Place, Screwing Navigation, Reel Feeding, Screwing 
Safeguarding 
Modes 
Implemented 
Power & Force Limiting, 
Hand Guiding 
Safety Rated Monitored Stop, 
Power & Force Limiting 
Safety Rated Monitored Stop, Power 
& Force Limiting, Hand Guiding 
Manipulator Third party medium 
payload cobot (30kg) 
Low Payload ROSSINI Cobot 
(>5kg) 
Mobile ROSSINI Cobot – Medium 
Payload (20Kg) 
Achievable 
collaboration  Collaboration Parallel Cooperation Collaboration (Feeding), Parallel 
Cooperation (Navigation) 
Figure 15 - Use Case #3 TO BE Configuration 
 
26 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Gender dimension 
ROSSINI project will adopt practical methods for sex and gender analysis as a resource to develop novel 
HRC workstation design. ROSSINI’s four lines of research (control, sensing, actuation, Human-robot mutual 
understanding) will take in account the integration of sex/gender issues from the setting of research priorities 
through developing methodologies, gathering and analysing data, to evaluating and reporting results and 
transferring them to markets. During the development of the whole project, ROSSINI consortium will 
incorporate knowledge about sex and gender into engineering innovation processes, in order to design HRC 
workstation that promote human well-being, including gender equality, and develop technologies that meet 
the needs of a complex and diverse user group.
1.4 Ambition 
1.4.1 Progress beyond the state of the art 
Smart and Safe Sensing System 
Today the robot work area is usually monitored only on its perimeter and mainly for safety reasons. In 
every instance of their use, safety sensors are intended to do two things:  monitor specific regions for operator 
presence and signal the equipment to slow or stop when the operator's presence is detected.  
For industrial applications, sensitive protective equipment (SPE) for the detection of the presence of human 
beings may include both Electro-Sensitive Protective Equipment (ESPE) such as laser curtains, laser scanners 
and vision-based safety systems e.g SafetyEye, and Pressure-Sensitive Protective Equipment (PSPE) as 
pressure sensitive mats, etc. Typically, the selection of the equipment as part of the safety-related system 
depends on the application. SPE are designed to monitor a predefined space and needs to be triggered to be 
shut down or stopped. Therefore, the positioning and installation dictates a minimum distance that needs to be 
maintained from the hazardous zone. When triggered, these sensors use electrical safety signals, and each 
single safety sensor decides if safety reaction is needed. Therefore, only simple Boolean operations are done 
between the results of different sensors. Non-standardized sensors such as passive infrared thermal protective 
devices are permitted for use as part of a larger safety system, but without an associated performance standard 
they are neither considered reliable enough nor suitable as the sole means of protection. Subsequently, such 
non-standardized sensors must be accompanied by primary, safety-rated sensing equipment (Marvel. J et al. 
2014).  
In addition, in a robotic workcell vision systems are often used for object localization and robot guidance, as 
they deliver high-precision measurement results and consequently play a key role in making part handling (e.g. 
SICK) and robot guiding, and tactile sensors are used on robot’s end-effector to control the grasping force and 
allow a correct and stable grip of the objects. However, this kind of sensors are very different form safety 
sensors, which are designed to slow down the robot once the worker is in a certain area/space and to stop it 
once the worker is too close.  
Moreover, even in collaborative workcells, the robot movements are computed based on predefined and 
optimized trajectories, and some areas are forbidden for safety reasons, particularly to avoid collision, (e.g. 
Safe Moe Robot Safety Option ABB). In industrial applications, safe areas around robots are defined at 
setup time using complex tools and procedures, thus limiting the flexibility because even a complex sensor 
system can guarantee security but cannot provide a real-time univocal multidimensional semantic scene map. 
Moreover, the necessity of a stringent risk assessment is usually transformed into conservative speed 
limitations or bounds on driving torques of robots. Yet, even if the robot’s internal components and software 
have been certified, a risk assessment certification is required for the whole application, and a new certification 
is needed every time the system changes. 
ROSSINI innovation 
ROSSINI aims to design a Smart and Safe Sensing System with improved detection and tracking capabilities 
for monitoring of the entire work area volume with a set of sensing technologies which radically improve 
the performance of currently available equipment. Actually, the Rossini Smart and Safe Sensing System 
(RS4) system will combine information from several different customised sensing technologies (Vision, Laser 
Scanning, Radar, Mat, etc.) in order track not only the position but also the speed of each operator and object 
in the scene. Moreover, the miscellaneous set of information generated by the platform sensing layer will be 
 
27 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
integrated in a single multidimensional image of the overall scene and processed in real time to generate 
suitable 3D safety regions around each object in the working environment. This will be achieved by 
developing a dedicated RS4 fusion module, made of safety fieldbus communication and safety sensor modules 
controller. In this way, the data acquired by several sensors will be considered together to decide a safety 
reaction, resulting in a more efficient detection capability and detection accuracy. Another important 
innovative characteristic is than ROSSINI will use Sensor fusion also for robot guidance, integrating both 
safety and non-safety sensors. This will encompass the traditional use of classic fences/light curtains or in the 
case of moving robots the use of laser scanner, providing a medium range environment sensing covering the 
robot with multiple sensing layers, which can include thermal, ultrasound and acoustic sensing. 
ROSSINI Smart and Safe Sensing System will also operate directly on the robot, equipping it with a 
distributed sense of touch, combining the tactile-sensors technology with the soft materials in a “skin” 
covering the surface of the robot, able to detect intensity and direction of the force of the impact. ROSSINI 
will also introduce in HRC workcells a dynamic replanning: the robot movements will be continuously re-
planned not only to maximize its efficiency but also to avoid dangerous situations before a safety action is 
required. In other words, ROSSINI will carry out a novel concept of dynamic safety: all the safety zones will 
by dynamically defined around all the objects in a multidimensional scene based on their actual position and 
vectorial speed. Sensor coverage will be dynamically checked and occlusions will be considered: this will 
maximize the operator and robot freedom of movement without affecting safety. In order to reduce the set-up 
time of safe areas and define them without complex tools and procedures, ROSSINI will develop a graphic 
configuration software which will simplify the initial setup and automatically adjusts the parameters about 
the position of the robot and of each sensor. The SW will also compute the actual sensor coverage and, given 
the type of robot and of its end effectors, the safety parameters of the robot (e.g. speed and work area). Finally, 
trough ROSSINI platform, changes in workcell system will require a simplified certification procedure if 
compared to the state-of-the-art, thanks to modular inherently safe devices and safety network. This important 
innovation will speed up the now lengthy on-site risk analysis necessary to ensure that the operating robot does 
not exceed the limit values when getting in an unintended contact with a human. 
Safety Aware Control Architecture 
Today dynamic semantic scene maps are based only on safety sensors and on the robot’s kinematics (e.g. 
SAPARO). Nerveless, for industrial application, there is a need of adding semantic information to the simple 
geometric maps that are currently used by fusing sensor data, embedding information coming from all sensors 
and prediction on the motion of all the entities in the workspace. Actually, now the robot control architecture 
can visualize images, but cannot interpret them. Since typically in robotic application task planning is done by 
disregarding safety, simple safe behaviours (e.g.slow down/stop the robot) are forced when safety sensors are 
detects and unsafe situation. In other words the safety map generated with the sensing system is essentially 
static. However in order to be able to perfom task optimization and  actions replanning in a safe way a dynamic 
system is required. In order to enable not only robot sensing, but actual perception, suitable data processing 
techniques based on artificial intelligence need to be deployed. Artificial intelligence AI is designed so that it 
can learn from interactions with its surroundings and alter its behavior accordingly, so it has huge potential to 
improve health and safety in industrial environments, particularly in HRC applications. Despite all these 
potential benefits, at the moment, AI is mainly used for intention recognition for autonomous cars and finds 
very few applications in HRC. Today in factory robotic workcells, safety is added into existing high-level 
control architectures, in other words it is not perfectly integrated with performance oriented planning/control. 
ROSSINI innovation 
ROSSINI will provide several advances beyond the state of the art, developing a Safety Aware Control 
Architecture for robot cognitive perception and optimal task planning and execution. The Rossini Safety Aware 
Control Architecture will represent a substantial evolution of the current PILZ motion control technology, now 
represented by the PRIMO motion and safety controller. In order to enable actual perception, ROSSINI will 
deploy a data processing technique based on artificial intelligence, taking advantage of GPU computing and 
advanced machine learning algorithms for real-time image recognition,, to obtain a semantic scene map that 
adapts to dynamic working conditions. ROSSINI will adopt AI algorithms also for motion prediction of 
humans and moving entities, and will embed their stochastic information in the dynamic semantic scene map. 
This will allow the robot to further refine its planning in order to maximize performance while preserving 
safety. Moreover, the deployment of artificial intelligence techniques for data processing will not be just aimed 
 
28 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
to enable robot perception, but will also make robot cognition possible. In other words, besides being able 
to interpret data, the ROSSINI Safety Aware Control Architecture will make it possible for robots to optimally 
schedule the tasks reacting to a changing environment. Each action to be executed will be sent of a dynamic 
planner that will dynamically optimize its execution in terms of trajectory to follow and/or interactive 
behaviour to reproduce while considering the variable safety conditions in the working area. In this way, 
ROSSINI will reach the goal to optimise the trade-off between human operator safety and manufacturing 
productivity and will introduce a novel perception and control architecture blending safety and performance 
oriented planning/control. 
Collaborative by Birth Robotic Arm 
Presently available collaborative robots are mainly standard robotic manipulators, on top of which specific 
technologies have been added in order to reduce risks for humans within collaborative operations. However, 
no substantial leap towards true Human Robot Collaboration can be obtained, without redesigning a robotic 
technology from scratch, considering safe interaction with humans as the main guiding principle at each design 
step. In most cases force detection is used to make the robot more collaborative. If an external force is applied 
to the robot (i.e. by a human operator), it is detected through motor current allowing the controller to make a 
decision on an alternative response like stop motion, reduce speed, or change direction. There are actually two 
main methods for embedded detection and measurement of force or torque: strain gages and motor torque. 
Strain gages normally only cover certain single dimensions requiring multiple sensors. They also carry a 
significant wiring challenge. Detecting motor torque changes as feedback from external forces applied is the 
preferred method because the motor is what is providing the motion in the first place and its current levels are 
directly proportional to its torque output. For instance, KUKA – IIWA presents integrated position and torque 
sensors in each joint. Unfortunately, any compliance and decoupling of the robot mechanics from the motor 
results in errors in torque measurements especially in the presence of stiffness/compliance. 
In case of collision with a human, robot reaction is typically driven by the same joint motors responsible of 
robot standard-actuation. This feature actually limits the intrinsic safety of the collaborative robot, because the 
motor responsible of the normal joint positioning during task execution need to act as safety device for fast-
retract in case of collision. Moreover, the total inertia of the retraction movement could be significant. In 
practice these design constraints translate into a lower standard speed of the robotic arm during the task 
execution. 
ROSSINI innovation 
ROSSINI aims to develop a “Collaborative by Birth” Robotic Arm range with novel built-in safety features. 
Through ROSSINI, PILZ and SUPSI will work at the development of a new range of robotic manipulators, 
which will be offered to integrators as the platform actuation layer. The ROSSINI Natively Collaborative 
Robotic Arm will feature safe axis position signaling via double communication channels, and an innovative 
solution for coupling brushless motors within robot joints, thus speeding up the robot braking and retraction. 
The new approach uses a dual encoder solution (before and after the gearbox) not only to improve joint 
accuracy, but for real-time monitoring of the stiffness/compliance in each robot joint. This method allows to 
monitor both joint position and torque concurrently in order to provide information to the collaborative robot 
controller. With accurate torque and position monitoring force sensing, even in the presence of 
stiffness/compliance can be compensated for. 
In order to increase the intrinsic safety of the collaborative robot, the basic idea is to design a new concept of 
robot joint, provided with a second auxiliary motor acting as fast safety device. The first motor is responsible 
of the normal joint positioning during robot task execution, the second one acts as safety device for fast-retract 
of the robot in case of collision with a human. The auxiliary motor, during the normal functioning of the robot, 
has to guarantee the stiffness of the kinematic chain by delivering the maximum torque at zero-speed. In case 
of a collision, different reaction strategies will be applied depending on the force and the direction of the 
collision itself: the second motor could be completely released, acting as a safety clutch, or it could be driven 
in the opposite direction of the collision, limiting the total inertia of the movement. Again, two or more 
auxiliary motors can act synchronously, with something like a light-interpolation, to allow the robot to follow 
a predefined path during the retraction movement. It should be noted that the ROSSINI “Collaborative by 
Birth” Robotic Arm will be validated by experienced PILZ risk assessment specialists, thus assuring intrinsic 
safety.  
 
29 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Human-Robot Mutual Understanding Framework 
Today the design of HRC workcells is predominantly based on technical feasibility, productivity 
considerations and safety issues. Recently a certain emphasis has been placed on the need of incorporation of 
human centred design in the early design stages of a HRC application. However, developments have focused 
primarily on the technology and, until recently, little research has been geared to understand the key human 
factors (HF) that need to be considered to enable successful implementation of industrial HRC. Nowadays, 
while realizing an HRC workcell, the assessments of job quality takes place in the operational stage, although 
it is desirable that in the near future OECD's job quality index should be used already during the design stage 
to measure progresses in job quality improvement in factories. Moreover, currently the HRC workcell task 
planning are fixed and with limited attention to human factors, so there is a need of dynamic task planning 
during the operational stage, accounting for human factors and allowing workers to make easy changes. 
Finally, in an actual workplace, Human-robot collaboration seems to be limited by low mutual predictability 
of the intentions of man and robot (through sensing of human intentions and projecting robot intentions). 
ROSSINI innovation 
ROSSINI ambition is to develop a framework for Human-Robot Mutual Understanding in collaborative 
operations. The ROSSINI platform will incorporate a human-centred process design level to address and 
account for human factors like job quality, user experience, trust, feeling of safety, and liability, in the early 
design stages. To reach this objective, ROSSINI will develop a set of validated OECD-based metrics and 
evaluation tools and a guideline for design process (including task and capacity analysis, task allocation, and 
scenario analysis) to be used in operational stage. The developed tools, applicable throughout the life-cycle of 
a Human-robot collaboration application, will be able to measure impact, e.g. predict and evaluate job quality 
indices. Moreover, an adaptive cooperation level will constantly monitor the process progression, human 
behaviour, and robot behaviour. In detail, the adaptive level will consider foreseeable and unforeseeable  
human factors when dispatching tasks to humans and robots and allowing operators to make online changes to 
the planning and allowing monitoring , so dynamic allocation of tasks can be made during operation. Finally, 
a profound mutual understanding between robots and people in operation will be realized through a 
Communication Level, and thereby making human-robots collaborations more predictable increasing mutual 
predictability of robot and human intentions. Key technologies to reach this goal will be estimating human 
intentions through sensor fusion and projecting robot intentions by Augmented Reality (AR). Definitely, the 
ROSSINI Human-Robot Mutual Understanding layer will result in a set of software tools to be integrated into 
robotic applications, and will be offered to robot integrators and manufacturers as a platform component. 
Integration and Validation Layer 
The most relevant standards for HRC are ISO 10218 (especially part 2) and ISO/TS 15066. Both specify 
general requirements on the robot system and define more specific requirements for the type of human-robot 
collaboration. The two important modes are Speed & Separation Monitoring or Power & Force Limiting. The 
former describes a cooperation in which the robot and human are working simultaneously in a shared 
workspace while physical contact between both is not allowed. In this case, the robot must initiate a protective 
stop if a certain distance to an approaching human is violated. The latter mode describes a collaboration of 
both agents whereby physical contact between them is possible. In this mode, the operational conditions of the 
robot must be limited to a safe level so that in the case of unintended contact between robot and human, no 
injuries can occur (even slight injuries such as bruises or bumps are not allowed). 
Power & Force Limiting allows for the most flexible usage of collaborative robots since it covers all forms of 
collaboration (Behrens, Saenz, Vogel, and Elkmann, 2015). Its highest priority is the prevention of injuries 
that physical contact between robot and human may cause (Behrens and Elkmann, 2014). ISO/TS 15066 
differentiates between two forms of contacts, namely quasi-static and transient contact. For both forms, it 
specifies biomechanical limit values, which a collaborative robot shall not exceed when working hand in hand 
with humans. There are limit values available for all regions across the human body. After setting up a 
collaborative robot, an on-site risk analysis is necessary to ensure that the operating robot is not able to exceed 
the limit values when getting in an unintended contact with a human. The validation procedure relies on 
measuring the possible collision cases between the robot in question and an appropriate human surrogate. 
In 2009, the German Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (IFA) developed a measurement device that 
mimics the viscos-elastic behavior of various regions of the human body for which ISO/TS 15066 provides 
 
30 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
limit values. It also released a specification that allows companies like Pilz to develop their own devices. Since 
then, more and more companies have been creating services around the risk analysis of collaborative robot to 
support their users obtaining CE certification, including on-site collision measurement. Even if these kind of 
services are prospering, a huge drawback still compromises collaborative robots to expand heavily and full 
extent. The major drawback lies in the very requirement to measure and analyze any collision/clamping against 
a rigidly mounted measurement device. Doing so, pure transient collisions, which are the most likely cases of 
unintended contact, are not simulated properly by a fixed device. This situation leads to unnecessarily low 
robot speeds for being compliant with the limit values of ISO/TS 15066, neglecting the fact that colliding with 
a free body part results in much lower forces than with a spatially constrained one (Behrens, N. Elkmann, and 
H.-J. Ottersbach, 2012). The conclusion of this is, if clamping collisions can be avoided by design, higher and 
still safe robot speeds are achievable but only if they can be validated properly. 
ROSSINI innovation 
Our ambition is to complement the current procedure for validating collaborative robots in Power & Force 
Limiting mode with a new approach that allows for analyzing impacts with free and non-clamped parts of the 
human body. We will develop a transformation method to convert impact results, measured with a rigidly fixed 
device, into such that represents the non-measureable free case. Our method will not affect the currently 
available specification since it is completely model-based and relies on results as measured today. We expect 
that this particular contribution will help to make collaborative robots more efficient as they can be today. 
1.4.2 Innovation potential 
A disruptive, inherently safe robotic applications development platform 
As such, the ROSSINI platform will guarantee inherent safety to robotic applications developed through 
it, since all its components have been designed to maximise the compliance with existing requirements for 
human-robot collaboration. By making safety an underlying, more easily fulfilled requirement, it will be then 
easier, for integrators and manufacturers, to shape HRC applications which maximise both productivity and 
job quality, in order to “optimally combine the repetitive performance of robots with the individual skills and 
ability of people” (ISO, 2015). The ROSSINI platform aims to introduce a disruptive stakeholder in the current 
Human-Robot Collaboration (HRC) technology market, by creating an open ecosystem, where integrators will 
enjoy an unequalled degree of freedom in designing HRC workstations.  
By offering a full range of such physical and virtual components for HRC applications design, ROSSINI will 
arise as a game-changer in the market of robotic technologies, differentiating from existing hierarchical 
and rigid platforms supported by large manipulators manufacturers, which are technology (manipulators-) 
pushed rather than market (application-) pulled. In the consortium’s vision, this will in turn give rise to a new 
generation of robotic applications, which will be able to collaborate with humans at an unattained level up to 
now, thus dramatically contributing to the sustainability of manufacturing in Europe.  
The ROSSINI Platform: 
 Will ensure inherent safety for applications developed through it, thanks to an optimised set of 
components and to an optimised integration layer  
 Will allow for maximised HRC workcells productivity, thanks to higher working speeds and 
payloads compared to presently available cobots, granted by enhanced sensing and built-in safety 
features in manipulators, and to dynamic optimisation of robots task granted by artificial intelligence 
 Will feature high adaptability to individual workers characteristics, and a communication 
framework between man and robot. 
 
31 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Patent search 
Today the industrial robotics patenting market is characterized by a clear divide in terms of patent portfolio 
size (Figure 16). The largest portfolios belong to European or Japanese traditional robotics manufacturers, that 
is Kuka, ABB, Fanuc and Yaskawa. On the other hand, four emerging cobot manufacturers with small patent 
portfolios stand among the fastest growing companies: Rethink Robotics, Universal Robots (acquired in 2015 
by Teradyne), Gomtec (acquired in 2015 by ABB) and Barret Technology. Nevertheless, traditional robotics 
manufacturers are fully involved in cobot related technologies, and their patent portfolios appear to be 
constantly growing.  
The new players are too small to be a 
threat to the market leaders within 
their main business of industrial 
robots, but they can well compete in 
the cobot space. As they create 
innovative products with lower price 
tags, enabling especially small 
companies to use robotics in their 
production, they can find their niche 
in the market. In this scenario, the 
ROSSINI consortium intends to enter 
the specific market niche of high 
customizable HRC workstation.  
The ROSSINI consortium has conducted a thorough patent search to make sure that no conflict exists now.The 
results have shown that ROSSINI developments are novel and are not conflicting any kind of patented 
knowledge (see Table 5). Continuous monitoring for new advancements will be held during the project, so as 
to ensure smooth exploitation and IP rights for the ROSSINI industrial partners.  
Table 5 - Rossini Freedom to Operate Assessment Excerpt 
PATENT 
NUMBER 
ASSIGNEE/ 
APPLICANT 
TITLE  ROSSINI 
FTO 
EP1901151 
 
ABB RESEARCH  
 
A method and a device for avoiding collisions 
between an industrial robot and an object 
Ok 
US20140067121 RETHINK 
ROBOTICS  
 
Systems and methods for safe robot operation 
 
Ok 
 
US20140244004 ROCKWELL 
AUTOMATION 
Recognition-based industrial automation control 
with position and derivative decision reference 
 
Ok 
US20150158178  SIEMENS Robot arrangement and method for controlling a 
robot 
 
Ok 
US20160279796  FANUC  Robot control apparatus having function of 
detecting contact with object or person  
Ok 
US20060049939 
 
SICK  
 
Method and apparatus for the control of a safety-
relevant function of a machine  
Ok 
  
Figure 16 – Industrial Robotics Patent Mapping (Chiper IP Analytics) 

 
32 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
2. IMPACT 2.1 Expected impacts  2.1.1 Contribution to FOF-02-2018 Impacts Demonstrating the potential to bring back production to Europe 
Automation has a high potential to 
enable reshoring for European 
manufacturing companies because it 
mitigates the high cost of labour. In 
a survey of 238 Citigroup clients, 
70% believed that automation would 
encourage companies to move their 
manufacturing closer to home and 
consolidate production (Citi and 
Oxford Martin School 2016). 
Moreover, companies that use robots 
are more likely to reshore (European 
Commission 2015). Robotics plays a 
major part in reconfiguring the 
productivity metrics of a 
manufacturing setup located in 
counties characterized by a high cost 
of labour. A 2015 Harvard Business 
Review paper calculates that robotics 
has the capability to increase labour 
productivity by 0.35% annually. 
Beside this, for a company 
considering reshoring as a commercially viable alternative, standard productivity calculations are only part of 
the overall cost/benefit analysis. For instance, reasons for companies to engage in reshoring include, among 
others, a faster response to changing customer demands, and the easier retention of the benefits available 
from the capabilities and experience provided by skilled human workers. One of the biggest problems that a 
company can face when reshoring is the scarcity of skilled workforce, and lack of motivation to work in 
factories (Hutzel and Lippert, 2014). 
Cobots and in general HRC solutions, which can be used for multiple functions due to their flexibility in 
deployment, offer higher returns on investment and faster payback, compared to legacy industrial robots. 
Moreover, cobots’ safety features and ease of use make integration and implementation less costly than the 
traditional industrial robots. In high-cost countries, having skilled human workers engaged in suitable 
configured manufacturing, assembly, finishing and inspection operations side by side with cobots is one of the 
most cost- effective ways to leverage the unique value-adding capabilities of a skilled human workforce. 
One of the main reasons for the manufacturing shift to Asia (especially China) several years ago, is because of 
the very low labour costs and concurrently because of the much higher dexterity of humans compared to 
robots, which at the end of the day makes them able to adapt way more easily to new tasks, mostly in presence 
of frequent change of product. This represents the extra edge of manual manufacturing in terms of flexibility 
but concurrently makes the manufacturing speed slower than what it could potentially be.  
The ROSSINI project will help to bring production back to Europe because it will demonstrate to European 
manufacturing companies the competitive advantages offered by the introduction of high performance 
collaborative robotics in the factory, increasing job quality, maximizing productivity and improving flexibility. 
ROSSINI will deliver high performance HRC workcells, combining the safety of traditional cobots with 
the working speed and payloads of industrial robots, capable of optimising task execution. This will trigger 
manufacturers’ investment in HRC technology, increasing European factories productivity and thus 
competitiveness versus low-cost manufacturers. Moreover, the inherently safe, flexible, ease to use and 
Figure 17- Top 10 Reshoring Reasons (Source: Reshoring Initiative - http://reshorenow.org/) 
 
33 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
economically viable robotic platform developed by ROSSINI, makes it possible to add automation of 
bottleneck processes without disturbing or remodelling the rest of their workflow or machinery layouts 
Hence, the old paradigm which triggered delocalisation in the past decades will be reversed, as the 
comparison between full manual manufacturing in China at smaller pace versus the collaborative production 
in Europe factories with advanced robots will start to be financially worthwhile. With comparable 
manufacturing costs manufacturing time will become the real driving factor, especially considering the 
reduction of stock trend which companies have embraced in the last decade. This will be the gating item which 
will make bringing back production to Europe a realistic option. 
Furthermore, ROSSINI will help European factories to attract skilled workforce in factories because of the 
attention paid to job quality and employee satisfaction. Finally, ROSSINI’s use cases will contribute to the 
validation of the application of HRC expected performance in terms of production flexibility increase and job 
quality improvement, thus inciting European enterprises in investing in sustainable reshoring, as shown below. 
Demonstrator 1 – ROSSINI for Domestic Appliances Assembly – (end-user WHIRLPOOL) 
The domestic appliances sector is a mature 
industry. Products are relatively similar and 
simple to produce, and production is being 
delocalised to developing countries, where 
not only input costs are lower, but demand 
growth rates are higher as ownership of 
domestic home appliances is strongly 
corelated to economic development (CECED, 
2017).  
The WHIRLPOOL use-case, provided by one 
company that has resisted the delocalisation 
trend that affected white goods production in 
Europe and in Italy in particular, regards the 
assembly process of washing machines. 
Currently the continuous flow line paradigm 
is inconsistent with effective traditional 
automation and traditional robotic: Process 
Engineers must either design complex 
production lines with combination of manual 
operation and automatic operation or assign boring, non-value added and not ergonomic operation to human. 
Now both solutions are not economical competitive considering the high cost of labour in Europe. Trough 
ROSSINI project, implementation of real and cost effective HRC will allow to redesign workplaces 
combining automation and lean manufacturing concept, with a drastic reduction of conversion cost, thus 
reducing the impact of labour cost in Europe. Different legal and internal policy frameworks will be applied, 
so to provide a reference system as wider as possible to allow the methodology development be easily 
transferrable to different countries and industries. 
Demonstrator 2 – ROSSINI for Electronic Components Production (end-user SCHINDLER) 
The European EMS (Electronic 
Manufacturing Services) Industry is 
forecast to reach Euro 32 billion by 
2021, continuing the last 3 years of 
consecutive growth, and for this reason 
this sector is considered strategic for the 
return of production in Europe (see 
Figure 19, source Reeds Electronics 
Research, 2017). Today the major 
trends and issues for EMS are: 
outsourcing of electronic production, 
shortening time to market, production 
Figure 18 - Production Facilities in Europe 2014 (CECED, 2017) 
Figure 19 – Western Europe Electronic Production, 2007-2017 
 
34 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
shifting to Lower cost Labour Locations, skill shortages in the whole of the supply chain, IoT and Industry 4.0 
challenges, etc. SCHINDER demonstrator regards a high critical process, in which individually separate but 
related items are grouped, packaged, and supplied together as one unit. It provides experimental evidences of 
the benefits and of the challenges of the interaction between human operators and robot. ROSSINI platform 
will permit the end-user to maintain the high mix/low volume production in Europe by increasing cost 
competitiveness. This use case may indicate a way to bring back to Europe the production of fixtures for 
Commodity elevators (high volume production line), which is at the moment in Far East. 
Demonstrator 3 – ROSSINI for Food Products Packaging (end-user IMA) 
The food packaging market in European 
countries should grow by around 2.1% 
per year between 2014 and 2018, to reach 
1,043 billion packaging units 
(Canadean). In this kind of factories, 
currently robotic systems are rigid and 
are not suitable for the use in flexible and 
collaborative platforms.  In fact, the 
safety of the operators is a strong barrier 
to the use of robotic systems:  low speed 
(safety requirements) reduces the robot 
efficacy, and the total cost doesn’t make 
it economically convenient. 
ROSSINI platform aims to increase both 
safety and performance in packaging 
lines. Once the economic advantage of 
the proposed solutions has been 
demonstrated, the end-use IMA could supply it combined with its machines, both for existing lines and new 
models. 
15% increase in OECD Job Quality Index through work environment and safety improvement 
The ROSSINI project aims to develop a set of technologies and design tools to address human factors in the 
early design stages of a robot application, to constantly monitor the production process and human and robot 
behaviour and to realize profound mutual understanding between robots and people in operation. The 
ROSSINI platform aims to design an effective Human Robot Collaboration through a HUMAN LAYER 
composed of a Design level, an Adaptive level and a Communication level. This approach will result in 15% 
improvement of job quality and 
will enhance human workers trust 
and feeling of safety by 25%. 
To reach these goals, first of all, 
ROSSINI will use a three level 
approach to develop OECD 
related metrics and evaluation 
tools.  
On the primary level, ROSSINI will 
use the OECD’s Job Quality Index 
to obtain the overall measure of the 
Quality of the Working 
Environment by age (15-29, 30-49 
and 50-64), by education (low, 
medium and high) and by sex, 
taking in account the main 
underlying factors regarding job 
demands and job resources (Table 
6). 
 
Figure 20 - European packaging market by country expressed in billions of 
packaging units 2010-2018 (Source: Canadean) 
      OECD Job Quality Index Earnings quality Labour market insecurity     Quality of the working environment   Job demands time pressure long working hours  high work intensity working time inflexibility physical health risk factors dangerous work hard work   Job resources work autonomy and learning opportunities workers’ freedom to choose and change their work tasks and methods formal and informal learning opportunities at work Social support at work workplace relationships 
Table 6- OECD Job Quality Index 
 
35 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
According to OECD (2017), two types of job demands are identified: time pressure, which encompasses long 
working hours, high work intensity and working time inflexibility; physical health risk factors, such as 
dangerous work (i.e. being exposed to noise, vibrations, high and low temperature) and hard work (i.e. carrying 
and moving heavy loads, painful and tiring positions). Similarly, two types of job resources will be 
considered, namely: work autonomy and learning opportunities, which include workers’ freedom to choose 
and change their work tasks and methods, as well as formal (i.e. training) and informal learning opportunities 
at work; social support at work (workplace relationships) which measures the extent of which workers receive 
social support from colleagues and supervisors. 
Following the three-level approach, the second level ROSSINI will focus on will be the ergonomic factors, 
underlying Job Quality but not explicitly addressed in the OECD approach. To this end, ROSSINI will make 
use of validated assessment methodologies and guidelines. For instance physical load assessment based on 
existing standards and guidelines e.g. ISO 11226; ISO 11228; EN 1005; and psychosocial load assessment 
based on Job-Demands Resource model” (Demerouti et al. 2001). Thirdly, ROSSINI will address other factors 
that are relevant in HRC, like trust and acceptance, for which the project will use Trust in Automation Scale 
(Kessler – 2016) and System Usability Scale (SUS) (Brooke - 1996 - SUS-A quick and dirty usability scale), 
respectively. Thanks to the three-level approach previously described, ROSSINI will develop a Design Level 
that will allow users to follow and evaluate process designs on multiple dimensions, where job quality and 
related metrics will be the primary outcomes together with productivity, product quality and cost. The tool will 
allow tasks to be distributed among teams of humans and robots and allow the design of interdependent 
relations between team-mates, which is a key factor in increasing job autonomy, a contributing factor to 
quality of the work environment. In ROSSINI’s model, the co-active design method will be extended with 
specific features to assess and account for job quality and efficiency. This design level will result in a 10% 
increase of job quality through improvement of Quality of the Working Environment compared to current 
situation.  
Moreover, ROSSINI will develop an Adaptive Level that will create flexibility in the distribution of tasks 
among human operators and robots,and will monitor the job quality of the human operator based on the 
assigned tasks. A key feature of the design level previously described is the possibility to allow multiple paths 
that lead to tasks completion. During operation tasks can be flexible assigned to human operators or robots. 
The assignment of tasks can be based on foreseeable and unforeseeable measures. A preferred task execution 
is provided by a planner. However, human operators can make (limited) on the job changes to this plan. A task 
monitor assures that production and quality targets are met, and that human operators perform tasks that 
maintain a good quality of their jobs. This results in a fulfilment of operator and industry needs, and thereby 
contribute to further 5% improvements of job quality. As a result, the specific objectives will result in 15% 
improvement of job quality. 
Finally, ROSSINI Communication Level will develop a Human-to-Robot Communication system that 
monitors and anticipates human task progression. The operator will be allowed to make changes to the 
production process in the operational stage. The progress of the human operator and the possible changes with 
respect to the original planning should be monitored and communicated to the planner and via the planner to 
the robot. By adequately estimating the human state and, within a limited window, anticipate future states, 
conflicts with robot actions could be predicted, an robot actions could be adapted to avoid unnecessary 
triggering of safety mechanisms.  Another goal of the project is to develop a Robot to Human 
Communication system that communicates future robot states to the operator, since tasks are flexibly 
assigned, human operators cannot anticipate robot actions simply by assuming repetitions of previous robot 
actions. and thereby making human-robots collaborations more predictable. Overall, ROSSINI 
Communication Level will enhance trust and feeling of safety at the operator by 25% (Table 7) 
Table 7 - ROSSINI Job Quality Impacts 
 OECD’s Job Quality Index HRC trust and acceptance 
ROSSINI Design Level +10%  
ROSSINI Adaptive Level +5%  
ROSSINI Communication Level  +25% 
Total +15% +25% 
 
36 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
20% reduction in production reconfiguration time and cost 
In a production process, a reconfiguration is typically required whenever a new part type needs to be 
manufactured or when a new production condition occurs, but this represents a challenge for the design of a 
robotic workcell. While designing a robotic cell, selecting the most suitable robot for a given industrial 
operation is one of the most difficult assignments. The robot selection attributes of interest include cost, load 
capacity, max speed, repeatability, accuracy, number of degrees of freedom, and man–machine interface. The 
best solution would depend on the application as different configurations including robot and its accessory 
equipment have different advantages which make them more suitable for a certain task, so the need to make 
production reconfigurations could lead to unsustainable costs. Compared to the traditional robotic cell, a 
collaborative robotic cell involves more human factors, such as workload, vigilance, situation awareness, 
errors, etc., making the reconfiguration problem even more complex. In this contest, ROSSINI project 
considers the human factor as an added value for the reconfigurability of the HRC workcell, because it intends 
to fully exploit the great adaptability of the human being with respect to the robot. 
With the term “reconfiguration”, referred to promptly responding production systems, it is possible to address 
both the concepts of “flexibility” (the ability to adapt to different requirements without physical changes to 
the system) and “reconfigurability” (the ability to change system components when new requirements arise). 
Moreover, “reconfigurability” can be divided into physical (i.e. redesign the layout of the system) and logical 
(i.e. redesign the process sequence) reconfiguration, touching on both definitions of flexibility and 
reconfigurability. In this work, also parametric reconfiguration is included in the definition (Järvenpää, 2017).  
ROSSINI’s platform can positively affect all the above-mentioned factors, in order to respond to rapid 
changes in production needs in a cost-effective way, thanks to a significative reduction in production 
reconfiguration time and cost. 
Safety Aware Control Architecture 
The ROSSINI Safety Aware Control Architecture will ensure a dynamic operations scheduling, i.e. updated 
when the working environment conditions, captured by the semantic scene map, change. Continuous 
replanning is implemented in order to adapt the low-level behavior to variable working conditions. Among 
such variable working conditions, it is possible to include also the sudden need to change production 
parameters due to an unexpected new job to be performed by the workcell.   
The Safety Aware Control Architecture, will allow high flexibility in the redefinition of human-robot 
interaction through a self-learning and self-adapting behavior, allowing the system to be resilient to changes 
and reducing the needs of physical or logical reconfiguration. As a result, it is expected to reduce production 
reconfiguration costs by up to 5%. 
Human-Robot Mutual Understanding Framework 
ROSSINI’s platform can improve the level of automatability thanks to the easy task allocation between the 
robot and the human operator. A classical result for optimal job is to enhance the productivity by two main 
means: determining the relative robot/prescribed task position and giving an optimal scheduling solution. 
ROSSINI aims to improve HRC to the point that human and robot will form a team able to complete tasks 
sooner. To achieve this an optimization process will establish in which task have them cooperate, which one 
because of its complexity to have the operator perform and which one to have the robot perform because 
simpler and/or recurring. The optimal task allocation and the enhanced mutual understanding between man 
and robot are expected to reduce production reconfiguration costs by 5%.  
ROSSINI Integration and Validation Layer 
The necessity of a stringent risk assessment is usually transformed into conservative speed limitations or 
bounds on driving torques of robots. Nevertheless, even if the robot’s internal components and software have 
been certified, a big part of the risk assessment process has to be done by considering the application and the 
environment itself. Today, there is no absolute answer to the question of what to do first to reduce a risk at the 
design stage, as there is no available design platform yet. Thanks to ROSSINI’s new tool for collision 
measurement within risk assessment, it will be possible to speed up the now lengthy on-site risk analysis 
necessary to ensure that the operating robot does not exceed the limit values when getting in an unintended 
contact with a human, reducing production reconfiguration time by an estimated 10%. 
 
37 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Design tool for easy reconfiguration of the HRC workcell  
ROSSINI’s platform will respond to this need as it offers an easy reconfiguration of the workcell in response 
to a change in the layout of the production line, thanks to a graphical tool for the system setup, positioning, 
calibration and monitoring (See Implementation - Task 6.2).  
The output will be a design tool enabling: 
- the setup of the whole System components to monitor the scene in the real application, allowing the 
suitable system setup, positioning, calibration and monitoring  
and 
- the programming of robot-human interaction in the working environment to speed up the commissioning 
of the real system layout 
Thank to this tool, both physical and logical reconfiguration time and cost could decrease even up 10%, 
Table 8 - ROSSINI Reconfiguration Impacts 
HRC workcell reconfiguration challenge Rossini impact 
Safety Aware Control Architecture 5% reduction in production reconfiguration time and cost 
Human-Robot Mutual Understanding 
Framework 
5% reduction in production reconfiguration time and cost 
ROSSINI Integration and Validation Layer 10% reduction in production reconfiguration time and cost 
Design tool for easy reconfiguration of the 
HRC workcell 
10%-50% reduction in production reconfiguration time and cost 
TOTAL 30% reduction in production reconfiguration time and cost 
2.1.2 Other relevant impacts Impact for the wider European industry 
As mentioned above, ROSSINI will support the 
penetration of Human-Robot Collaboration 
(HRC) in European factories. The introduction of 
HRC has the potential to considerably reshuffle the 
way in which assembly lines, production units, 
value chains are organised. Secondly, a certain 
degree of value chain integration is also expected 
to take place as a result of the uptake of advanced 
robotics in European factories. For example, HRC 
solutions make it possible to integrate production 
machinery, warehousing systems and production 
facilities into single human-centred cyber-physical 
systems. As such, the traditional frontier between 
the production and logistical tasks of manufacturing 
can be expected to become increasingly 
interconnected. 
Thirdly, an increased uptake of HRC will lead to a 
change in the robotics value chain itself. 
Suppliers, integrators and users are bound to 
collaborate more intensively which is already leading to new business models such as rental/leasing 
agreements, pay-on-production, predictive maintenance, etc.  
According to SPARC, in the field of industrial robotics, which is currently growing at 8 % p.a., Europe’s share 
of the world market is about 32%, mainly in the automotive sector. A recent study by McKinsey estimates that 
the value of the application of advanced robotics in healthcare, manufacturing and services could have an 
annual economic impact of between $1.7 trillion and $4.5 trillion worldwide by 2025. Europe’s share in the 
Figure 21 - Estimates on the world robotics market developments and reachable European market shares (SPARC) 
 
38 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
world service robotics market currently stands at 63% which is the result of Europe’s excellence in 
interdisciplinary research in “intelligent robots” and a culture of cooperation between industry and academia, 
but to sustain this technology advantage it will be important to find new applications outside the automotive 
sector.  ROSSINI project, thanks to its holistic approach easily adoptable from all kinds of enterprises, will 
help the European robotics value chain to collaborate in a more strictly way and to find novel and effective 
application for a new generation of HRC solutions for the manufacturing industry. 
Social impact 
ROSSINI will enable the shift from traditional human-machine relationships to a novel HRC solution which 
puts the human being at the centre of the whole factory system. This approach will result in a significant 
social impact for the factory employees, the supply chain stakeholders and the entire society. 
ROSSINI’s occupational health and safety impacts are primarily represented by a reduction of heavy 
works impacts on physical working condition, and by the reduction in work-related injuries and illnesses. 
The positive effect of a wide HRC adoption, will definitively result in fewer jobs requiring physical, manual 
labour in the factory. Furthermore, in ROSSINI’s HRC applications assisting workers with manual tasks will 
be particularly valuable in responding to the needs of the aging workforce.  
Moreover, ROSSINI project will contribute to improve work life balance of employees, allowing for greater 
involvement and proactive mindset, a condition particularly important for older workers, thanks to the possible 
reduction of working hours spent in physical working. Notably, the workforce employed in the factory will 
shift away from more physically laborious tasks, towards those of assembly, programming etc.  
In this way, jobs could become more interesting given their need for higher levels of creativity, problem-
solving and decision making, definitively resulting in an improved job satisfaction. ROSSINI will make 
companies more competitive and safe from an economic point of view, bringing benefits also for what concerns 
job security and welfare. 
 ROSSINI’s approach, which poses the human being at the centre of the factory life, will also have an impact 
in terms of culture development, by improving continuity and stability of the employment, promoting the 
culture of innovation and improving responsibility and accountability issues for the whole workforce, with 
positive impacts on enterprise cohesion.  
Finally, ROSSINI project will carry out a real workforce development in the factory, providing additional 
high-skilled capacity and improving job attractiveness. ROSSINI perfectly responds to this task because its 
new HRC environment will be able to intelligently adapt its behaviors according to external conditions, 
working conditions and the specific workers’ skills, tasks, and cognitive-physical abilities, thanks to a set of 
human-centred and context-aware configuration rules.  
As previously reported, the project will have also a social impact regarding the development of the European 
robotic supply chain. Thanks to the wide set of innovation carried out by ROSSINI platform, supply chain 
stakeholders will benefit of improved client and end-user satisfaction and novel market opportunities. 
Moreover, the intrinsic interdisciplinarity of ROSSINI’s HRC solution will encourage a long-term partner 
relationship between the various players of the supply chain and the academia, and the entire European robotic 
sector will benefit from the positive stimulus deriving from the introduction of ROSSINI’s technological 
innovations on the market.  
These positive impacts can help to improve the social acceptance of cobots in manufacturing industries and 
therefore to increase Governmental approval. ROSSINI will also have a positive impact on the whole society. 
Firstly, the integration of advanced automation and HRC into manufacturing processes has the potential to 
positively impact workers’ health and safety, reducing the physical burden of some jobs and occupations and 
decreasing work-related injuries and illnesses (i.e. musculoskeletal disorders, etc.).  
This implies cost savings for companies, but also for the health system of each country. Finally, ROSSINI 
ease-to-use cobot solution will contribute to training and upskilling both skilled and unskilled workers to 
prepare them for work in collaboration with robots. In this way, ROSSINI will pave the way for the provision 
of high-tech job opportunities for a large number of European citizens.  
Table 9 represents the main Indicators of the social performance of ROSSINI. 
 
39 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Table 9 - ROSSINI Social Performance Indicators 
Beneficiaries Performance issues  ROSSINI’s social impact Key Indicators 
Workers Occupational health 
and safety 
Reduction of heavy works impacts on physical working condition 
Reduction in work-related injuries and illnesses 
Improved work life balance 
Job satisfaction  Higher levels of creativity, problem-solving and decision making  
Impacts on job security and welfare  
Culture development Improved continuity and stability of the employment  
Promoting the culture of innovation  
Impacts on enterprise cohesion  
Responsibility and accountability issues 
Workforce 
development  
Providing additional capacity development  
Improved job attractiveness 
Supply 
chain  
Stakeholders 
satisfaction 
Improved client and end-user satisfaction 
Impacts on market opportunities 
Partnership impacts on maintaining the long-term partner relationship  
Industry well-being Stimulating technological innovation  
Social and governmental approval 
Society Public well-being Reduction of impacts of health costs  
Job opportunities  Provision of high-tech job opportunities 
Standardisation impact 
To achieve safety, robotic applications traditionally exclude operator access to the operations area while the 
robot is active. Therefore, a variety of operations requiring human intervention often cannot be automated 
using robot systems. ISO/TS 15066 Technical Specification provides guidance for collaborative robot 
operation where a robot system and people share the same workspace. In such operations, the integrity of the 
safety-related control system is of major importance, particularly when process parameters such as speed and 
force are being controlled. A comprehensive risk assessment is required to assess not only the robot system 
itself, but also the environment in which it is placed, i.e. the workplace. When implementing applications in 
which people and robot systems collaborate, ergonomic advantages can also result, e.g. improvements of 
worker posture. This Technical Specification supplements and supports the industrial robot safety standards 
ISO 10218-1 and ISO 10218-2, and provides additional guidance on the identified operational functions for 
collaborative robots. Note that ISO/TS 15066 is not a standard, it is a Technical Specification, so it will likely 
continue to undergo improvements based on input from robot integrators, automation engineers and production 
managers who use the document. The content of the standard will be rolled into the primary international 
standard for industrial robot safety, ISO 10218, when it is next revised.  
Today manufacturers of cobots design the units to be “inherently safe”, but even with cobots’ built-in safety 
systems, ISO/TS 15066 requires that robot integrators perform a comprehensive risk assessment that evaluates 
the robot system and the environment in which it is placed. That’s because virtually every cobot installation is 
unique: you can have the same robot arm but it can have many different end effectors and combinations of 
safeguarding equipment. Today it’s the responsibility of the integrator to identify risks of the installation and 
propose ways to mitigate them. Moreover, a risk assessment is necessary anytime a collaborative robot 
workcell changes the type of tasks it performs. That makes it critical for robot engineers and integrators to 
identify and evaluate each risk for their customers and, if a barrier to safety exists, determine whether the risk 
is acceptable, thus limitating the acceptance of new HRC technologies. For these reasons, the future goal for 
standardization is to validate that not only the robot but the complete workcell is safe. 
In this contest, the contribution of ROSSINI project could be very effective to harmonize the regulatory 
scenario, as the project will aim to design and develop an innovative robotic manipulator, characterized by 
built-in safety features, and a safety aware control architecture, which will dynamically optimize the behaviour 
of the robot for maximizing the efficiency while preserving the safety of the overall system. To validate all the 
innovative solutions developed by ROSSINI platform, for each technology used IFF will define what 
constraints can come from risk assessment methodology, verifying the compliance of the design results. 
Another advantage for the improvement of the standardization scenario, is that the concept of ROSSINI’s 
manipulator is totally modular, because it supports different control concepts like ROS, Pilz Primo, KEBA 
controller, etc, so the risk assessment methodology could be more easily extended to many players of the 
robotics supply chain.  
 
40 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
2.1.3 Barriers & obstacles 
The barriers that prevent the ROSSINI project to achieve its full potential are described in the following points. 
Normative barriers. The evolution of standards and national norms may be much slower than the 
technological pace. The evolution proposed by ROSSINI may be hampered by this slowness. However, 
through the Standardisation WP, ROSSINI partners will take an active stand in the standardisation process and 
will favour the positive evolution of norms in the light of the technical results of activities. liability issues 
linked to potential accidents stemming for human robot-interactions 
Workforce acceptance. HRC could encounter the opposition of trade unions and other workers 
representatives, as it may be a potential threat to existing jobs given the shift away from human intervention. 
Furthermore, contractual arrangements may be impacted by two emerging issues: liability issues linked to 
potential accidents stemming for human robot-interactions and privacy issues stemming from robots that 
collect data about human behavior and performance. However, there are favourable views when it comes to 
increasing worker health and safety, and the demonstrated potential to bring back production to Europe will 
help in this regard.  
Privacy issues. HRC systems collect a large amount of data about human behavior and performance, due to 
the intensive monitoring with sensors to capture human behavior and movements and store it for future 
reference. In this way, recording capacities of HRC potentially could give employers a great deal of 
information about how their employees perform, and could thus result in staff being constantly monitored and 
placed under surveillance. Concerns, particularly from a legal viewpoint, have been identified around 
legitimacy and privacy of human workers working in HRC workcells, with implications for employees’ 
privacy rights. However, through WP5, which aims to develop a set of technologies and design tools to address 
human factors in the early design stages of a robot application, ROSSINI will develop and promote engineering 
techniques and methodologies that permit HRC to fully respect the dignity and rights of the individual, 
considering privacy engineering principles by default. 
Lack of skills. HRC will bring in the need for new skills from factory workers, shifting from the traditional 
paradigm to the new one. HRC is expected to modify certain occupations, which can occur in drastic changes 
and will require upskilling, mostly through on-the-job training. This will require significant investments in 
skills upgrading. Moreover, the deployment and maintenance of HRC will bring about an increased need for 
certain types of occupations such as specialists in automation and programming, robotic systems integrators 
and robot maintenance. These occupations integrate a range of different skillsets and competences into a single 
occupational profile, and enterprises today find difficulties in filling certain positions that require a mix of 
skills in engineering, IT and programming, and data and mathematics skills. To mitigate this potential barrier, 
in WP9 (impact enhancement) ROSSINI will stress the concept that lifelong learning and workforce 
requalification programmes will be key of workforce upskilling, not only to avoid opposition, but also to make 
sure that the potential benefits of HRC are reaped by manufacturers. 
Financing. HRC needs investment. Normally HRC producers claim very low payback times, but the truth is 
that this really depend by the management availability to redesign production. In this contest, ROSSINI’s 
Demonstration Activities (WP7) are consistently able to demonstrate a remarkably rapid return on investment, 
so that a company who decides to invest in HRC is not locked into a risky decision about one specific, relatively 
immutable manufacturing configuration.
2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
2.2.1 Dissemination and exploitation of results 
ROSSINI addresses the full range of potential users and uses along with the related issues concerning the 
dissemination, exploitation, and knowledge management of intellectual property rights (IPR), by proactive 
planning and agreements. The following sections describe in detail the programmed steps and the available 
tools of the dissemination and exploitation strategy 
Plan for Dissemination and Exploitation of Project Results 
CRIT, Impact Enhancement manager of the project, will lead the preparation of a detailed PEDR on 
commencement of the project. Furthermore, CRIT will be responsible for the development of an acceptable 
 
41 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
exploitation agreement for the partners and for the exploitation and dissemination of the results to outside 
parties. It is mentioned that approval of the Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be required for 
dissemination of information. In order to prepare the market for the ROSSINI Platform, a comprehensive 
dissemination strategy (outlined in WP8) has been developed. At the end of the project we will have developed 
several case studies and collected a wealth of information on the individual scientific and technological 
advancement, along with the commercial advantages as well as with the contribution to the regulations and 
standards.  
CRIT will champion dissemination of information, particularly for the purpose of ensuring future exploitation, 
strongly supported by all the project partners. General dissemination activities will include the inclusion of 
project results on the partner’s websites and the disclosure of information through project brochure to relevant 
associations in the Manufacturing sector, components suppliers, robot integrator and end user industries. 
Additionally, the partners will be encouraged to publish the project’s results in scientific and industrial 
communities through papers and articles, published in refereed conferences and high impact factor journals. 
They will mainly include open access journals (“gold”) and self-archiving (“green”) to non-open access 
journals in order to comply with the Horizon2020 Guidelines on Open Access. Table 10 outlines potential 
journals and conferences that ROSSINI aims to be published in. 
Table 10 - Potential Journals and Conferences for ROSSINI Dissemination 
Media (Journal or Conference) Impact Factor Open Access 
IEEE Transactions on Robotics 4,036 Green 
International Journal of Robotics Research 5,301 Green 
Autonomous Robots 2,706 Green 
IEEE Transactions on Mechatronics 4,357 Green 
Elsevier Mechatronics 2,496 Green 
IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics 6,112 Green 
Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 2,552 Green 
The consortium will target to disseminate the knowledge produced during the project through several 
relating European and international organisations: 
 EFFRA: The European Factories of the Future Research Association (http://www.effra.eu)  
 ManuFuture-EU European Technology Platform (http://www.manufuture.org)  
 IMS: Intelligent Manufacturing Systems Global Research and Business Innovation Program 
(http://www.ims.org) 
 The International Federation of Robotics (www.ifr.org) 
 euRobotics AISBL (Association Internationale Sans But Lucratif): https://www.eu-robotics.net 
Table 11 outlines the main events at which the ROSSINI results are expected to be presented. The list 
includes scientific conference for the dissemination of scientific results, as well as trade fairs for more 
exploitation-oriented communication acitivity, to be peformed mainly by the industrial partners. CORE will 
oversee the communication actitvies, coordinating events participation and suggesting conference, fairs, 
meetings and workshops to attend. 
Table 11 - Events for the dissemination ROSSINI results 
NAME TYPE URL 
European Robotics Week One week of robotics related activities 
across Europe for the general public 
https://www.eu-
robotics.net/robotics_week/ 
Automatica  Trade Fair Smart for Automation and 
Robotics 
https://automatica-munich.com/  
SPS IPC Drives Europe´s leading exhibition for electric 
automation 
https://www.mesago.de/en/SPS/ 
 
42 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
NAME TYPE URL 
The International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation 
IEEE Robotics and Automation 
Society's flagship conference 
www.icra2017.org  
International Conference on 
Intelligent Robots & Systems 
Conference www.iros2018.org 
Interpack international packaging Fair https://www.interpack.com/  
Business plan 
The world industrial robots and collaborative robots market 
In 2016, robot sales increased by 
16% to 294.312 units, a new 
peak for the fourth year in a row. 
Since 2010, the demand for 
industrial robots has 
accelerated considerably due to 
the ongoing trend toward 
automation and continued 
innovative technical 
improvements in industrial 
robots. Between 2011 and 2016, 
the average robot sales increase 
was at 12% per year (CAGR). The 
number of robot installations had 
never increased so heavily before 
(source: IFR, 2017). The main 
driver of the growth in 2016 was again - like in 2015 – the electrical/electronics industry (+41%). Robot 
sales in the automotive industry increased, like in 2015, at a rather moderate rate (by 6%) after a considerable 
increase between 2010 and 2014. The automotive industry is still the major customer of industrial robots with 
a share of 35% of the total supply in 2016. The electrical/electronics industry has been catching up, specially 
in 2015 and 2016, reaching a share of 31% of the total supply in 2016. The rising demand for electronic 
products and new products, the need to automate production and the increasing need for batteries, chips and 
displays, were driving factors for the boost in sales.  
The electronic equipment 
production facilities are mainly 
in Asian countries. The food and 
beverage industry also increased 
robot orders in 2016 by 20% to 
almost 8,200 units, accounting for 
a share of 3% of the total supply. 
The annual average growth rate 
between 2011 and 2016 was 12%. 
The average global robot density5 
is about 74 industrial robots 
installed per 10,000 employees in the manufacturing industry in 2016. The most automated countries in the 
world are the Republic of Korea, Singapore, Germany and Japan. The IFR Survey indicates that the world 
potential for robot installations in the general industry is tremendous: From 2018 to 2020, global robot 
installations are estimated to increase by at least 15%, and total global sales will reach about 520,900 units in 
2020. Between 2017 and 2020, it is estimated that more than 1.7 million new industrial robots will be 
installed in factories around the world.  
Regarding the specific market of collaborative robots, it was was valued at USD 176.7 Million in 2016 and 
is expected to reach USD 4.28 Billion by 2023, at a CAGR of 56.94% between 2017 and 2023 (Markets and 
 
5 Defined as the number of multipurpose industrial robots per 10,000 persons employed in manufacturing industry 
Figure 22 - Estimated worldwide annual shipments of industrial robot by regions 
Figure 23 - Estimated annual supply at year-end by industries worlwide 2014-2016 
 
43 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Markets, 2017).Technavio’s market research (Technavio, 2017) analyst predicts the global collaborative robots 
market to grow exponentially at a CAGR of above 60% by 2021. In terms of geography, APAC accounted for 
the maximum market share during 2016 and will continue to dominate the market for the next few years. The 
collaborative robots market in APAC is characterized by its strong automotive, electrical and electronics, 
semiconductor, and metal processing industries. The global collaborative robots market is characterized by the 
presence of several established international vendors (ABB, FANUC, KUKA, Universal Robots), with a 
large number of other prominent vendors such as DLR, EPSON, Kawasaki Robotics, OMRON, Rethink 
Robotics, Yaskawa Motoman,  
The main applications of collaborative 
robots are Material handling, General 
assembly, Painting Inspection, and 
Welding. During 2016, the material 
handling segment dominated the 
collaborative robots market and 
accounted for a major part of the overall 
market share: materials handling 
machines are deployed in almost all 
manufacturing and distribution 
industries and involve resource 
consuming operations, such as machine 
feeding, loading, and unloading, 
packing, palletizing, and disengaging. Regarding Payload, it is interesting to note that a rencent research 
(Grandview, 2017), shows that cobots with low payloads are expected to keep covering most world sales.   
The ROSSINI idea of developing a platform for advanced HRC applications is related to the main industrial 
partners market vision, aiming to structure and consolidate their current and future technological offer in the 
field of robotics. As such, ROSSINI will represent, for DATALOGIC and PILZ, but also for IRIS, 
MACHINEBOUW and IMA, a great chance for reinforcing their presence on a fast-growing and 
competitive market, such as that of robotic solutions and equipment. Moreover, through the unique pool of 
knowledge and skilled research teams involved, ROSSINI will act as catalyser for developing new products 
and solutions in the field of robotics, and for strengthening collaborations and synergies among the different 
partners. It must be noted, indeed, that all industrial partners involved are already accustomed to each other, 
having worked in the past in collaborative projects or through customer-supplier relationships. 
Last but not least, ROSSINI will provide the chance, to PILZ in particular (but also to other partners which 
will supply components and side products) for directly entering the market of robotic manipulators with 
their own, distinctive solution (the Collaborative by Birth Robotic Arm). Here, the competitive position of 
ROSSINI will benefit from the fact that, contrary to large scale producers which are focused on the product, 
the RIS arm will build on knowledge and experience directly gained on the shop floor. 
ROSSINI will result in the generation of 12 key exploitable results, summarized in Table 12.  
Table 12 - ROSSINI Expected Key Exploitable Results 
Type of ER Exploitable result WP ER Manager Involved 
partner(s) 
Exploitation 
vision 
Product New Safety 3D 
flexible cameras; 
Advanced SLS 
cluster;  
3 DATALOGIC PILZ Product sales 
Product New Radar Sensors; 
Safe communication 
bus  
3 PILZ DATALOGIC  Product sales; 
Engineering 
service 
Equipment RS4: a Sensor Fusion 
System able to 
properly monitor the 
working space  
3 PILZ DATALOGIC Product sales; 
Software 
License; 
Engineering  
Figure 24 - Expected cobots market share accoring to different payloads 
 
44 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Type of ER Exploitable result WP ER Manager Involved 
partner(s) 
Exploitation 
vision 
Knowledge & IP Semantic Scene Map: 
a tool enabling danger 
awareness that can be 
added to robot control  
4 IRIS  UNIMORE; PILZ Software 
License; 
Engineering  
Knowledge & IP Safety Aware 
Control 
Architecture: tool 
enabling safe task 
optimisation to be 
added to robot control 
4 PILZ IRIS; UNIMORE Software 
License; 
Engineering; 
Embedded in 
PRIMO robotic 
controller 
Knowledge & IP Semantic Scene Map: 
a tool enabling danger 
awareness that can be 
added to robot control  
4 IRIS UNIMORE; PILZ  Software 
License; 
Engineering 
service 
Knowledge & IP Safety Aware 
Control 
Architecture: tool 
enabling safe task 
optimisation tp  be 
added to robot control 
4 PILZ IRIS; UNIMORE Software 
License; 
Engineering; 
Embedded in 
PRIMO robotic 
controller 
Knowledge & IP Dual-drive robot joint 
design;  
Dual-encoder robot 
joint design;  
5 SUPSI PILZ  Patent; 
Embedded in 
ROSSINI 
Manipulator; 
License 
Product Collaborative by 
Birth Robot Arm: 
new concept of low 
inertia, high 
performance cobot 
5 PILZ SUPSI Product Sales 
Knowledge & IP Human-Robot 
Mutual 
Understanding 
Framework Software 
Suite for integrators 
6 MACHINEBOUW  TNO; PILZ; 
UNIMORE;  
Software 
License; 
Engineering 
service 
Knowledge & IP Model-based collision 
measurement method 
enabling quick ramp-
up and higher robot 
speed  
7 IFF PILZ Standardization; 
Engineering 
Service 
Equipment ROSSINI Design 
Tool: desktop-based 
design tool for robot 
integrators 
7 IRIS PILZ; 
DATALOGIC;  
Software 
License; 
Engineering 
Service 
Process HRC Workcells for 
domestic appliances & 
electronic components 
8 WHIRLPOOL, 
SCHINDLER 
PILZ, 
DATALOGIC, 
MACHINEBOUW 
Use in company 
processes; 
market 
replication 
Process Collaborative mobile 
platform for food 
packaging 
8 IMA PILZ, 
DATALOGIC 
Engineering 
and turnkey 
plant sales 
 
45 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Since leading industries are involved in ROSSINI, commercial usability will be guaranteed. The consortium 
will take part in initiatives such as the Common Exploitation Booster promoted by the EC to enhance 
collaboration and better define exploitation strategies. Following is an analytic exposition of individual 
exploitation plans. 
DATALOGIC will the embed the technologies developed within ROSSINI, particularly the Smart and Safe 
and Sensing System, in its future product range, to be marketed along with PILZ to the ROSSINI platform. 
Products to be sold will include New Safety 3D flexible cameras and advanced SLS clusters, endowed with a 
safe communication bus between sensors and to the Safety Controller via Safety protocols. DATALOGIC 
expects that smart, flexible, modular dynamic Safety Sensors will be widely adopted not only in robotic 
application but also in many other industrial applications where human operators and automatic machines 
already work side by side. 
PILZ will follow an integrated exploitation path with DATALOGIC, for its sensing products (Vision, Radar, 
Ultrasound), and will also market a Fusion Sensor System able to properly monitor the working space and 
provide high quality information on that to setup a more advantageous compromise between operator safety 
and robot task execution efficiency. This system will be completely integrated with the Robot Control System, 
the PILZ PRIMO Motion Controller, which will feature the possibility to embed the Safety Aware Control 
Architecture. In addition, PILZ will exploit the skills and knowledge acquired in ROSSINI to increase its sales 
of consulting services related to safety in automation. But the most relevant exploitation route for PILZ will 
be the start of a new business unit as a robot vendor, for the market take up of the Collaborative by Birth 
Robotic Manipulator. To this end, PILZ has developed a dedicated business case (Table 3), which shows that 
the ROSSINI Manipulator RP will result in an additional yearly 45M€ turnover by 2027, with a 27,5M€ 
investment net present value in 2019 and 2,86 years payback time. The main model assumptions are:  
 PILZ sees a potential market for 1500 manipulators per year by 2027 
 The differential investment an additional 2M€ invested in non-funded promotional activities 
(marketing, advertising, etc.).  
 The discount rate applied for actualisation (8,60%) is taken from the European dataset for the 
“Machinery” category, yearly updated by Prof. A. Damodaran of New York Stern School of Business6 
Table 13 - ROSSINI Collaborative by Birth Robotic Arm business case 
 
IRIS will increase its skills in the field of Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence applied to robotics, 
also valorizing the Semantic Scene Map via software licensing, and non-recurrent engineering projects.  
Thanks to ROSSINI, MACHINEBOUW will offer solutions to customers so that specific needs in machine 
customization are easy and fast in use offering them short changeover times and an increase in flexibility, 
MACHINEBOUW will be a key ROSSINI integrating partner, leveraging its market knowledge of HRC. 
 
6 See: http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/New_Home_Page/datacurrent.html  
Year 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027Year #0 1 2 3 4 5N. of items sold (Robot) 400 500 800 1000 1500Unit Price 30.000 30.000 30.000 30.000 30.000Additiional ROSSINI related revenues (premium price) 12.000.000 15.000.000 24.000.000 30.000.000 45.000.000-Differential investment amortization -400.000 -400.000 -400.000 -400.000 -400.000-Differential production costs -9.000.000 -11.250.000 -18.000.000 -22.500.000 -33.750.000= differential EBIT 2.600.000 3.350.000 5.600.000 7.100.000 10.850.000- Taxes (T=40%) -1.040.000 -1.340.000 -2.240.000 -2.840.000 -4.340.000= differential NOPAT 1.560.000 2.010.000 3.360.000 4.260.000 6.510.000+ Investment amortization 400.000 400.000 400.000 400.000 400.000- Δ CCN (CCN = 10% Revenues)-1.200.000-300.000-900.000-600.0003.000.000- Differential investment 2.000.000FCF 2.000.000 760.000 2.110.000 2.860.000 4.060.000 9.910.000FCF NPV (r = 12%) 2.000.000 699.816 1.789.051 2.232.937 2.918.816 6.560.313ROSSIN COLLABORATIVE ROBOTIC ARM NPV 16.200.933ROSSIN COLLABORATIVE ROBOTIC ARM PAYBACK TIME 2,86Years
 
46 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
IMA will exploit the robotics solutions developed in ROSSINI, by integrating them in present and new 
generation IMA tea-packing machine platforms, in order to intercept the packaging industry’s rapid evolution 
driven by higher sensitivity for job quality, and efficiency and flexibility of production lines. 
WHIRLPOOL and SCHINDLER will implement the collaborative HRC Workcells in their production 
process, in order to increase productivity and flexibility, and improve job quality. 
CRIT and CORE will further improve their skills and develop their network, in order to provide their 
customers advanced technology consulting and innovation support services in the field of robotics. 
Table 14 summarizes the expected market impact for the ROSSINI industrial partners. 
Table 14- ROSSINI Market Impact 
 
The main ROSSINI market impacts can be summarized as follows: 
 ROSSINI is expected to unleash new market opportunities for the consortium industrial partners, 
resulting in a total yearly turnover of worth 125M€ by 2027 
 In the period from 2023 to 2027, ROSSINI will generate a total actualized cumulated EBIT 
(Earnings Before Interest and Taxes) worth 87M€ 
 The turnover increase for ROSSINI industrial partners will generate over 1.000 new workplaces by 
2027, especially specialized mechatronics technicians and engineers, but also other, less specialized 
profiles for auxiliary services, and social/humanist profiles for marketing and HR management  
Knowledge management strategy 
The corner stones of the IPR and Exploitation management of ROSSINI will be the Consortium Agreement 
(CA) and the Plan for Exploitation and Dissemination of Results (PEDR).  
The Consortium Agreement (CA) will provide the legal basis for the internal relationships and responsibilities 
among the beneficiaries. The CA will be signed before the entry into force of the Grant Agreement, and it will 
give details of IPR management including terms and conditions of protection and transfer IPR; access rights 
to background or foreground for carrying out the project or for use of a beneficiary´s own foreground, etc. 
Some principal rules are as follows: 
 Patents. Partners who will develop patentable knowledge will be encouraged to apply for patent or similar 
form of protection and shall supply details of each such application to the other partners. 
 Access Rights. Partners grant to each of the other partners royalty-free access right to knowledge generated 
in the project to the extent needed to successfully perform the project. Access rights to a partners pre-
existing knowledge for use outside the project is, when needed and only to the extent necessary to make 
use of the project result, given on preferential conditions to the other partners. Any details concerning the 
access rights to will be defined in the Consortium Agreement. 
 Ownership of Knowledge. Knowledge is owned by the partners who carried out the work generating it, or 
on whose behalf such work was carried out. If a partner wishes to assign any knowledge to a third party 
he should inform the other partners and request their consent, which should not unreasonably be withheld. 
Units Sold Turnover Units Sold Turnover EBIT Units Sold Turnover Units Sold Turnover Units Sold TurnoverNew Vision Systems DATALOGIC5.000,00€                   1.500,00€     1000 5.000.000,00 €      3000 15.000.000,00€    4.500.000,00€       5000 25.000.000,00€       7000 35.000.000,00€       8000 40.000.000,00€       New Safety Laser Scanners DATALOGIC1.200,00€                   360,00€         5000 6.000.000,00 €      7000 8.400.000,00€       2.520.000,00€       12000 14.400.000,00€       16000 19.200.000,00€       20000 24.000.000,00€       New Sensors (Radar) PILZ800,00€                       240,00€         1250 1.000.000,00 €      2000 1.600.000,00€       480.000,00€           3000 2.400.000,00€         5000 4.000.000,00€         6000 4.800.000,00€         Motion/Safety Controllers PILZ1.000,00€                   300,00€         300 300.000,00 €          600 600.000,00€           180.000,00€           960 960.000,00€             1200 1.200.000,00€         1800 1.800.000,00€         Robotic Arm PILZ30.000,00€                9.000,00€     250 7.500.000,00 €      500 15.000.000,00€    4.500.000,00€       800 24.000.000,00€       1000 30.000.000,00€       1500 45.000.000,00€       Consulting Services PILZ15.000,00€                2.250,00€     50 750.000,00 €          70 1.050.000,00€       157.500,00€           90 1.350.000,00€         100 1.500.000,00€         120 1.800.000,00€         Integration Services MACHINEBOUW100.000,00€              15.000,00€  5 500.000,00 €          7 700.000,00€           105.000,00€           10 1.000.000,00€         12 1.200.000,00€         15 1.500.000,00€         Non recurrent Engineering IRIS50.000,00€                7.500,00€     10 500.000,00 €          15 750.000,00€           112.500,00€           20 1.000.000,00€         30 1.500.000,00€         40 2.000.000,00€         Collaborative Mobile Platform IMA60.000,00€                18.000,00€  10 600.000,00 €          20 1.200.000,00€       360.000,00€           50 3.000.000,00€         80 4.800.000,00€         100 6.000.000,00€         Technological services CRIT5.000,00€                   750,00€         8 40.000,00 €            10 50.000,00€             7.500,00€                12 60.000,00€                15 75.000,00€                20 100.000,00€             Consulting Services CORE3.000,00€                   450,00€         10 30.000,00 €            12 36.000,00€             5.400,00€                15 45.000,00€                20 60.000,00€                25 75.000,00€                22.220.000,00 €   44.386.000,00€    12.927.900,00€    73.215.000,00€      98.535.000,00€      127.075.000,00€    20.460.405,16 €   0 37.634.518,01€    10.961.458,24€    0 57.162.417,94€      0 70.838.803,95€      0 84.122.271,69€      22.220.000,00 €   66.606.000,00 €   19.320.900,00 €   139.821.000,00 €   238.356.000,00 €   365.431.000,00 €   22.220.000,00 €   22.166.000,00 €   28.829.000,00 €     25.320.000,00 €     28.540.000,00 €     185                         185                         240                           211                           238                           Total Yearly Turnover in 2027127.075.000,00€    Total Yearly EBIT in 202737.301.250,00€      NPV Cumulated Sales 2023-2027270.218.416,74€    NPV Cumulated EBIT 2023-202787.249.925,90€      Jobs Created 2023-20271.059                        ROSSINI CONSORTIUM TOTAL EXPECTED REVENUES, EBIT, JOBS CREATED, 2023-2027Total Sales / Annual EBITCumulative Sales / EBITJobs Created (1 new job every 120 k€ additional turnover)KEY EXPLOITABLE RESULT PARTNERItem Price (average) EBIT/ItemAdditional Yearly TurnoverActualized Total Sales / Annual EBIT2023 2024 2025 2026 2027
 
47 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
 IP Ownership. Foreground IP shall be owned by the project partner carrying out the work leading to it. If 
any Foreground IP is created jointly by at least two project partners and it is not possible to distinguish 
between the contributions of each of the project partners, such work will be jointly owned by the 
contributing project partners. The same shall apply if, while carrying out work on the project, an invention 
is made having two or more contributing parties contributing to it, and it is not possible to separate the 
individual contributions. Any such joint inventions and all related patent applications and patents shall be 
jointly owned by the contributing parties. 
The first version of the PEDR will include identification of market segments, initial dissemination activities 
as well as the first version of exploitable results. It will be provided in month 6. Regular updates will follow, 
at Month 18 and Month 30. The conclusive PEDR will be included in the final report of the project to be 
submitted within 60 days after the end of the project. The final PEDR will have two sections. Section A will 
include a list of scientific publications concerning the foreground, as well as other dissemination ctivities. 
Section B will include all the intellectual property rights applied and registered, all exploitable foregrounds, as 
well as an explanation concerning the plans use of foreground, either in research and/or commercially.  
Management and protection of data and knowledge 
ROSSINI project aims at contributing to the sustainability of European manufacturing, by promoting the 
integration of HRC on the shopfloor in order to have more productive, flexible and human-friendly factories. 
Hence, the achievements are required to be communicated to the public and the respective targeted markets. 
The results will be distributed openly to the public and as a result ROSSINI will participate in the Open 
Research Data Pilot in Horizon 2020. However, the quality and performance data of the Manufacturing 
enterprises will be considered private and will only be available after granting permission.  
Therefore, a Data Management Plan (DMP) document will be developed which will indicate whether and how 
this data will be shared and/or made open, and how it will be curated and preserved. An initial plan has already 
been explored in and its results are summarised in Table 15. 
Table 15 – ROSSINI Expected Research Data 
Research data Related partner(s) 
RS4 system specification and performance indicators  DATALOGIC, PILZ 
Preliminary assessment data for external certification of RS4 DATALOGIC, PILZ 
Safety Aware Control Architecture algorithms 
experimentation results  
UNIMORE, IRIS 
Collaborative Robotic Arm simulation and validation 
outcomes  
SUPSI, PILZ 
OECD metrics and datasets TNO 
Actual collision values algorithms and model FRAUNHOFER 
KPIs from use cases IMA, WHIRLPOOL, MACHINEBOUW, 
SCHINDLER 
The initial data management plan will be conducted and delivered in a document format in the first 6 months 
of the project. However, this is not a fixed document; it will be updated and augmented with new datasets and 
results during the lifespan of ROSSINI. The document will contain the following information for each dataset: 
 Data set reference and name –Unique identifier for the produced data. 
 Data set description – description, origin, nature, scale, reuse, integration, publishability, etc. 
 Standards and metadata – reference to standards, how metadata will be created, etc. 
 Data sharing access procedures, dissemination strategies,  embargo periods, etc. 
 Archiving and preservation (including storage and backup)  
2.2.2 Communication activities 
Objectives. It will be imperative to communicate ROSSINI results and their benefits for the stakeholders, to 
the widest possible audience internationally. Communication activities will have 5 main objectives: 
 
48 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
1. Prepare content, graphical identity and effective communication instruments,  
2. Promote ROSSINI to all target groups in EU and beyond ;  
3. Collect feedback from additional potential end-users and other target groups,  
4. Establish and reinforce the brand-name of ROSSINI as a key-player in the robotics market;  
5. Raise awareness on ROSSINI philosophy to scientific and standardisation communities 
Strategy. ROSSINI will take a structured approach to identify the most relevant stakeholders and target groups 
at each stage of the communication strategy, their motivations for pursuing project results, and identifying 
their favoured communication approaches. The communication strategy will target different audiences:  
i. For the industrial stakeholders (manufacturers, robot integrators, third parties, etc ) the strategy is 
aiming at creating technical and business interest in the opportunities created by the project’s results;  
ii. For the scientific and standardisation communities the strategy is aiming at highlighting ROSSINI 
validated results beyond the state of the art, incl. results with potential for contribution to standards.  
The website will provide up-to-date information about the project and a strong representation on relevant social 
media will be established. Traditional channels such as newspapers and industrial magazines will also be used; 
Publications will be prepared and participation in relevant events will be pursued (see Table 11 above). 
Target stakeholders and groups. The communication plan will set out specific target stakeholders and groups 
covering the full range of potential users in manufacturing value chains as well as industrial and R&D 
communities. Each communication activity will be tailored to the specific group: 
1. Manufacturing and process companies: Food & Beverage, Electronics, Rubber/Plastics, etc. 
2. Industrial research communities, EFFRA, ICT and FoF research communities; Standardisation bodies. 
3. Robot Integrators and suppliers of robot components and/or related services 
4. National/international societies and umbrella organisations, such as IFR, euRobotics AISBL, etc. 
Timeline. This is structured in three main phases: 
 Phase1 – Initial awareness (M1-M12) aims at: Agreeing upon communication strategy and future 
activities; Creating initial awareness in markets related to Project’s scope and objectives. 
 Phase2 – Targeted awareness (M13-M36) aims at: informing targeted stakeholders and groups; 
Informing target market about the technological breakthroughs and business benefits of ROSSINI. 
 Phase3 – Strategic phase (M37-M42) aims at: Maximizing target market and industry awareness 
regarding the ROSSINI platform and its exploitable products;  
Table 16 - ROSSINI Communication Matrix 
Communication Supports & 
Channels KPIs 
Target Stakeholders (×=Main Target, 
□=Secondary) 
R&D, Entities End-Users  Facilitators  
Project documentation 
Leaflet 1 initial version + update × × × 
Poster 1 initial version + update × × □ 
Reference PPT presentation 1 initial version + update × × × 
Project publications 
Press releases At least 2 per year × × × 
Project newsletter 1 every 6 months □ × × 
Articles and proceedings 9 publications (1+3+3+2) × × □ 
Project deliverables See list of deliverables × □ □ 
Open access repository (RDR)  1 deposit per year × □ □ 
Project videos (incl. YouTube presence) (1 initial version + update) × × × 
Online presence 
Project website  1 website, monthly updated × × × 
LinkedIn  At least 1 monthly update × × × 
Twitter  At least 2 monthly updates × × × 
Events 
Presentation sessions 6 × □ × 
Thematic events 3 workshops + 1 conference × × × 
Participation to external events 30+  Depending on specific event 
  
 
49 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
3. IMPLEMENTATION
3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables  
Taking into account the project overall goals, in order to guarantee the objectives achievement and to 
efficiently and effectively manage the project, a coherent work-plan, over 42 months, has been devised. 
ROSSINI work-plan is organized through 8 work-packages (WPs). The first WP is dedicated to requirements 
collection 4 R&D work packages are focused on the 4 research lines implemented during the project lifetime. 
In particular: 
- WP2 will address the ROSSINI Smart Safe Sensing System 
- WP3 will be focused the ROSSINI Safety Aware Control Architecture 
- WP4 will develop the ROSSINI Collaborative by Brith Robotic Arm 
- WP5 will address the ROSSINI Human-Robot Mutual Understanding  
All the research WPs will bring thir respective ROSSINI platform technological components up to TRL5 (va 
technology validated in industrially relevant environment). After this milestone, to be reached at M30, the 
Integration and Validation WP will bring the results together in a comprehensive platform, which will also be 
complemented by specific design and validation tools for integrators. 
The results of these WPs point to a fundamental validation in WP7: ROSSINI will develop 3 industrial 
demonstrators, which will act as technological showcases for the market replication and therefore for the full 
leverage of the market potential of exploitable results. WP7 will bring the ROSSINI technologies to TRL6 
(technology demonstrated in industrially relevant environment) and will mark the end of the funded project. 
WP8, Impact Enhancement, and WP9, Management, and, run in parallel throughout the other project. 
Table 3.1a: List of work packages 
 
 
50 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                 
ROSSINI GANTT  

 
51 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Table 3.1b Work Packages Description 
Table 3.1c List of Major Deliverables 
PERT Chart
3.2 Management structure, milestones and procedures  
The project consists of the following organizational hierarchy of responsible bodies as shown below. At 
management level, the Steering Committee (SC) is the central decision-making body, composed by the Project 
Coordinator, the Risk and Quality Manager and the Dissemination & Exploitation Manager. The General 
Assembly, as later described, supports and checks the SC activities. At operational level, the project is divided 
into work-packages, under the lead of Work Package Leaders. 
The Steering Committee (SC) is the main decision-making and arbitration body and includes the above-
mentioned bodies: the Project Coordinator, the Risk and Quality Manager, the Dissemination & 
Exploitation Manager. It is responsible for the global steering, monitoring and management, and the 
execution of its decisions. The proposals made by the Steering Committee must be validated and approved by 
the General Assembly. Decisions are taken by simple majority, where in case of even votes, the coordinator 
vote decides. The steering committee is normally held every two months starting from the kick-off meeting or 
upon request by any of the partners. The meeting can be a physical one or through videoconference.  
The Project Coordinator (PC) – DATALOGIC. The Project Coordinator acts as a direct interface towards the 
EC. The PC is the head of the Steering Committee and he is responsible for: 
 The correct execution of the whole research program; 
 The communication among the partners and between the consortium and the EC; 
 The coordination of the overall project administrative and financial aspects; 
 The report of project financial and budgetary status to the Steering Committee; 
 The preparation of the project progress reports; 
The Risk and Quality Manager (RQM) – CRIT and UNIMORE - are the technical parts of the Steering 
Committee with the intent to act as a bridge from the operational to the strategic management level.  
The Dissemination & Exploitation manager (DEM) - CRIT - will take care that the dissemination activities 
are executed according to what defined in the PEDR and will regularly monitor relevant international initiatives 
        Demo 1 - Domestic Appliances Assembly Demo 2 - Electronic Components Kitting Demo 3 - Food Products Packaging TRL 6 TRL 4 TRL 5 WP1 Requirements WP2 Smart Safe Sensing System WP3 Safety Aware Control Architecture WP4 Inherently Safe Robotic Manipulator WP5 Human-Robot Mutual Understanding WP6 Integration Layer  WP7 Demonstration WP8 Impact Enhancement Lines of Research WP9 Management Definition of platform requirements Use case design Implementation of design tool New method for assessing transient contact Platform integration 
 
52 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
promoting the participation to those events where ROSSINI objectives and results should be presented and 
appropriately disseminated. The Dissemination manager authorizes the participation to any dissemination 
event. In addition CRIT will provide a continuous support to identify all exploitation opportunities for 
ROSSINI, studying the best way to transform project results in business opportunities. 
The General Assembly (GA). The “General Assembly” is composed of one authorised representative of each 
of consortium partners. Decisions are taken by simple majority (except the cases detailed in the Consortium 
Agreement). The responsibilities of the General Assembly include: 
 Approving upon the allocation of the Project budget in accordance with the EU contract; 
 Approving or making proposals in relation with possible defaulting partners; 
 Approving upon the entering into the consortium of new partners; 
 Approving upon reviewing or amending the work-plan, the costs and time schedules; 
The Work-Package Leaders (WPL). For each single work package, a Work Package Leader has been 
designated. The Work-Package Leader reports to the STM about the work done. The Work-Package Leader is 
responsible for: 
 Coordination of the work in the work packages; 
 The technical progress of the activities in his WP; 
 Participation in the detailed planning, monitoring and reporting of each task in his work-package; 
Each WP leader will call a meeting on a monthly base for checking the status of the project and identify as 
soon as possible risks and deviation from the plan. In Case of deviation or problem, the Scientific and Technical 
Committee has to be alerted and the steering committee convened. In order to reduce cost of travels all 
meetings will be synchronized. 
Table 3.2a Milestones 
Quality Procedures. The project will be carried out using the highest standards and procedures of quality, in 
terms of management, software and accuracy of deliverables. More specifically, the consortium will follow 
formal quality procedures, using an agreed quality plan document that meets the needs of all participants. This 
document will contain the proposal for: communication and reporting procedures, deliverable templates, 
project meeting draft agendas, minute templates as well as actions that should be taken in case of conflicts. 
Consortium Agreement. The Consortium Agreement provides rules and terms of reference of any legal issue 
concerning the cooperation among the parties as well as the intellectual property rights (foreground) of 
individual partners and the consortium as a whole, also better defining the roles and responsibility so far 
highlighted. It also further specifies roles and decision procedures within the project. The Consortium 
Agreement will be established since the start of the project and then signed by all partners. 
Risk Management 
Following is an overview of the ROSSINI technical, management and market risks 
Table 3.2b Risks and mitigations
3.3 Consortium as a whole  
The ROSSINI consortium has a strong industrial identity. The funding core lies in the historical partnership 
between PILZ (world leader in safety for automation systems and equipment, including controllers, sensors, 
consulting services.....and soon robots) and DATALOGIC (world leader in the automatic data capture and 
process automation technologies) With a vision to develop an inherently safe HRC platform, capable of 
providing industrial performance, high flexibility and job quality improvements, those two companies rounded 
up a consortium of 13 European organizations: 5 large companies, 4 SMEs, 4 Research centres. The research 
institutions (UNIMORE, SUPSI, FRAUNHOFER, TNO) hold clear scientific and technological excellence 
in the project domains and show attested experience of working in European cooperative research initiatives. 
In a complementary way, the end users (SCHINDLER, WHIRLPOOL, IMA) are providing a diverse and 
complete representation of the future deployment scenario of ROSSINI technologies. One such end user (IMA) 
is also a packaging machinery manufacturer, and this will streamline the market replication of ROSSINI in 
highly promising sectors such as food and beverage, and electronic products. In order to run project activities, 
4 highly specialised SMEs in the field of artificial intelligence (IRIS), technology consulting (CRIT), 
innovation valorisation (CORE) and robot integration (MACHINEBOUW) have been involved, 
 
53 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
complementing the consortium skills and specialisation. Concerning the geographical distribution, ROSSINI 
gathers partners from 7 Countries: Italy, Germany, Switzerland, Belgium, Spain, Greece, the Netherlands.
3.4 Resources to be committed 
Table 3.4a Summary of staff effort 
Table 3.4b: ‘Other direct cost’ items (travel, equipment, other goods and services, large research infrastructure) 
DATALOGIC7 Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  € 23.200,00  Project Periodic Meetings, Technical Meetings and Workshops 
Equipment  € 45.000,00  3xEnsenso cameras (or smilar), PCs, Test station for 3D cameras, 
SDK licences (VS, 3D libraries,…) 
Consumables € 78.000,00 8 x Camera prototypes, SLS prototypes, Safe bus board 
prototypes, Controller prototypes 
Other goods / services  € 15.000,00  Certificates on the Financial Statements 
Total  € 161.200,00   
 
PILZ Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  € 25.000,00  Project Periodic Meetings, Technical Meetings and Workshops 
Equipment  € 20.000,00  Cost for lab facilities 
Consumables € 125.600,00 Robot components (drives, machined parts, cables, etc.) + 
prototypes for vision systems and other sernsors 
Other goods / services  € 15.000,00  Certificates on the Financial Statements 
Total  € 175.600,00   
 
SUPSI Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  € 15.000,00  Project Periodic Meetings, Technical Meetings and Workshops 
Equipment  -  
Consumables € 257.200,00 Robot components (drives, machined parts, cables, etc.) 
Other goods / services  € 15.000,00  Certificates on the Financial Statements 
Total  € 290.720,00   
 
CORE Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  € 15.000,00  Project Periodic Meetings, Technical Meetings and Workshops 
Equipment  -  
Consumables -  
Other goods / services  € 25.000,00  Dissemination material, events organisation 
Total  € 30.000,00   
 
SCHINDLER Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  € 15.000,00  Project Periodic Meetings, Technical Meetings and Workshops 
Equipment  -  
Consumables € 80.000,00 Components for HRC workcell (Horizzontal feeder, Vertical 
feeders, Shelves for autokitting, Automatic bed of nail, etc.) 
Other goods / services -  
Total  € 95.000,00   
 
IMA8 Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  € 14.000,00  Project Periodic Meetings, Technical Meetings and Workshops 
Equipment  € 70.000,00  Robotic arm, Gripper, AGV for collaborative mobile platform, 
Vision System 
Consumables € 15.000,00 Components for demo and dissemination material;  
Other goods / services € 5.000,00 CFS 
Total  € 104.000,00   
 
7 In addition, within WP3, Datalogic expects to subcontract to an independent entity (i.e. TUV) for the for the evaluation 
and certification of the RS4 system safety concept (expected total amount 30.000 €). 
8 In addition, within WP7, IMA will need to involve an engineering company, for the specific customisation of the vision 
systems designing, to identify clogged areas and operate on clearing the causes of jams in Use Case #3. The subcontractor 
will be chosen according to the “best value for money” principle. Expected cost 45.000 Euros. 
 
54 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
SECTION 4: MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM
4.1 Participants (applicants) 
1. DATALOGIC 
  
 
Organisation’s name 
DATALOGIC SRL 
URL www.datalogic.com <  
Organisation’s profile  
Datalogic is a global technology leader in the automatic data capture and process automation 
markets, specialized in the designing and production of bar code readers, mobile computers, sensors 
for detection, measurement and safety, vision and laser marking systems.  
Closeness and timely response to every customer requirements, together with continuous innovation 
and high quality offering, are the distinctive elements at the base of Datalogic success for over 40 
years. Its cutting-edge solutions help to increase the efficiency and quality of processes in the Retail, 
Manufacturing, Transportation & Logistics and Healthcare industries, along the entire value chain. 
With products used in the majority of supermarkets and points of sale, at major airports, at top 
shipping and postal services, and in the largest factories and hospitals worldwide, Datalogic 
guarantees its customers a complete offer that covers all the market needs and whose technology is 
the ultimate result of decades of expertise. 
Datalogic can boast 45 years of history, during which it has achieved unique results: more than 1,200 
patents in multiple jurisdictions; 10 research centers and development  (in Italy, USA, China and 
Vietnam); thousands of prestigious  partners and customers deployed over five continents. The 
company has grown constantly over the years, thanks to the dedication with which customer needs 
have always been at the heart of the quality of its products and to the considerable investments in 
Research & Development, supported by a management capable of looking to the future. 
Today, Datalogic Group employs approximately 2,700 staff worldwide, distributed in 30 countries, 
with manufacturing and repair facilities in the USA, Brazil, Italy, Slovakia, Hungary and Vietnam.  
Datalogic S.p.A. is listed on the STAR segment of the Italian Stock Exchange since 2001 as 
DAL.MI. The Group is headquartered in Bologna, Italy. 
In the field of Manufacturing, Datalogic technology detects object presence, safeguards workers with 
light curtains, assures product quality with vision sensors, and identifies items using laser marking. 
Datalogic is already a strong market player in the robotics world, through successful solutions such 
as the Sentinel Laser Scanner, and dedicated sensors, cameras, and vision processors for robot 
guidance.  
Role in the project 
Datalogic will be in charge of coordinating the project, monitoring its implementation and checking 
deviations, and ensuring financial and administrative project coordination. Datalogic will also be 
coordinating WP3 (RS4), aiming to develop the ROSSINI platform’s sensing layer. The vision of 
DATALOGIC for ROSSINI is to develop skills capable of consolidating its market leadership, as a 
key supplier of technologies capable of enhancing robots sensing capabilities. 

 
55 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Key Personnel 
Mr. Stefano Vassura (M): he is currently at the head of the Advanced Business Intelligence team 
with the key focus on the permanent monitoring of the market and technology trends, competitors 
activities and strategies, positioning of the company on the market place.  With Datalogic since 
1989, he covered several positions in R&D, product Marketing, Business development and 
Innovation scouting.  He is graduated in Electronic Engineering at the University of Bologna (spec. 
Microelectronics). 
Matteo Zanaroli (M): is a professional specializing in IP and Innovation Management at Datalogic 
IP Tech Srl. As an alumnus of University of Bologna (Italy), he received his B.S. and M.Sc. in 
Industrial Engineering and was further awarded a certificate in IP Law from the University of 
Washington (U.S.A.). Beginning his work with Datalogic in 2010, he rapidly gained experience 
participating, as a member of a multifunctional team, in various M&A Activities and FTC 
Investigation. He focused on corporate level qualitative and financial evaluation of intangibles 
assets, monetization of the IP portfolio, and government channel fund raising activities.  He has been 
on international assignment for two years in Eugene, OR. He is currently based in Bologna office, 
working on cross-functional project involving Legal and IP department, and fund raising activities. 
Mr. Nicola Alessi (M): R&D Sensors & Safety Senior Manager - Automation Products. With a 
degree in electronic engineering from the Univesity of Bologna, he works for Datalogic since 1997, 
where he started as HW designer and project leader, both in new products development (barcode 
readers for retail market, barcode scanners and connectivity solutions for industrial applications) and 
new technologies development (scan engines, mixed signal ASICs for barcode readers). Since 2013, 
he is the R&D manager for the Sensors and Safety Product Group, overseeing the development of 
the widest range of photoelectric sensors and safety devices for universal and specific purposes 
applications. 
Mr. Claudio Saporetti (M): With 27 years of experience, he now manages the development of new 
technologies in the Industrial Automation hub of Datalogic. He is the technical responsible of the 
“AIDA” ERDF-OP funded project. In Datalogic he developed, both as a designer and as project 
manager, different generations of high performance vision systems mainly targeted to code reading 
or pattern recognition. With these activities he acquired a wide-spreading technical knowledge 
ranging from software at all levels to hardware, optics and mechanics. He is the inventor of 11 
granted patents. He graduated cum laude in 1989 at the University of Bologna. 
Mr. Michele Benedetti (M): R&D Automation Products VP. With over 20 years of experience in 
high-tech companies, he manages one of the largest R&D departments in Datalogic whose mission is 
to create innovative products for Industrial Automation such as scanners, machine vision systems, 
sensors and safety devices. Previous experiences in Program Management, Innovation Management, 
Systems Engineering. He graduated cum laude in 1996 at the University of Bologna (MDEE spec. 
Telecom). 
Relevant publications, products or services 
 Laser Sentinel. The flexible solution for safe area protection for static and moving 
applications. Configurable safety and warning areas can be easily designed according to the 
geometry of the machinery. It can be installed on vehicles to guarantee the safety of 
operators: http://www.datalogic.com/eng/products/manufacturing/sensors-and-safety/laser-
sentinel-pd-829.html  
 Vision Systems. Datalogic smart camera products are standalone, general-purpose, 
industrialized machine vision inspection systems with extremely flexible programming 
through the IMPACT software platform: http://www.datalogic.com/eng/products/industrial-
automation/vision-systems/smart-cameras-pg-48.html  
 
56 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
 IMPACT Software. IMPACT is the extremely powerful software suite common to all 
Datalogic machine vision devices: http://www.datalogic.com/eng/products/manufacturing-
transportation-logistics/vision-systems/impact-software-pd-605.html  
Relevant previous projects or activities 
Latest project carried out by or involving Datalogic: 
 Laboratorio per la Visione Industriale (VIALAB). Project carried out with the support of the 
Emilia-Romagna Region. Regional Plan for Innovation (2011-2013, 1,6M€) 
 Smart and Efficient Location, Identification, and Cooperation Techniques (SELECT). Project 
carried out with the support of the European Commission. 7th Framework Programme - ICT 
(2010-2013, 4M€) 
 Piattaforma per automazione industriale Intelligente, Interoperabile e Interconnessa (I-
CUBE). Project carried out with the support of the Emilia-Romagna Region. Regional Plan 
for Innovation (2012-2014, 2,5M€) 
 Automazione Industriale aDattativA attraverso sistemi di vision cyber-fisici (AIDA). Project 
carried out with the support of the Emilia-Romagna Region. European Regional 
Development Fund (2016-2018, 2,5M€) 
Relevant infrastructure 
Engineering and production plant located in Monte San Pietro (BO), Italy. It currently hosts roughly 
300 employees and is endowed with state of the art equipment for products testing and certification, 
such as optical lab and testing chamber for EMC emissions.    
  
 
57 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
2. PILZ 
                  
Organisation’s name 
PILZ GMBH & CO. KG 
URL https://www.pilz.com  
Organisation’s profile  
Pilz is an innovative automation technology company operating internationally. Pilz uses its 
solutions to create safety for man, machine and the environment. In addition to the head office in 
Ostfildern near Stuttgart, the family business is represented with over 2,200 staff in 40 
subsidiaries and branches on all continents. The company's products include sensor technology, 
electronic monitoring relays, safety relays, configurable and programmable control systems, 
automation solutions with motion control, systems for industrial communication as well as 
visualisation solutions and operator terminals. 
Pilz solutions can be used in all areas of mechanical engineering, including the packaging and 
automotive industry, plus the railway technology, press and wind energy sector. These solutions 
ensure that baggage handling systems run safely at airports and funiculars or roller coasters travel 
safely; they also guarantee fire protection and energy supply in buildings. Pilz also provides a 
comprehensive range of services worldwide, including safety advice, engineering, product 
training and seminars on the subject of machinery safety. Pilz is also active in the sector of 
camera-based safety technology Pilz with its award-winning camera system SafetyEye, which 
can be used to observe virtual safety zones. Pilz is member of the Arena2036, a research platform 
for the future of the automobile, which shows our focus on future technologies. In this 
consortium, Pilz is inquiring new sensor technologies for safeguarding dangerous areas in the 
flexible production of the future. In the past Pilz was part of several research projects on sensor 
technologies, like INSERO3D, where a stereo camera was built. In addition, Pilz has shown a 
successful technology transfer from the Fraunhofer IFF in Magdeburg in the field of tacticle 
sensor systems. 
Role in the project 
PILZ will lead WP2 (requirements) and WP7 (integration) and will be the main ROSSINI 
platform market driver. It will strongly support WP5 (robotic manipulator) and WP3 (sensors 
development), with a view to expand its technology range and enter the market of robotic 
manipulators vendors. 
Key Personnel 

 
58 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Dipl.-Ing. Matthias Schweiker, male, almost 10 years’ experience in the technology 
research/advanced development department, today working in the advanced development sensor 
technology department and functional safety professional (TÜV Süd). 
Dipl.-ing.(FH) Jochen Vetter, male, over 10 years of experience in the technical support and in 
the consulting for machinery safety and since 2014 lead of the consulting department for robot 
safety. 
Dipl.-Ing. Bernd Neuschwander, male, almost 10 years’ experience in the technology 
research/advanced development department, today working in the advanced development 
technology watch and projects department and functional safety professional (TÜV Süd). 
Relevant publications, products or services 
Pilz already provides a full range of products and services aiming at enabling safe human-robot 
collaboration.  
 Zone monitoring with safe camera systems. With the safe 3D camera system SafetyEYE, 
guard-free workspaces, which are shared by human and machine, can be monitored 
safely. SafetyEYE identifies when there are people within the robot's action radius or 
when anyone has accessed a zone with an increased safety level. In this case the robot's 
movements will be slowed down or stopped. 
 Area monitoring with safety laser scanners and pressure-sensitive safety mats. For area 
monitoring of human-robot workstations without safety fences, the safety laser scanner 
PSENscan and the pressure-sensitive safety mat PSENmat are the ideal choice. Should 
anyone enter the action radius of the hazardous movement, the robot's movement is 
braked or stopped in a controlled manner. 
 PRIMO Motion and Safety Controller. The PMCprimo control systems have PLC and 
motion functionality. They perform the automation within a plant, including motion 
management. This is possible for a large number of servo axes. 
 PILZ services related to robotics are: 
o Risk Assessment. Pilz reviews robot applications in accordance with the 
applicable national standards and directives and assess the existing hazards 
o System integration. The results of the risk assessment and safety concept are 
implemented to suit the particular requirements through selected safety measures 
o Safety concept. Pilz develops detailed technical solutions for the safety of robot 
applications through mechanical, electronic and organisational measures 
o Validation. Pilz expert specialist staff review and analyse the risk assessment and 
safety concept and perform collision measurement in accordance with the limit 
values laid down in TS/ISO 15066. 
Relevant previous projects or activities 
 Expert cooperative robots for highly skilled operations for the factory of the future (X-act). 
Project carried out with the support of the European Commission. 7th Framework Programme 
- FOF (2012-2015, 4,8M€) 
 Seamless Human-Robot Cooperation for Intelligent, Flexible and Safe Operations in the 
Assembly Factories of the Future (ROBO-PARTNER). Project carried out with the support of 
the European Commission. 7th Framework Programme - FOF (2013-2017, 8,6M€) 
 
59 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
 Highly customizable robotic solutions for effective and safe human robot collaboration in 
manufacturing applications (FourByThree). Project carried out with the support of the 
European Commission. H2020 Programme - FOF (2014-2017, 6,8M€) 
 Insero 3D   FKZ 16SV5997; http://insero3d.ims-chips.de/ 
 KonKaMis  FKZ 16SV5159; http://www.pronto-konkamis.de/ 
 Easy Cohmo    FKZ 03ZZ0443F; https://www.3d-
sensation.de/de/Projekte/Verbundvorhaben_EASY-COHMO.html 
Relevant infrastructure 
Activities will be carried out in the Pilz R&D facilities in Ostfildern, Germany. 
 collision measurement set PROBms for human-robot collaboration 
 robot arms + laboratory 
 vision lab 
  
 
60 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
3. UNIMORE 
 Organisation’s name 
Università degli studi di Modena e Reggio Emilia 
URL www.unimore.it - https://www.arscontrol.org/   
Organisation’s profile  
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia is organized on a “site network” model embracing the 
cities of Modena and Reggio Emilia (Italy), in close cooperation with surrounding economical 
clusters (more than 300 companies, most of them in the area of mechatronics, logistic and 
automotive in one of the richest economic area in Italy). UNIMORE will participate to the project 
through the Department of Sciences and Methods of Engineering. The Department includes 
different competencies and research groups, in particular the Automation Robotics and Systems 
Control (ARSControl) Group. The mission of the ARSControl group is the design of control 
architecture for automation and the control of complex robotic systems as groups of mobile robots, 
teleoperation systems and surgical robots. Prof. Cristian Secchi and Prof. Cesare Fantuzzi are part 
of this group. 
It participated and coordinated several national and European project. It is coordinating the H2020 
project INCLUSIVE (Smart and adaptive interfaces for INCLUSIVE work environment), where it 
works on adaptive human machine interfaces. It is participating to the H2020 project 
SYMPLEXITY (Symbiotic Human-Robot Solutions for Complex Surface Finishing operations), 
where it works human robot interaction and teleoperation for natural programming of industrial 
robots and on the H2020 project IMPROVE (Innovative Modelling Approaches for Production 
Systems to Raise Validatable Efficiency), where it works on the optimization of the performance 
of a production system considering human capabilities. It coordinated the experiment TRAFCON 
(Traffic Control of AGVs in automatic warehouses, 2010-2012) funded by the FP7 ECHORD 
project, where it worked on the coordinate navigation of AGVs, and the experiment TIREBOT (A 
Tire Workshop Robotic Assistant), funded by the FP7 ECHORD++ project, where it worked on 
the design, control and teleoperation of an assistant robot cooperating with an operator in tire 
workshops. It also participated to the FP7 project PAN-ROBOTS (plug and navigate robots for 
smart factories, 2012-2016), where it worked on improving the flexibility of AGVs in automatic 
warehouses. In particular, it participated to the FP7 project I-SUR (Intelligent Surgical Robotics, 
2010-2014), where it worked on the teleoperation and control of interaction during automatic 
surgical operations, and it is participating to the H2020 project SARAS (Smart Autonomous 
Robotic Assistant Surgeon), where it worked on the development of a teleoperated robotic surgeon.  
Furthermore, it participated to and coordinated several technical applied research projects directly 
funded by private companies, especially in the area of cooperative robotics and mobile robotics for 
industrial applications. 
 
Role in the project 
UNIMORE together with CRIT will be in charge of the Technical Project Management, leading, 
monitoring and supporting partners’ work will lead Work Package 4, aiming to develop the 
ROSSINI Safety Aware Control Architecture), and will support Work Package 3 (Safe Sensing 
System) Work Package 6 (Human-Robot Mutual Understanding). 

 
61 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Key Personnel 
Prof. Cristian Secchi (male) graduated in 2000 at the University of Bologna and he has got the 
Phd in Information Science (curriculum: automatica) from the University of Modena and Reggio 
Emilia in 2004. He’s currently Associate Professor of Robotics at the University of Modena and 
Reggio Emilia. In 2006 his thesis on interactive robotic interfaces has been selected as one of the 
three finalists for the Euron Georges Giralt PhD Award for the best PhD thesis on robotics in 
Europe. He has participated to the CROW (Coordination of AGVs in Automatic Warehouses) 
project that has been selected as a finalist for the 2010 EUROP/EURON Technology Transfer 
Award for the best Technology transfer project in Europe.  He has served as an Associate Editor 
of the Robotics and Automation Magazine in the period 2005-2008, for the IEEE Transactions on 
Robotics in the period (2012-2017). He is serving as an Associate Editor for the IEEE Robotics 
and Automation Letters. He has been a founding co-chair of the IEEE-RAS Technical Committee 
on Telerobotics from 2007 to 2012. He has coordinated the TIREBOT Experiment, funded by the 
FP7 ECHORD++ project, and the TRAFCON Experiment, funded by the FP7 ECHORD project, 
and he has participated to the I-SUR project and to the SARAS project as a local coordinator. His 
main research interests are the control of human-robot interactive and collaborative systems, the 
control of multi-robot systems and the control of industrial mobile robots. 
Prof. Cesare Fantuzzi (male) is full professor in Robotics and Industrial Automation at the 
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia. His primary research interests are industrial automation 
and human robot interaction, especially for improving the way robots are used (e.g. smart 
programming) by operators in industrial and in civil environments.  He is Associated Editor for the 
Elsevier International Journal on Mechatronics. He is PI for SYMPLEXITY and for PAN-
ROBOTS and coordinator of the H2020 project INCLUSIVE.  He has also participated and 
coordinated several projects related to robotics and industrial automation, funded both by private 
companies and by public bodies.    
Dr. Federica Ferraguti (female) is Researcher in Robotics and Automation at the Department of 
Sciences and Methods for Engineering of the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia. She 
received the Ph.D. in Industrial Innovation Engineering from the University of Modena and Reggio 
Emilia in 2014 focusing on control and teleoperation of autonomous surgical systems, within the 
EC FP7 I-SUR project. Her research interests focus on the control of collaborative systems.  
Chiara Talignani Landi (female) is a Ph.D. student of the  Department of Sciences and Methods 
for Engineering of the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia. She holds a degree in 
Mechatronics Engineering . Her research interests focus on physical human robot interaction. 
Relevant publications, products or services 
1. S. Farsoni, C. Talignani Landi, F. Ferraguti, C. Secchi, M. Bonfé, “Compensation of Load 
Dynamics for Admittance Controlled Interactive Industrial Robots using a Quaternion-
based Kalman Filter”, IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2(2):672-679, April 2017. 
2. Franken M., Stramigioli S., Misra S., Secchi C., Macchelli A., Bilateral Telemanipulation 
with time delays: A two-layer approach combining passivity and transparency, IEEE 
Transactions on Robotics 27(4):741-756, August 2011. 
3. Franchi A., Secchi C., Ryll M., Buelthoff H.H., Robuffo Giordano P., “Bilateral Shared 
Control of Multiple Quadrotors: Balancing Autonomy and Human Assistance with a Group 
of UAVs”, Special Issue on “Aerial Robotics and the Quadrotor platform”, Robotics and 
Automation Magazine, Volume 19, Issue 3, 2012 
4. Franchi A., Secchi C., Son H.I., Buelthoff H.H., Robuffo Giordano P., Bilateral 
Teleoperation of Groups of Mobile Robots with Time-Varying Topology, IEEE 
Transactions on Robotics, 28(5):1019-1033, 2012 
5. F. Ferraguti, N. Preda, A. Manurung, M. Bonfé, O. Lambercy, R. Gassert, R. Muradore, P. 
Fiorini, C. Secchi, “An Energy Tank-Based Interactive Control Architecture for 
 
62 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Autonomous and Teleoperated Robotic Surgery”, IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 
31(5):1073-1088, 2015 
Relevant previous projects or activities 
 2016-2019: UNIMORE coordinates the H2020 project INCLUSIVE, where a natural and 
adaptive interaction between human operators and machines (e.g. robots) is pursued.  
 2015 – 2018, UNIMORE participates to the H2020 project SYMPLEXITY, where it works 
human robot interaction and teleoperation for natural programming of industrial robots 
 2011 - 2014, UNIMORE participates as a third party to the FP7 project ISUR, where it 
worked on the development of a control architecture for controlling the interaction between 
a surgeon and a surgical robotic system. 
 2015-2017, UNIMORE coordinates the ECHORD++ Experiment TIREBOT, where a robot 
collaborating with a tire workshop operator has been developed.  
 2010, UNIMORE is selected as a finalist for the EURON/EUROP Technology Transfer 
Award for the project CROW, where a novel safe and efficient traffic control strategy for 
AGV traveling in a warehouse populated by humans and human guided forklifts has been 
developed. 
 
Relevant infrastructure 
1. 1 lightweight robot KUKA LWR 4+, designed for interactive tasks and very sutable for 
testing human-robot interaction tasks and teleoperation algorithms.
2. 1 UR5 Collaborative Robot 
3. Two Phantom Haptic devices that can be used as master devices for a teleoperation system.
4. 1 AGV  
 
 
 
  
 
63 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
4. IRIS        Organisation’s name Innovacio I Recerca Industrial I Sostenible SL URL http://www.iris-eng.com/  Organisation’s profile  IRIS is an advanced engineering company that specialises in process monitoring and control, and process optimisation. Its commercial division offers advanced monitoring and control solutions based on NIR and hyperspectral imaging solutions for foreign body detection and chemical composition analysis; data management solutions for data processing, decision support, automation and data analysis (big production data).  Besides, IRIS’ innovation division has 4 core lines: 1. Optical and spectroscopy technologies (e.g. MEMs spectrophotometers, fluorescence and Raman) for process monitoring for on-line and PAT applications in food, pharmaceuticals and the process industries 2. SMAC technologies: information technologies and data management 3. Novel processing technologies (ultrasound, plasma, microwave…) for process intensification and non-thermal decontamination   4. Sustainable processing technologies: waste valorisation strategies, biocompounds and biopackaging for the circular economy The company was established in 2007 and currently employs 56 staff with a turnover of €3.8 M. It is equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified and also is certified under UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i.  

 
64 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
 The data science teams in IRIS include Telecommunications and IT Engineers with a strong track record in either FP7 and H2020 of building IT and data processing applications, especially sensor data processing and embedded artificial intelligence algorithms. Hence, IRIS’s profile matches the tasks of data fusion and map building for AI planning in an industrial process context as described in the ROSSINI proposal. This is also supported by IRIS’s participant person profiles, relevant projects and publications.  Role in the project IRIS will Lead Task 4.1, aiming to develop the ROSSINI Safety Map within the Safety Aware Control Architecture, and will lead Task 7.2, aiming to implement the ROSSINI design tool.  Key Personnel Mr. Arnau Fatjó Brugueras. (male) BSc (5 years degree) in Electronics Engineering (2008) from Polytechnic Univ. of Catalonia, Spain; MBA (2011) from EADA Business School, Spain. Since 2016 managing several projects with wide expertise and best practices in the European Framework Programme project management. Acting as H2020 project coordinator of the LCE project Waste2Fuels (GA 654623) and SPIRE project IbD® (GA 680565), and as project manager of the FoF project PREVIEW (GA 636892), SFS projects NeuRice (GA 678168) and MyToolBox (GA 678012), and ICT project Miracle (GA 780598). Prior joining IRIS Arnau had worked for 4 years at IMB-CNM, where he acted as project coordinator / manager of several European projects focused on ICT, NMP, MSCA, ECSEL and CS. Dr. David F. Nettleton (Male) is Senior Data Scientist at IRIS. Has a Ph.D in Artificial Intelligence from the Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, M.Sc. In Computer Software and Systems Design from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K., and B.Sc. (Hons) Computer Science from the University of Wolverhampton, U.K. Has over 20 years experience of applying data mining algorithms (including neural networks, rule induction, support vector machines, kernel based algorithms) and statistical techniques (including ANOVA, regression, clustering, principal components) in a diversity of data analysis and modeling projects, such as industrial process modeling, sensor data analysis, medical diagnosis/prognosis, online user web search behaviour and data privacy. As well as commercial projects, he has conducted research and lectured at two universities. He has published a diversity of articles in specialized data analysis journals/congresses and three books. He has participated in several 

 
65 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
competitive multi-partner research projects and has a European patent application for a graph 
matching algorithm. His IT Industrial experience includes project management, consultancy, 
programming and analysis, database development and business startups. He has developed 
software with a diversity of programming languages, (including Java, C++ and 
COBOL/CICS/DB2), database systems (such as Oracle, Ingres, MySQL) and data mining 
systems (IBM Intelligent Miner, Clementine, Weka). In IRIS he is currently involved in two 
major European projects (OpenMind and Ecobulk), as a data mining specialist. The work in 
OpenMind involves modeling complex industrial production processes for producing high 
precision medical instruments. The work in Ecobulk involves developing a Quality Assurance 
and Decision Support System for a circular economy application (material recycling and dis-
assembly) using a Case Based Reasoning framework with machine learning back-end. 
Mrs. Diana Galilea (Female) is an expert IT Developer at IRIS with 15 years professional 
experience, and who has been involved in IT development in several of the key projects indicated 
below (ProPAT, Hypera). Therefore she has the relevant skills for the sensor data fusion, GPU 
programming and data processing necessary for IRIS’s tasks (especially T2.4, T2.5 and T3.1)  in 
the ROSSINI project. 
Mr. Ivan Paquico (Male) is Scrum Master at IRIS. Has a Telecommunications Degree from 
University Polytechnic of Catalonia and a Joint Degree in Multimedia Development from LUAS 
(Finland). Final thesis, 'Augmented Reality Chess and Application to Detect Chess Moves', 
implemented by using Computer Vision, Augmented Reality and Artificial Intelligence 
techniques, has won several awards: Best Final Thesis of the UPC and Best Final Thesis of Spain 
(received from Vodafone Spain and Universia foundation). Professional Scrum Master certified 
by Scrum.org, and an official iOS and Android Developer since 2010. Since then he has created 
numerous social network Apps for Mobile Platforms with experience programming with iOS 
SDK from Apple, Couchbase database technology, and using different programming languages 
such as C, C++, Objective C or Java, 8 bits embedded and real time systems. He has expertise in 
multimedia methodologies ranging from Virtual Reality programming techniques to 3D/2D 
modelling software such as OpenGL, Quest3D, Autodesk Maya, Autodesk 3DS Max or Adobe 
Photoshop. He is currently working as a Scrum Master in IRIS, and is leading a number of 
software scrum teams working in internal, commercial and collaborative R&D projects in the 
development of the software for advanced monitoring systems, sensor integration, wireless 
sensor networks, among others. 
 
Relevant publications, products or services 
 
1. Christian Wasiak, David F. Nettleton, Henning Janssen, Christian Brecher, Quantification of 
Micro-Pullwinding Process as Basis of Data Mining Algorithms for Predictive Process 
Model, Proc. 21st Int. Conf. on Composite Materials, Xi'An, China, August 2017. 
2.  David F. Nettleton, Elodie Bugnicourt, Christian Wasiak, Alejandro Rosales, Towards 
Automatic Calibration of In-line Machine Processes, Proc. 18th Int. Conf. on Industrial 
Engineering and Manufacturing, ICIEMPM 2016At: London, U.K., July 2016. 
3.  David F. Nettleton, Albert Orriols-Puig, Albert Fornells Herrera, A study of the effect of 
different types of noise on the precision of supervised learning techniques, Artificial 
Intelligence Review 33(4):275-306, April 2010. 
4.  David F. Nettleton, Vicenç Torra, A comparison of active set method and genetic algorithm 
approaches for learning weighting vectors in some aggregation operators, International 
Journal of Intelligent Systems 16:1069-1083, Sept. 2001. 
 
66 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
5.  David F. Nettleton, Attribute fusion using a heterogeneous representation of crisp and fuzzy 
medical data, Proc. 8th Int. Fuzzy Systems Association World Congress, Tapei, Taiwan, 
1999, Vol.2, pp. 618-623. 
Relevant previous projects or activities 
1. Openmind is an ongoing H2020 project in which IRIS is responsible for the Work Package 
dedicated to machine learning and calibration to simulate the industrial production of medical 
guidewires, using sensor data from different machines and process steps. 
2. Smart-Gran is an H2020 project in which IRIS was responsible for developing the big data 
platform for processing high volume streaming data and storing it in a big data repository. 
The data consisted of sensor data and images from pharmaceutical production installations. 
3. ProPAT is an H2020 project in which IRIS was responsible for developing the cloud platform 
and dashboard decision support and control front end for a industrial chemical process. This 
involved sensor fusion and high volume online data processing. 
4. HYPERA is an in-line Hyperspectral Imaging (HSI) analyser developed in-house by IRIS. In-
line Hyperspectral Imaging (HSI) analyser for spatial quality monitoring, based on Near 
Infrared (NIR) technology. A high-precision chemical imaging system to monitor in real-time 
product quality with spatial information. 
Relevant infrastructure 
IRIS is well equipped with IT infrastructure of hardware and software for data processing and 
analysis (relational databases, general statistical software packages such as StatGraphics and 
MatLab and specific statistical software packages for Chemometric modeling (SOLO). Also, for 
machine learning and AI paradigms IRIS uses Weka as a GUI and as a Java based API library, 
and Dlib as a C++ based API library for embedded applications. In terms of hardware, almost all 
the computers in IRIS hace 64 bit processors with 4 or 8Gb memory. We also currently have 
installed an NVIDIA GTX 1080 which is multi-thread programmed for sensor data processing.   
A rack configuration of servers and hard disks is also available for parallel processing and big 
data application. 
In terms of programming and advanced ITs capabilities, IRIS has a specialized staff (software 
and telecommunication engineers with programming experience) that work on the basis of the 
Agile methodology and philosophy (scrum and kanban) for developing complex applications that 
include hardware interfaces, SQL and No-SQL databases (MySQL, PostgresDB, Couchbase 
among others) and advanced and user-friendly graphic user interfaces not only for computers 
(using Windows Presentation Foundation) but also for smartphones (Android, iOS) or web-based 
access (HTML 5).  
In order to work under scrum and kanban methodologies, IRIS has dedicated project corners and 
sprint rooms in which programming teams can develop their duty in a creative atmosphere.   
 
 
 
 
  
 
67 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
5. SUPSI    Organisation’s name Scuola universitaria professionale della Svizzera italiana URL www.suspsi.it - http://www.supsi.ch/dti/  Organisation’s profile  The University of Applied Sciences of Southern Switzerland (SUPSI) is one of the 7 UAS in Switzerland. It has a university statute focused on applied research. Department of Innovative Technologies DTI At the DTI, ISTePS (Institute of Systems and Technologies for Sustainable Production) employs researchers and engineers with a wide range of expertise for the transfer and application of technology in industrial sector. The Institute participates in a network of national and international centers for supporting SMEs. Key research areas are: Automation and Control, Mechatronic, Reconfigurable Robotics, Interaction Human-Robot, Artificial Vision Systems, Industrial Technologies for Additive Manufacturing, Data Modeling, Transformation and Flow Management, Production scheduling, Lifecycle management and optimization, Simulation. Role in the project SUPSI will Lead Work Package 5, aiming to design and develop the ROSSINI Inherently Safe Robotic Arm, and will support Work Package 6, aimed to enable Human-Robot Mutual Understanding.. Key Personnel  
 
Marco Colla, Prof. He is the Director of the ISTePS Institute, was active for several years in Software R&D activities for private companies in the industrial automation field. He is author and co-author of various papers and articles on architectures and standards for the distributed industrial automation, reviewer for various IEEE conferences and journals, and Swiss representative in the IEC (International Electrotechnical Commission as expert in the TC 65/SC 65B/WG 15. 
 
Anna Valente, Ph.D. She is the Head of the AST LAB. She got a Ph.D. in Manufacturing Technologies and Production Systems at Politecnico Milan, Post-doctorate in interoperability for adaptive factories at UBath, UK. Robotic cell design and configuration at Italian Research center for Aerospace (CIRA) in Boeing 787 project. Current research on production system (re)configuration techniques, development and dynamic optimization of control systems. Currently RTD Coordinator of Borealis, Symbionica, 4D Hybrid and Free Wheel. Author of 2 books and more than 60 journal papers on system (re)configuration, robotics and control systems. Member since 2013 of EU AM Platform, IEEE Robotics and Automation 

 
68 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Society, Technical Advisory Group of MTConnect® Institute and 
STEP-NC Standardization Community ISO/TC 184/SC 1/WG 7 & 
WG 3/T 24.  
 
Mattia Zamboni, Eng. Graduated as Electrical Engineer at 
University of Applied Sciences of Southern Switzerland in 1999, he 
holds 15 years of experience with robotic material handling systems, 
assembly automation and factory logistics for manufacturing, 
accumulated while working at Middlesex General Industries, Inc. 
(USA) as manager of Control Hardware development. 
 
Gianluca Pavesi, Eng. Automation engineer, specialist in the design 
of customized automation architectures and software development 
for PLC, HMI and SCADA control systems for different industrial 
applications as conveyor systems, painting lines for automotive, 
fume dedusting plants for steelworks, leak-testing machines, 
ultrasonic washing plants, robotic cells. He attended the 2nd IFAC 
Conference on Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles 95 as co-author of 
a paper concerning neural-networks based algorithms applied to 
mobile robotics. He was involved in the White’R, 2 project as 
Electronic Project Leader. He is currently involved in several 
European projects as responsible of PLC and CNC software 
development.  
 
Ambra Vandone, Ph.D. Graduated as a Mechanical Engineer in 
2011, she continued her education and got her Ph.D. qualification in 
Measurement and Experimental Techniques at Politecnico di 
Milano, building a solid academic background on Non-Contact 
Measurements. Her main research activities are focused on image 
and 3D scan data acquisition and processing. She is currently 
involved in several European projects as developer of vision-based 
solutions in support of Manufacturing process monitoring. 
  
 
Relevant publications, products or services 
The project activities will be supported by the Automation Robotics and Machines (ARM) lab 
that offers education and research activities focused on: 
● Design of reconfigurable robots and mechatronic equipment for multi-metal material AM 
technologies for aerospace and medtech industries 
● Design and development of innovative machining and high precision manufacturing 
systems based on flexibility and reconfigurability principles, of their data models and data 
flow management 
● Design and development of new automation solutions integrating advanced industrial 
technologies and robots with focus on Human-Robot collaboration. 
● Integration of 2D/3D vision systems for image acquisition and processing in new 
automatic processes  

 
69 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
● Design and development of embedded applications for real-time processing of digital 
signals and data streams, and of parallel and distributed applications for heterogeneous 
platforms 
Relevant previous projects or activities 
ARM laboratory has developed in the last twenty years, in national and international projects, a 
strong experience on applying advanced industrial technologies for developing new 
manufacturing concepts based on the combination of automated modules made of mechatronic 
elements that can be configured according to the production requirements, allowing to move 
away from manual operations to high-accuracy automated methods.  
Various projects also focused on structuring the levels of distributed intelligence and knowledge 
for managing products and advanced processes, on coordinating the automation modules and on 
processing the amount of data gathered from smart sensing systems through the design of high 
performing control and processing applications, the configuration and adaptive management and 
scheduling of production systems.  
Free Wheel 
Promotion of social inclusion of disabled and elderlies by developing a smart mobility platform 
based on a revolutionary reconfigurable autonomous vehicle to ease individual mobility in urban 
environment, EU H2020, Project ongoing. 
Amatho 
Project aim to design, assess and manufacture a novel tiltrotor drive system housing exploiting 
the features of additive manufacturing techniques, EU H2020, Project ongoing. 
Symbionica 
Reconfigurable Machine for the new Additive and Subtractive Manufacturing of next generation 
fully personalized bionics and smart prosthetics, EU H2020, Project ongoing. 
WhiteR 
New manufacturing concept based on the combination of fully automated, self contained, “white 
room” modules whose components are conceived as “Plug&Produce” mechatronic sub-modules 
properly configured coherently with the production requirements, EU H2020. Project completed. 
EduCNC 
Open-source numerically controlled machine, Supsi internal project: analysis, development and 
implementation of a modular and versatile open-source machine tool enabling a collaborative 
development environment and an easy knowledge transfer between cross-disciplinary teams, 
2014. Project completed. 
Relevant infrastructure 
 
  
Robotics Lab Additive Manufacturing Lab  

 
70 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
 
  
Design Vision and 3D scan solutions 
 
  
Laboratories Auditoriums 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
71 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
6. TNO  Organisation’s name Nederlandse Organisatie voor toegepast-natuurwetenschappelijk onderzoek URL www.tno.nl  Organisation’s profile  The Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research (TNO) is a knowledge organization holding a prominent position in international science. With a turnover of more than 500 M€, TNO is the second largest applied research institute in Europe. The staff of 3,900 employees consists mainly of academics. TNO’s main activities are research and consultancy; working closely together with industry and universities.  TNO’s objective is to make a significant contribution to the competitiveness of companies and organisations, to the economy and to the quality of society as a whole. TNO’s unique position is due to its versatility and capacity to integrate knowledge. We work for a variety of customers:  governments, SMEs, large companies, service providers and non-governmental organisations. To strengthen our position in science, TNO has established 30 knowledge centres, which function as innovation centres with universities and companies participating. TNO is active internationally with offices located in Brussels and in several other countries, and is well-equipped to participate in EU initiatives, programs and projects. TNO focusses on several themes, each of which has a prominent place in national and European innovation agenda, among others ‘Information Society’, ‘Industrial Innovation’, ‘Healthy Living’. Various underlying fields of expertise will be utilized in AiF (1) process engineering and performance simulation, (2) workplace innovation, (3) user centred design and industrial  safety in relation to human-robot systems. Role in the project TNO will lead Work Package 6, aimed to enable Human-Robot Mutual Understanding. Key Personnel Prof. Dr. Michiel de Looze, PhD (Senior Scientist and Professor in Production Ergonomics at VU University in Amsterdam - male). Michiel worked as human factors researcher in the Netherlands and Belgium. From 1998, Michiel works as senior scientist at TNO. He is a professor in Production Ergonomics at VU University in Amsterdam since 2005 (part-time). He received a Ph.D. in Human Movement Science in 1992. His focus is on optimization of work processes from the perspectives of performance and  health. Specific domain: advanced technology in human work. He is specialized in human-machine system design and performance evaluation. He is coordinator of large multi-client projects and involved in research and innovation projects within Public-Private Partnerships. He was involved in several European FP6 and FP7 projects, among others as Scientific Coordinator in IMOSHION and Exploitation Manager in CyberManS. Personal profile: https://www.linkedin.com/in/michieldelooze Wietse van Dijk is research scientist at TNO at the department of Sustainable Productivity & Employability. He focusses on robotics and human-machine interaction. Wietse has master’s degrees in both Mechanical Engineering with a specialization in Biomechanical Engineering and Industrial Design Engineering with a specialization in Emerging Technology Design from the University of Twente. In 2015 he finished PhD thesis on Human-Exoskeleton Interaction at the Delft University of Technology. This research resulted in different exoskeleton prototypes and multiple peer-reviewed journal papers. After his graduation he worked at Philips and since 2016 he works at TNO. At TNO Wietse works task allocation and robotics. This has resulted in models 

 
72 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
and demonstrators for human robot co-operation in the workspace. Personal profile: 
https://www.linkedin.com/in/wietse-van-dijk-25045243 
Tim Bosch works as a senior researcher at TNO since 2002. He received a Ph.D. in Human 
Movement Science in 2011. He focusses on human factors engineering and performance 
simulation in industry settings and is specialized in the development of methods and tools to 
simulate and evaluate sustainable productive systems including task allocation, human robot 
collaboration, user need assessment, usability design and operator support systems. He 
participated in several EU FP7 and H2020 projects for research and innovation. Personal 
profile: https://www.linkedin.com/in/boschtim 
Relevant publications 
 O’Sullivan, L.W. and Looze, M.P de. (2010) Cybernetic Manufacturing Systems. Human Fac-
tors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing & Service Industries 20 (4) 253–254. 
 De Looze, M. P., Krause, F., & O'Sullivan, L. W. (2017). The Potential and Acceptance of 
Exoskeletons in Industry. In J. González-Vargas, J. Ibáñez, J. L. Contreras-Vidal, H. Van der 
Kooij & J. L. Pons (Eds.), Wearable Robotics: Challenges and Trends. Proceedings of the 2nd 
International Symposium on Wearable Robotics, WeRob2016, October 18-21, 2016, Segovia, 
Spain (pp. 195-199). Cham: Springer International Publishing AG. 
 Van Dijk, W., Meijneke, C., & Van Der Kooij, H. (2017). Evaluation of the achilles ankle 
exoskeleton. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, 25(2), 
151–160. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSRE.2016.2527780 
 Van Teeffelen, K. J., Dresscher D., Van Dijk, W., Stramigioli, S. Intuitive Impedance 
Modulation in Haptic Control using Electromyography. To be submitted for 7th IEEE RAS & 
EMBS International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics (BioRob 
2018). Enschede, The Netherlands. 
 Bosch, T., Könemann, R., de Cock, H., & van Rhijn, G. (2017, June). The effects of projected 
versus display instructions on productivity, quality and workload in a simulated assembly task. 
In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to 
Assistive Environments (pp. 412-415). ACM. 
Relevant projects 
 Horse: H2020, Smart integrated Robotics system for SMEs controlled by Internet of Things 
based on dynamic manufacturing processes. (2015-2020)  
 Robo-Mate: FP7 Intelligent exoskeleton based on human-robot interaction for manipulation 
of heavy goods in Europe’s factories of the future. (2013-2016)  
 SI-Drive: FP7, Social Innovation: Driving Force of Social Change. (2013-2018) 
 ManuVAR: FP7, Manual Work Support throughout System Lifecycle by Exploiting Virtual 
and Augmented Reality. (2009-2012) 
 IMOSHION: FP7, Improving Occupational Safety & Health in European SMEs with help of 
Simulation and Virtual Reality. (2011-2014) 
Relevant infrastructure 
TNO’s legal, financial and administrative departments guarantee an efficient approach in the 
management and coordination of the project. Laboratory facilities available for intermediate 
testing and validation including:  
o the HORSE Compentence Center at TNO and i-Botics laboratory. This innovation hub is 
part of RoboHouse  Delft. Available hardware: 2 Kuka IIWA 7 robots, OPS Light Guide 
Projection System, Force Dimension Omega 7 haptic device, HTC Vive, Shadow Hand 
Robot Company Shadow Hand Lite robotic hand, Dexta Robotics Dexmo hand 
exoskeleton. 
 
73 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
o the TNO Human Factors Engineering laboratory at TNO Leiden. Available hardware: 
Franka Emika robot, torque guns, Arkite spatial AR system, measuring devices (‘brain’ 
(EEG, NIRS), ‘eye’ (Tobii, smart Eye), ‘face’ (Facereader), ‘physiology’ (skin 
conductance, heart rate), ‘motion’ (Xsens) and ‘biomechanics’  (3DSSPP)) 
o Fieldlab Flexible Manufacturing at the Brainport Industries Campus. Shared research and 
production facility aimed at the support of manufacturing companies in the Netherlands. 
TNO is key partner and responsible for research on Human robot collaboration. 
TNO is an active member in RoboNed |  EuroHaptics Society |  EFFRA | ManuFuture | IEA | 
Material Handling Forum | European Enterprise Network EUWIN  
 
 
  
 
74 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
7. FRAUNHOFER 
 
  
Organisation’s name 
Fraunhofer Gesellschaft Zur Foerderung Der Angewandten Forschung E.V. 
URL www.iff.fraunhofer.de/rs  
Organisation’s profile  
The Fraunhofer Institute for Factory Operation and Automation IFF is an autonomous institute 
of the non-profit Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft, a provider of contract applied research. The 
Fraunhofer IFF specializes in research and development in the fields of robotics, sensor systems, 
virtual engineering, logistics and process and plant management. 
The Fraunhofer IFF’s Robotic Systems Business Unit has extensive experience developing, 
engineering and integrating different robotic technologies and systems for use in challenging 
environment and under special conditions. Its research and development work spans virtually the 
entire discipline of automation: mechanical design and engineering, electrics and electronics, 
control engineering, sensor development and integration, complex data processing systems and 
software architecture development. The Robotic Systems Business Unit also specializes in safe 
physical human-robot interaction in shared workspaces. This work includes tactile sensing, safe 
manipulators, safe workspace monitoring and studies on biomechanical limit values for 
minimizing the consequences of human-robot collisions. Furthermore the IFF has recently 
conducted a large amount of industrially-contracted research focused on teaching large 
companies from the automotive and aerospace industries about the use of collaborative robots 
including aspects such as ensuring conformity to standards and methods for verification of a 
system after it has been installed.  
The Fraunhofer IFF aims to share their extensive experience in the design, evaluation, and 
verification of collaborative robotics applications with the robotics community to speed up the 
take up of new robotics applications in a wide range of industries and domains. 
Role in the project 
Fraunhofer will lead Task 7.1 (“Method for assessing transient contact”), and will support for 
safety validation of inherently safe robotic manipulator under WP4. 
Key Personnel 
Prof. Norbert Elkmann received his Diplom degree in Mechanical Engineering from the 
University of Bochum (Germany) in 1993 and his doctorate in Mechanical Engineering from the 
Technical University of Vienna (Austria) in 1999. He has headed the Robotic Systems Business 
Unit at the Fraunhofer IFF since 1998 and manages a staff of 25 researchers. His research 
interests include mobile robots, inspection robots and safe physical human-robot interaction. He 
is currently lead managing several industrial and publicly funded applied and basic research 
projects. He has published more than 80 papers and is a coauthor in the Springer Handbook of 
Automation. In November 2015, he has been awarded an honorary professorship at the Otto-von-
Guericke University in Magdeburg. 
 

 
75 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Roland Behrens is a Chief Research Scientist with a degree in Mechatronics. He graduated from 
the Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg (Germany) and has been associated with the 
Fraunhofer IFF since 2009. His recent research is in the field of reliable limit values for ensuring 
safe physical human-robot interaction. Furthermore, he is responsible for risk assessment and 
initiated the installation of a versatile collision test bed for collaborative robots at the Fraunhofer 
IFF. This test bed allows for testing human-robot collisions under the condition as given by 
national and international standards as ISO/TS 15066. The test bed was used in 2016 for bringing 
five collaborative robot applications of different companies into safe operations. 
Beside risk assessment activities, Roland Behrens headed a number of studies with human test 
subjects (volunteers) for investigating the pain and injury onset at several parts across the human 
body. His last study was initiated and funded by the German Employer’s Liability Insurance 
Association for the wood and metal working industry (BGHM) and its objective was to determine 
biomechanical limit values for quasi-static and dynamic human-robot contact which should not 
exceed the pain onset level of human at different body locations. A pendulum and a pressure 
algometer are used to apply defined load portions to volunteers systematically. Previously he also 
conducted studies on the inertia effect of human body parts and the injury onset level of the 
human. 
 
José Saenz earned a B.S. in mechanical engineering from Stanford University (USA) in 1999 and 
a M.S. in mechatronics from Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg (Germany) in 2004. He is 
a Senior Research Scientist and has been at the Fraunhofer Institute for Factory Operation and 
Automation in Magdeburg (Germany) since 2000. His main research interests are in the fields of 
safe human robot collaboration, mobile manipulation, inspection and cleaning service robots, and 
safety sensor development.  
He was elected to the eurobotics aisbl Board of Directors in 2017 and is currently also the 
Coordinator of the Topic Group Industrial Robots in the same organization, responsible for 
updating the Multi-Annual Roadmap from the perspective of Industrial Robots. He is also active 
in the Topic Groups Software Engineering, System Integration, Systems Engineering, and 
Physical Human-Robot Interaction.  
He was recently coordinator of the FP7 Project VALERI and in the past has worked on and/or led 
various publicly funded projects including CAFE, 4x3, ColRobot, COVR, and PickPlace. He has 
also been project manager for the industrial project “Inspection robot – Damage detection 
system” for the Emscher Sewer, one of the largest industrial projects in the entire Fraunhofer 
Gesellschaft, managing a team of up to 15 researchers over a time period from 2002-present day. 
He has been a reviewer for numerous conferences and has published over 25 articles in peer-
reviewed conferences and journals. 
 
Hauke Petersen graduated from Otto-von-Guericke University in 2017 with a bachelor's degree 
in mechanical engineering and a master's degree in mechatronics. In the same year, he joined the 
Fraunhofer Institute for Factory Operation and Automation in Magdeburg as a research assistant 
in the business field of robot systems. His research interests include robotic track planning, safe 
human-robot collaboration and mobile robotics. 
Relevant publications 
1. Behrens, R.; Elkmann, N., "Study on meaningful and verified Thresholds for minimizing 
the consequences of human-robot collisions," Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2014 
IEEE International Conference on , vol., no., pp.3378,3383, May 31 2014-June 7 2014 
2. Walter, C.; Vogel, C.; Elkmann, N.: US2013201292A – Device for monitoring at least one 
three-dimensional safety area 
3. Behrens, R.; Elkmann, N.; Ottersbach, H. J.; , "A Contribution for Standardized Risk 
Assessment: Examination of Constrained and Unconstrained Human-Robot-Collisions," 
 
76 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, 
Workshop "Safety in Human-Robot Coexistence & Interaction: How can Standardization 
and Research benefit from each other?" 7-12 Oct. 2012 
4. Behrens, R.; Saenz, J.; Vogel, C.; Elkmann, N.: "Upcoming Technologies and 
Fundamentals for Safeguarding All Forms of Human-Robot Collaboration", 8th 
International Conference Safety of Industrial Automated Systems (SIAS 2015), 
Königswinter, Germany 18-20 November, 2015. ISBN 987-3-86423-163-6, S.18-23 
5. Behrens, Roland; Elkmann, Norbert (2013): Correlation between Constrained and 
Unconstrained Human-Robot Collisions. In: Technische Universität München (Hg.): DGR-
Tage 2013. DGR-Tage 2013. München, 07.-08.10.2013. Technische Universität München. 
Relevant projects 
1. “Study for the Experimental Verification of Biomechanical Limits during Human-Robot 
Collisions” – Joint project between the Fraunhofer IFF and the Otto-von-Guericke 
University Clinic from 2013-2015 whereby biomechanical limits were tested with human 
test subjects. The goal of the study was to determine the threshold to injury (defined as a 
slight bruise and/or a bump), and it was financially supported by Daimler and KUKA. Over 
25 test persons were tested in 4 body regions along their arms. The force, pressure, and 
energy-based thresholds were determined and presented to the ISO standardization 
committee. The current version of the ISO/TS 15066 refers to this study.  
2. „KAN Study 52: Biomechanical Thresholds and Limits“ – A research project funded by a 
consortium of German public bodies (the KAN Commission including the DGUV, DIN, 
BMAS and the BAuA) in 2014 to do an intensive research on the state of the art for 
determining what biomechanical thresholds are useful for safe human-robot collaboration. 
The outcome of the study resulted in a positive recommendation by the KAN Commission 
to fund further research on collisions for determining the thresholds for the onset of pain 
and the onset of injury.  
3.  “Collaborative robots: Determining the onset of pain in Human-Robot Interfaces due to 
static and dynamic contacts” – Research project funded by the Institution for Statutory 
Accident Insurance and Prevention in the Woodworking and Metalworking Industries 
(BGHM), which further tested biomechanical thresholds on human test subjects. The goal 
of the tests was the determination of the onset of pain for various types of contacts (quasi-
static and dynamic) with different impactor sizes and shapes. The study ran from 2014-
2016, whereby 60 human subjects were tested at over 20 different body locations.  
4. “COVR: Being safe around collaborative and versatile robots in shared spaces” – ongoing 
EU project that collates existing safety regulations relating to cobots in e.g. manufacturing 
and fills in regulatory gaps for newer cobot fields and technologies. Its purpose is to make 
the safety assessment process clearer and allows cobots to be used with more confidence in 
more applications. The project will rovide a one-stop shop that a common approach to 
safety assessment and is valid across all fields and applications. For more details visit 
www.covrproject.eu. 
5. Digital Hazard Prevention for HRC (Digitale Gefahrenprävention MRK) is a 2-year 
project funded by the German Social Accident Insurer (DGUV) which began in January 
2018, focusing on web-based tools to support SMEs in the hazard assessment process for 
applications featuring HRC.  
Relevant infrastructure 
Laboratory for Human-Robot Interaction 
 
77 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
 Testing of interactions during contact between humans and robots (force, momentum) with different force test stands and comparison with specifications from standards  Development and evaluation of sensor technologies for collision avoidance (workplace monitoring) and collision detection (tactile sensor system)  Development of safe robot kinematics, evaluation of factors influencing contact forces and the implementation of appropriate measures for safe kinematics  Equipment  Robots: KUKA LBR, KUKA  iiwa 14, KUKA AGILUS, KUKA KR16, KUKA KR60, KUKA KR90, ABB IRB 140, Universal Robots UR5, Fanuc 165F      Mobile robots: Kuka Omnirob (VALERI), research platform ANNIE, life science assistant robot LiSA, 3 Pioneer platforms         Collision test facilities and force measurement devices  High-speed camera system     

 
78 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
8. MACHINEBOUW       Organisation’s name Industriële Mechanisatie of Automatisatie NV URL http://machinebouw.be/  Organisation’s profile  IMA, which stands for 'Industrial Automation and Mechanization, was founded in Houthalen by André Vandeput in 1987. The initial intent: to carry out customization for industrial automation and turnkey projects. Because of the success over the years and however well-planned expansion to the various technical disciplines, the company has grown to become the ideal partner in mechanical engineering, automation, engineering and maintenance. It still standing safety, durability and cost savings ahead. The company automates processes so that not only productivity will increase, but also savings are achieved. The company develops and builds custom machines where mechanical, electrical and software engineering is done entirely in-house. Innovation and creativity play an essential role: Each machine is designed in close consultation with the customer, in any industry and application whatsoever. The company has 2 locations in Belgium and can count on 48 passionate employees. Role in the project MACHINEBOUW will coordinate Task 2.3 (Use Case Design), and will support the implementation of Work Package 7 (Platform Integration) and Work Package 8 (Demonstration), providing the skills and knowledge of experienced robot integrators, including risk assessment and validation. Key Personnel Joris Ceyssens (M): started his professional career as a project leader in the industrial automation industry. After 5 years he moved to a techno-commercial function for the Pilz sales department in Belgium and Luxemburg. Today he is co-owner of MACHINEBOUW and responsible for sales and marketing. He offers the IMA customers total solutions in machine building with a strong experience in developing prototype machines & general automation services and integration.   Steven Geudens (M) : started his professional career as a software engineer in the industrial automation industry with an expertise in the pharmaceutical industry (Johnson & Johnson). Mr. Geudens founded the automation departement at IMA and is now general director and responsible for operations at the IMA Houthalen facility, he’s also co-owner of the company.      

 
79 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
 
 
Johan Doucé (M) : Started his career in the industrial automation 
industry as a project manager. Mr. Doucé has a track record of 18 years 
in the design and manufacturing of custom machinery, today he’is 
senior project manager at IMA and co-owner. 
 
 
 
 
Relevant publications, products or services 
The company delivers the following services to their customers: 
 Prototyping: delivery of custom made machine building solutions for processes that are too 
demanding and specific for standard off-the-shelf equipment.  
 Automation: Design & integration of industrial techniques and control systems by the 
automation team of IMA, representing electrical engineers, software engineers and 
technicians. 
 Tooling: development and manufacturing of fine mechanical parts & components using CNC 
machinery.  
Relevant previous projects or activities 
 Founded in 1987, IMA has developed and build over 4000 projects. 
 Industrial innovations based on EU intellectual property assets in the field of atmospheric 
plasma technology (IP4PLASMA). Project carried out with the support of the European 
Commission. 7th Framework Programme - NMP (2014-2016, 4,8M€) 
http://ip4plasma.eu/en/partners 
 Design and manufacturing of multiple assembly and test machines for Continental  
Automotive. These machines are designed and build for the manufacturing and testing of  
ABS speed sensors. (multiple machines from 2012 up to now) Gros value 10M€. 
 
  
 Design and manufacturing of a label and testing line for batteries PANASONIC Batteries. 
Gros value 1,6M€ 
 

 
80 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
  
Relevant infrastructure 
Activities will be carried out in the company premises in Houthalen, Belgium. 
 
 
 
  

 
81 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
9. CRIT              Organisation’s name Centro di Ricerca e Innovazione tecnologica srl URL www.crit-research.it  Organisation’s profile  CRIT is an SME innovation company belonging to 26 large manufacturing and processing industries in Emilia-Romagna, including SCM, FIAT Group, ALSTOM, Tetra Pak. CRIT addresses services both to shareholders, mostly large companies, and to their suppliers, which are mostly SMEs. The aim of CRIT is to support enterprises in innovation and technology transfer by acting as a common ground for collaborative industrial research. In addition, CRIT acts as collective technological interface among industrial actors and Research centres throughout the world. Core activities of CRIT are: management and deployment of technology transfer projects; analysis and processes of mission critical information on specific technology fields or key-players; development of collaborative innovation activities aimed at quickly starting up the adoption of new technologies. Role in the project CRIT will be leading T10.3 (Risk and Quality Management), in close collaboration with DATALOGIC and UNIMORE, checking the technical quality of project outputs and proposing countermeasures in case of unforeseen events. Moreover CRIT, together with UNIMORE, is also in charge of T10.2 the Technical Project Management, leading, monitoring and supporting partners’ work. CRIT will also lead Work Package 9 (Impact Enhancement), acting as the Consortium Dissemination and Exploitation Manager, and leveraging on their skills in innovation management and technology business development, and will lead T2.1 (State of the Art Analysis). Key Personnel Enrico Callegati (M): Master in IPR management. He has gained experiences at the Italian embassy at Warsaw, the EU, and the Institute of Industrial Promotion. He entered the staff of CRIT in 2010 as an expert of public funding for research and innovation. He supports the shareholders of CRIT and other clients regarding regional, national and European calls. He also manages financed projects. He has over 10 years experience in EU FP 6&7 and H2020. Johanna Ronco (F): Graduated in Material Engineering and additionally specialized in Environmental Management Technologies, she gained long term experience in the R&D,  design and plannning of production processes for companies ranging from mechanic sector to ceramics. She is in CRIT since 2007 as expert in materials, mechanics, design, production, environment and green technologies. She managed several training activities in collaboration with local technical high schools in the field of innovation and technology transfer. Relevant publications, products or services  Ronco, J., Pelosi, R. (2013). L’Open Innovation come modello di gestione della conoscenza per facilitare l’eco-innovazione - Open innovation as a knowledge management model to facilitate eco-innovation. Energia, Ambiente e Innovazione, 5, 28-32. 

 
82 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
 Sardone, A., Lazzarini, R., Zauli, B., Ronco, J., Pelosi, R. (2013). L’eco-innovazione 
nell’industria manifatturiera italiana: due casi di successo - Eco-innovation in manufacturing 
italian industry: two success cases, Energia, Ambiente e Innovazione, 5, 61-67. 
 Ronco, J., Seeger, H. (2013). Lo scouting tecnologico favorisce l’innovazione – The 
technology scouting fosters innovation. Automazione Integrata, 7, July 2013, 43-45. 
 Callegati, E. (2013).  Supply chain, mass customisation, production planning. Automazione 
Integrata, 4, April 2013, 44. 
 Berghella, G., Seeger, H. (2013). Il futuro delle tecnologie di automazione made in Italy – The 
future of Italian automation technologies. Automazione Integrata, 1, January 2013, 50-52.  
Relevant previous projects or activities 
 FP7 NMP2-SL-2009-229333: REMPLANET “Resilient Multi-Plants Networks” 
 H2020-FoF-07-2014-CSA – 637212: FoF-Impact “Enhanced impact of the Factories of the 
Future PPP through technology transfer and expanded community” 
 H2020-ICT-2014-1 – 645119: TAPPS “Trusted Apps for open CPS” (as Third Party) 
 H2020-SPIRE-2016 – 723641: DREAM “Design for Resource and Energy efficiency in 
cerAMic kilns” 
 INTERREG CE – 2016 – CE318: NUCLEI “Network of technology transfer nodes for 
enhanced open innovation in the Central Europe advanced manufacturing and processing 
industry” 
It is worth highlighting the relevant experience that CRIT gained in 2015-2016 through the FOF-
IMPACT project, a CSA implemented within the Factories of the Future PPP, and aimed at enhancing 
the impact potential of FOF Funded projects. Here, CRIT has been responsible for the design and 
implementation of the FOF-IMPACT toolkit, i.e. a list of success factors and practical advice 
documentation, addressed to consortia members of funded projects, and aiming to boost their 
exploitation activities (see more at: https://goo.gl/PHQQHJ). Subsequently, CRIT has been also 
responsible for deploying the toolkit to selected application cases, which led to the proof of concept 
for the FOF-Impact framework, and to the establishment of a Factories of the Future Technology 
Transfer Network. 
 
Relevant infrastructure 
Virtual Machine Server: HP Proliant ML350G6, 2 Intel Xeon E5520 2.26 GHz, 28 GB RAM 
Disk Storage Server: HP Proliant ML350G5, 2 x Intel Xeon E5420 2.50 GHz, 2 GB RAM, 1 x 250 GB HDD, 3 x 144 GB HDD, 1 x 500 GB external HDD, 1 x 2 TB external HDD 
Annual subscription to Thomson Innovation IP intelligence and collaboration platform and to ScienceDirect publications database 
 
 
  
 
83 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
9. CORE                 Organisation’s name Core Innovation and Technology OE URL http://www.core-innovation.com  Organisation’s profile  Core Innovation and Technology OE (Core Innovation) is a start-up company established in 2016 with a vision to become one of the most important innovation-intensive company in the region of South-East Europe. CORE’s expertise is based on the experience acquired by its founding members through the years. CORE’s mission includes the following:  Innovation Management: A 5-step strategy to secure market success and timely delivery of the developed technologies. Understanding both technology and market is a prerequisite for success.  Technology: Data processing and Mining, Modeling & Simulation, Decision support algorithms, Neural Networks, Fuzzy Logic based techniques, Optimization techniques  Training and mentoring: Training by experience and interactive sessions. Learn about Access to Finance, Innovation Management and Business Models through gaming and active interactions  Communication Strategy: Deliver the message in a comprehensive way. We identify the target audiences, set the objectives and the budget and assess the process Role in the project CORE will be leading Task 9.1 (Communication) and 9.2 (Dissemination). Key Personnel Nikos Kyriakoulis, PhD, Msc (Μ): Nikos holds a degree of Production and Management Engineer and a PhD in Robotics Vision systems for target tracking and tracing from Democritus University of Thrace. He has published more than 20 scientific papers and serves as a reviewer to numerous scientific journals and international conferences. Since 2006, he has participated as a senior researcher and project leader in more than 20 EC funded projects, all in the field of Multimodal sensory systems, for multiple applications such as computer & robotic vision, Ultrasounds-Acoustic, NDT, rehabilitation, security, and heterogeneous data fusion, advanced data processing and analytics, and computational/machine intelligence. Moreover, he has undertaken the management activities varying among Innovation, Communication, and Exploitation Management. Nikos has also worked as a Business Developer for the industry. The key responsibilities were the commercialization of the companies' products, exploitation of business opportunities, mitigation of risks, network, expansion and to increase the companies' awareness and impact. He is a co-Founder and Managing Partner of Core Innovation. 
 

 
84 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Stefanos Kokkorikos, Msc (Μ): Stefanos is an Electrical & Computer Engineer holding an MsC 
Diploma from the National Technical University of Athens. He has been involved in European 
research projects under FP7 and H2020 since 2008, working as project manager, technical lead and 
innovation manager for the industry and research organisations. He is now looking to use his 
experience to bring to life more innovative ideas. He is a co-Founder of Core Innovation and his CORE 
vision is to provide the appropriate tools bridging the gap between research, market and society. 
 
Apostolos Chondronasios, PhD, MSc (M): Apostolos holds an M.Eng in Production and 
Management Engineering from Democritus University of Thrace, an M.Sc in Advanced 
Manufacturing Technologies and a PhD in Machine Vision & Learning in Manufacturing from 
University of Portsmouth. Since 2016, he has participated in many European projects (FP7 and H2020) 
as a Senior Researcher, involving Machine Learning, Machine Vision, Deep Learning, Simulation, 
Optimization and Data Analytics. His expertise includes programming in Python, TensorFlow, 
PyTorch, Matlab, simulations in Simscape for complex systems and Halcon Vision Software. He is 
the Technical Manager of Core Innovation.  
Relevant publications, products or services 
Publications: 
 L. Ma, Z. Wang, H. K. Lam and N. Kyriakoulis (2017), Distributed event-based set-
membership filtering for a class of nonlinear systems with sensor saturations over sensor 
networks, IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, Volume: 47, Issue: 11, Nov. 2017, (ISSN 2168-
2267), DOI: 10.1109/TCYB.2016.2582081 
 Chondronasios, A., Popov, I., & Jordanov, I. (2016). Feature selection for surface defect 
classification of extruded aluminum profiles. The International Journal of Advanced 
Manufacturing Technology, 83(1-4), 33-41.  
 Chondronasios, A., Gonelas, K., Kanakoudis, V., Patelis, M., & Korkana, P. (2017). 
Optimizing DMAs' formation in a water pipe network: the water aging and the operating 
pressure factors. Journal of Hydroinformatics, 19(6), 890-899.  
 Gonelas, K., Chondronasios, A., Kanakoudis, V., Patelis, M., & Korkana, P. (2017). Forming 
DMAs in a water distribution network considering the operating pressure and the chlorine 
residual concentration as the design parameters. Journal of Hydroinformatics, 19(6), 900-910. 
 
Products-Activities: 
Profit Simulation Tool: Core Innovation offered sub-contract services for Innovation Management, 
Business Modelling, Penetration Methodologies, Market research for FoF-Impact (EU-funded 
project coordinated by EFFRA – GA 637212). To support our clients and partners, we built a new 
Profit Simulation Tool which takes into account the customer segments, the activities and resources 
needed providing estimated Revenues and Costs projected in time.  
Forward by Innovathens: Dr Nikos Kyriakoulis, co-Founder of Core Innovation, is one of the 
aspirators of Forward, a new platform developed by Innovathens of City of Athens, the biggest 
Innovation hub in Greece. The goal of FORWARD is to demonstrate and disseminate the research 
results of funded projects, bringing shareholders, customers, researchers and the public together. 
Relevant previous projects or activities 
Z-Bre4k (GA-768869): CORE contributes in the collation of the user-requiremens as well as the 
consolidation of the technical requirements based on SoA. We will collaborate with our partners 
during the inspection and metrology R&D to implement the data analytics to identify the 
deterioration trends, based on the received signals and their analysis. In addition, we will support the 
machine learning in techniques contributing also to the decision making process. Apart from the 
technical parts, CORE will lead the Innovation Management task and the business modelling by 
 
85 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
applying their Profit Simulation Tool and their experience in business development. CORE will 
work on the predictive maintenance  
RECO2ST (GA-768576): CORE is leading the exploitation activities for the project results. 
Moreover, we will be participating in the business model creation, applying our business model 
engineering approach. To accomplish that, we will use our extensive expertise in innovation 
management to fully maximise the potentials of both scientific and technological research project 
results. 
ENABLING (GA-774578): CORE will be leading the dissemination and communication efforts of 
the project. Our experience in defining the audiences' profiles will determine the right message for 
each segment. The different customer and final users characteristics will be approached differently in 
order to increase the awareness levels of the BBI technologies. 
Relevant infrastructure 
 
 
 
 
  
 
86 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
11. WHIRLPOOL 
 
 
 
 
Organisation’s name 
Whirlpool EMEA Spa 
URL http://www.whirlpoolcorp.com/ 
Organisation’s profile  
Whirlpool Corporation is the world’s leading global manufacturer and marketer of major home 
appliances. In Europe, Whirlpool EMEA SpA relyies on approx 26.000 employees, has a sales 
presence in over 30 countries and an extremely articulated and strong footprint. In Europe 
Whirlpool produces and commercializes a wide array of products including: washing machines, 
dryers, dishwashers, fridges, freezers, ovens, microwaves, hobs and hoods, and is leader in the 
refrigeration and laundry segments, while being the number one player for the white goods 
sector in several countries including UK, Italy, Poland, France and Russia. The European head 
quarter is located in Milan (Italy) where the growth and development strategy of the EMEA 
region is defined. In Italy, besides the managerial centre, Whirlpool owns its Centre of 
Excellence for Research in Cassinetta, Italy (Varese district), and in Fabriano, employing approx 
750 international researchers and technicians working on the development of innovations which 
are transferred to all European businesses of the group. The Research Division has acquired over 
the years expertise in numerous areas such as manufacturing, materials, mechanical design, 
thermodynamics, energy transmission, energy efficiency, etc.. that enable the company to 
undertake significant and challenging research projects. Strategic collaborations with several 
universities and research centers from all around Europe support Whirlpool needs. 
Role in the project 
WHIRLPOOL will provide the ROSSINI Use Case related to Domestic Appliance Assembly (Task 
8.1) 
Key Personnel 
Pierluigi Petrali (Male) Has been with Whirlpool since 1989 and currently coordinates efforts 
in Manufacturing R&D across Whirlpool European factories and product groups inside 
Whirlpool Operation Center of Excellence. He’s been involved in several EU funded projects in 
several programs (IAPP, NMP, ICT) in various field of application: Future Internet, CPS, 
Ergonomics, Technology Forecast. He’s the EMEA delegate to Whirlpool Global Advanced 
Manufacturing organization. He has been introducing in Whirlpool TRIZ methodology, helping 
also its Italy diffusion through the foundation of Apeiron, the Italian TRIZ association. The first 
years of his career he was working in industrial ICT as system and network manager, network 
designer and system architect for MES based on VAX/VMS architectures. 
Relevant publications, products or services 
 “GRACE Ontology Integrating Process and Quality Control”, P.Leitao, C. Turrin, A. 
Pagani, P. Petrali et al., Montreal, IECON 2012  
 “Methodology for Consideration of Product Quality within Factory Automation 
Engineering”, M. Foehr, C. Turrin, A. Pagani, P. Petrali et al.; paper submitted to 
ICIT2013 Capetown, SA  
 “Implementation of a methodology for consideration of product quality within 
discrete manufacturing”, M. Foehr, C. Turrin, A. Pagani, P. Petrali et al.; IFAC MIM 
2013, S. Petersburg, RU  

 
87 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
 “An Improved Decision Support System in Factory Shop-Floor Through an IoT 
Approach”, P. Petrali, Enterprise Interoperability, I-ESA 14 Proceedings. Wiley ISBN 
978-1-84821-799-7 
 
Relevant previous projects or activities 
GRACE (NMPP2-SL-2010-246203) - GRACE main objective was to conceive, study, develop, 
implement and validate a collaborative multi-agent system (MAS) which operates at all stages of a 
production line, integrating process control with quality control at local and global level 
 
FITMAN (FI.ICT-2011.1.8 604674) - The mission of the FITMAN (Future Internet Technologies for 
MANufacturing industries) project is to provide the FI PPP with a set of industry-led use case trials in 
the Smart, Digital and Virtual Factories of the Future domains, in order to test and assess the suitability, 
openness and flexibility of FI-WARE Generic Enablers, this way contributing to the social-
technological-economical-environmental-political sustainability of EU Manufacturing Industries. 
 
MAN-MADE (FoF.NMP.2013-3 609073) - The MAN-MADE project aims at defining new socially 
sustainable workplaces where the human dimension is a key cornerstone. Workers are foreseen at the 
centre of the factory, on the one hand, in terms of workplace adaptation (and production planning, at 
large) to skills, expertise and characteristic of each single worker and, on the other hand, in terms of 
capability to make the most out of worker’s knowledge and potentials across all age groups and 
different roles, simultaneously fostering enhanced worker’s safety. Moreover MAN-MADE promotes 
the vision of an effective integration of this anthropocentric factory within the social environment 
toward the implementation of context-aware factories that promotes and take advantage of extended 
services to the workers in terms of accessibility, inclusiveness, efficiency. 
Relevant infrastructure 
Operation Excellence:  
A central organization in charge of Manufacturing Standards, Industrial Engineering, Quality and 
Environment Health and Safety, employing more than 60 engineers, coordinating all the 22 
European factories. It is the department responsible to scope and implement the technological 
innovation in processes, for product industrialization and for defining and govern the Whirlpool 
Production System.  
Manufacturing sites relevant for the project:  
Cassinetta Site (Lombardy, Italy): Cassinetta site is the largest site of Whirlpool EMEA and it is the 
European hub for all built-in appliances. It host two factories, one for refrigeration products (built in 
refrigerators and vertical freezers) and one for cooking products (built in ovens and microwaves 
ovens, built-in, cooktops). The site is also the main quarter for several central and global functions 
(Product Development, Global Consumer Design, Global Sourcing Strategy, Whirlpool Operation 
Center of Excellence and Whirlpool R&D organization) 
 
  
 
88 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
12. SCHINDLER           Organisation’s name Schindler Elettronica SA URL https://www.schindler.com/  Organisation’s profile  Founded in Switzerland in 1874, the Schindler Group is a leading global provider of elevators, escalators and related services. Its innovative and environmentally-friendly access and transit-management systems make an important contribution to mobility in urban societies. In 2016, the Schindler Group generated revenue of almost CHF 9.7 billion. Schindler mobility solutions move more than one billion people every day all over the world. Behind the company’s success are over 58,000 employees in more than 100 countries. Schindler Electronics LTD is a modern production plant of Schindler Supply Chain Europe and it’s the leading factory of the Schindler Group for production of electronic systems and subsystems. Schindler Electronics LTD has been identified as the pilot factory of the Schindler Group for Industry 4.0. Together with its partners from science and industry, the organization is developing new solutions to improve its cost positioning using lean manufacturing methodologies and to optimize its manufacturing footprint.   

 
89 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Role in the project 
SCHINDLER will provide the ROSSINI Use Case related to Electronic Components Kitting (Task 
8.2) 
Key Personnel 
Antonio Lentini received his MSc in Aerospace Engineering from the University Politecnico di 
Milano and holds a certification as Project Manager Professional from the Project management 
Institute. He has 18 years Project and Program Management experience in R&D, Product 
Management, Key Account Management, Supply Chain and working experience in Automotive and 
Elevator multinational companies. 
He worked for one year as a researcher at the Instituto Superior Técnico of Lisbon, Portugal, within 
the framework of the Marie Curie EU program «RADIARE», where he developed an artificial neural 
network for modelling NOx emissions of coal fired boilers and an application to calculate thermo-
dynamical characteristics in a user defined power plant. 
 
Main interests: combustion and turbulence modelling, artificial intelligence, energy efficient 
mobility, large projects, complex projects. 
Patents:  
 D 06/021 "Verfahren zur Bestimmung eines Zylinderdrucksignals" 
 D 06/012 «Verfahren zur Bestimmung einer Mittelgastemperatur" 
 2005E17604 DE «Detection of start of combustion using cylinder pressure» 
 2003E00162 DE «Method of determining correct valve actuation times in direct injection 
combustion engines» 
 
Federico Alessandro Filzi is an Industrial Engineer, graduated at the University Politecnico di 
Milano as Industrial Engineering. 
He has developed its career in three areas: 
-Industrial Assembly Automation 
-Industrial Engineering logics concerning Manufacturing and logistic  
-Lean Manufacturing 
He has worked for several multinational companies and currently is the Lean Production Engineering 
Manager at Schindler Electronics LTD. 
Relevant publications, products or services 
Papers:  
Monti, S. D’Arco, A. Deshmukh, Y. Work and A. Lentini, "From simulation to hardware testing: A 
low-cost platform for Power-Hardware-in–the-Loop experiments". Summer Computer Simulation 
Conference 2007 (SCSC 2007), San Diego, California (USA), July 15-18, 2007, 
http://www.sce.carleton.ca/faculty/wainer/SCSC07/196.html 
 
Monti, S. D’Arco, Y. Work, A. Lentini, “A Virtual Testing Facility for Elevator and Escalator 
Systems”. PESC 2007 Paper PE-0582, http://www.pesc.org 
Relevant infrastructure 
 7 production lines for electronic systems and sub-systems 
 A test tower with 11 elevators dedicated for testing purposes (R&D tests, installation test, 
training and simulations, commissioning training and tests) 
  
 
90 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
13. IMA 
 
  
 
Organisation’s name 
I.M.A. Industria Macchine Automatiche SPA 
URL www.ima.it 
Organisation’s profile  
IMA Group: Established in 1961, IMA is world leader in the design and manufacture of automatic 
machines for the processing and packaging of pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, tea, coffee and food. 
Its position of leadership is the result of significant investments in R&D, regular and constructive 
dialogue with the end-users in its sectors and the Group's ability to expand internationally, conquering 
new markets. Its history features a constant growth that has enabled the Group to close the year 2016 
with a consolidated turnover of €1,310.85 million, 86.6% of which destined for export. 
The Group has over 5,500 employees and has a presence is in about 80 countries, supported by a 
sales network of 27 branches (Italy, France, Switzerland, the U.K., Germany, Austria, Spain, Poland, 
Israel, Russia, the U.S., India, China, Malaysia, Thailand and Brazil), representative offices in 
Central-Eastern Europe and more than 50 agencies. The Group has 41 production plants in Italy, 
Switzerland, the UK, the USA, India and China. 
IMA S.p.A. has been listed on the Milan Stock Exchange since 1995 and in 2001 joined the STAR 
segment. IMA has filed about 1,600 patents; over 500 designers committed to product innovation have 
allowed IMA to launch many new machine models over the last years. The R&I department is working 
an all the aspects related to I 4.0 (robotics, additive manufacturing, IoT, etc) and their application in 
different  IMA business field. 
IMA invests massively in R&D. The Group has invested €48.15 million in the fiscal year 2016, 3.7% 
of the turnover. This amount refers to the costs incurred on the technological upgrading of existing 
products and in the design and development of innovative products and does not include the cost of 
development work ordered by specific clients, or the cost of customized standard products. Around 
20% of the staff is involved in R&D activities. 
The Company has an Innovation Department whose activities are developed in three areas: 
 Research 
 New technologies – Software automation 
 Research and development 
 
Role in the project 
IMA will lead WP8, aiming to demonstrate the ROSSINI platform into 3 industrial use case scenarios. 
Additionally, it will provide the ROSSINI Use Case related to Food Products Packaging (Task 8.2), 
and will support the activities of WP4. 
Key Personnel 

 
91 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
 Dario Rea (male), degree: Mechanic Engineering from University of Bologna, 1988. IMA Group 
Research and Innovation Manager. Main tasks are to facilitate competence transfer among the 
Company Divisions, define the Company’s technological developments, both in cooperation with 
research centres and with the end-users, and develop innovative machine models based on existing 
technologies and on new design approaches, by integrating electronics into our machines and shifting 
to mechatronics. 
 
 Daniele Argelli (male), degree: Statistics and Economics, University of Bologna, 1989. Managing 
the administrative and financial aspects of IMA Group’s R&D projects that benefit from public 
funding, at the regional, national and EU level. 
 
Relevant publications, products or services 
IMA already has cooperative robots like the one we aim at developing in its catalogue. Specifically 
we’re talking about a robot platform to be used alongside the C24-E Tea machine made up of: 
 Movable platform, which includes: 
o KUKA KMP 200 mobile unit, with security sensors; 
o KUKA LBR iiwa 14 cooperative robot 
o Vision system for the detection of positional landmarks; 
o Laser distance sensor to detect the reel diameter 
o Control computer for the management of the vision system 
 PC Server for the management of one or more movable platforms 
 Moving systems for the collection, placing and movement of reels and kernels 
 Tool change system to manage different moving systems 
 C24E machine changing group with a robot platform consisting of: 
o Reel-carrier and pneumatic circuit modifyer 
o Dedicated HMI page for the processing of the requests to the robot system 
The system is compliant with the CE directives and is CE-labelled.   
Technical data:: 
 Robot payload up to Kg 
 Pick-up strength up to 1000N 
Relevant previous projects or activities 
MaXima 
A project financed by the Italian Government 
Aim of the MaXima project is to support the Company in adopting the “Advanded Production 
Systems” Key Enabling Technology in the technological “Industrial processes and plants” area of the 
specific Packaging industrial sector, according to the Industry 4.0 Initiative. 
The following areas will be developed: 
- Adaptive and smart production systems; 
- High-performance, efficient and eco-friendly production systems. 
 
92 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
 
IMA Digital Manufacturing 
A project financed by the Emilia-Romagna Region 
The aim is to digitalize the IMA processes and its supply chain in order to be more efficient and reduce 
its time-to-market response; one of the key aspects of this project is the adoption of a new software, 
tools and equipment in order to take advantage of the new technologies - Additive Manufacturing in 
the first place. 
 
I-MECH 
A project co-financed by the ECSEL Joint Undertaking, Horizon2020 and by the Italian Government 
Aim of the I-MECH project is to provide augmented intelligence for a wide range of cyber-physical 
systems having actively controlled moving elements, hence to support the development of smarter 
mechatronic systems. 
IMA’s main role within the project, as End User, will be to install and validate the project outcome in 
its machinery with particular reference to Multicore Realtime platform. That platform should allow 
IMA to integrate the handling of machine control, motion control, vision system and Human-Machine 
interface into a single CPU. 
EuRoC - www.euroc-project.eu 
A project financed by the European Union 
The EuRoC initiative aims to launch three industry-relevant challenges: 
- Reconfigurable Interactive Manufacturing Cell (RIMC), 
- Shop Floor Logistics and Manipulation (SFLM), 
- Plant Servicing and Inspection (PSI). 
It aims at sharpening the focus of European manufacturing through a number of application 
experiments, while adopting an innovative approach which ensures comparative performance 
evaluation. Each challenge is launched via an open call and is structured in 3 stages. 
IMA’s role in the project is to cooperate with the University of Aveiro to develop a system for flexible, 
collaborative blank loading on machines on industrial shop floors. 
Relevant infrastructure 
IMA will provide: 
- a robot cell with one or more automatic machines; 
- the know-how developed in other projects and on the field; 
- the possibility to share our experience with our most important clients; 
- our know-how as designers and developers of automatic machines, and the physical 
infrastructure that goes with it. 
 
 
93 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
4.2. Third parties involved in the project (including use of third party 
resources) 
1. DATALOGIC 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
Y 
Within WP3, Datalogic expects to subcontract to independent entity (i.e. TUV) for the evaluation and  
certification of the RS4 system safety concept (expected total amount 30.000 €). 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties Y 
Since 2012, Datalogic was endowed with an organizational platform for the medium-long term 
technological research, through the creation of Datalogic IP Tech (Intellectual Property & 
Technology). The main areas of work of Datalogic IP Tech srl are: 1) strategic technological 
management and supervision of research projects by Datalogic Strategic Technology Committee, a 
team of international experts coming from universities and research centers; 2) research of new 
technologies and support to divisional group for the development of products, while supplying them 
the required technological innovations to be always updated in the markets in which they operate 
thanks to Datalogic Labs; centralized management of the Group’s patent portfolio, with the aim of 
systematically coordinating all activities connected with the evaluation, management and protection of 
the Group’s Industrial Property 
Datalogic IP Tech will be involved in WP10 Financial and Administrative coordination and WP9 
impact enhancement. Expected effort is 10 man-months, for a total direct costs of 50.000 (€ 62.500,00 
including overhead) 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 
11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
2. PILZ 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 
and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
3. UNIMORE 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties N 
 
94 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 
and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
4. IRIS 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 
and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
5. SUPSI 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 
and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
6. TNO 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 
and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
7. FRAUNHOFER 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 
and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
 
95 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
8. MACHINEBOUW 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 
and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
9. CRIT 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 
and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
10. CORE 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 
and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
11. WHIRLPOOL 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 
and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
96 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
 
12. SCHINDLER 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 
and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
13. IMA 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
Y 
IMA will need to involve an engineering company, for the specific customisation of the vision systems 
designing, which is necessary for the industrial application of the cooperative robots., in particular to identify 
clogged areas and operate on clearing the causes of jams. The subcontractor will be chosen according to the 
“best value for money” principle. Expected cost 45.000 Euros. 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 
11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
  
 
97 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
SECTION 5: ETHICS AND SECURITY
5.1 Ethics 
 
No ethics issues have been entered in the table in the administrative proposal forms.
5.2 Security 
 
Please indicate if your project will involve:  
   activities or results raising security issues: (NO)  
   'EU-classified information' as background or results: (NO)  
  
 
98 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
ANNEX – REFERENCES 
All4pack, Packaging: Market and Challenges in 2016, 
https://www.all4pack.com/content/location/136757 
Basu, Chandrayee, and Mukesh Singhal. "Trust Dynamics in Human Autonomous Vehicle 
Interaction: A Review of Trust Models." 2016 AAAI Spring Symposium Series. (2016). 
Behrens, R., N. Elkmann, and H. J. Ottersbach. "A Contribution for Standardized Risk Assessment: 
Examination of Constrained and Unconstrained Human-Robot-Collisions." 2012 IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS 2012). (2012). 
Behrens, Roland, and Norbert Elkmann. "Study on meaningful and verified thresholds for 
minimizing the consequences of human-robot collisions."Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 
2014 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, (2014). 
Behrens, Roland, et al. “KAN Study 52: Biomechanical thresholds - A study to support 
standardization work on collaborative robots” (2014). 
Behrens, R., et al. "Upcoming Technologies and Fundamentals for Safeguarding All Forms of 
Human-Robot Collaboration."8th International Conference Safety of Industrial Automated 
Systems (SIAS 2015), Königswinter, Germany. 2015. 
Boenzi, F., et al. "Workforce aging in production systems: Modeling and performance evaluation." 
Procedia Engineering 100 (2015): 1108-1115. 
Bortolini, Marco, et al. "Assembly system design in the Industry 4.0 era: a general framework." 
IFAC-PapersOnLine 50.1 (2017): 5700-5705. 
Brooke, John. "SUS-A quick and dirty usability scale." Usability evaluation in industry 189.194 
(1996): 4-7. 
Case, Keith, et al. "Digital human modelling and the ageing workforce." Procedia Manufacturing 3 
(2015): 3694-3701. 
CECED, ” Home Appliance Europe 2015-2016 report.“ (2017) 
Citi, G. P. S. "Global Perspectives and Solutions,“Technology at Work v2. 0: The Future Is Not 
What It Used to Be”." (2016). 
Cortes, Corinna, and Vladimir Vapnik. "Support-vector networks." Machine learning 20.3 (1995): 
273-297. 
Davies, Ron. “Industry 4.0 Digitalisation for productivity and growth”. Briefing from EPRS. 
European Parliamentary Research Service (2015). 
Demerouti, Evangelia, et al. "The job demands-resources model of burnout." Journal of Applied 
psychology 86.3 (2001): 499. 
Demerouti, Evangelia, et al. "Burnout and engagement at work as a function of demands and 
control." Scandinavian journal of work, environment & health (2001): 279-286. 
European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions, “Advanced 
industrial robotics : Taking human-robot collaboration to the next level” (2017). 
 
99 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Franklin, Carole,. “Take a safe approach to collaborative robots” ISA InTech Magazine 2017 
Jul/Aug (2017). 
Haage, Mathias, et al. "Reconfigurable parallel kinematic manipulator for flexible manufacturing." 
IFAC Proceedings Volumes 42.4 (2009): 145-150. 
Hutzel, Tim, and Dave Lippert. Bringing jobs back to the USA: Rebuilding America’s 
manufacturing through reshoring. CRC Press. (2014). 
IFR Press Conference 27 September 2017 Frankfurt, How robots conquer industry worldwide. IFR 
Press Conference (2017). 
Järvenpää, Eeva, et al. "Capability matchmaking procedure to support rapid configuration and re-
configuration of production systems."Procedia Manufacturing 11 (2017): 1053-1060. 
Johnson, Matthew, et al. "Coactive design: Designing support for interdependence in joint activity." 
Journal of Human-Robot Interaction, 3 (1), 2014 (2014). 
Kim, Yong-Jae. "Anthropomorphic Low-Inertia High-Stiffness Manipulator for High-Speed Safe 
Interaction."IEEE Transactions on Robotics 33.6 (2017): 1358-1374. 
Kinney, G. Fine. Practical risk analysis for safety management. China Lake, CA: Naval Weapons 
Center, 1976. 
Klien, Glen, et al. "Ten challenges for making automation a" team player" in joint human-agent 
activity." IEEE Intelligent Systems 19.6 (2004): 91-95. 
Kessler, Theresa T., et al. "A Comparison of Trust Measures in Human–Robot Interaction 
Scenarios." Advances in Human Factors in Robots and Unmanned Systems. Springer, Cham, 
2017. 353-364. 
Magnavita, Nicola. "Productive aging, work engagement and participation of older workers. A 
triadic approach to health and safety in the workplace." Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Public 
Health 14.2 (2017). 
Marvel, Jeremy A., et al. Tools for Robotics in SME Workcells: Challenges and Approaches for 
Calibration and Registration. No. NIST Interagency/Internal Report (NISTIR)-8093. 2015.  
Matthaiakis, Stereos Alexandros, et al. "Flexible programming tool enabling synergy between 
human and robot." Procedia Manufacturing 11 (2017): 431-440. 
Müller, Vincent C., et al., “euRobotics topics group on ‘ethical, legal and socioeconomic issues’ 
(ELS)”, Position Paper : Ethical, Legal and Socio-economic Issues in Robotics.(2017) 
OECD, How Good is Your Job? Measuring and Assessing Job Quality , 
https://www.oecd.org/std/labour-stats/Job-quality-OECD.pdf 
European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions, White Paper. 
Advanced industrial robotics : Taking human-robot collaboration to the next level. (2017). 
Pellegrinelli, Stefania, et al. "Motion planning and scheduling for human and industrial-robot 
collaboration." CIRP Annals 66.1 (2017): 1-4. 
Peruzzini, Margherita, and Marcello Pellicciari. "A framework to design a human-centred adaptive 
manufacturing system for aging workers." Advanced Engineering Informatics 33 (2017): 330-
 
100 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
349. 
Settles, Burr. "Active Learning Literature Survey. 2010." Computer Sciences Technical Report 
1648.(2010) 
SPARC The partnership for Robotics in Europe,. Strategic Research Agenda For Robotics in 
Europe 2014-2020. , (2017): 108. 
Spena, Pasquale Russo, et al. "Requirements for the Design of flexible and changeable 
Manufacturing and Assembly Systems: a SME-survey." Procedia CIRP 41 (2016): 207-212. 
Technavio, “Global Collaborative Robots Market 2017-2021”. 
The European EMS Industry, “ A Strategic Overview of the European Electronic Manufacturing 
Services Industry 2016-2021”, Reed Electronics Research, (2018) 
Thomas, C., et al. "Intuitive work assistance by reciprocal human-robot interaction in the subject 
area of direct human-robot collaboration." Procedia CIRP 44 (2016): 275-280. 
Universal Robots, “White Paper: Cobots as a Catalyst for Reshoring” 
Van Der Laan, Jinke D., Adriaan Heino, and Dick De Waard. "A simple procedure for the 
assessment of acceptance of advanced transport telematics." Transportation Research Part C: 
Emerging Technologies 5.1 (1997): 1-10. 
Wisskirchen, Gerlind, et al. "Artificial intelligence and robotics and their impact on the workplace." 
The International Bar Association Global Employment Institute (IBA GEI) (2017). 
Williams, Christopher KI, and Carl Edward Rasmussen. "Gaussian processes for machine learning." 
the MIT Press 2.3 (2006): 4.