3.3 CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE .............................................................................................................................. 52
3.4 RESOURCES TO BE COMMITTED ..................................................................................................................... 53 
 
  
 
2 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
1. EXCELLENCE
1.1 Objectives  
The ROSSINI project aims to design, develop and demonstrate a modular and scalable platform for the 
integration of human-centred robotic technologies in industrial production environments. This will be 
achieved both by developing innovative technological components and methodologies in all fields related 
to collaborative robotics (sensing, control, actuation, human aspects, risk assessment methodology), and by 
integrating all such components in an open platform ensuring quick ramp-up and easy integration. 
ROSSINI ultimately aims at making HRC a viable choice for manufacturers which up to now did not 
implement it, due to the regulatory and technological limitation of the technology. Indeed, by increasing the 
sensing capability, the intelligence, the fast reaction capacity and the communication skills of robots, 
ROSSINI will deliver high performance, in terms of payloads, working speed and productivity, to HRC, 
thus ensuring that manufactures enjoy the “best of both worlds” of industrial and collaborative robots. 
The ROSSINI partnership, led by two large industrial stakeholders with a worldwide reputation as 
technological leaders in the field of safety in automation (PILZ and DATALOGIC), is inspired by the ambition 
to enable intelligent, dynamic HRC applications, in which task allocation, safety functions and working 
parameters can be easily adapted to production requirements, and to specific human operators’ needs. 
As such, ROSSINI technological developments will build upon the partners’ current technologies (sensors, 
controllers and other mechatronic devices), which are already widely applied in robotics, and will achieve both 
components performance improvements and their structuring in a coherent and synergic platform. Moreover, 
through ROSSINI, the consortium intends to develop and demonstrate a novel concept of “collaborative 
by birth” robotic arm, specifically designed for collaborating with humans, featuring built-in collaborative 
features for reducing reaction time and safe position signalling. As such, the ROSSINI platform will guarantee 
inherent safety to robotic applications developed through it, since all its components have been designed 
to maximise the compliance with existing requirements for human-robot collaboration. By making safety an 
underlying, more easily fulfilled requirement, it will be then easier, for integrators and manufacturers, to shape 
HRC applications which maximise both productivity and job quality, in order to “optimally combine the 
repetitive performance of robots with the individual skills and ability of people” (ISO, 2015).  
To achieve this target, PILZ and DATALOGIC shaped the ROSSINI consortium, aggregating European 
excellent research centres (UNIMORE, SUPSI, TNO and FRAUNHOFER), highly specialised innovative 
SMEs (IRIS, CRIT, CORE, MACHINEBOUW), and manufacturing end-users (IMA, SCHINDLER and 
WHIRLPOOL), which have agreed on a set of clear, measurable, realistic and achievable objectives. 
Specific Objective 1 - To design a Smart and Safe Sensing System with improved detection and tracking 
capabilities for monitoring the working environment, and a safety-graded fusion module for the 
processing of data 
The ROSSINI platform shall include sensing technologies which radically improve the performance of 
currently available equipment, since closer human-robot collaboration first needs to rely on a highly detailed 
information base on the working environment. The Rossini Smart and Safe Sensing System (RS4) will pursue 
this goal, by combining information from several different customised sensing technologies (Vision, Laser 
Scanning, Radar, Mat, etc.) in order track not only the position but also the speed of each operator and object 
in the scene. Moreover, the miscellaneous set of information generated by the platform sensing layer needs to 
be integrated in a single multidimensional image processed in real time to generate suitable 3D safety regions, 
or “dynamic safety shells”, around each object in the environment. This will be achieved by developing a 
dedicated RS4 fusion module, made of safety fieldbus communication and safety sensor modules controller.  
Means of verification. RS4, developed by DATALOGIC, will be validated by experienced PILZ risk 
assessment specialists using Collaborative Operations Method c) according to ISO/TS 150661. by Month 30, 
and is expected to show a 70% faster Response Time compared to currently available technologies.  
 
1 ISO/TS 15066:2016 specifies safety requirements for collaborative industrial robot systems and the work environment, 
and supplements the requirements and guidance on collaborative industrial robot operation given in ISO 10218‑1 and ISO 
10218‑2. 
 
3 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Exploitation vision. The Rossini Smart and Safe Sensing system will be marketed by PILZ and DATALOGIC, 
building on the current companies’ technological offer, which already includes successful sensors for HRC 
such as the Sentinel Safety Laser Scanner and the A-, P-, T- Series Smart Cameras (from DATALOGIC), and 
the PILZ Safety Eye and Safety Mat. 
Specific Objective 2 - To develop a Safety Aware Control Architecture for robot cognitive perception 
and optimal task planning and execution 
In order to enable not only robot sensing, but actual perception, suitable data processing techniques based on 
artificial intelligence need to be deployed, such as an advanced GPU computing and machine learning 
algorithms for image recognition, to obtain a semantic scene map that adapts to dynamic working conditions. 
This will allow to add semantic information to simple geometric maps that are currently used by fusing sensor 
data, thus making it possible for the robot not only to visualize images, but also to interpret them. Moreover, 
the deployment of artificial intelligence techniques for data processing will not be just aimed to enable robot 
perception, but will also make robot cognition possible. In other words, besides being able to interpret data, 
the ROSSINI Safety Aware Control Architecture will make it possible for robots to optimally schedule the 
tasks that they need to accomplish, and to optimise the trade-off between human operator safety and 
manufacturing productivity. Each action to be executed will be sent to a dynamic planner that will dynamically 
optimize its execution in terms of trajectory to follow and/or interactive behaviour to reproduce while 
considering the variable safety conditions in the working area.  
Means of verification. The Rossini Safety Aware Control Architecture will be tested in the ARSControl 
Laboratory of UNIMORE by experienced research staff by Month 30, and is expected to earn a reduction of 
up to 45% of the overall Task Execution Time, and by 5% of the production reconfiguration time and cost. 
Exploitation Vision. The Rossini Safety Aware Control Architecture will represent a substantial evolution of 
the current PILZ motion control technology, now represented by the PRIMO motion and safety controller. 
Specific Objective 3 - To develop a “Collaborative by Birth” Robotic Arm range with novel built-in 
safety features 
Presently available collaborative robots are mainly standard robotic manipulators, on top of which specific 
technologies have been added in order to reduce risks for humans within collaborative operations. However, 
no substantial leap towards true Human Robot Collaboration can be obtained, without redesigning a robotic 
technology from scratch, considering safe interaction with humans as the main guiding principle at each design 
step. Through ROSSINI, PILZ and SUPSI will work at the development of a new range of robotic 
manipulators, which will be offered to integrators as the platform actuation layer. The ROSSINI Natively 
Collaborative Robotic Arm will feature safe axis position signalling via double communication channels, and 
an innovative solution for coupling brushless motors within robot joints, thus speeding up the robot braking 
and retraction. Therefore, ROSSINI will introduce a new player in the market of robotic arms producers, a 
player which will take advantage of a wide experience, gained working directly on the shop floor assisting 
manufacturing companies for safe automation, and which will leverage on an established market reputation as 
“ambassadors of safety”. 
Means of verification. The Rossini “Collaborative by Birth” Robotic Arm will be validated by experienced 
PILZ risk assessment specialists by Month 28 with the support of the 3 industrial end users, and is expected to 
show a 45%, reduction in the Protective Separation Distance within Collaborative Operations Method c) 
according to ISO/TS 15066.   
Exploitation Vision. The Rossini Collaborative by Birth Robotic Arm will be marketed by PILZ, and will be 
offered to customers that want to experiment the optimal synergy of all platform components into one 
specifically designed new concept of robotic manipulator. 
Specific Objective 4 – To develop a framework for Human-Robot Mutual Understanding in 
collaborative operations 
The ROSSINI platform will incorporate a human-centred process design level to address and account for 
human factors like job quality, user experience, trust, feeling of safety, and liability, in the early design stages. 
Moreover, an adaptive level will constantly monitor the process progression, human behaviour, and robot 
behaviour. Dynamic allocation of tasks allows that online changes to the original task planning (as defined in 
 
4 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
the design level) can be made during operation. Finally, a profound mutual understanding between robots and 
people in operation will be realized (Communication Level) and thereby making human-robots collaborations 
more predictable.  
Means of verification. The ROSSINI Human-Robot Mutual Understanding Layer will be tested by Month 24 
by TNO experts, and is expected to result in 15% improvement of job quality, 25% increase in trust and feeling 
of safety, and 5% increase in system flexibility. 
Exploitation Vision. The ROSSINI Human-Robot Mutual Understanding level will result in a set of software 
tools to be integrated into robotic applications, and will be offered to robot integrators and manufacturers as a 
platform component, primarily through consortium partners which are already performing robot integration 
(IMA, MACHINEBOUW).  
Specific Objective 5 – To integrate all the ROSSINI technological components into one inherently safe  
platform for HRC applications development.  
The innovative technologies made available through the ROSSINI research activities need to be made available 
to integrators and manufacturers in a complete package, which will ease the job of deploying human-robot 
collaboration on the shop-floor. Therefore, after having ensured suitable technological interfaces among all 
platform components, the ROSSINI Integration and Validation Layer will encompass both an application 
design tool for easy configuration and reconfiguration of platform modules, and a set of new methodologies 
for risk assessment and validation (collision measurement), based on specific skills and knowledge of 
consortium partners, to speed up the validation and increase the efficiency of HRC applications. Most 
important, the ROSSINI platform will guarantee inherent safety to robotic applications developed through it, 
as it will contain safety compliant design guidelines and an optimised set of components and methodologies 
for safety. 
Means of verification. The ROSSINI integrated platform, capable of ensuring 30% increase in production 
flexibility, will be ready for demonstration by Month 34, and will be tested into 3 real manufacturing scenarios 
by Month 42. 
Exploitation vision. The ROSSINI integrated platform will be offered to robot integrators and manufacturers 
willing to implement HRC, in the form of a development tool which will act also as a gateway for the different 
technological components (sensors, manipulator, control software and hardware…), to be freely combined 
among each other and with third parties’ technology, in order to develop the optimal HRC application for each 
manufacturing scenario. 
The ROSSINI platform aims to introduce a disruptive stakeholder in the current Human-Robot Collaboration 
(HRC) technology market, by creating an open ecosystem, where integrators will enjoy an unequalled degree 
of freedom in designing HRC workstations. Ultimately a safe HRC application is the result of several factors: 
interplay between normative framework conditions and a complex risk analysis on this basis, selection of a 
robot with the relevant safety functions, selection of appropriate, additional safety components and finally, 
validation through a systems integrator. By offering a full range of such physical and virtual components for 
HRC applications design, ROSSINI will arise as a game-changer in the market of robotic technologies, 
differentiating from existing hierarchical and rigid platforms supported by large manipulators manufacturers, 
which are technology (manipulators-) pushed rather than market (application-) pulled. In the consortium’s 
vision, this will in turn give rise to a new generation of robotic applications, which will be able to collaborate 
with humans at an unattained level up to now, thus dramatically contributing to the sustainability of 
manufacturing in Europe.
1.2 Relation to the work programme  
The ROSSINI project addresses the Horizon 2020 call for proposals “H2020-NMBP-TR-IND-2018-2020”, 
topic “DT-FOF-02-2018: Effective Industrial Human-Robot Collaboration“ as explained below. 
Human-Robot Collaboration (HRC) on the factory floor has a high potential economic impact for European 
industry. Past research to implement HRC in an industrial setting concentrated largely on safety of humans, 
allowing workers and robots to share working space without fences. Most of the developments started from 
existing industrial robotic arms, augmenting it with technologies to make it safe for humans to interact with 
the robot. This has already led to production environments with safe interaction between humans and robots. 
 
5 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
However genuine collaboration between humans and robots require more holistic solutions encompassing 
smart mechatronic systems designed to improve the quality of the job performed and to increase flexible 
production. Such systems have not yet been demonstrated for manufacturing purposes. 
 The ROSSINI Human-Robot Mutual Understanding Framework (Specific Objective 4) will make it 
possible to assess and maximise the quality of the job performed within collaborative applications 
 By decreasing the protective separation distance needed in human-robot collaborative applications, 
ROSSINI will unleash the potential for HRC to improve the flexibility and productivity of 
manufacturing in Europe. ROSSINI aims at radically changing the current safety paradigm adopted in 
the setup of cooperative robotic cells for industrial application, and making collaborative robotic 
system much more flexible and efficient if compared to the state-of-the-art. 
 ROSSINI will be demonstrated in 3 industrial use cases (Domestic Appliances Assembly, 
Electronic Components Production, Food Products Packaging), thus showing the Platform’s potential 
to enable genuine human-robot collaboration, and to increase production flexibility.  
In order to move from a structured factory floor where robots work behind closed fences to an open 
environment with smart mechatronic systems and humans collaborating closely, interdisciplinary research in 
the fields of robotics, cognitive sciences and psychology is required, also taking into account regulatory 
aspects.  
 The ROSSINI lines of research will encompass all the involved disciplinary fields in collaborative 
robotics, from “classical” mechatronics (optics, mechanics electronics for the Inherently Safe Robotic 
Arm and the Smart Safe Sensing System) to artificial intelligence and cognitive computing (for the 
Safety Aware Control Architecture) to social science and psychology (for the Human-Robot Mutual 
Understanding Framework) and regulatory aspects (for the ROSSINI Integration and Validation layer) 
More attention has to be paid to develop novel inherently-safe robotic concepts where collaboration with 
humans is taken up already in the design phase.   
 The ROSSINI “Collaborative by Birh” Robotic Arm (Specific Objective 3) is a new, human-centred 
concept of robotic manipulator, where collaboration has been the main guiding principle in design 
 Moreover, the ROSSINI platform will guarantee inherent safety to robotic applications developed 
through it, as it will contain safety compliant design guidelines and a complete set of mechatronic 
components with built-in safety features 
In order for effective HRC to be taken up by industry, beyond safety aspects, including ergonomics, 
adaptability, liability issues, inclusiveness of vulnerable workers, acceptability and feedback from users need 
to be considered in a holistic way. 
  The ROSSINI project proposes a human-centred approach to design and engineer adaptive 
manufacturing systems to support inclusiveness of vulnerable workers, taking in account the need of 
an ageing European workforce. In detail, ROSSINI’s new HRC environment will be able to 
intelligently adapt its behaviours according to external conditions, working conditions and the specific 
workers’ skills, tasks, and cognitive-physical abilities, thanks to a set of human-centred and context-
aware configuration rules. 
Integration in industrial production environments of novel human-centred designed smart mechatronic 
systems such as for example soft robotics for high payloads. .  
 The ROSSINI Smart and Safe Sensing System will provide robots with unattained sensing 
capabilities, which will in turn enable a safe and accurate measurement of the actual speed of the 
Human Operator and the other objects (including the Robot itself) in the working cell 
 Through ROSSINI, PILZ and SUPSI will work at the development of a new range of  human centred 
robotic manipulators, which will be offered to integrators as the platform actuation layer. The 
ROSSINI Inherently Safe Robotic Arm will feature safe axis position signalling via double 
communication channels, and an innovative solution for coupling brushless motors within robot joints.  
Implementation of novel artificial intelligence technologies capable of massive information processing and 
reacting in real-time to enable new levels of autonomy, navigation, cognitive perception and manipulation for 
robots to collaborate with humans in the process;  
 The ROSSINI Safety Aware Control Architecture will deploy advanced machine learning and 
object recognition algorithms which will make it possible to obtain a semantic scene map that adapts 
to dynamic working conditions, and to optimally schedule the robot tasks  
 
6 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Development of methods for robotic hazard assessment and risk management to clarify trade-offs between 
productivity and safety for mixed human-robot smart devices environments. 
 Through the ROSSINI Safety Aware Control Architecture, safety will be transformed from an 
unforeseen barrier into a dynamic constraint to consider when dynamically planning the best 
sequence of actions to fulfil a desired task.  
 The ROSSINI Integration and Validation layer will feature a set of new tools for collision 
measurement within robotic risk assessment procedures as per ISO/TS 15066, which will speed 
up the validation and efficiency of HRC applications 
Proposals need also to take into account Social Sciences and Humanities (SSH) elements regarding human-
related barriers for the uptake of smart mechatronic systems including robot technology in industrial 
environments such as ergonomics, user experience, comfort, trust, feeling of safety and liability in modern 
production facilities, taking into account age and gender aspects. 
 The ambition of ROSSINI Human-Robot Mutual Understanding Framework is to enhance smooth and 
flexible HRC by explicitly addressing human factors in early design and operational stage. 
Moreover, the use-cases will involve real workers thus allowing the project to gather a statistical 
relevant amount of data so to clarify as much as possible all the SSH aspect linked to the HRC.    
Proposals submitted under this topic should include actions designed to facilitate cooperation with other 
projects; to enhance user involvement; and to ensure the accessibility and reusability of data produced in the 
course of the project. 
 ROSSINI Impact Enhancement activities will include specific actions designed to facilitate 
cooperation with other projects and maximize the user involvement. Furthermore, WP7- 
Demonstration aims to demonstrate the TRL5 validated ROSSINI platform into 3 diverse industrial 
settings, in order to verify the expected performance in terms of production flexibility increase, job 
quality improvement and production reshoring enabling.
1.3 Concept and Methodology 
1.3.1 Overall ROSSINI Concept  
Although European industry now benefits from the advantages of a single large market, it is faced with new 
challenges in order to remain competitive in a global scenario. In this contest Advanced Robotics, and in 
particular Human-Robot Collaboration (HRC) applications, could have a high potential economic impact. 
Nevertheless, at present there are numerous obstacles that limit the diffusion of these technologies to 
manufacturing companies in Europe. 
Human-Robot Collaboration: a key driver for manufacturing sustainability in Europe 
HRC for Production Reshoring  
Today, Europe is experiencing the re-shoring of production facilities previously off-shored to emerging 
countries. Comparing Europe to emerging countries, the higher cost of labour means that automation is a key 
element in the growth of manufacturing (Bortolini, 2017). In this context, the adoption of a large use of 
robotics in production and assembly are key factors in making manufacturing within Europe 
economically viable. For these reasons, the European market for manufacturing robots is strongly expected to 
grow through diversification into industries with lower volumes, and into areas of manufacturing where manual 
assembly has previously moved away from Europe. For a manufacturing company which requires low 
installation and running costs and a high degree of flexibility, which cannot typically be provided by traditional 
large-scale manufacturing robotics, reshoring is also likely to be driven by the availability of highly flexible 
and easy to use manufacturing robots.  
HRC for Flexible Manufacturing Systems  
Nowadays the shift from high volume/low mix to low volume/high mix is becoming the new production 
paradigm in manufacturing sector, and Industry 4.0, linking the real-life factory with a virtual one, will play 
an increasingly important role in this epochal transition (IFR 2017). To meet the unknown or uncertain market 
demands with one, fixed assembly system over the whole life cycle, manufacturing systems must be designed 
to fulfil the peak performance and to offer a high degree of flexibility. In this context, advanced robotics can 
be viewed as an enabling technology which can be deployed across a wide range of industries and value 
 
7 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
chains. Due to its tendency to draw from and integrate different technologies and disciplines into the 
development of a single device or robot (i.e. machine vision, artificial intelligence, machine-to-machine 
communication, sensors, and actuators), advanced robotics is better described as a ‘technology bundle’ (see 
Figure 1) rather than as a 
single technology, 
(Eurofund 2017). Moreover, 
there is an increasing desire 
to have robots that in an 
efficient way can assist 
human workers (Haage et al. 
2009). In this way, co-bots 
are shifting the traditional 
limits of “what can be 
automated?” increasing 
manufacturing flexibility as 
‘low volume- high mix’ 
becomes the new normal. 
Compared with co-bots, the 
legacy industrial robots have 
higher speed, bigger payload 
and better stiffness, but they 
cannot compete in 
flexibility.  
HRC for Ageing Workforce 
Compensation 
In the last 15 years the 
percentage of European employees older than 50 years rose from 21.6% to 57,2% and today 5.9 million people 
of the European workforce are older than 60 years (Source: OECD). Ageing of the workforce poses a 
dramatic challenge for health and safety in all European countries, and most of the highly developed 
European nations are already facing shortages of qualified workers in some critical productive sectors (see 
Figure 2). For these reasons, today productive aging, work engagement, and participatory ergonomics appear 
to be the most promising areas of research in the field of worker aging (Magnavita 2017). Many aspects are 
involved in worker performance evolution with age, regarding both physical-physiological responses 
(muscular strength and power, aerobic capacity and endurance, reaction time) and cognitive capabilities. In 
any case, it is important to keep in mind that while, on the one hand, work-related musculoskeletal disorders 
are prevalent in highly repetitive short cycle operations, on the other hand, for more complex tasks, 
experience can compensate age capabilities 
decline and can assume a predominant 
importance. Furthermore, cognitive skills are 
needed by workers to interact with new 
technologies. Therefore, the need for new 
organizational tools able to take into account 
age-related changes in workforce productivity is 
urgent. (Boenzi et al. 2015). A digital human 
modelling based inclusive design approach is 
considered useful for addressing work-related 
issues of a diverse workforce, especially older 
workers. This proactive design approach benefits 
individuals and organizations by securing safe 
working conditions where people, with their 
existing differences, can perform at their best. 
(Case et al. 2015). In this context, smart system should adapt their behaviours to support the workers’ 
interaction with machine and to improve the global system productivity. System adaptation rules can be 
defined taking into account not only the variability of the process parameters and the external conditions, 
revealed by sensors, but also understanding the workers’ needs and reduced workability due to both physical 
Figure 1- Technology clusters in advanced industrial robotics 
Figure 2 - Employment rate in the EU, % of population 55-64 
 
8 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
and cognitive functional decrease is fundamental to improve the design of smart manufacturing systems 
(Peruzzini & Pellicciari 2017). In particular, the integration of robot technologies in the design and 
management of assembly processes leads to novel assembly systems. In these new assembly workstations, 
aided assembly improve the fastening and picking activities reducing their duration and ensuring safe working 
conditions, through several technologies such as IoT, Augmented Reality and Co-bots. In this contest, an 
efficient degree of Human-Robot Collaboration (HRC) has a high impact, because co-bots automatically 
adjust their configuration in real-time to best fit with the worker physique and the fastening task features. 
Moreover, co-bots provide to the worker an artificial force to perform hazardous activities reducing the 
ergonomic risk of strenuous tasks (Bortolini et al., 2017). 
Current methods and constrains to achieve Human-Robot Collaboration 
Recently introduced sensors and robot technologies enable different degrees of HRC on the factory floor, 
ranging from fenceless coexistence to close collaboration. According to the world's first specifications of safety 
requirements for collaborative robot applications (ISO/TS 15066:2016), collaborative operations between 
humans and robots may include one or more of the safeguarding methods depicted in Table 1.  
Table 1 - Representation of HRC safeguarding methods as per ISO/TS 15066:2016 (PILZ GMBH & CO. KG) 
 
Safety-related stop (STO)  
The robot motion ceases before an operator enters the collaborative workspace to 
interact with the robot system and complete a task (e.g. loading a part onto the end-
effector). Robot system motion can resume without any additional intervention only 
after the operator has exited the collaborative workspace. 
 
Hand Guiding  
The operator uses a hand-operated device to transmit motion commands to the robot 
system. Before the operator is permitted to enter the collaborative workspace and 
conduct the hand-guiding task, the robot achieves a safety-rated monitored stop. The 
task is carried out by manually actuating guiding devices located at or near the robot 
end-effector.  
 
Speed and distance monitoring  
The robot system and operator may move concurrently in the collaborative workspace. 
Risk reduction is achieved by maintaining at least the protective separation distance 
between operator and robot at all times during robot motion. When the robot system 
reduces its speed, the protective separation distance decreases correspondingly. 
 
Power and force limiting  
A physical contact between the robot system (including the workpiece) and an operator 
can occur either intentionally or unintentionally. Power and force limited collaborative 
operation requires robot systems specifically designed for this particular type of 
operation. Risk reduction is achieved, either through inherently safe means in the robot 
or through a safety-related control system. 
In modern factories, human and robots can share workspace in different ways, and in the robotic community 
the terms coexistence, cooperation and collaboration are widely-used in the robotic community to refer to a 
case in which a human and a robot are working together in a fenceless environment, giving rise to 
misunderstandings and unclear wording. Behrens, Saenz, Vogel, & Elkmann, (2015)2 propose a taxonomy 
based on three essential characteristics of collaborative workcells that may build on each other to determine 
different forms of co-work: 
 Shared Workspace: The human co-worker is intended to carry out a certain task in at least a limited 
part of the robot workspace. 
 Simultaneous Co-Work: The human co-worker is intended to carry out a certain task within the shared 
workspace while the robot is moving to complete its task 
 Physical Contact: The human co-worker is intended to work hand in hand with the moving robot. 
 
2 The authors of this paper are members of the Fraunhofer IFF team that will work on ROSSINI. 

 
9 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Based on the simultaneous presence of one or more of these essential characteristics, it is possible to define 
four forms of co-work, depicted in Figure 3. In a manufacturing context we interpret coexistence as the 
completion of independent tasks in separate 
workspaces (the human is working at a workplace 
that is close to a workplace of a robot with no physical 
overlapping between both workplaces). In 
Sequential Cooperation, the robot and human are 
working successively on the same workpiece in a 
sequential order: while the human is working the 
robot is stopped and while the robot is working the 
human is not in the shared workspace. In Parallel 
Cooperation, the robot and the human are working 
simultaneously on the same workpiece within the 
shared workspace while physical contact between 
both is not allowed. Finally, Collaboration is the 
closest form of cooperation and refers to joint actions 
to complete a common task at the same time, with 
Physical contact needed and therefore included. 
Each form of co-work can then be safeguarded with one or more methods defined in ISO/TS 15066 (Figure 
4). The question “Which of the possible safeguarding 
modes makes the most sense?” cannot be answered per se. 
However, it is to be noted that the “Power and Force 
Limiting” is the only safeguarding mode which allows 
the user to switch between the different forms of co-
work, so that the flexible use of the robot in a rapidly 
changing production is always possible (Behrens, Saenz, 
Vogel, & Elkmann, 2015). The ISO/TS 15066 
specification includes formulas for calculating the 
protective separation distance for speed and separation 
monitoring. Moreover, it contains guidance on pain 
threshold limits for various parts of the body, for use when 
designing power- and force-limiting applications. These 
pain thresholds were established by a study from the 
University of Mainz, Germany, using male and female 
volunteer human test subjects of a variety of ages, sizes, 
and occupations. The data can be used to set limits on 
levels of power and force used by the collaborative robot 
system or application. 
At the end of this necessary recap of the HRC current methodological and technical framework, it is important 
to stress three relevant facts for the ROSSINI concept: 
1) Cobot safety requirements based on actual power and force limiting technologies often lead to the 
exclusion of some typical applications of industrial robots, characterized by high performance in 
terms of speed and payload. In other words, today there is a lack of high performance robotic 
technologies, able to combine the safety of cobots and the productivity of industrial robots.  
2) Another common misconception is that if the robot is "inherently safe," then the operation is safe. The 
term "inherently safe" is similar to the term "collaborative robot." It describes built-in safety features 
of the robot's design. Again, no matter how "safe" or "collaborative" a robot arm, it needs to be 
assessed as integrated into a complete robot system-and the system as a whole may not be safe 
for collaborative use. For instance, if the operation requires a robot to manipulate sharp objects, then 
it is not safe to have a human beside it-no matter how small, rounded, or padded the robot arm itself 
might be-without additional protective safety measures (Franklin, 2017).  
3) Finally, Human-Robot Collaboration faces the constant threat of lack of acceptance from the 
workforce. On one hand, workers need to get acquainted with complex safeguarding modes that are 
Figure 3 - Flowchart to determine the form of co-work 
Figure 4 - Types of safeguarding modes depending on the form of co-work 
 
10 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
constantly reminding the risk of being injured. On the other hand, the robotic co-worker may insinuate 
the fear that it will totally replace the human operator in the future. 
Human-Robot Collaboration: a potential still untapped 
The considerations expressed above should make it clear that the spread of HRC is presently far from having 
reached its full potential. According to the International Federation of Robotics (IFR), HRC applications pose 
several interesting challenges to the manufacturing industry (Table 2). Some collaborative robot designs, for 
instance, sacrifice accuracy and repeatability in favour of inherent safety, which impacts the robots’ 
reliability on the production floor. (Jeremy et al. n.d.). Furthermore, the lack of methodologies for a productive 
and effective motion planning and 
scheduling of human–robot cooperative 
(HRC) tasks is still limiting the spread of 
HRC systems (Pellegrinelli et al. 2017). 
Today 45% of the robot supply is taken 
up by 10% of the industry, and 90% of 
the potential users have not adopted 
robotics for manufacturing. Therefore, 
despite all the previously mentioned 
advantages, HRC technologies still must 
overcome the barrier of high investment 
costs. According to IFR, the cost of 
deploying an HRC automation system can 
be split into 20-25 % for the robot, 20-30 % auxiliary hardware, and 45-60 % systems integration. The cost of 
systems integration is significant as there is very limited reuse of software from one application to the next. In 
addition, a large investment in effort, time and intellectual capital is required to integrate robots and 
sensors into the manufacturing workflow, as these systems must be both individually and collectively 
calibrated and registered together. Such an investment is particularly challenging to SMEs enterprises, but has 
a certain impact also for several large eneterprises (Fousekis et al. 2017). 
The ROSSINI answer: a comprehensive solution from the safety experts  
In order to tackle the challenges explained above, and to seize the HRC potential to enable sustainable and 
flexible manufacturing, the ROSSINI consortium has agreed on an ambitious plan to develop and demonstrate 
a platform for the integration of human-centred robotic technologies in industrial production.  
The ROSSINI founding core is the historical partnership between PILZ and DATALOGIC, two global 
leaders in the fields of automation safety and sensors technology respectively. These two companies decided 
to structure their collaboration and to join efforts to structure their technology offer in an integrated way, with 
a specific focus on enabling sensor and control technology for HRC, developing the Smart and Safe Sensing 
System (RS4) for improved human and robot detection and tracking. RS4 will combine a set of sensors based 
on different technologies but able to work together delivering full information on the monitored area (sensor 
fusion), thus overcoming the limits of current technologies, where a single type of sensor cannot guarantee an 
adequate level of safety. By involving the Automation, Robotics and System Control at UNIMORE and IRIS, 
the concept of Safety Aware Control Architecture was elaborated, through which the massive amount of 
data generated by the RS4 is processed through object recognition and machine learning algorithms to generate 
a semantic scene map, constantly updated and explicitly considered in the design of the next generation of 
PILZ PRIMO Motion controllers. This approach will in turn lead to the realization of a cognitive layer which 
will dynamically optimize the behaviour of the robot for maximizing the efficiency while preserving the safety 
of the overall system. In addition to this, PILZ has taken the historical decision to enter the market of robotic 
manipulators, and for this reason the Collaborative By Birth Robotic Arm concept was developed, also 
through the involvement of the SUPSI Automation Robotics and Machines research group. Beyond actuation, 
control and sensing system, the human co-worker has been identified as the fourth element of the platform, 
thanks to the involvement of the Sustainable Productivity & Employability research group at TNO, who will 
deliver a framework to realise effective human-robot mutual understanding. The ROSSINI Platform was 
then conceived, bringing together all such innovation into one set of integrated layers, which will include also 
specific tools to support integrators developing safe HRC applications: in this sense, the ROSSINI platform 
can be considered an inherently safe robotic concept. The involvement of the Robotic Systems Unit at the 
Table 2 - Trends, challenges and Enablers in robot integration (Source IFR) 
 
11 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Fraunhofer Institute for Factory Operation and Automation IFF allowed to include, in the ROSSINI platform, 
also a set of tools and guidelines to speed up and increase the efficiency of risk assessment and validation 
procedures for HRC, particularly when measuring collision. Finally, in order to ensure an adequate feedback 
from end users and demonstration of the platform’s functionalities, the consortium added MACHINEBOUW, 
an experienced robot integrator, and three manufacturing companies, which will provide three use-cases 
related to Domestic Appliances Assembly (WHIRLPOOL), Electronic Components Production 
(SCHINDLER) and Food Products Packaging (IMA).  
Through ROSSINI, the limits to HRC spread expressed above will be systematically addressed: 
1) Safety requirements limiting applications in terms of speed and payload: 
 the ROSSINI platform will allow for higher working speeds and reduced separation distance in 
HRC thanks to specific technological improvement at the level of sensing, control and actuation 
technology 
2) Need to assess the safety of HRC at the level of application  
 the ROSSINI holistic approach will carry out an effective harmonisation of different technologies 
through an integrated platform, thus ensuring the inherent safety of the developed applications  
3) Lack of workforce acceptance in HRC 
 The ROSSINI human-robot mutual understanding will improve the quality of the human job, and will 
provide an early assessment of the job quality impact on HRC already in the design phase 
TRL Positioning and related R&D Activities 
The ROSSINI Project results, even considering the challenging objectives, are expected to reach a TRL6 
suitable for the preliminary implementation in relevant industrial environment, thanks to the solid 
technological base to work with, provided by ROSSINI industrial and research partners. All lines of research 
start from the translation of a working prototype (TRL4) in a new industrial environment. TRL5 will be 
achieved at the completion of the 4 research WPs, obtaining 4 industrial scale prototypes, which will be 
combined into an integrated platform. Demonstration activities, carried out at three different industrial sites, 
will lead to the attainment of TRL6 at the end of project activities, thanks to an extensive testing and validation 
campaign aimed at confirming the expected performance improvements. 
ROSSINI will leverage on the preliminary results and outputs arising from national and international research 
and innovation activities carried out by partners, as highlighted in Table 3: 
Table 3- ROSSINI Related R&D Activities 
PROJECT PROGRAMME RESEARCH TOPICS LINKS WITH ROSSINI 
SAPARO – Safe Human-
Robot Cooperation with 
high payload robots in 
industrial applications 
European 
Commission – FP7 
(ECHORD++ 
Experiment, GA 
601116) 
Dynamic safety zones based 
on robot joint positions and 
velocities  
Pressure-sensitive tactile floor 
detecting human position 
Dynamic safety zones 
integrated in ROSSINI 
control architecture 
PILZ Safety Mat integrated 
in the ROSSINI RS4 
FourByThree - Highly 
customizable robotic 
solutions for effective and 
safe human robot 
collaboration in 
manufacturing applications 
European 
Commission – H2020 
(GA 637095) 
PILZ & 
FRAUNHOFER 
Involved 
Safety strategies allowing 
intrinsically safe behaviour of 
the robot 
Open-control architecture 
allowing the integration of 
custom algorithms by third 
parties 
Intrinsic safety and openness 
concepts will be brought by 
ROSSINI from the control 
level to the whole platform 
level 
ROBO-PARTNER - 
Seamless Human-Robot 
Cooperation for Intelligent, 
Flexible and Safe 
Operations in the 
Assembly Factories of the 
Future 
European 
Commission – FP7 
(GA 608855) 
PILZ Involved 
Safety Eye for Fenceless 
robot working spaces 
Integration and 
Communication architecture, 
using ontology model to 
provide real time monitoring 
and information  
Safety Eye will be further 
optimised and integrated in 
the ROSSINI RS4 
Safety Aware Control 
Architecture will improve 
the I&C architecture through 
Artificial Intelligence 
 
12 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
PROJECT PROGRAMME RESEARCH TOPICS LINKS WITH ROSSINI 
X-act - Expert cooperative 
robots for highly skilled 
operations for the factory 
of the future 
European 
Commission – FP7 
(GA 314355) 
PILZ Involved 
Highly intuitive interfaces for 
cooperation of humans and 
robots 
Fenceless human robot 
supervision system (Safety 
Eye) for detecting/ monitoring 
human presence 
Intuitive interfaces will be 
used for human-robot 
mutual understanding 
Safety Eye will be further 
optimised and integrated in 
the ROSSINI RS4 
SELECT - Smart and 
Efficient Location, 
idEntification, and 
Cooperation Techniques 
European 
Commission – FP7 
(GA 257544) 
Datalogic Involved 
High-accuracy detection, 
identification, and location of 
objects/person using a 
network of intelligent self-
configuring radio devices.  
ROSSINI RS4 will expand 
the sensing technologies and 
the diversity of data to be 
generated and managed by 
the system 
VALERI - Validation of 
Advanced, Collaborative 
Robotics for Industrial 
Applications 
European 
Commission – FP7 
(GA 314774) 
FRAUNHOFER 
Involved 
Mobile manipulator to assist 
assembly tasks in aerospace, 
able to work side by side with 
humans 
ROSSINI Use Case related 
to Food Products Packaging 
will involve a mobile 
manipulator to assist 
machine operators 
Autonomous Blank 
Feeding for Packaging 
Machines 
European 
Commission – FP7 
(EUROCC 
Experiment, GA 
608849) 
IMA Involved 
Robotised system for flexible, 
collaborative blank loading on 
industrial shop floors 
The robotised system 
concept will be translated 
into a collaborative mobile 
co-worker in ROSSINI 
white’R – white room 
based on Reconfigurable 
robotic Island for 
optoelectronics 
European Commision 
– FP7 
(FoF.NMP.2013 – 2, 
Innovative Re-Use Of 
Modular Equipment 
Based On Integrated 
Factory Design, GA 
609228) 
SUPSU Involved 
Project and development of a 
high-precision 6-DOF robot, 
for assembly and disassembly 
of high value added 
optoelectronic products. 
Integration of the robot  in a 
cell at the shop-floor level 
with other operation units, 
transport, handling and 
tooling systems. 
Development of a new- 
concept actuation systems 
for anthropomorphous 
collaborative robots. 
Integration of the robot in a 
collaborative production cell 
at the shop-floor.  
MAN-MADE  
MANufacturing through 
ergonoMic and safe 
Anthropocentric aDaptive 
workplacEs for context 
aware factories in 
EUROPE 
(FoF.NMP.2013-3 
609073  
WHR, SUPSI 
Involved 
New socially sustainable 
workplaces where the human 
dimension is key.  
Workplace adaptation to 
skills, expertise and 
characteristic of workers 
Adaption of workplaces to 
embed collaborative robots 
and ontology to represent 
workers from 
anthropometric and skills 
perspective. 
1.3.2 Rossini Methodology 
Though a structured and coherent approach, ROSSINI will develop and demonstrate technologies enabling a 
significant advancement in HRC. Besides implementing 4 synergic lines of research, and the integration of the 
results into one comprehensive platform for the design and validation of HRC application, ROSSINI will also 
develop 3 industrial demonstrators, which will act as technological showcases for the market replication and 
therefore for the full leverage of the market potential of exploitable results. 
Line of research 1 – Sensing Technology  
The RS4 (ROSSINI Smart and Safe Sensing System) will be the link between the environment and an 
efficient and safe movement of a robot in it, when at least a human operator is also present in the same 
environment. RS4 will be a set of sensors based on different technologies but able to work together in order to 
provide full information on the monitored area (sensor fusion). The application designer will identify the actual 
set of sensors based on the application and of the complexity of the scene. Not only the position but also the 
 
13 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
speed of each operator and object in the scene will be tracked in order to continuously adjust the robot 
trajectories (dynamic robot control). The same information will be used to continuously adjust both the 
position and the dimensions of the safety areas (dynamic safety). The robot movements will be limited only 
in case of real danger for persons or things.  
More specifically, RS4 will allow both a 2D and a 3D monitoring based on the specific requirements. 2D and 
3D sensors can be used and each sensor may have a different performance in terms of speed, resolution, 
accuracy. In order to avoid occlusions or to improve safety some areas might be covered by redundant sensors. 
The expected vision sensors interaction pattern will be the following: 
 Wide-range, low-speed and 2D sensors monitor access to the danger zone at large and medium 
distance from the robot, to inform downstream sensors of the complexity of the scene. 
 Medium-range, faster, 3D sensors monitor the operating space at medium distance from the robot. 
 Short-range, high-resolution, very fast, 3D sensors monitor the area at very short distance from the 
robot (or the same sensors as above in a different operating mode). 
 Moving objects (men or vehicles) are monitored by tracing them from the peripheral areas of the 
working area. 
RS4 will be based on different technologies: the safe sensor list will include at least laser scanners (based on 
the DATALOGIC Sentinel Safety Laser Scanner), sensitive rubber mats (based on the PILZ Safety Mat), 3D 
cameras (based on the PILZ Safety eye) and radar sensor. The sensors will provide different types of 
information: 
o safety alarms: when a single sensor is sufficient to detect a safety violation 
o complex safety information (e.g. point clouds): to be used by a safety controller to detect complex 
safety conditions by means of sensor fusion 
o non-safety related information (e.g. images): to be used for high level motion planning and for 
human-machine interfacing like gesture recognition or operator identity detection 
RS4 sensors will use safe buses to exchange safety data (IO Link Safety, Profinet/Profisafe, or Ethernet-
IP/CIP Safety) and may use non-safe buses (standard Ethernet) for non-safety information. RS4 sensors will 
be configured using a single graphic interface with auto-learn features to ease and speed up the installation 
and the certification. Based on the evolution of international safety regulations, the RS4 set of sensors may 
contain non-safe sensors to be used for safety  
RS4 will first of all include a new Safe 3D Vision Sensor module, for which Hardware, Software, Mechanical 
and Optical with intrinsic safety features will be carried out. The PILZ Safety Eye represents the State of the 
Art and it will be taken as the starting point for a design that aims to be a substantial improvement. Regarding 
Laser Scanning, the goal is to modify the existing Laser Sentinel Cluster to add advanced features needed to 
create a single compound image starting from several partially overlapped images coming from each elements 
of the cluster. Besides, technology research shall also be needed on different technologies, among which the 
consortium envisages radar and capacitive sensing, and medium range environment sensing, which can 
include thermal, ultrasound and acoustic sensing. The whole sensors array will need standard ethernet based 
safety fieldbus communication, with modular hardware implementation development using standard FPGAs 
or Microprocessors. Finally RS4 will involve the design of a Safety Sensor modules Controller, in charge of 
the integration of multi sensors information in a single multidimensional image of the overall scene (fusion of 
RS4 sensors partial data).  
The vision is to use RS4 to develop a "Dynamic Safety Shell", shown in Figure 5, which expands and contracts 
dynamically, based on the minimum required distance, calculated as a function of the robot speed, as defined 
by the ISO standard. 
 
14 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
 
 The communication over safe field-buses (ProfiNet Safety, DeviceNet Safety, Ethernet/IP Safety) will allow 
to connect RS4 to the robot controller and to define which protected spaces to activate based on the presence 
or absence of the operator, always guaranteeing a degree of security conforming to PLd cat.3, according to 
ISO13849. This will allow to create a flexible and self-reconfiguring security system capable of meeting the 
safety requirements defined in ISO 15066: 2016-5.5.4 about speed monitoring and minimum separation 
distance when robotic system and operator work concurrently within the same collaborative workspace. In this 
way, it will be possible to overcome the limitation of the static predefinition of the robot’s protected 
working spaces by computing in real-time a volume which encloses the mechanical structure of the robot 
(links, joints and end-effector) and moves together with it, thanks to the real-time analysis of the angular 
positions of the joints, monitored by safe encoders (see Line of Research 3 – Actuation Technology). In the 
same way, through a 3D safe vision system and other technologies, such as 3D vision system and geo-
localization, the position and speed of the operator can be detected, which will also be surrounded by its 
"Dynamic Safety Shell" that expands and contracts based his/her speed and direction. To further increase the 
safety level a dedicated multiprocessor system should perform the computation on different processors or 
alternatively different cores (in case of multi-core processor).  
The ROSSINI RS4 is expected to act as the key enabler for advanced robotic safety and collaboration functions 
deployed in the subsequent platform layers. As such, it is expected to deliver the following performance: 
Figure 5 -  Robot Dynamic Safety Shell 
 
15 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
 70% reduction in Response Time compared to presently available sensing technologies This will 
reduce the contribution to the Protective Separation Distance attributable to the operator’s change in 
location (Sh) for Collaborative Operations Method c) according to ISO/TS 150663. 
 The capacity to fuse data coming from at least 5 different sources (Vision, Laser Scanning, Radar, 
Capacitive Sensors, Ultrasounds) 
 Safe and accurate measurement of the actual speed of the Human Operator and the other objects 
(including the Robot itself) in the working cell 
Line of research 2 – Robot Control Technology 
ROSSINI aims at radically changing the current safety paradigm adopted in the setup of cooperative 
robotic cells for industrial application. Currently, safety is treated as a barrier in front of which the robot has 
to slow down and eventually stop. The behaviour (e.g. motion, interaction) of the robot is the output of a 
planner whose planning strategy is built considering a free environment and/or few obstacles in a fixed 
position. Because of the variability of the environment, such a setup can cause several unexpected stops and 
the user has to adapt to the safety-induced, often inefficient for a specific cooperative scenario, behaviour of 
the robot during the cooperation. In ROSSINI safety is transformed from an unforeseen barrier into a 
dynamic constraint to consider when dynamically planning the best sequence of actions to fulfil a desired 
task. This makes ROSSINI collaborative robotic system much more flexible and efficient than collaborative 
systems currently available on the market. ROSSINI will reverse the classical paradigm according to which 
“the user has to learn how the robot works and to adapt to it” for achieving a novel cooperative paradigm 
according to which “the robot learns what the human wants and adapts to it”. 
To this aim, the data coming from the sensors of the cooperative cells will be collected and aggregated to 
achieve a semantic scene map that allows the control system to be aware of the position of the main elements 
of the cooperative task to execute (e.g. humans, objects to manipulate) and the main areas where a safe 
behaviour is required (e.g. humans, infrastructure elements, mobile robots). Semantic scene maps are 
dynamically updated and explicitly considered in the design of the ROSSINI controllers in order to build a 
safety aware control architecture. By the knowledge of the task to execute, of the input of the human and of 
the safety critical areas, the control architecture can dynamically optimize the behaviour of the robot for 
maximizing the efficiency while preserving the safety of the overall system.  
The ROSSINI safety aware control architecture has a hierarchical structure and it is represented in Figure 6.  
In the context of Artificial Intelligence tools, we propose to use a GPC (Gaussian Process classifier, 
Rassmussen et al., 2006) together with an incremental active learning technique (Settles, Burr, 2010) in 
which the human user labels uncertain cases, when necessary. Active learning is a special case of semi-
supervised machine learning in which a learning algorithm is able to interactively query the user (or some 
other information source)4. One issue with this approach is that the learning algorithm should be able to "auto-
evaluate" itself - for example, when its uncertainty about classifying a given object goes above a given 
threshold, it asks the user for clarification about the corresponding object. This selective requesting avoids 
overloading the user (asking him/her to label everything). Also, as the learner resolves more cases, it may 
 
3 ISO/TS 15066:2016 specifies safety requirements for collaborative industrial robot systems and the work environment. 
The document identifies a formula to calculate the Protective Separation Distance between the robot and the human 
operator in collaborative operations: 𝑆𝑝(𝑡0) = 𝑆ℎ + 𝑆𝑟 + 𝑆𝑠 + 𝐶 + 𝑍𝑑+ 𝑍𝑟 
Where: 
𝑆𝑝(𝑡0) = Protective separation distance 
𝑆ℎ = The operator’s change in location 
𝑆𝑟 = The robot’s change in location 
𝑆𝑠 = The robot’s stopping distance 
𝐶 = The intrusion distance that a part of the body can move 
𝑍𝑑+ 𝑍𝑟 = Position uncertainty for both the robot and operator toward the hazard zone prior to actuation of the safeguard 
4 Some typical machine learning algorithms used for active learning and in robotics are 'Support Vector Machines' (Cortes, 
Vapnik, 1995), LogitBoost classifiers and Gaussian Process classifiers (Rasmussen and Christopher, 2006). Indeed these 
algorithms were benchmarked by Grimmett et al. (Grimmett, Paul, Triebel, Posner, 2013) and the GPCs were found to 
be the best for traffic light and road sign identification. Grimmett also calculated an uncertainty threshold using 
information theory (Shannon entropy measure), normalizing by the maximum value. 
 
16 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
require progressively less requests to the user. This results in a process of active disambiguation via a human-
machine dialogue. 
The pieces of information collected 
by the safe sensors are merged by 
means of a sensor fusion strategy in 
order to obtain a complete picture of 
the safety conditions in the working 
area, compensating occlusions and 
other events that can lead to a loss of 
information to some of the safe 
sensors.  Both (merged) safety 
sensors and non-safe sensors are 
exploited for building the semantic 
scene map, where all the elements of 
the scene and safety areas are 
mapped. Given the task to be 
executed, the inputs coming by the 
operator or by external sensors (e.g. 
coordination with other machine in 
the production line) and the semantic scene map, the cognitive layer schedules a high-level plan for the 
robot. This plan consists of a set of cooperative actions that the robot needs to execute (e.g. move in front of 
the user, grasp a given mechanical part).  
The schedule is dynamic and it is updated when the working environment conditions, captured by the semantic 
scene map, change. The planned actions are queued and sent to the flexible execution layer. The Task 
Execution planner interprets the high-level action to execute and it generates the most efficient and 
safety preserving low-level plan for the robot (e.g. the motion of the manipulator). This is done by 
optimizing task related metrics while modelling safety-critical regions as constraints to avoid. Continuous 
replanning is implemented in order to adapt the low-level behaviour to variable working conditions. The 
desired low-level behaviour is then reproduced on the robot by the Task Execution Controller and the control 
signals are directly sent to the robot. Both the cognitive layer and the task execution planner will exploit 
intention prediction to infer what the user will do next and therefore be able to plan a more efficient behaviour 
in advance. This represents a smart time-saving tool which step-by-step makes the overall process significantly 
more efficient. The safety layer takes care of guaranteeing safety in case of unexpected events. In fact, 
while the cognitive layer and the task execution layer always plan the behaviour of the robot in order to avoid 
unsafe situations, unexpected situations can be created by external entities. For example, it can happen that the 
human, unintentionally, gets too close to the robot, preventing safe motion to be planned. Thus, the output of 
the safe sensors is fed back to the safety controller that monitors and reacts to the rise of these situations. When 
a safety critical condition is detected, the command coming from the Task Execution Controller is inhibited 
and a proper safety recovery action (e.g. stop the robot) is activated. After this kind of emergency occurs a 
new safe plan is implemented and the process can resume.  
The ROSSINI Safety Aware Control Architecture is expected to deliver the following performance: 
 To exploit the task description and the safety map, the cognitive layer will deploy AI-powered 
scheduling strategies in order to dynamically find the best sequence of actions for the robot which 
concurrently allows to execute the tasks efficiently without compromising the safety at anytime. This 
will lead to an optimized task's execution which adapts to the variable working conditions. Thanks to 
this optimization, the ROSSINI dynamic scheduler will allow to reduce by 20% the task execution 
time.  
 The dynamic planner will process every single action and will dynamically optimize the execution 
both in terms of trajectory and/or interactive behaviour to perform while considering the variable 
safety conditions in the working area. This will lead to an optimal implementation of each robot's 
cooperative action, which will eventually results in a reduction of up to 25% of the execution time 
of each action.  
 
Figure 6 -  Hierarchical structure of the ROSSINI safety aware control architecture 
 
17 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
The joint action of the dynamic scheduler and of the dynamic planner can lead to a reduction of up to 45% 
of the overall task execution time within robotic workcells. Moreover, This approach allows high flexibility 
in the redefinition of human-robot interaction through a self-learning and self-adapring behaviour, allowing 
the system to be resilient to changes and reducing the needs of physical or logical reconfiguration, reducing 
production reconfiguration cost by an estimate 5%. 
Line of research 3 – Robot Actuation Technology 
 When it comes to actuation, the Rossini project addresses a 
number of challenges, which will contribute to the 
improvement of the scientific and industrial state of the art with 
reference to fundamental robotic topics. In today’s robotics 
there are several different types of robot design, each with its 
own strengths and specialties but concurrently weaknesses. 
Focusing on industrial and collaborative robotics state-of-the-
art, it is possible to highlight relevant features related to 
performance and safety depicted in Table 1. The ultimate goal 
of the project is to combine the best of both worlds to 
engineer a new generation of robots featuring the safety peculiarities of cobots and the high 
performances of industrial robots. Specifically, the focus must be placed on the ability of handling precisely 
and fast heavy objects with a collaborative robot and concurrently guarantee a high safety level for the human 
operator. In order to achieve the above mentioned goal, the following aspects have to be considered in the 
project: 
a. Robot mechanical conceptual redesign. A major mechanical redesign is needed in order to reduce the 
overall inertia of the robotic arm and ensure a stiffness level which eventually results in a positioning 
precision comparable to the one of standard industrial robots. The needed steps are the following: 
 new concept of the kinematic chain, focused on the repositioning of the actuation systems (motors 
& gearboxes) closer to the robot base in order to reduce the arm inertia, taking advantage of innovative 
belt or cable-based mechanical transmission (Yong-Jae Kim, 2017) 
 reshape the robot’s body by taking advantage of  forefront advanced materials (e.g. 
composite/hybrid) as well as cutting edge manufacturing technologies (e.g. Additive manufacturing) 
to ensure high stiffness while maintaining a light weight 
b. Force feedback. In most cases force detection is used to make the robot more collaborative. If an external 
force is applied to the robot, (by a human operator, for example), it is detected through motor current 
allowing the controller to make a decision on an alternative response like stop motion, reduce speed, or 
change direction. There are two main methods for embedded detection and measurement of force or torque, 
strain gages and motor torque. Strain gages normally only cover certain single dimensions requiring 
multiple sensors. They also carry a significant wiring challenge. Detecting motor torque changes as 
feedback from external forces applied is the preferred method because the motor is what is providing the 
motion in the first place and its current levels are directly proportional to its torque output. Unfortunately, 
any compliance and decoupling of the robot mechanics from the motor results in errors in torque 
measurements. The new approach uses dual encoders, not only to improve joint accuracy, but for 
real time monitoring of the stiffness/compliance in each robot joint. Through this method, joint 
position and torque can be monitored together to provide safe information to the collaborative robot 
controller. With accurate torque and position monitoring force sensing, even in the presence of 
stiffness/compliance can be compensated for. 
c. Dual-motor robot joint. In order to increase the intrinsic safety of the collaborative robot, the basic idea is 
to design a new concept of robot joint, provided with two motors, the first one responsible of the normal 
joint positioning during robot task execution, the second one acting as safety device for fast-retract of the 
robot in case of collision with a human. The auxiliary motor, during the normal functioning of the robot, 
has to guarantee the stiffness of the kinematic chain by delivering the maximum torque at zero-speed. In 
case of a collision, different reaction strategies will be applied depending on the force and the direction of 
the collision itself: the second motor could be completely released, acting as a safety clutch, or it could be 
driven in the opposite direction of the collision, limiting the total inertia of the movement. Again, two or 
Table 4 - Industrial/Collaborative Robot Benchmark 

 
18 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
more auxiliary motors can act synchronously, with something like a light-interpolation, to allow the robot 
follow a predefined path during the retraction movement. 
The potential margin of improvement can be estimated by considering a commercially available existing 
robot (Kuka) with the following specs: 25 Kg payload / 2033 mm reach / 6-axis industrial robot. The typical 
stopping distances for STOP 0 (category 0 stop), axis 1 is shown in Figure 7. The graphs shows the axis 1 (A1 
- robot base rotation) stopping distances after a STOP 0 is triggered. The values refer to the following 
configurations: Extension I = 33 / 66%; Program Override POV = 30..100%; Load mass m = 33 / 66 / 100%.  
For our calculation, considering a robot involved in a collaborative task, we use the typical extension value of 
66%. With a max robot reach of 2033 mm the resulting tool distance from the robot base is then about 1340 
mm. Assuming the maximum load applied on the robot flange (25 Kg – 100%) and a 50% of the max speed, 
we can get from the graph a stopping distance of about 10° for axis 1, which means about 116 mm of robot 
flange stopping distance in case of linear motion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7 – Standard robot Stopping Distance (Source: Kuka) 
With the newly designed robot 3 factors contribute to the reduction of the stopping distance: 
1. dual-motor joint with fast braking and retraction (20% expected reduction) 
2. dual-encoder joint with force feedback fast evaluation (10% expected reduction) 
3. mechanical robot redesign with reduction of total robot inertia (15% expected reduction) 
 
Figure 8 - protective separation distance for cobots (ISO TS 15066:2016) 

 
19 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Based on the above assumptions we can determine a total reduction of 45%, which reduces the stopping 
distance from 116 to 63 mm. Based on the definition of protective separation distance for cobots (ISO TS 
15066:2016, see Figure 8), this improvement results in the possibility of:  
 reducing the minimum separation distance human-robot by 45%, with advantages in term of 
productivity for most collaborative tasks 
 or an increment of 45% of working speed of the robot, which can result in better performance of 
other collaborative tasks 
Line of research 4 – Human-robot mutual understanding 
Successful adoption of new and genuine human-robot collaborations, both increasing flexible production and 
improving the quality of the job, requires a holistic approach in which: 
(1) human factors like user experience, comfort, trust, feeling of safety, and liability, are addressed and 
accounted for in the early design stages (Design Level); 
(2) constant monitoring of the process, human behaviour, and robot behaviour takes place and online changes 
to the original task planning can be made during operation (Adaptive Level); 
(3) profound mutual understanding between robots and people in operation is realized (Communication 
Level). 
Design level. Elements to address in the design stage, is the explicit design of the human-robot interaction and 
the definition of human-robot collaboration scenarios. Here the work process is evaluated. Based on a task and 
capacity analysis it is investigated which actors (human and/or robot) can perform which task. Moreover, 
scenarios describe possible ways for humans and robots to interact. The scenarios indicate what information 
needs to be exchanged between actors to establish mutual understanding and successful job completion 
(Johnson et al., 2014). Furthermore the scenarios give a basic indication on how the workspace is designed 
(shared workspace, synchronous movements, basic safety implementations). An evaluation tool allows to 
assess job quality, productivity, flexibility, and configuration time for different collaboration scenarios in 
early stages of the design process.  
Adaptive level. The adaptive level dispatches tasks to the actors according to the scenarios that were made. 
When the scenarios contain multiple execution paths the ACL should consider human and machine factors 
when dispatching tasks to humans or robots. Dispatching criteria are influenced by foreseeable and 
unforeseeable factors. 
 Foreseeable: Inclusiveness of vulnerable workers, Day shifts / night shifts, training, scheduled 
equipment maintenance, etc. 
 Unforeseeable: Sick leave, safety interventions, equipment failure, temporarily lowering of operator 
capacity, etc. 
We also propose that operators can make online changes to the planning in an intuitive way. This allows 
operators to give feedback to the system and enhance autonomy. Dispatching of tasks to the operator is 
monitored. It can be checked that the tasks dispatched to the operator fulfil the operator and industry needs 
(work load, task variety, breaks, etc.). Ethics are an important issue here, only that information is collected and 
shared that guarantee that operators’ privacy and safety are maintained. 
Communication level. To enhance smooth human robot interaction, human and robot must be mutually 
predictable and adequately estimate each other’s intentions (Klein et al, 2004). Two key technologies to 
achieve this are: 
 Estimating human intentions through sensor fusion 
 Projecting robot intentions through augmented reality (AR) 
Estimating human intentions through sensor fusion. This level estimates the user intention via sensor fusion 
(e.g. motion tracking, gestures, EMG, facial expression recognition sensors, speech recognition). By 
estimating the human intention, the robot can better anticipate on human action. This for example allows the 
user to stop the robot by hand gestures, or expression. In a hazardous situation a robot can be stopped before a 
hard safety mechanism is triggered. This enhances the authority of the operator 
 
20 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
Projecting robot intentions through augmented reality. Making robots more predicable enhances trust and 
feeling of safety. AR (e.g. via spatial AR projections or smart glasses) is used to communication the robot 
intention (e.g. future robot states) to the user.  
The ROSSINI Human-Robot Understanding framework is expected to have a positive effect on job quality in 
manufacturing, according to the following, three level approach: 
1. Quality of the Working Environment. On the primary level we use the OECD’s Job Quality Index to 
obtain the overall measure of the  Quality of the Working Environment. The main underlying factors 
of the Quality of the Working Environment are: (a) Job Demands, including Time pressure at work and 
Physical health risk factors and (b) Job Resources, including Work autonomy and learning 
opportunities, Workplace relationships. For measuring the Quality of the Working Environment we 
will select one out of the two available survey methodologies , the 4th European Working Conditions 
Survey or the 3rd Work Orientations module of the International Social Survey Program. The goal 
will be a 15 % increase of the Quality of the Working Environment compared to current situation 
(without HRC) 
2. Ergonomics. On the secondary level we focus on the ergonomic factors, underlying Job Quality but 
not explicitly   
 physical work load, including energetic loading and biomechanical loading associated with arm-
hand forces, lifting, pushing and pulling, working postures and hand-arm and whole-body 
vibrations;  
 psychosocial work load, including job demands, control opportunities, aggression and violence, 
emotional load, working times, support, and autonomy; 
 perceptual-cognitive work load, including 
capacity to perceive, capacity to stay focused, 
information processing capacity, and capacity to 
act; 
 environmental work load, including chemical 
substances, biologic agents, radiation, noise, 
heat/cold, and feeling of safety 
Measuring: We use validated methodologies and 
guidelines. For instance, physical load assessment 
based on existing standards and guidelines e.g. ISO 
11226; ISO 11228; EN 1005; and psychosocial load 
assessment based on Job-Demands Resource model” 
(Demerouti et al. 2001). Finally, for each of the 
variables we use the assessment and risk classification 
method  based on Fine & Kinney (1976). The 
outcome will be a set of risk profile similar to those 
provided in Figure 9. The goal will be to have all work 
load aspect within acceptable levels (i..e no risk for 
developing work-related health complaints according 
to current occupational health guidelines and 
standards  
3. Other factors (e.g. trust). On the third level we 
address other factors that are not addressed on the first or second level, but are likely to be relevant for 
the human-robot collaboration: 
 One such parameter is ‘trust’, to be assessed via the Trust in Automation Scale (Kessler – 2016) 
 Another relevant parameter to is acceptance, to be studied by use of the System Usability Scale 
(Brooke, 1996) or Usefulness and satisfaction acceptance scale (van der Laan, 1997) 
Aiming at increasing the overall flexibility, ROSSINI faces the lack of a dynamic representation of the human 
activities rethinking the human’s and robot’s roles through the development of a human layer supporting the 
controller in the optimized allocation of tasks within a collaborative assembly station. The optimal task 
Figure 9 – Example of risk profile adaptable to the ROSSINI Human-Robot Mutual Understanding Framework 
 
21 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
allocation and the enhanced mutual understanding between man and robot are expected to give a boost to the 
synergy between the human operator’s flexibility and adaptability, and the robot’s precision and repeatability. 
Thanks to this, it is possible to estimate that the workcells employing the ROSSINI human-robot mutual 
understanding framework will increase production flexibility by 5%. 
Results integration into one comprehensive platform 
The developed components are expected to be integrated in to the ROSSINI Platform architecture, depicted in 
Figure 10: 
 
Figure 10 - The ROSSIN Platform Architecture 
The Platform can be represented as an integrated set of layers, each related to a specific dimension/function: 
 The Sensing Layer will combine information from safe and non-safe sensors in a fusion module to 
feed the Safety Aware Control Architecture 
 The Perception Layer, through the employment of artificial intelligence techniques, will generate a 
Semantic Scene Map integrating geometric and semantic information, which will in turn create a set 
of virtual “Dynamic Shells” for safety, surrounding each object in the scene 
 The Cognitive Layer will be provided by a high-level scheduler, capable of dynamically planning a 
set of cooperative actions that the robot needs to execute, and to update them when the working 
environment conditions, captured by the Semantic Scene Map, change. 
 The Control Layer will interpret the high-level action to execute and will generate the most 
efficient and safety preserving low-level plan for the robot, thus optimizing trade-off between safety 
and productivity in the workcell, ensuring that  
 The Actuation Layer will encompass a novel concept of manipulators with built-in safety features, 
capable of reducing the separation distance between the man and the operator when performing 
collaborative applications, thus increasing the degree of freedom for robotic applications design 
 The Human Layer will ensure the inclusion of human-related factors from the early design phases 
of collaborative applications design, and the constant monitoring of factors influencing job quality 
during robotic operations 
 The Integration Layer will provide integrators with a set of tools and guidelines to ensure inherent 
safety in design of HRC applications, and to speed up application configuration and reconfiguration 
Moreover, the platform will include also a set of methodologies and guidelines to improve application 
design and risk assessment in HRC. Recent research studies (R. Behrens, N. Elkmann, and H.-J. Ottersbach 

 
22 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
2012) show that the difference between free and clamping impacts depends on how the involved robot and 
human masses are distributed. ISO/TS 15066 already provides a scaling factor that allows for switching 
measured impact results between both contact cases. The factor only applies if the effective masses, colliding 
at the contact point, are given. A method to estimate the robot mass is also available in ISO/TS 15066. It takes 
all link masses and their configuration account and estimate the mass at the considered contact point (in most 
cases the robot TCP).  Besides this estimate, each robot manufacturer offers models with higher precision. 
Instead of providing a similar method for estimating the effective mass of the human body, ISO/TS 15066 
recommends using the single weights of the particular body parts and neglects the body kinematics. 
From a scientific standpoint, this approach will lead to wrong and highly biased estimates that have the 
potential to a wrong risk evaluation and is therefore not accepted by official bodies. To ensure reliable estimates 
of body part masses, the ROSSINI Platform will include a simplified human body model that replicates 
the kinematics and mass distribution of a 50th percentile human. The development work to be carried out 
will include the development of the kinematics of the model, the integration with other available studies and 
the conversion the model in an algorithm. The inertia parameters will be derived from the result of a collision 
study with volunteers which was carried out in 2012 (ethical approved – see R. Behrens, N. Elkmann, and 
H.-J. Ottersbach 2012). The study goal was to determine the difference between constrained and unconstrained 
impacts. The results of this study can be considered as valid and enables the model to create reliable results.  
Through the risk assessment and validation tools, the ROSSINI platform will be enabled to: 
- Speed up the now lengthy on-site risk analysis necessary to ensure that the operating robot does not 
exceed the limit values when getting in an unintended contact with a human, reducing production 
reconfiguration time by an estimated 10% 
- Allowing for 20% higher robot speeds still compliant with the limit values of ISO/TS 15066, since the 
validation will consider that colliding with a free body part results in much lower forces than with a 
spatially constrained on  
ROSSINI Demonstration Activities 
The ROSSINI Platform will be demonstrated into 3 industrial environments up to TRL6. The use cases have 
been chosen trying to have the widest possible span in terms of application sector, tasks to be executed 
technologies to be deployed. 
Use Case #1 – Domestic Appliances Assembly (WHIRLPOOL) 
The first use case will be provided by the 
WHIRLPOOL Operation Excellence TWI 
Experimental line located in Cassinetta (VA), Italy. 
The challenge to be addressed is to implement HRC in 
the process of washing machines assembly. In 
Washing Machine production, the assembly of the 
counterweight, a bulky and heavy piece of concrete 
used to stabilize the washing unit during spinning 
operations, has been always a big problem. The part is 
pretty heavy (ranging from 12 to 14 kg depending on 
product model) and is currently assembled to the 
washing unit with a manual operation: the human 
operator, assisted by a 0-gravity crane picks each 
counterweight from a container and then position it 
onto the washing unit where it has to be tighten using 
screws. Despite being assisted by a tool, the operation, especially during the picking of the part, is heavily 
not ergonomic. Moreover, currently available HRC solutions cannot guarantee a sustainable application due 
to regulatory limitations in terms of robot working speed and separation distance from the human operator. 
The ROSSINI Platform will be demonstrated in Whirlpool, by designing and implementing an HRC 
application where a robot system will support the operator in counterweight picking and assembly. The 
use case will integrate robotic arms, design and realization of specific grippers, sensing devices able to identify 
and virtualize the reality of the workplace. All the devices will be interconnected in a end-to-end solution and 
integrated with the current MES system. All the data coming from robotic arm and environment sensors 
Figure 11 – ROSSINI Use Case #1: AS-IS Layout 
 
23 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
(camera, laser etc.) will be elaborated to digitalize information about payload (for picking and placement) and 
about human operator (identity, anthropometric data, position) in order to adapt all the automatic operations 
to real time status and  feedback the human operator on right posture to reduce ergonomic risks. The vast 
amount of data to be elaborated in real time requires combination of all mentioned technology. 
The proposed use case will be experimented in two phases: the first phase in Operation Excellence TWI 
Experimental line located in Italy, that will allow complete freedom of operation. During this phase, central 
and factory experts in assembly operation, cost evaluation, safety and ergonomics will be involved to assess 
the system during its evolution stages. Different legal and internal policy frameworks will be applied (eg.: 
Italian, Slovak laws; internal WHR Corporation Safety policies) so to provide a reference system as wide as 
possible to allow the methodology development be easily transferrable to different countries and industries. In 
the second phase the system will be deployed for its final demonstration to the target factory allowing for 
definitive consideration. The use case, especially in its second phase test, will involve real workers thus 
allowing the project to gather a statistical relevant amount of data and feedback so to clarify as much as possible 
all the SSH aspect linked to the HRC.  
In the WHIRLPOOL use case, ROSSINI will deploy the adaptive features of the Human Layer and the Safety 
Aware Control Architecture in a highly challenging context (continuous flow line) in terms of working 
speed, with the RS4 system delivering laser scanning, radar and possibly other sensing technologies to 
constantly monitor the scene. The manipulator will be chosen among commercial products, to demonstrate the 
platform potential to interact with and be wrapped around third party technologies. 
Use Case #2 – Electronic Components Production (SCHINDLER) 
The second use case will be provided by the 
SCHINDLER production plant of Locarno 
(Switzerland), specialised in the production of 
elevator’s panels (COP-Car Operating Panels, LOP-
Landing Operating Panels and LIP-Landing Indicator 
Panels). The actual production line which will be part 
of the pilot is the Fixtures Assembly line. The 
complexity of the proposed demonstrator is due to the 
high mix/low volume nature of the production, 
which requires a kitting of the components to be 
assembled and tested and well-balanced operations. 
The human-robot collaboration is aimed to enable the 
vision of one piece flow production by avoiding set-
up reconfiguration time for production changes and 
by improving the balancing of workplaces operations 
(for example advancing some of the current operations 
on the high-value-adding assembly line to the lower-
value-adding kitting area). 
 Product description: fixtures production line (high mix/low volume) 
 Working station/tasks performed now (AS-IS):  
1. Create a new kitting order from SAP-ME. 2. Pick-to-light of components. 3. Reading of single 
barcodes. 4. Filling of the kitting unit. 5. Close the kitting order in SAP-ME. 6. Movement of the 
handling unit to the assembly line. 7. Pre-assembly of the kit of components. 8. Assembly of the 
product. 9. End-of-line test of the product. 10. Packaging. 11. Kitting of the handling unit. 
12.Strapping on pallet. 13. Notification to the logistic operator for collection of the handling unit. 
The idea is to realize a U-cell in which a product is fully assembled and tested thanks to a close 
collaboration between a human operator and a robot. The current existing production line will be fully 
replaced by a number of U-Cells according to the takt time. This new concept will provide Schindler more 
flexibility to produce mixed product also in higher volumes also thanks to an easy reconfiguration. 
Figure 12 - Use Case #2 AS IS kitting area 
 
24 
[818087][ROSSINI] – Part B                                                                                
The production steps will be as depicted 
in Figure 13: 
1. The human operator places the 
panel’s frame on the table, face up. 
2. The robot scans the panels ID with 
its onboard barcode reader and 
receives the recipe stored in the SAP 
system with the components needed 
for the assembly. 
3. The active vertical components 
warehouse feeds all the needed 
button’s caps on a conveyor belt.