3.3 CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE 64
3.4 RESOURCES TO BE COMMITTED 65 
SECTION 4. MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM 70 
3.5 4.1 PARTICIPANTS 70 
3.6 4.2 THIRD PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE PROJECT (INCLUDING USE OF THIRD PARTY RESOURCES) 117 
SECTION 5. ETHICS AND SECURITY 123
5.1 ETHICS 123
5.2 SECURITY 123 
SECTION 6. ANNEXES 124 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
SCALIBUR creates a holistic consortium to cut urban biowaste and replace it with a new production chain of 
biomaterials, forming a partnership of end users to recover and transform biowaste from three municipalities, 
namely Madrid (ES), Albano (IT) and Kozani (EL), into value added products.  
During SCALIBUR a complete study of the quality, logistics and management schemes for municipal solid waste 
(MSW) and urban sewage sludge (USS) will be performed, to integrate innovative sys tems and technologies and 
obtain high-value biobased products.  
In SCALIBUR, HORECA waste will be transformed to proteins, lipids and chitin from insect rearing, while the organic 
fraction of MSW will generate biopesticides and bioplastics by high -solid en zymatic hydrolysis followed by 
fermentation.  The resulting biogas from MSW and USS will be upgraded by bioelectrochemical treatment to 
produce commodity chemicals and bioplastics, such as PHBV.   
By cutting traditional linear waste management, new busines s models are created for the resulting circular value 
chains, applying a sustainable approach to generate new activities and benefits. These new profit sources will be 
created from a baseline analysis of existing waste management data and business models f or each municipality, 
generating social innovation and favouring the adaptation and uptake of new opportunities along the entire urban 
value cycle.  
Continuous tests and development along 
SCALIBUR will create and fine tune new 
business models based on innovative processes, 
and feedback will be obtained from all 
stakeholders, in order to improve the definition, 
performance and integration of value, to 
minimize waste and maximize its benefit.  
With social engagement strategies, key 
communities will participate in all aspects of the 
new value creation, calibrating the returns of 
the project both for the generation of jobs and 
improved urban welfare, such as reducing the 
dependence from outside materials and the 
environmental impacts.   
 
Figure 1. Geographical scope of SCALIBUR 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
3 
   
SECTION 1. EXCELLENCE
1.1 OBJECTIVES 
OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES 
Current European biowaste management is not yet aligned with the circular economy roadmap proposed by the 
European Commission.1 Across the EU, over 100 M tonnes of biowaste are produced every year, with management 
of this waste representing a cost as large as 143 billion euros. Households and HORECA  are the main producers 
(35% and 7.4 % respectively), while a significant amount consists of food waste ( an average of 173 kg per person 
per year). 2 Despite continued efforts to introduce policies to reduce biowaste, these numbers are expected to 
increase in the coming years.3  
Unfortunately, in stark contrast to the successes obtained for other resources (e.g. paper, cardboard, glass, 
plastics), EU recycling policies have proven largely ineffective for biowaste. 4 Currently, more than 75% of biowaste 
is sent for incineration or landfilling, which causes significant environmental damage. Therefore, a great part of this 
biowaste is not being valorised, which irreversibly extracts valuable resources from the economic cycle. 
Considering these numbers, an effective waste management chain and innovative recycling strategies are required.  
With the clear objective of reducing the environmental damage, the  proposal COM (2015) 594 for a Directive 
amending the existing EU Landfill Directive requires member states to progressively reduce landfilling of municipal 
biodegradable waste to 10% by 2030.5 In fact, as much as 40% of biowaste in the EU is still landfilled (up to 100% in 
some member states), 6 resulting in major environmental hazards through the associated emission of greenhouse 
gases (GHG) and pollution of soil and groundwater.  
Besides reducing waste generation and increasing recycling of existing waste, changes in the whole biowaste chain 
are required to reach EU goals. Whilst a reintroduction of biowaste in the production value chain allows a return of 
resource value of waste into the economy (closing the loop), new business opportunities and economic growth are 
foreseen.7,8 Adopting policies where waste from industrialised counties is used as a resource across the EU could 
save €1.4bn a year and generate €1.6bn in sales. 9 Thus, with the right policies, the circular economy may help 
reduce waste, increase recycling, and give new use to biowaste through its transformation into profitable products.  
Finding feasible and economically viable procedures to convert  urban biowaste into valuable biobased products is 
in fact a challenge. Currently, market policies for bioproducts derived from waste are limited, which in turn leads to 
low valorisation rates of bio -waste.2 In order to optimize and reach the full potential of the biobased products 
derived from waste, action across the whole value chain is required.  
GLOBAL OBJECTIVES OF SCALIBUR 
SCALIBUR aims at closing the gap between technological feasibility and industrial applications in the field of urban 
biowaste valorisation by enhancing strategic cooperation between sectors. SCALIBUR contributes to two European 
challenges - to reduce landfil ling and the creation of a bio based Economy in 2030 -  through the creation of a 
holistic consortium that handles the recovery of urban biowaste from citizens through several municipalities, the 
production chain of biobased products by innovative technologies, and equally important, direct collaboration with 
the future end-users.  
SCALIBUR’s main objectives are:  
 To engage all relevant stakeholders in the urban biowaste value chain in line with RRI principles.10 SCALIBUR will 
start at the household level directly involving citizens and public authorities in the recovery of biowaste at their 
city ( pilot municipalities : Madrid (ES), Albano ( LAZIO, IT) and Kozani ( CLUBE, EL)). Together with innovative 
                                                                                                               
1 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/resource_efficiency/about/roadmap/index_en.htm  
2 Estimates of European food waste levels 
3 http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52010DC0235&from=EN 
4 https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/managing-municipal-solid-waste  
5 http://www.europarl.europa.eu/EPRS/EPRS-Briefing-573936-Circular-economy-package-FINAL.pdf  
6 http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Waste_statistics 
7 Journal of Cleaner Production, 114, 11- 32 (2016). 
8 Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 112, 37-44 (2016). 
9 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/resource_efficiency/pdf/working_paper_part2.pdf  
 
10 http://ec.europa.eu/research/swafs/pdf/pub_rri/rri_indicators_final_version.pdf  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
4 
   
monitoring of selected biowaste fractions to assess waste qual ity during collection, direct information 
regarding the separation practices by citizens will be obtained. The City of Lund (ES) will be considered as an 
example of best performance in biowaste collection in order to transfer their experiences to the pilot  
municipalities in the project. With the implementation of best practices on the selective collection, S CALIBUR 
aims at increasing  the quality and quantity of urban- biowaste collection  in the pilot municipalities to the 
percentages summarized below (Table1.1a).  
Urban biowaste collection Madrid (ES) Albano (IT) Kozani (EL) EU 
Quantity 
Before SCALIBUR 71% 19% 75% 37% 
After SCALIBUR 85% 50% 90% 85% 
Quality 
Before SCALIBUR 70% 89% 95% 60% 
After SCALIBUR 95% 95% 97% 95% 
Table 1.1a SCALIBUR’s goals regarding quality and quantity of urban biowaste collection 
SCALIBUR aims at: increasing the understanding of citizens, changing behaviour regarding collection and biowaste 
usage, increasing acceptance of urban- biowaste products, and reducing the amount of mixed and non- valorised 
biowaste. As a long-term goal, SCALIBUR aims at improving current policies and logistics in the waste management 
chain, and supporting new profitable business models and social innovation initiatives (WPs 2&10).  
 To demonstrate innovative value chains converting  three urban-biowaste streams, namely organic fraction of 
municipal solid waste (OFMSW), HORECA and retail organic waste (ROW), and urban sewage sludge (USS) from 
wastewater treatment plants (UWWTP)  into high-value industrial bio based products  with enhance d 
sustainability profiles and new functionalities by a vast number of innovative technological processes (WPs 4 -
6). Among these valorisation  processes, biobased plastics (WPs 4& 6), biopesticides (WPs 4& 6), commodity 
chemicals (WP4 &6), and a sustainable and resilient sour ce of proteins, lipids, and chitin (WP5) will be 
produced.  
 To assess the sustainability of all technological processes included in SCALIBUR, by analyzing their performance 
at the techno-economical, environmental, and social level. Environmental impacts will be analyzed through Life 
Cycle Assessment (LCA) . Environmental management tools su ch as Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) and Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and T hreats (SWOT) analysis will be also 
included (WP8). The potential social benefits ( e.g. creation of jobs, policy changes and recommendations) will 
be assessed with a  social life cycle assessment (S LCA). In addition, all the technological developments will be 
analysed under and engineering -oriented approach for the techno -economic assessment of the developed 
processes.   
 To ensure the safety of the new biobased products and provide recommendations for the regulatory framework 
to biowaste which will be assessed by in-depth safety and risk analysis and a regulatory assessment during the 
progress of the project (WP8). 
 To influence current and new policies and logistics in the waste management chain that allow the introduction of 
new supply changes for food and feed,  by involving all relevant stakeholders  (citizens (represented by the 
Urban B iowasteclubs), academia, industry and government (represented by the pilot municipalities and 
regions)) in the waste value chain and by accumulating evidence-based know-how (WPs 2, 3 & 7). 
 To identify effective business and social innovations considering the information obtained from the stakeholders 
(WP2) and implemented in a practical way to support the integration of the new value chains for the bio based 
products generated in ea ch municipality where the pilots are taking  place. Further replication of SCALIBUR 
results in numerous municipalities shall be encouraged (see letters of support, Annex).  
SPECIFIC MEASURABLE OBJECTIVES OF SCALIBUR 
SCALIBUR is an ambitious project aim ed at changing urban biowaste value chain management, which includes  
different sectors. A combination of social and technological innovation systems in different munic ipalities is 
proposed to boost valorisation  of biowaste. A list of specific objectives is summ arized in Table 1.1b . Indicators of 
success of SCALIBUR objectives have been identified. 
Specific measurable objectives Success Indicators 
Social engagement in waste management (WPs 2, 3, 7 and 9) Number of citizen s and stakeholders actively involved  
(minimum 100 stakeholders involved). 
Implementation of best practices in the pilots already identified 
in WP2. (WP3) 
Increased quantity of biowaste collected and quality of 
biowaste on organic material (see table 1.1a). 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
5 
   
Table 1.1b Specific measurable objectives of SCALIBUR and success indicators.
1.2 RELATION TO WORK PROGRAMME 
The SCALIBUR project addresses the topic CE-SFS-25-2018: Integrated system innovation in valorising urban 
biowaste, part of the focus area “ Connecting economic and environmental gains - the Circular Economy (CE)”. This 
section shows how SCALIBUR addresses each of the issues indicated in the specific challenge and scope indicated in 
the call text. 
SPECIFIC CHALLENGE 
Most of the biowaste produced in cities (such as garden and park waste, food and kitchen waste fr om households, 
restaurants, caterers and retail premises), as well as sewage sludge from urban wastewater treatment plants are 
processed without fully exploiting , in a smart and innovative cascading fashion , its potential as feedstock for 
valuable and precious compounds. 
The SCALIBUR consortium is built to fit the challenges, aiming at using innovative social and industrial technologies 
to produce high -value bio based products ( proteins, lipids, chemical commodities,  bioplastics and  biopesticides) 
from biowaste (OFMSW, HORECA, ROW, and USS from WWTP ). This pr oject will have a direct impact by reducing  
health threats and burden on the environment. Significant economic benefits are also envisioned from SCALIBUR, 
e.g. creation of new profitable businesses, biowaste valorisation and production of high-value products. 
Besides the technological challenges, there will be a need for public authorities to adopt new policies; changing 
citizens' behaviour will require social innovation initiatives, and new, profitable bu siness models along the entire 
urban biowaste value chain will have to be developed.  
A consortium of R&D organizations, academia, waste management companies and municipalities are taking the 
initiative to develop new strategies to contribute to wards attai ning a circular biobased economy scheme with 
urban waste. With SCALIBUR ’s strategies, public authorities will have the facts and the support to implement 
changes in the current policies. Outcomes from the project will be also used to modify citizen attitud es towards 
biowaste as a raw material source for new products, ensuring a good quality supply of biowaste. Such changes will 
be promoted by the participating municipalities. At the same time , waste management companies will seek the 
optimum conditions and supply of biowaste to run the above -mentioned processes for the management of 
biowaste both at OFMSW  and USS from UWWTP . Pilot studies will be performed in 3 municipalities in three 
different countries from southern Europe (Spain, Italy, and Greece), while a Swedish municipality will act as a best-
performing territory (BPT) as example of a high-performance on biowaste collection from households. 
SCOPE 
Proposals shall focus on an integrated system i nnovation approach in urban biowaste recycling and valorisation for 
the production of high-value biobased products, including proteins for food and feed. 
MSW, HORECA, ROW  and USS from WWTP  will be used as starting mater ials to produce high -value bio based 
products. New technologies from several partners are combined  together to p roduce a portfolio of bio based 
products (proteins, lipids, chemical commodities, bioplastics and biopesticides) from these waste streams. 
Proposals shall ensure the full integr ation of the upgraded urban bio waste value chain into the existing  local 
waste/wastewater management schemes. 
The SCALIBUR project will involve the recovery and treatment of 3 different waste sources with 3  different 
municipalities for OFMSW,  HORECA, ROW  (Madrid (ES), Albano  (IT), Lazio, (IT) and Kozani ( CLUBE, EL)), in 
cooperation with UWWTP treating the USS  from Ostrava (SMVAK, CZ) and Braban province (WBD, NL). Collection, 
transport, logistics, sorting and pre -treatment (through stabilization and homogenization) of biowaste  will be 
Demonstrating an integrated conversion  route for the 
valorisation of the OFMSW into biobased products (WPs4&6)  
More than 75%  of the OFMSW converted into high -value 
bio-based products. 
Processing and val idation of bio -based polyesters for food 
packaging applications (WP4). 
Compliance with Foo d Contact Regulation (ES) 1935/2004 
and material fully degradable & compostable to EN 13432 
Demonstrating the production of fermentable sugars from 
OFMSW in an operational environment. (WP4) 
Approximately 15,000 Kg of sugar enriched hydrolysate will 
be produced for its conversion into biobased products. 
Demonstrating of bioconversion of USS (WP6) Scale-up of a bioelectrochemical prototype aiming at 
production rate of 4 g of carbon per day. 
Demonstrating valorisation of HORECA  and ROW into proteins, 
lipids and conversion of chitin into nanowhiskers, 
biocomposites, coatings and chitosan blends (WP5). 
Yield of 14% of protein from dry matter and 6% from wet 
prepupae after fractionation and extraction 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
6 
   
implemented into the management schemes to ensure optimal results (WP3). Urban waste management, including 
citizen behaviors and collaborative attitude in waste collection and recycling will be analyzed in the municipalities 
where the pilot is performed, to provide the benchmark for the analy sis of the  results. This strategy will ensure 
social participation and feedback into the valorisation processes , with the engagement of relevant stakeholders 
following activities described in WP2 such as interactive workshops, “see, touch, taste” events or  walking tours. 
Moreover, full integration of the upgraded urban- biowaste value chain will be achieved with the participation the 
BPT (Lund, SE), which will be a benchmark from the beginning of the project. 
Proposals shall guarantee the active participation of local and regional authorities, waste/wastewater management 
utilities, (bio-based) industries, the scientific community, local communities and citizens. 
SCALIBUR has put together 7 industry partners  (FCC, SMVAK, Aqualia, Aeris, WBD, ASA, NOVAMONT) and 4 
scientific centres (ITENE, CENER, UNIMORE, WETSUS)  with the participation of 9 European countries. Moreover, 
the best biowaste as starti ng material is obtained through  the coll aboration of 3  municipalities ((Madrid (ES), 
Albano (Lazio, IT) and Kozani ( CLUBE, EL) and the collaboration of the local commun ities through several partners. 
The results of SCALIBUR will be implemented in several external municipalities (see letters of support, Annex). 
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) of the entire urban biowaste valu e chain; improving logistic models taking into account 
behaviour change and participation of citizens and local communities in relation to the collection and use of this 
particular feedstock; increasing consumer awareness and acceptance of urban biowaste -derived products; 
adapting/developing business models for successful market uptake; food and feed safety aspects; regulatory 
aspects; and facilitating the exchange of good practices and experiences between all stakeholders. 
Under the supervision of ITENE (c oordinator of SCALIBUR), a LCA will be performed (WP8) aiming at recovering 
biowaste and producing new products (closing the loop) through five different technologies (WPs 3-6). This LCA will 
yield science -based support for more efficient and environmental ly sustainable waste management through 
biowaste valorisation  and will identify the preferable processing options of the biowaste . LCA and SLCA will be 
applied to also tailor SCALIBUR end -products to the needs of society ( environmental and social aspects) and 
promote SCALIBUR strategies. In addition, cost-benefit analysis, social LCA, and input and output analysis are useful 
tools to obtain relevant information to ensure the success of the project. Social acceptance of high -value biobased 
products produced  in this project will be performed by the engagement activities described in WP2, namely, 
interactive workshops, “see-touch-taste” events, walking tours, etc.  
Optimized logistic models with metaheuristic algorithms for  the transport of both OFMSW,  HORECA and ROW will 
be generated during SCALIBUR development, which will be completed with consumer research, socio -economic 
research, business model development and the circular economy. 
Food and feed safety and regu latory aspects of the final bio based products intended for human and animal 
consumption will be performed by Nutrition Science, experts on safety assessment. In addition, regulatory aspects 
will be assessed by the legal unit in UNIMORE (WP8). 
Consumer awareness of good practices will be tackle d from the start of SCALIBUR through engagement activities 
and continuous monitoring of citizen’s waste management (WP2).  Moreover, SCALIBUR’s pilot municipalities, BPT 
and following municipalities will exchange best practices on waste management during this project.  
New business and organisational models on cities ensuring the full integr ation of the upgraded urban bio waste 
value chain into the existing local waste/wastewater management schemes; 
SCALIBUR strategy consists of building a business model for each mun icipality involved in the pilots. Such models 
will be co-created with previously engaged citizens, waste generators, the municipalities, the waste managers and 
other relevant stakeholders. A stakeholder platform will be generated (WP7) to integrate the new  business models 
based on cooperation and transparency. Indeed, through this platform the results of SCALIBUR will be available for 
waste generators, which are the main providers of waste fractions, capable of taking action to improve waste 
fractions. The next step consists of innovative treatment processes (WP s4-6), which will greatly benefit from 
optimization of waste recovery. The result of these strategies will be implemented to improve waste management 
policies in each municipality. SCALIBUR can encour age new waste management through the economic value of 
waste-derived products potentiating biowaste collection or enhancing financial sustainability of the overall waste 
system. These new business and organizational models will be validated following munic ipality group  to ensure 
replication in EU countries with emphasis on eastern EU countries (see letters of support). 
Improved perception of citizens on urban biowaste as a local resource and their enhanced active participation in its 
separate collection thr ough social innovation initiatives; and improved c onsumer acceptance of urban bio waste-
derived products, including food and feed ingredients; 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
7 
   
SCALIBUR will engage citizens from the beginning of the project with the creation of Urban Biowaste Clubs and  a 
stakeholder platform (WPs2& 7). Following this strategy, citizens will be able to check the results of their actions, 
contributing directly to the production of high -value products from urban biowaste.  These clubs will also increase 
consumer acceptance and participation, together with dissemination activities done by G!E (WP9). 
A more sustainable and resilient protein supply chain; 
There is an urgent need to increase protein supply from sustainable sources for feed and food. At the moment they 
represent an imp ortant share of imports. 11 To face this urgen t issue , the European Parliament has adopted a 
resolution to foster actions to replace imported protein crops with alternative European sources. 12 SCALIBUR’s 
approach using insects rear ed on bio-waste are a possib le contribution to these efforts . With an innovative and 
sustainable approach described in WP5, using insects fed with HORECA  and ROW, proteins will be obtained to be 
further used in the production chain of food and feed applications and potentially also i n the production of 
bioplastics. This approach has been identified as an economic, efficient, competitive and low -impact system to 
exploit these organic masses making their disposal profitable and with a lesser impact on the environment, fitting 
within The Protein Challenge 2040 to shift the production of protein onto a more sustainable path. 
Safety assessment of biobased processes and products from urban bio-waste; 
Safety assessment of the end products is essential to ensure their use by humans and animals. Safety of bio based 
products generated by in WP s4-6 will be performed by Nutrition Science, who are experts in in-vitro analysis with 
tailored Standard-operating Protocols (SOP). 
Reduced amount of urban bio -waste that would otherwise be incinerated or landfilled, and hence reduced 
environmental impact (including emissions of GHG and of air pollutants and their precursors) of municipal and foo d 
waste; 
The outcome of SCALIBUR should highlight the best use of urban biowaste in moving towards a zero-waste circular 
economy at local level, by reducing resources depletion, and in promoting economic growth.  Based on the waste 
hierarchy, it will promote valorisation actions and shift current landfilling and incineration practises.  The biowaste 
value chain has great social, environmental and economic opportunities and SCALIBUR aims to turn biowaste into a 
profitable renewable material for valuable bio based products from which society can greatly benefit.  Preliminary 
numbers show that a great increase of biowaste collection and an improved organic fraction in the collected 
biowaste will be achieved with SCALIBUR actions (see Table 1.1a). 
Detailed assessments of specific technical, regulatory, financial, market and logistical barriers hampering the full 
exploitation of the urban biowaste value chain; 
Both feasibility assessment and an analysis of the barriers that can potentially hamper this project will be 
performed at the start of the project  (WP10). During this project, the stakeholder platform (WP7) will serve as a 
feedback loop to all WPs, ensuring best exploitation of the value chain. 
Evidence-based support for EU policies/targets in the biobased and ci rcular economy, climate mitigation, 
sustainable growth and re-industrialisation. 
SCALIBUR is aligned with  EU policies on the waste management hierarchy focusing o n the efficient recovery of 
biowaste and its reus e. The goals of this project  deal with b iowaste in the most resource- efficient and 
environmentally way, which is also in line with the EU Waste Framework Directive (2008/98/EC) . Using disruptive 
and feasible technological solutions SCAL IBUR will valorise 3 different biowaste sources  (OFMSW, HORECA, ROW 
and USS) into profitable products, promoting biowaste usage. Safety assessment of the products will be done to 
ensure that they meet end-market requirements in line with EU legislation.
1.3 CONCEPT AND METHODOLOGY 
1.3.1 CONCEPT 
The SCALIBUR consortium has been designed to effectively implement all RRI tools and co -creation with 
stakeholders and society, combining  all inputs from the participants  and creating a platform that brings together 
citizens, municipalities, waste management companies, industries, policy makers, and other relevant stakeholders. 
Through close feedback between individual WPs, SCALIBUR aims to create a synergistic series of innovative 
strategies that will enable improvements across the urban biowaste value chain. 
                                                                                                               
11 http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?type=REPORT&reference=A7-2011-0026&language=EN#title1  
12 http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?type=TA&reference=P7-TA-2011-0084&language=EN  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
8 
   
 
Figure 2. SCALIBUR concept 
SCALIBUR presents an innovative concept to valorise  3 important biowaste streams: OFMSW, and retail biowaste, 
and USS from WWTP. In this project, high-value products such as proteins, lipids , chemical commodities,  
bioplastics, and biopesticides  with boosted  sustainability profiles and new functionalities will be produced using 
three innovative technological lines (WPs 4-6).  
SCALIBUR’s goal of producing high-value biobased products will be tested and validated in 3  municipalities (Madrid 
(ES), Albano (LAZIO, IT) and Kozani (CLUBE, EL)) and 2 UWWTP (CZ and NL) . These operational environments are 
highly relevant, allowing for the channelling of feedback into the production chain to reach optimal results. Indeed, 
all work packages in this project are feeding each other: e.g. from stakeholder and citizen engagement designed in 
WP2 to improve waste management, recycling and social engagement, SCALIBUR will obta in OFMSW fractions 
that, in turn, will improve the results of the valorisation  of this waste stream (WP4). Moreover, WP3 will include 
innovative selection strategies to optimize biowaste  in plant, engaging citizens and supplying best quality starting 
materials to the indus tries where valorisation  is performed. In addition, an online stakeholder platform (WP7) is 
expected to engage all actors involved (quadruple helix stakeholders) in the value chain and provide them with the 
knowledge to contribute using best practices in w aste management. Moreover, local authorities will also be 
involved in this platform to improve current policies on biowaste disposal, collection and treatment, and to test the 
full integration of the valorized urban-biowaste value chains.  
Life cycle and safety assessment (WP8) will give information about the sustainability approaches followed in WPs4-
6 for the selected waste streams, which allows optimization of these technological procedures along the duration 
of SCALIBUR project. Safety and regulatory aspects are also considered (WP8). 
In addition, following a circular economy approach, business and social innovation models will be identifie d to 
support the integration of  the resulting value chains  on a city level . To create these models, a benchmark analysis 
will be performed regarding the current situation on existing urban-waste management data, social innovation and 
business models for each municipality participating in the pilots (WP2). Updating and adapting these models along 
the entire urban biowaste value chain during SCALIBUR progress is also planned. Indeed, continuous tests of these 
approaches will be performed along all valorisation approaches, obtaining beneficial feedback to define them 
better and to improve their performance and integration in urban-biowaste value chains.  
With the results of SCALIBUR, implementation across Europe is intended. A large network of municipalities has 
already shown interest on the implementation of the work done in this project (see letters of support). 
TRL and project positioning  
SCALIBUR aims to integrate , at a European leve l, available technologies for the valorisation  of biowaste into 
biobased products. The process configuration can be considered to have a TRL between 5 and 6. According to the 
timeline projected for SCALIBUR, progress up to 7 is estimated within the project (see Table 1.3a for initial TRL).  
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
9 
   
Project activity Starting TRL Targeted TRL 
WP3 
Metaheuristic algorithms for transport of biowaste [OFMSW and HORECA] 5 7 
Optimized homogenisation/stabilisation of OFMSW (FCC) 5 7 
Combined CH4, H2S and temperature sensors for monitoring of biowaste degradation 4/5 7 
Biowaste monitoring system (VISUM) 5/6 7 
WP4 
Demonstration of high-solid enzymatic hydrolysis of OFMW in 3,000 L bioreactors  5 7 
Demonstration of bacterial biopesticide production in 1,000 L 5/6 7 
Optimization of the enzyme mixture during enzymatic hydrolysis. 5 7 
Demonstration of fermentation to diols (1,4-bioBDO) 5 7 
Demonstration of bio-based compounded polyesters  5 7 
Development of biopolyester formulations for plastic materials 5 7 
WP5 
Optimization of pilot plant and implementation of Input and Output stage. 6 7 
Fractionation process/technologies developed in the lab will be scaled-up  4/5 7 
Preparation of biocomposites formulations based on chitosan with PHB and PLA 5 7 
WP6 
Pre-treatment techniques evaluation 5 7 
Sewage sludge advanced anaerobic conversion 5 7 
Bioconversion of steering CO2 fermentation with bioelectrochemical systems 5 7 
A biotechnological accumulation step to produce PHBV-rich biomass  6 7 
A solvent extraction process to produce pure PHBV 5 7 
Table 1.3a. TRL summary of technological approaches (WPs4-6) 
Partner involvement in selected international R&I activities linked to the project 
SCALIBUR consorti um combines several bio -waste management stakeholders, all with extensive scientific and 
technical knowledge and expertise on all required fields for the achievement of the project objectives. Table 1.3b 
summarizes main recent national and international R& I activities relevant to SCALIBUR project. The WPs that will  
benefit from these projects are indicated. 
Project name Partner involved Project aim 
AGRIMAX, BBI –JTI 
2016-2020 
Coordinated by IRIS 
(VISUM), ITENE, EXERGY 
Fine-tuning of biowaste -derived compou nds for industrial processing 
packaging applications (WP4-6,8)  
PLASTICIRCLE, CIRC-01-2017-
2021 
ITENE Waste Chain optimisation. Development of new technologies on collection, 
transport and sorting of packaging waste (WP3) 
DECISIVE 2016-2020 AERIS Design and implementation of innovative biowaste management schemes, 
targeting urban biowaste, to produce valuable bioproducts; thus, closing the 
organic loop (WP4-6) 
ARBOCAR ASA Enzyme design and enzymatic modification of lignin for the refining o f 
thermoplastic lignin compounds (WP4) 
BIOrescue, BBI-JTI 
2016-2019 
CENER Production of bacterial biopesticide from sugar derived fraction from 
mushroom compost supplemented by another feedstock (WP4) 
R2π 
2016-2019 
CSCP More viable, sustainable and competitive economi c business model; strong 
emphasis on stakeholder involvement (WPs2,3,7&9) 
Percal, BBI-JTI 
2017-2020 
 
EXERGY 
VISUM 
CENER 
PERCAL exploits Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) as feedstock to develop 
intermediate chemical products at high yield and low impurity (WPs2,4,7) 
Urbiofin, BBI-JTI 
2017-2021 
EXERGY 
VISUM 
Demonstration of techno-economic and environmental  
viability of the conversion at semi -industrial scale of the OFMSW. F unded 
under a complementary topic BBI JU D6 2016 (WPs4&8) 
Waste2Bio 
BESFT3 - 
EXERGY Validation and demonstration of a global process for organic MSW through 
its recovery in bioethanol and biogas. (WPs4&8) 
InDirect, BBI-PPP 
2016-2019 
NS Insect rearing and downstream processing into added value compounds  
(WP5) 
ANSWER SMVAK Demonstration of th e feasibility of an innovative alternative for resources 
recovery from wastewater based on electro- coagulation and bio -
electrochemical processes (BES) (WP6) 
ValoriBio UNIMORE 
KOUR 
Valorisation of organic waste by Black Soldier Flies to produce bioplastics . 
Optimization of the insect substrate in a demonstration plant for insect 
rearing designed and built by KOUR in collaboration with UNIMORE (WP5) 
First2Run, BBI-JU 
2015-2019 
NOVAMONT High performance biobased and biodegradable polyesters production and 
validation into sustainable packaging films application (WP4-6,8) 
Table 1.3b. R&I projects from partners linked to SCALIBUR 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
10 
   
SCALIBUR versus other R&I activities  
The SCALIBUR Project  has been designed to complement  the activities developed by other on -going projects 
funded under H2020 and BBI JU initiatives (Table 1.3.c). In some of them, partners are involved (such as URBIOFIN, 
with Exergy and VISUM), while some other partners are already working in collaboration  with other projects (such 
as EMBRACED, where VISUM is also creating synergies with the BBI POLYBIOSKIN project coordinated by IRIS). 
  
Table 1.3c. The complementarity of SCALIBUR with the projects funded under H2020 topics CIRC-05-2016, H2020 CIRC-02-2016-A and BBI 
2016.D6 has been sought following the topic text requirements. 
1.3.2 METHODOLOGY 
SCALIBUR is aiming to improve the reuse of urban biowaste and fully exploit its value  producing a vast number of 
biobased products. In the following section a brief description of the overall methodology together with the 
activities and approaches during SCALIBUR project is described. All WPs are described in detail in section 3.1. In the 
following paragraphs SCALIBUR approaches are briefly introduced: 
Social innovation, Stakeholder Engagement, Co-Creation and Sustainable Business Models (WP 2,3,7,9) 
Social innovations take manifold approaches and present a wide array of success stories. In the environmental 
sector, social innovation is expected to have an even stronger role in enabling positive changes in behaviour in the 
future. Often social innovations have an explicitly local role.
13 The projects H2020 FUSIONS and REFRESH 
investigated how social innovations can help (as one activity among others) to prevent food waste. 14 SCALIBUR will 
build on these and other findi ngs and inventories 15 of promising practices to identify initiatives that -  uptaken, 
adapted, modified or scaled up -  help to achieve the full integration of the valorised urban biowaste technologies 
on a city level.  
In relation to stakeholder involvement in waste management, emphasis will be on the contribution of citizen s in 
the chosen municipalities. Already in 1996, in a study about landfill procedures ( Swiss case stud y) it was argued 
that “the public is in  principle capable and wise in making prudent decisions…[their] input is essential to make the 
right decision, and not only strategically necessary to gain acceptance.” The strong dependence on consumer 
choice entails increased awareness of (un)sustainable behaviour and puts emphasis on citizens’ involvement more 
generally. 
The SCALIBUR project aims to involve citizens  whenever possible. Citizen contribution to SCALIBUR strategy 
requires direct action with citizens, not only in correct organic waste separation and recycling,  but also in decision-
making. Frequent interaction of citizens should be stressed as a key factor  when dealing with bio waste. 
Interestingly, separate collection of bio waste has also shown to lead to  higher capture rates and higher quality of 
fractions of waste.16 Indeed, a case study in the city of Milan highlights that separate collection is possible in cities 
through intensive communication and education campaigns. 10 It is possible to convince house holds to separate 
                                                                                                               
13 Howaldt, Jürgen 2018: Atlas of Social Innovation. New Practices for a Better Future. 
14 https://www.eu-fusions.org/phocadownload/FUSIONS%20Feasibility%20studies%20evaluation%20report.pdf    
15 E.g. https://www.eu-fusions.org/index.php/component/finder/search?q=household&f=1&Itemid=158   
16 The case study of Milan 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
11 
   
their waste as long as they are provided with the right knowledge and tools. SCALIBUR aims at giving the citizens 
these tools and autonomy to act, helping households with their waste management to, in turn, improve t he 
recovery of high quality biowaste. The specific tools provided by SCALIBUR are described in WP7.  
Citizens shall be empowered so that they can take full ownership of their own tasks in waste management. To 
ensure wide participation, engaging activities such as Biowasteclubs, interactive citizen workshops and “feel-touch, 
taste experiences” are key components of the project  (WP2). Biowasteclubs are based on trust, respect, and 
transparency and will give a voice to key stakeholders, including citizens.  
Improving urban waste collection, characterization and homogenization (WP3) 
Implementation of best practices from BPT (Lund (SE)) in both social and technical aspects will be performed in the 
participating pilot territories, while following territories will implement the processe s for future replicability . The 
aim is to improve the quality and quantity of urban biowaste  selectively collected to fully exploit its potential in 
valorisation processes. Characterization of all waste streams in SCALIBUR will be done, together with pre -
treatment, before their conversion into high-value products (WP3). 
Valorisation of different biowaste streams (WPs 4-5-6) 
The production of bio based products from biowaste from 3 different municipalities based on the valorisation  of 
MSW, HORECA, ROW and USS will be performed  in 7 demo dites (DS) s by 2 research organisations (CENER, and 
WETSUS), 3 large industrial partners (FCC, SMVAK and NOVAMONT), 3 SMEs (Aeris Technologies, KOUR and ASA), 1 
water authority (WBD) and 1 university (UNIMORE), working in close  collaboration among them, to m aximize the 
production of high-value products by three different technological lines. Validation of the technological processes 
and the characterization of the products will also be performed by several partners (NS and Zetadec), to ensure the 
quality and the safety of the final products. Assessment of the potential environmental impacts will be done  by 
ITENE and CENER (WP8). 
All 3 lines of valorisation  are described in detail in section 1.4 and section 3.1 . In the following p aragraphs all 3 
technological approaches are briefly introduced: 
 Valorisation of (OFMSW) into commodity chemicals, bioplastics and biopesticides (WP4) 
Previous to being valorised, the OFMSW needs to be stabilized and homogenized (WP3). This pre- treatment of the 
OFMSW will be perform ed in demo site DS  1 (Las Dehesas, ES). OFMSW will then be  valorised using innovative 
enzymatic hydrolysis and submerged and solid-state fermentation (SSF) processes in demo site DS  2 (CENER, ES) 
and 3 (AERIS, ES), respectively . Through careful characterization of the OFMSW composition and optimal enzyme 
selection, this work package aims at producing first a hydrolysate leading to two different fractions:  
1. A liquid fraction subsequently treated by submerged fermentation to produce diols for the synthesis of bio - 
based polyesters for packaging uses (DS 4, NOVAMONT, IT) and biopesticides (DS 2, CENER, ES).  
2. A solid fraction used in  solid-state fermentation to produce biopesticides by SSF (DS 3, AERIS, ES), as well as 
for the mixing with sewage sludge to be subsequently used in WP6.  
Currently more than half of the biogas produced in the MSW management and biomethanation plant “Las 
Dehesas” (DS 1) is misused and flared in a torch. An innovative solution will be validated to convert  CO
2 contained 
in this off -gas (35% in DS  1) in to different high -value products  (chemical commodities). About 830 kg of these 
compounds can be potentially produced per hour in this type of MSW management facilities, leading to 12,264 Ton 
of CO
2 per year that can be captured by implementing the SCALIBUR process at full-scale in DS 1. 
 Valorisation of HORECA and ROW biowaste into proteins, lipids and chitin (WP5) 
HORECA and ROW is full of raw materials to feed insects like Black Soldier Fly  (BSF) Hermetia illucens (Diptera, 
Stratiomyidae), who  can efficiently convert kitchen , restaurant and caterer scraps  or organic materials in to a 
biomass rich in proteins, lipids and chitin. SCALIBUR is following a sustainable and resilient approach to shifting the 
production of protein onto a more sustainable path. In addition, this project  exploits all products formed during 
insect rearing, isolating all proteins, lipids and chitin.  This valorisation process will be done in  demo site  DS 5 
(Unimore and KOUR, IT). Chitin is an imp ortant natural polymer used in a vast number of applications including 
medicine and cosmetics. 17 The main sources of chitin are marine crustaceans (e.g. shrimp and crabs). SCALIBUR ’s 
approach to obtain chitin from BSF rearing is sustainable and environmentally friendly.  
 Valorisation of USS into bioplastics and biopesticides (WP6) 
Actions will be carried out at DS 1, where USS will be partitioned to improve its valorisation. USS will be used as co-
substrate in the advanced anaerobic  digestion (AD)  step. Subsequently, the resulting material is used for 
                                                                                                               
17 Progress in Polymer Science. 31, 603-632, (2006). 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
12 
   
bioelectrosynthesis technologies ( BES). In this WP two prototypes will be designed and built to perform AD and 
BES, DS 1 (Madrid, ES) and DS 6 (SMVAK, CZ). Special attention will be given to the key parameters a nd system 
design for the production of valuable organics such as acids and alcohols (from the gas stream), which are in 
demand by different industrial segments (pharmaceutical, chemical and food industries). SCALIBUR will use these 
products for the production of bioplastics in a downstream process. 
In addition, and to fully exploit the BES prototype, the biogas produced in wastewater treatment plants operated 
by SMVAK (16%) will be valorised instead of flared. An innovative solution will be validated, which converts the CO
2 
contained in this off-gas (45% in DS #6) into different high-value products using BES.  
 Valorisation of surplus sewage sludge and organic waste into high quality PHBV bioplastic (WP6) 
The surplus activated sludge produced in the WWTP (WBD , NL) can be optimized to produce 
polyhydroxyalkalnoates (PHA) bioplastic harvested as a functional biomass. PHA will be produced when the 
biomass is subjected to aerobic or anoxic feast conditions within the WWTP using the microbial community 
growing directly in the biomass, with no additional requirement of energy. Using an extraction method with green 
solvents the PHA will be obtained . PHA has several applications, both as a biodegradable plastic and as an additive 
to improve other materials. This process will be done in DS 7 (WETSUS & WBD, NL). 
Life cycle and safety assessments (WP8) 
To verify and optimize the relative environmental sustainabil ity of the final bio based products obtained in this 
project, comparative LCA and SLCA studies are planned with the information collected from WPs 4-6. Together with 
the societal value of SCALIBUR results  a green profile and a cost profile are essential elements to be considered in 
the preparation of business models. Moreover, to verify and optimize efficacy and safe ty for humans and animals, 
quality driven analysis as well as in vitro safety and efficacity studies will be performed.  
Innovation-related activities (WPs 9-10) 
To reach key biowaste players, SCALIBUR project  will carry out a series of activities to disseminate key results to 
municipalities, waste managers, investors, current and future entrepreneurs as well as citizens  (WP9). These 
activities will increase awareness of collection solutions and will foster good practices in cities.  
A durable e xploitation strategy for the project’s results and the development of replicable business plans  will be 
performed during this project. The goal is to ensure successful market uptake of the valorisation technologies and 
products generated within the project (WP10). With the findings of the functional analysis and market assessment, 
the consortium will develop business models and business plans for each exploitable result.  
Sex and gender analysis 
The results of the innovation action are widely interdisciplinary and impact strongly upon women and men. A socio-
demographic analysis on the Attitude of Europeans towards waste management and resource efficiency reported in 
201418 shows a big gap among the answers of women and men, which is important to consider to ensure the 
excellence and high quality of the outcomes of SCALIBUR. At the start, the project team will create Urban Biowaste-
clubs to actively engage all relevant stakeholders in the waste value chain and to support the integration of the 
urban-biowaste valorisation a pproaches on a city level within each of the pilot regions. Citizen beh aviour and 
attitude towards bio waste and its valorisation will be assessed, considering also g ender and sex aspects. As 
previous EU reports show, d ifferent attitudes among women and men are expected.19 For example, women are 
more prone than men to reduce their household waste, whilst men are slightly more likely than women to think 
that better enforcement of existing antilitter laws would be effective (37% vs. 32%). In addition, women are  more 
likely to argue that reducing waste and sorting recyclable waste at home would make the biggest difference (54% 
vs. 49%). Moreover, it has been reported that gender may play a relevant role on the social acceptance of waste 
management costs.
20 It is therefore essential to perform this analysis to ensure that the social innovation initiatives 
are in line with the citizens  and to ensure that all actions implemented in SCALIBUR are gender inclusive . Special 
attention will be given to language and also to the design of the SCALIBUR stakeholder platform, which will also be 
gender inclusive.   Gender issues will  be addressed as well by promoting gender equality in recruitment and 
employment, following EC guideline s.21 This consortium consists of both highly qua lified female and male 
participants and partners will ensure that no gender will be unjustifiably preferred when recruiting new staff.  
 
                                                                                                               
18Attitudes of Europeans towards Waste Management and Resource Efficiency 
19Attitudes of Europeans towards Waste Management and Resource Efficiency 
20 Waste Manag. 2014 Dec;34(12):2434-44] 
21 http://ec.europa.eu/research/swafs/gendered-innovations/index_en.cfm?pg=home  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
13
1.4 AMBITION 
1.4.1 STATE-OF-THE-ART AND BEYOND 
Proteins, lipids, chemical commodities, bioplastics, and biopesticides will be obtained using innovative technologies 
in the valorisation of urban biowaste. Three different waste sources will be used for valorisation processes (MSW, 
HORECA, ROW  and USS) in 7 different DSs. A design of three different lines of valorisation  processes has been 
created, namely biochemical conversion of the OFMSW (WP4), protein, lipid and chitin production from insects 
reared on ROW (WP5), and  generation of products from USS by anaerobic digestion and subsequent  
bioelectrochemical treatment of the resulting biogas; or fermentation of USS into PHA (WP6). Each line has been 
designed to optimally exploit each waste, considering their composition and physicochemical characteristics. 
Moreover, to fully optimize the bio based conversion of all waste fractions, where  applicable, side fractions not 
exploitable in the dedicated line can be shared among different WP s. These technological approaches are 
described below and detailed methodologies are summarized in section 3.1 (WPs description). 
Stabilisation of biowaste (WP3).  
Stabilisation of OFMSW, HORECA waste and USS will be performed before its valorisation into high-value products. 
Separation and optimisation of MSW from Madrid municipality (FCC, DS 1) will be done as follows: Detection of 
impurities directly in the conveyor belt and manual separation, trituration, separation of high density materials and 
removal of metals. Homogenisation, to balance different fractions of the organic waste will be done. Further, 
stabilization, hygenisation and sterilization to inhibit decomposition will be carried out. 
Sorting and pre-treatment of HORECA waste (Albano (IT), UNIMORE DS 5): Most suitable blends of HORECA waste 
(LAZIO, IT) for insect rearing will be identify, searching for the right balance of nutrient-enriched waste.  
Sorting and pre-treatment of USS (SMVAK, DS 6 and WBD, DS 7) consist of homogenisation of the sludges collected 
from primary settlement and the biological treatment. Optimised mixtures of fractions from the primary and 
secondary treatments will be done to r each the right balance before its valorisation. The activated sewage sludge 
from WBD ( DS 7, NL) will be collected from secondary treatment. Optimization to keep feedstock cultures with 
constant activity for PHBV production will be done. Additionaly, the ch ance to mix the secondary activated sludge 
from UWWTP with regionally sourced residual organic waste materials will be explored.  
Biochemical conversion of the organic fraction of MSW (WP4).  
Organic Fraction of Municipal Solid Waste (OFMSW) will be collec ted in Madrid ( DS 1) and will be pre -treated to 
ensure its stability. This stabilized OFMSW will be used for valorisation into bioplastics and biopesticides in DSs 2-4. 
To yield these bio-based products, several technological steps are required.  
  Enzymatic hydrolysis (EH) (DS 2, CENER): 
State-of-the-art: Biowaste displays high variability  in its compositio n (see table below) . D epending on the waste 
source and the effective decomposition of some of these components (cellulose, hemicellulose, starch and 
proteins) to simple molecules (i.e. sugars and amino acids) is often considered a rate -limiting factor of the 
biochemical process. Boosting this decomposition improvement of the solubilisation of the organic components in 
the OFMSW is required. Generally, different pretreatment processes - thermo-chemical, hydrothermal, enzymatic 
hydrolysis and combinations of chemical, thermal, and enzymatic treatments - are carried out. 
Component % in dry weight 
Cellulose 35-37% 
Hemicellulose 1.5-4.5% 
Lignin 7-9% 
Protein 5-6% 
Others (starch, sugars and lipids) ≤1.5% 
Table 1.4.1a Major components in OFMSW22 
EH uses enzymes as biocatalysts for the breakdown of cellulose into monomeric sugars . In combination with ß -
glucosidases, cellulases have the capacity to hydrolyse cellulose into glucose. In particular, t he filamentous fungus 
Trichoderma reesei produces a cocktail of enzymes (exo -cellulase, endo-cellulase, ß-glucosidase) that catalyses the 
reaction of water with cellulose to glucose. Due to the complex nature of cellulose, enzymatic hydrolysis is 
influenced by both the structural features of cellulose and related factors such as enzyme source, thermal 
                                                                                                               
22 Springham, D.; Moses, V.; Cape, R.E. Biotechnology - The Science and the Business. 1999. ISBN 9789057024078 - CAT# TF3180 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
14 
   
inactivation, activity balance for synergism, specific activity, nonspecific binding, and enzyme processability/ 
compatibility.  
The composition of enzymatic mixtures 
that will be used for EH depends on 
the nature of the raw material, the 
targeted compound and the ability of 
the used microorganisms to hydrolyze 
these compounds. Particularly, 
enzymatic hydrolysis has long been 
studied as a method to depolymerize 
the biogenic feedstocks into 
fermentable sugars, with a more 
recent focus on operating at high -
solids loadings.  This approach with 
high-solid loadings has been proposed 
to render the lignocellulosic 
conversion process more economically 
feasible.  Figure 3. Demo sites 1, 2 ,3, 4  
Currently there are several commercial technologies for biochemical conversion of MSW around the world. Only 
Fiberight23 (US), operates a demo plant based on EH and fermentation into ethanol. Nevertheless, Fiberight is 
doing solid loads of about 12% w/w; therefore, not yet into high solid loads. 
Beyond state-of-the-art: Unlike other commercial approaches, SCALIBUR’s efforts on EH processes will be focus ed 
on high solids loading (between 20% -25% w/w). 2425 This proc ess will be performed in specially adapted 3,000 L  
reactors, allowing higher sugar concentrations in the media and lower capital and operating costs.  A process is 
considered “high solids” if the ratio solid/liquid is such that almost no free water is present in the slurry or roughly 
a solids loadings ≥15% (w/w) 26,27. EH performed at high- solids loadings offers the following advantages over low - 
and moderate -solids loadings:  i) Higher final sugar concentrations  resulting in higher bio -based products 
concentrations ii) reducing energy use and costs associated with downstream processes because smaller equipment 
and/or fewer reactors to produce an equivalent output  are needed . iii) Reduction in water requirements:  this 
reduces the cost of disposal and/or treatment of processed water. 
The SCALIBUR project will use  a tailored enzyme cocktail based on careful analysis of biomass components, to 
optimize the full bioconversion of OFMSW by EH.  
Main challenges on Enzymatic hydrolysis at high-solids loadings:  
 Lack of available water in the reactor affects  mass transfer and lubricity.  When solid load reaches  20% (w/w) 
the apparent viscosity increases , complicating the mixing and handling of the material ,28 and contributing to 
increase final product inhibition of the enzymes . In SCALIBUR the enzymatic hydrolysis at high solids load (20 -
25% w/w) will be done in specially designed bioreactors with tailor-made impellers.  
 Long hydrolysis times. The reaction time needed for most enzymes to achieve sufficient glucose concentrations 
is usually 3 days27, which can only be reduced by increasing enzyme loading. However, enzymes can overcrowd 
accessible cellulose sites, affecting the full hydrolytic potential of the enzymes. In this project ASA will  provide 
cellulases with higher specific enzyme activity, the reaction temperature will be optimized for specific cellulase 
activity and mechanical-chemical will be also investigated. 
 Finding cost-effective approaches to develop highly active enzymes. Enzymes are typically added per weight of 
substrate, therefore at high loading the number  of enzymes must increase . SCALIBUR’s approach consists of 
using specific enzymes to depolymerize fractions other than carbohydrates (i.e. proteins, lipids), to achieve 
nutrient enriched hydrolysates for the next fermentation processes.  
                                                                                                               
23 http://fiberight.com/  
24 Appl Biochem Biotechnol 152:88, (2009) 
25 Biomass and Bioenergy 56, 526-544, (2013) 
26 Appl Biochem Biotechnol 152:88, (2009) 
27 Biomass and Bioenergy 56, 526-544, (2013). 
28 Appl Biochem Biotechnol;152:88, (2009) 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
15 
   
 The hydrolysate must comply with some quality requirements (solids, particulates, improper, etc.) for 
downstream processes commonly used at industrial scale. Throughout several intermediate processes e.g. 
coagulation and decanting the quality will be ensured. A concentration step will be applied to obtain high sugar 
syrup suitable for microbial conversion before fermentation if needed.  
  Fermentation to biopolyesters (DS 4, NOVAMONT): 
Conversion of OFMSW described above (using  EH and fermentation) yield several diols. Final valorisation  of these 
diols into bioplastics will be performed by NOVAMONT  (DS 4). Biobutanediol (1,4 BDO) will be obtained directly 
from sugars, thereby introducing production of other chemical intermediates from renewable sources.  
State-of-the-art: 1,4 Butanediol (BDO), which is normally obtained from fossil resources, is a chemical intermediate 
used in a wide range of applications (textiles, electronics, automotive, etc.), as well as a building block for the 
production of bioplastics. Besides the chemical processes that produce fossil -based BDO, there is an indirect 
biological route that produces 1,4 -BDO through the dehydration of succinic acid into succinic anhydride and the 
following hydrogenation to γ-butyrolactone (GBL).  
Beyond-state-of-the-art: Within the SCALIBUR project and based on the innovative enzymatic process developed by 
CENER (DS 2), the production of biobased 1,4 BDO from fermentable sugars produced through pre -treatment and 
hydrolysis of O FMSW will be demonstrated . Both upstream and downstream processes will be optimized for 
obtaining high purity (99%) 1,4 bio-BDO with optimal characteristics for polyesters formulation. 
Obtaining 1,4 Bio -BDO direct fermentation of sugars into succinyl -CoA b y an engineered E. coli  strain and 
subsequent production of 1,4 -BDO will be the strategy followed in SCALIBUR  (NOVAMONT DS 4). A downstream 
process mainly consisting of biomass removal, micro and nanofiltration, and ion exchange high purity Bio -BDO for 
polymerization application will be undertaken . This key building will then be  combined with other biobased 
dicarboxylic acids (among which azelaic acid obtained from low impact vegetable oils from dry corps ) to generate 
high performance biobased and biodegradable polyesters, which will be validated into sustainable packaging films 
application (by ITENE), following a full circular economy approach. 
Main challenges on the fermentation of liquid hydrolysed coming from OFMSW: 
 Low fermentability of OFMSW derived su gars into 1,4 bio-BDO: Work on sugar mix (including purer sources of 
sugars in combination with OFMSW derived sugars to achieve sustainable yields). Enhance sugars purification 
towards the obtaining of the desired purity. 
 Higher impurities in bio -BDO ferme ntation broth coming from OFMSW derived sugars : Downstream 
enhancement (separation and purification) towards the obtaining of high purity bio -BDO suitable for 
polymerization. 
  Production of microbial biopesticides (DS 3, AERIS): 
State-of-the-art: Currently, the standard method of productio n of substances with high- value by means of 
microorganisms is the process of fermentation. There are many types of fermentation; the two mo st common are 
"submerged" and "semi-solid", also known as “solid state fermentation” (SSF).  
The growth of microorganisms in a fully liquid system (so-called submerged or deep-tank fermentation) has several 
advantages: constant temperature and pH, the abil ity to pump air into the system and disperse it with stirring 
impellers, and the capacity to generate reasonably homogeneous conditions to maximize the growth of the 
microorganisms. Despite the se advantages, some fungi microorganisms will not yield a satis factory product 
through this type of fermentation. Semi -solid fermentation offers an alternative where the fungi microorganisms 
grow mainly on the wet surface of a solid material. This setting allows fungi to grow in conditions more similar to 
those found in nature, with the spores produced in the air being consequently more durable, and relatively easy to 
develop on a small scale. Nevertheless, scaling up this process to the sizes necessary for a commercial product 
presents numerous problems: aeration becomes difficult as the volume of a semi -solid mass and trays are difficult 
to keep sterile. In addition, the development of large vessels to scale- up semi-solid media fermentation requires 
the invention of a number of techniques or pieces of equipment.29 
Beyond state-of-the-art: The European biopesticides market is growing annually at a rate of 20%. Use of agro -
industrial wastes and SSF technology offers an alternative to biopesticide production with advantages vs  
conventional submerged fermentations:  reduced cost and energy consumption, low production of residual water 
and high stability products.  The reliability of SSF for the bioconversion of solid organic wastes into high -value 
                                                                                                               
29 Crit Rev Biotechnol.; 35,326-33 (2015) 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
16 
   
products is proven by a number of recent research studies 30,31,32. SSF consists of a low-cost technology that allows 
production of biosurfactants, enzymes (as peroxydases, cellulases, lipases or proteases), bioplastics and others.  
Nowadays, research efforts are focusing o n finding the most adequate culturing conditions (in terms of mixi ng, 
oxygen and nutrients requirements, temperature, pH, etc.) in order to optimize the production of these high- value 
compounds. During SCALIBUR, different strategies for the extraction and the conservation of the products will be 
optimized. The sugar hydr olysate produced from the EH  of the OFMSW  (CENER, DS 2) will be used for its 
bioconversion in biopesticides using Bacillus thuringensis sp (AERIS, DS 3) in a 1,000 L bioreactor to be considered a 
new valorisation route in a biorefinery. Moreover, the unhyd rolysed solid fraction wil l be also exploited using SSF  
to produce biopesticides (biofungicides and bioinsecticides). The optimal ranges of the main operational 
parameters will be established in order to maximize biopesticides production at an affordable cost.  
So far, most results have been obtained at lab -scale conditions, producing minimal amounts of valuable products 
and working under ideal, sterile conditions. Hence, one of the interests is in the upscaling of the process. A deep 
knowledge of the varia bles influencing the process and a wide experience in this or similar research fields is 
required in order to achieve an efficient scale-up. Both CENER and AERIS have this expertise.  
Main challenges in the production of biopesticides: 
 Maintenance of stabi lity of the production culture , both in its initial form (preservation) and as subcultures 
infrequently propagated via sporulation or vegetative generations. Laboratory tests to  establish the influence 
of the use of cultures previously adapted to the condi tions will be done . Emphasis will be on maximizing  the 
production of biopesticides and reducing the processing time. 
 Establishing the  conditions ensuring reproducible yields  and demonstration of microbial biopesticides 
production from substrates derived fr om OFMSW. SCALIBUR w ill tackle this by use of ra w ma terials of 
appropriate quality and the development of analytical methods for controlling culture processes.  
Protein, lipid and chitin production from insects reared on HORECA waste (WP5).  
Valorisation of ROW and HORECA waste by insect rearing will be done in Italy ( DS 5), where the current legislation 
considers that ROW is a by -product, while HORECA is considered a waste and feed for animals (including insects). 
To demonstrate that HORECA waste is a vali d feedstock for insect rearing, this stream will be used in parallel to 
ROW during WP5. HORECA waste and ROW will be collected in Lazio (IT)  and this by-product will be characterized 
and analysed. To produce bio-based products the Black Soldier Fly (BSF) will be used in a pilot plant (UNIMORE, DS 
5). SCALIBUR will focus its efforts on producing proteins, lipids and chitin through this innovative approach.  
 Insect rearing (DS 5, UNIMORE (IT)  
State-of-the-art: Insects like Black soldier Fly (BSF) Hermetia illucens (Diptera, Stratiomyidae) can convert in a very 
efficient way kitchen and restaurant scraps, or simply organic materials , into a biomass rich in proteins, lipids  and 
chitin33,34,35. In some European countries such as Germany ( www.hermetia.de) and the Netherlands 
(https://protix.eu) studies have been carried out  to use the BSF pre- pupae for food and feed  (aquaculture) 
purposes, rearing BSF on by-products of the vegetable food chain. 
As a demonstration of the growing interest in the subject, the EU has recently financed a €2.1M project (InDirect 
Project) aimed at developing biorefinery processes for the direct or indirect conversion of wa ste and by -products 
of the European agro -food chain through insects . Previously, another project of about 4 million euros 
(PROteINSECT) has been completed on the rearing of insects for the production of food and feed. 
Despite the great interest in BSF industrial rearing, there is  still no company able to propose industrial plants for 
massive insect rearing with several tons of insects per month production. At the moment in Italy there are only a 
few companies able to produce insects and BSF in particular that is mainly used for pet feeding/fishing.   
                                                                                                               
30 Biochemical Engineering Journal 44, 13-18, (2009). 
31 Bioresource Technology 100, 2600-6 (2009). 
32 Biochemical Engineering Journal 74, 15-19 (2013). 
33 Journal of Cleaner Production 102, 362-369, (2015). 
34 Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 97, 2594–2600, (2017) 
35 Renewable Energy 41, 75–79, (2012). 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
17 
   
 
Figure 4. Demo site 5 
Beyond state-of-the-art: This project takes advantage of the potential o f the organic materials using them  as a 
growth substrate to mass rear  the BSF , a non -infesting fly, whose larvae are able to rear on a wide variety of 
organic substrates with a high moisture content. Thanks to their action, the phosphorus and nitrogen content of 
the organic substrate is reduced, bacterial growth is suppressed, even that of harmful strains, 36 unpleasant odours 
and the population of invasive domestic flies are reduced. 37 The resulting residue after insect rearing is a good 
quality compost, valuable for agricultural crops. 38 In relation to th e type of growth substrate, mature larvae and 
pre-pupae (pre-adult stage) can be used for various purposes, depending on the laws of different countries.  
A project coordinated by UNIMORE  (leader of WP5), ValoriBio - Valorisation of organic waste by insects to obtain 
biomaterials for agricultural uses (€1.2 M POR -ERDF 2014-2020) - has developed a pilot plant for the breeding of 
insects on animal manure. A  new concept of BSF industrial rearing was adopted and new tech nologies were 
developed in order to decrease the manual labour and increase the industrial scalability. This  pilot plant is ready to 
be scaled-up and to be affordable for European applications. This production plant can be divided into  two main 
parts: a) the eggs production part where adults mate and lay their eggs  and b) the bioconverter where larvae grow 
on organic waste and carry out its conversion. A new technology for eggs collection was designed, tested in the lab, 
fabricated and covered by a patent ( submitted). In the larvae production part, a fully automated system for larvae 
feeding and growth was developed. This technology was designed to be industrially scalable and cost-effective. 
 Protein, lipid and chitin extraction from insect fractionation (DS 5, UNIMORE & Kour, IT) 
State-of-the-art: Protein may be extracted with different reported protocols, primarily used to separate only one 
constituent from the insect biomass 39,40,41, using pH adjustments to cause protein precipitation. Nevertheless, 
insects are rich with other interesting and valuable substances worth being  exploited: lipids and chitin. The 
extraction of lipids is the first step of insect fractionation. On dry, grinded insects  a solvent extraction is carried out 
to yield a defatted fraction for further protein extraction. The second step gives raw proteins and raw chitin by 
selective precipitations at different pH. Yield of protein extraction ranges between 70% and 90% depending on the 
procedure42. Unfortunately, current methods are too complex to be easily scaled up to an industrial level.  Other 
authors used less aggressive but time-consuming approaches, such as fermentation and EH43,44. 
Beyond state-of-the-art: SCALIBUR’s approach will benefit fro m the expertise of UNIMORE, whose protocol to 
extract all protein, lipid, and chitin,  has been recently developed 45. Different systematic approaches were applied 
on SF pre -pupae to fractionate lipid, protein and chitin to yield three fractions, following a cascade protocol. The 
protein yield reached on wet prepupae is about 6% and twice as much on dry matter. 
Characterisation of the protein will be performed by Zetadec. Zetadec’s methods will be optimised to validate and 
accurately estimate the potential use of the resulting products for feed, food, biomass and fertilizer industries. 
                                                                                                               
36 Entomological Research 42, 219–226, (2012). 
37 The Science of the total environment 458–460, 312–8, (2013). 
38 Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology 166, 1381–1387, (2012) 
39 Heliyon, 2, e00218, (2016) 
40 Journal of Food Processing and Preservation, 6(2), 99–110, (1982). 
41 Food Chemistry, 141, 3341–3348, (2013). 
42 Osborne, T. B. (1907). The proteins of the wheat kernel. Washington, DC: Carnegie Inst. 
43 Food Chemistry, 68, 147–152, (2000) 
44 Food Research International, 105, 812-820, (2018). 
45 Food Research International, 105, 812-820, (2018). 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
18 
   
Bioconversion of sewage sludge into high value chemicals, pesticides and polymers (WP6). 
  Conversion of biogas and solid fraction of USS (DS 1&6, Madrid & SMVAK): 
The main destinations for the biogas produced in WWTP  are cogeneration engines, where electricity and heat are 
concomitantly obtained, and flaring torch where excess of biogas is burned.  Instead of flaring the biogas, 
SCALIBUR’s approach raises its utilization to obtain enriched biomethane and organic compounds using 
bioelectrosynthesis (BES).  Specifically, CO 2 contained in biogas from MSW treatment ( DS 1 (ES) ) and from USS 
treatment (DS 6 (CZ)) will be used to produce organic compounds. T hese biological CO 2 streams have less toxic 
metal or chemical impurities compar ed to industrial CO 2 off-gases. The integration of this  process with the waste 
treatment would enable to re-utilize the emitted CO2 and increase the sustainability of these facilities. 
USS will be submitted to physical, chemical and biological processes in dividually or combined with the resulting 
solid fraction from EH of OFMSW (WP4, DS 2) to produce high-value products using BES. 
State-of-the-art: Nowadays, management of USS  includes composting for farmland utilization, incineration and 
landfilling46. The most widely used treatment is anaerobic digestion (AD) to convert it into biogas. This treatment is 
very inefficient (30-50% efficiency), and the produced biogas shows a low energy content (5,000 –  6,000 kCal/m3) 
as well as impurities like H2S and NH3. 
The rate limiting step in AD is the hydrolysis step, leading to high retention times, low organic solids degradation 
and unsatisfactory CH4 output47. Conventional mesophilic anaerobic digestion presents low overall volatile solids 
(VS) removal efficiency (30-50%) of raw sludge even at very long retention times of 20-30 days48. To accelerate this 
process and improve the efficiency of AD, various pre- treatment technologies have been developed, 
including49,50,51: i) mechanical (e.g. ultrasonic, microwave, electrokineti c, and high -pressure homogenization), ii) 
thermal, iii) chemical (e.g. acidic, alkali, ozonation, fenton chemistry) and iv) biological treatment (temperature -
phased AD, enzyme and microbial electrolysis cell).  
Although different pre-treatment methods have been proposed, full-scale application is not widely implemented. 
Figure 5. Demo sites 1, 3, 6 and 7 
There are a few patented technologies that 
have been applied in practical sludge 
treatment: CambiTHP™, Biothelys® (TH), 
Biosonator (ultrasonication), Aspal SLUDGE™, 
Praxair® Lyso™ (microwave), BioCrack 
(electrokinetic disintegration), MicroSludge™, 
and Cellruptor (HPH). The main disadvantages 
of full-scale implementation are: i) high 
energy demand and capital cost, ii) complex 
equipment, iii) complex operation and 
maintenance, and iv) risk of recalcitrant 
compounds formation in the case of thermal 
process. 
Beyond state-of-the-art: SCALIBUR proposes the implementation of reliable physical and mechanical pre -treatment 
for sewage sludg e conditioning to be subsequently treated by biological systems. This enhances sludge reduction 
and methane recovery, with associated energy, environmental and economic benefits. Therefore, energy required 
for pre -treatment, final sludge dewatering, transp ortation and ultimate disposal as well as corresponding GHG 
emission would be fully considered in SCALIBUR.  
Scalibur’s prototype for the anaerobic bioconversion of sewage sludge will include an innovative process for the 
collection (single and mixture was tes), conditioning and feed of the pre -treated materials. Pre-treatment by 
mechanical m illing and subsequent  anaerobic bioconversion will result in three value fractions: i) liquid for 
fertirrigation, ii) solid for biofertilizes production, and ii) biogas to obtain high-value compounds. 
                                                                                                               
46 Energy Rev. 12, 116–140, (2007) 
47 Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 69, 559–577, (2017) 
48 Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 34, 755–781, (2008) 
49 Bioresour. Technol. 216, 870–875, (2016) 
50 Bioresour. Technol. 216, 870–875, (2016) 
51 Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 38, 383–392, (2014) 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
19 
   
Bioelectrosynthesis technologies (BES) are an alternative to conventional physical and chemical biogas upgrading 
techniques for the production of biomethane from sewage sludge and MSW management. This process is driven by 
microorganisms grow n autotrophically using CO 2 as electron acceptor. Different compounds can be produced  
depending on the type of microorganisms present in the system . BES is highly versatile, with adaptable operation 
conditions allowing the preparation of target compounds, by influencing the metabolism of the microorganisms.  
The biogas from the AD of sewage sludge can be treated bioelectrochemically to produce high -value alcohols and 
carboxylic acids. For this purpose, biogas collection and conditioning wil l be carried out to be fed into the BES 
prototype. Optimization of the BES process will be done  using a ready-to-use inoculum. T his guarantees a quick 
start-up and stabilization of the SCALIBUR BES prototype.  Direct CO2 transformation in situ  BES and micro bial 
utilization of H 2 is achieved . This approach provides very high local H 2 concentration available for the microbial 
reaction, and lowering the overpotential of electrolytic H 2, which avoids process inhibition . This approach will 
greatly advance BES tec hnology readiness level to produce multi -carbon compounds from CO 2.52,53. To date, 
acetate is the most common final product of synthesis in the majority of BES studies that attempted this 
production methodology. However, University of Girona proved that buty rate and small amounts of ethanol and 
butanol can be produced by BES using CO2 as a sole carbon substrate70. 
Main challenges of USS pre-treatment, anaerobic bioconversion and bioelectrosynthesis technologies 
 Given the fluctuating composition of the raw was te materials (and mixtures) cost- effective homogenization 
and pre -treatment processes are desired to keep the system running close to steady state conditions. 
SCALIBUR addresses this issue including additional steps (separation, homogenization, pre-treatment methods) 
to be easily implemented in the prototypes and also at industrial scale.  
 The presence of complex molecules in the biowastes can make their hydrolysis difficult, limiting the anaerobic 
fermentation rate. Efficient physical and mechanical proces ses will be combined with chemical methods  to 
break-down complex molecules, improving the efficiency of the following anaerobic step. 
 Raw waste materials can contain inhibitory compounds and/or impurities  that can negatively impact on 
microorganisms. The B ES technology proposed in SCALIBUR uses the gas stream result ing from wastes 
processing, avoiding these effects and mitigating the impact of fluctuations in feed characteristics. 
  Valorisation of surplus sewage sludge into high quality PHBV (DS 7, WETSUS & WBD, NL): 
Most of the surplus activated sludge that is nowadays produced in the municipal WWTP  can be optimized to 
produce polyhydroxyalkalnoates (PHA) bioplastic 54,55. Fermented organic municipal waste or primary sewage 
sludge can be used to produce a PH A rich biomass  after dewatering and drying . The PHA can be extracted with 
green solvents to produce a pure and high quality PHA bioplastic with a very low environmental footprint. PHA has 
several applications both as a biodegradable plastic and as an additive to improve other materials56,57.  
State-of-the-art: Currently, it is estimated that the global PHA production (mainly by Kaneka, Danimer, Tianan) is 
between 2,000 – 4,000 tons/year. As market demand has started rising from 2015 onward, it is expected that these 
numbers will increase significantly due to scale up activities by various producer s.58 Furthermore, the current 
production methods are based on fe edstocks, like sugar or palm oil  that are in competition with food and feed 
production. With USS  one specific microbial culture is  grown that can produce the PHA with accumulation  in the 
microbes. Extraction from the biomass via oxidative wet- chemical methods is done. There are various European 
initiatives to produce PHA material using organic waste and USS . These approaches hold the promise of th e use of 
lower grades feedstock; however, none of the initiatives have progressed further than pilot scale.59,60 
Beyond state -of-the-art: Compared to other initiatives that intend to produce PHA from organic waste , the 
approach describe d here has some distinctive differences. First, PHA can be produced when this biomass is 
subjected to aerobic or anoxic feast conditions within the WWTP using the microbial community growing directly in 
the biomass  (without additional co sts from WWTP or additional energy and feedstock ). Secondly, a patented 
extraction method using green solvents to extract the PHA will be used, whereas most other competing processes 
                                                                                                               
52 Bioelectrochemistry. 117, 57-64, (2017) 
53 Chem. Commun. 51, 3235–3238, (2015) 
54 Biotechnol 35, 42-53, (2017) 
55 Bioresour Technol 181, 78-89, (2015) 
56 Chemical Society Reviews, 38, 2434-2446, (2009) 
57 Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA): Review of synthesis, characteristics, processing and potential applications in packaging 
58 http://docs.european-bioplastics.org/publications/EUBP_Facts_and_figures.pdf 
59 “Blueprint – producing biobased plastics from waste water”, market report by Bluetech research, June 2017. 
60 New Biotechnology 37, 9-23, (2017) 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
20 
   
use a n oxidative wet approach. This extraction procedure yields  high qual ity PHA material with high molecular 
weights and controlled  PHA composition. It also leads to  an increase in purity of the resulting PHA, removing 
impurities and micro -pollutants. Using this strategy,  a PHA that consists of a copolymer of butyrate and vale rate 
(PHBV) with unique properties (more rubbery, amorphous, lower melting point) is obtained.  
In 2015 – 2016 fifteen municipal WWTP in The Netherlands were tested for PHA accumulation-potential by analysis 
of their surplus secondary sludge. The maximum P HA content reached ranged from 15 to 52% of the organic 
content. Economic evaluations show that a PHA content of 40 -50% is sufficient; therefore, some municipal WWTP 
can serve as process units producing functional biomass with PHA storing capacities. More importantly, 
modifications to treatment plants are not required 61. Fine tuning of the process can be implemented in practice to 
bring a wide range of WWTPs to produce biomass with PHA accumulation potential of 50 to 69 % organic wt. A 10 -
month pilot includi ng PHA accumulation and extraction showed that a very high quality PHA product could 
consistently be made (PHARIO project).  
Main Challenges for valorisation of surplus sewage sludge and organic waste to produce high quality PHA: 
Currently, there are three challenges that will be overcome in SCALIBUR by establishing a production line making 
up to 100 Kg of material per year: 
 End-users require enoug h material to be able to evaluate their interest  in involvement. SCALIBUR will work  
with prototype materials to plan a developing business around the material supply chain. 
 Costs for the solvent extraction process in the scale -up are currently only estimates, showing that this process 
is economical. However, cost must be understood with greater certainty.  SCALIBUR findings in the kilogram 
facility will help secure investments in scale-up design.  
 Food packaging is a relevant and promising field of application of PHA materials . However, renewable 
resources produced from “wastes” are stigmatized, given their origin from waste. The available evidence shows 
that solvent extraction methods, as used in SCALIBUR, will yield a pure PHBV material that could be used in 
food applications. Notwithstanding, these aspects can only be understood from the data and experience 
gained from within a true production environment as proposed herein. SCALIBUR aims also at the production 
and characterisation of the resulting products to ensure high quality.  
1.4.2 Innovation Potential 
The SCALIBUR project has been designed considering the interdisciplinary interactions among all different 
strategies provided by 21 partners, each of them bringing expertise that contribute s to ensuring excellence in the 
project. The main goal is  to create and develop innovative urban biowaste valorisation systems to produce high -
value biobased products through adaptation and upgrading of the current value chain and by applying co -creation 
methodologies involving relevant stakeholders such as citizens and municipalities. 
SCALIBUR is an innovation action with a large innovation potential.  New products, services and business models will 
arise from the project, included, but not limited to: 
 The SCALIBUR concept integrated by biowaste management companies. 
 Commercialisation of the SCALIBUR processes for production of biobased products. 
 Commercialisation of improved biobased products with great interest in industrial applications (food industry 
packaging materials, agriculture, chemical industry, etc.) 
 New collection schemes of biowaste at the city level.  
 Integrated stakeholder platform for prevention of waste and improved biowaste quality and the establishment 
of best practices among European countries for urban biowaste selective collection. 
 Commercialisation of tailored monitoring systems for biowaste treatment plants. 
 Commercialisation of CH4 and H2S sensors in waste management companies. 
 Knowledge about user acceptance, user behaviour and willingness for adaptation. 
 Engineering services for further biorefinery projects and similar projects. 
 A set of practical recommendations for urban biowaste management at all levels. 
  
                                                                                                               
61 Stepping stone to a value chain for PHA bioplastic using municipal activated sludge, STOWA, report 2017-15 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
21 
   
 
SECTION 2. IMPACT
2.1 EXPECTED IMPACTS 
2.1.1 CONTRIBUTION TO EXPECTED IMPACTS UNDER THE CALL TOPIC CE-SFS-25-2018 
The SCALIBUR project aims to create and develop innovative urban biowaste valorisation systems by upgrading 
existing value chains, obtaining high value biobased products, and by applying co -creation methodologies involving 
citizens, municipalities and other related stakeholders. This project is expected to develop its full potential and 
achieve its objectives by 2022. SCALIBUR will involve the participation of three municipalities (Madrid (ES), Albano 
(LAZIO, IT) and Kozani (CLUBE
, LE)) to establish a pilot for every system developed. These systems will be replicable 
in different contexts internationally and are thus expected to encourage new policies regarding urban biowaste 
treatment. A figure of Best 
Performing Territories  is crea ted, 
which represents municipalities with 
the current Municipal Waste lowest 
landfilling rate (in SCALIBUR, 
represented by LUND, Sweden ). The 
current landfilling rate per country is 
shown in 
Figure 6. In addition, a 
Following Territories figure will also 
be created during the project, 
represented by municipalities in 
countries with the highest municipal 
waste landfilling rates. The Best 
Territories will have the role of 
exchanging best practices with the 
three pilot  municipalities, being a 
reference for the implementation of 
the new biowaste management scheme. Following Territories will be the receptors of the created good practices, 
business models and other project results for replicating SCALIBUR innovative biowas te management scheme and 
achieving an international impact. Furthermore, new sustainable business models will be created during the course 
of this project, to ensure economic revenue in the locations where these systems are implemented, and to create 
momentum for other stakeholders to engage in SCALIBUR technologies in an early stage. 
Validated technical and economic viability of the proposed approaches at target TRL 7  
SCALIBUR will develop three innovative processes to obtain added -value products. The fir st one (WP4) will make 
use of the sugar fraction coming from OFMSW to obtain biobased plastics (polyesters) and biopesticides, with an 
initial TRL of 5 -6 to a final TRL7. The second one (WP5) will use HORECA and ROW waste to produce added -value 
products (including proteins for food and feed, lipid biobased plastics and chitin/chitosan), with an initial TRL of 4-6 
to a final TRL 7. The last one valorises sewage sludge and MSW to obtain bioplastics (PHAs) for packaging purposes 
and biopesticides with a starting TRL 5-6 to a final TRL 7. The technical and economic viability of each new process 
will be continuously assessed and re-validated through a techno-economic assessment and LCA analysis (WP8). 
New business and organisational models on cities ensuring the full integration of the upgraded urban biowaste 
value into the existing local waste/wastewater management schemes 
From its start, SCALIBUR will cooperate with municipalities, citizens, waste collectors and managers and other 
quadruple helix stakeholders in the locations of its pilot plants, not only to implement the mentioned biowaste 
valorisation procedures, but also to develop new business and social innovation approaches enabling the full 
integration of the valorisation technologies tested in WP4 -6. This will ensure economic revenue from these novel 
waste re-valorisation methods in a circular-economy fashion. 
Improved citizen perception of urban biowaste as a local resource and their enhanced active participation in its 
separate collection through social innovation initiatives; improved consumer acceptance of urban biowaste -derived 
products, including food and feed 
Figure 6. EU Municipal Waste Landfilling rates per country. Source: European Parliamentary 
Research Service: “Towards a circular economy – Waste Management in the EU” 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
22 
   
Co-creation activities and citizen engagement are a key issue for the development of SCALIBUR project, as reflected 
in WP2. This will be achieved in each municipality through engagement activities involving all relevant stakeholders 
and encouraging social innovation. Engagement activities include the creation of a tailored stakeholder 
engagement plan, a forum representing all related stakeholder’ s interests (Urban Biowasteclubs, representing 
citizens, waste managers, waste collectors, policy representatives, etc.), co -creation workshops and “see, touch, 
taste” experiences, engaging presentations back-to-back at existing citizen events. The generated outcomes will be 
validated through monitoring tools including our stakeholder platform at a neighbourhood level, in order to 
corroborate and validate behaviour changes related to urban biowaste management. In addition, participatory and 
co-creation acti vities throughout the project will present urban biowaste -derived products as a local resource, 
hence aiming to improve consumer acceptance. DIY guidelines for further uptake of Urban Biowasteclubs and 
project replicability will be provided based on the pr oject results in the three municipalities to increase the impact 
of this project. A policy brief “Recommendations for urban biowaste management” will be created and 
disseminated in order to encourage national policy to foster this uptake in other regions, cities, and EU countries.  
A more sustainable and resilient protein supply chain 
One of the three innovative urban biowaste valorisation systems proposed in SCALIBUR will make use of ROW 
HORECA to obtain high -value biobased products, such as proteins for f eed amongst others (as described in WP5). 
In alignment with “The Future of Protein: The Protein Challenge 2040” 62 document, SCALIBUR will provide an 
innovative, sustainable and resilient pattern to obtain food and feed. A huge environmental impact reduction  and 
improved land use will be achieved this way, since fields currently used for the production of animal feed can then 
be used for other agricultural purposes. 
Safety assessment of biobased processes and products from urban biowaste 
The safety assessment  of each new processes, especially in relation to urban biowaste, will be continuously 
followed-up and validated through safety assessments performed by the partner NS, as they are experts in in -vitro 
analysis with tailored Standard-operating Protocols (SOP). Safety assessments will be performed in WP8. 
Reduced amount of urban biowaste that would otherwise be incinerated or landfilled, and hence reduced 
environmental impact (including emissions of GHG and of air pollutants and their precursors) of municipal  and food 
waste 
SCALIBUR’s main impact will consist of a wide reduction of urban biowaste incineration and/or landfilling. Only 
during the project, a significant increase in organic fraction selective waste collection will be achieved in each pilot 
municipality. The current rates for organic fraction selective waste collection and the expected final rate per 
municipality are: Albano (LAZIO) – from 75% to 90%; Madrid – from 71% to 85%; and Kozani (CLUBE): from 19% to 
50%. A total incrementation of collected and valorised OFMSW of 21,945,600 t/year will be achieved, a reduction of 
21,79 Mt CO2 eq/year. In relation to the waste management plants, 30 t of urban biowaste will be valorised through 
different chemical and biological processes applied in the Spanish pilot plant. A valorisation of up to 30,000 t/year 
could be achieved at the end of the project, only considering the Spanish pre -treatment plant from Madrid ( DS 1, 
FCC, Las Dehesas). Furthermore, more than half of the biogas produced in this pre -treatment plant is misused and 
flared in a torch. The same occurs in wastewater treatment plants operated by SVMAK (16% of biogas produced is 
flared). A conversion of CO
2 contained in this off -gas (40%) into high -value products will be also achieved as an 
indirect c onsequence of the project (by implementing the fermentation solution developed in WP4 in those 
plants), thus capturing more than 12,264 Tonnes of CO2 per day per every similar facility implementing SCALIBUR’s 
developed solutions (biomethanation & wastewater treatment plants).  
Moreover, it is projected that the installed biogas production capacity in Europe will be of 30 billion m 3/year by 
2030 (European Biogas Association, EBA), of which about 30 -40% are a potential CO 2 source. SCALIBUR’s results 
will potentially save 300 – 400 Mm3 emissions of CO2/year by 2030.  
Detailed assessments of specific technical, regulatory, financial, market and logistical barriers hampering the full 
exploitation of the urban biowaste value chain 
SCALIBUR includes activities addr essing all issues in order to achieve a successful market exploitation of project 
results: techno -economic analysis, together with LCA/SCLA and regulatory issues (WP8), and elaboration of 
business plans regarding the obtained biobased products (WP10). Logi stical barriers will be tackled all throughout 
the project. All of these activities will be continuously redefined through the feedback obtained during project 
development. The KERs (Key Exploitable Results) obtained during and after the project will be exploited by every 
involved partner, as defined in Table 3.2.1g, Table 3.2.1.h and Table 3.2.1.i. In addition, a preliminary exploitation 
                                                                                                               
62 https://www.forumforthefuture.org/project/protein-challenge-2040/overview  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
23 
   
strategy of the consortium as a whole is also defined in Section 2.2.A. The exploitation strategies defined for every 
partner and for the consortium as a whole will be based on conclusions from the assessments and analysis 
performed in the previously named activities. 
Evidence-based support for EU policies/targets in the biobased and circular economy, climate mitigation, 
sustainable growth and re-industrialisation 
SCALIBUR will also help fulfil the impact targets of the main European -related policies on the environment, climate 
mitigation, biobased products and circular economy, as required by the topic, including: UN Sustai nable 
Development Goals no 3, 6, 9, 11, 12 and 13, the EU's Bioeconomy Strategy 2012, the EU's Circular Economy  
2.1.3 OTHER SIGNIFICANT IMPACTS NOT MENTIONED IN THE WORK PROGRAMME 
Policy impacts 
SCALIBUR will produce results that will influence the modification  of existing policies and their adaptation to the 
new processes, products and biowaste value chains in the area of bioplastics, waste management and animal 
feeding, including D2.2. National manuals for local uptake, D2.3. Policy brief “Recommendations for urban 
biowaste management”, D.5.6. Regulatory draft amending provisions on animal feeding in order to include insects 
and D.8.6. Regulatory Assessment. These deliverables will bring scientific evidence and validated results influencing 
EU and national rela ted regulations, as the new waste collection methodologies implemented in pilot 
municipalities and the biobased products obtained will constitute an improved biowaste management scheme. 
Thus, upgrades on related policies will be a key issue in order to imp lement and replicate the SCALIBUR results in 
other countries or regions. 
The following KPIs will be used as policy success indicators : (1) local implementation of national manuals; (2) 
recommendations by EU institutions after the submission of amending pro posals on EU acts; (3) changes made to 
EU and national acts after the submission of amending proposals; and (4) removal of legislative barriers to the 
fulfilment of the project’s objectives. 
Alignment with Sustainable Development Goals63: SCALIBUR’s contribution to the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG): 
 
Figure 7. UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) to change our world 
The implementation of SCALIBUR will not only create a new scheme for maximum valorisation o f urban waste into 
high-value biobased products but will also contribute to most Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as defined in 
the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the EU’s Bioeconomy Strategy 2012, the EU’s Circular Economy 
Package 2015 and the FOOD 2030 Staff Working Document. 
1. Environment Dimension: SDG 6 – Clean Water and Sanitation: improvement of water use and consumption 
through citizenship awareness accomplished through engagement action plans; SDG 11 – Sustainable Cities 
and Communit ies: improvement of resource use and valorisation, contributing to the development of 
sustainable communities; SDG 13 – Climate Action: discouragement of landfilling and incineration of residues, 
and subsequent decrease GHG emissions (by 21,79 Mt CO 2 eq/year) : SDG 14 – Life Below Water: reduction of 
                                                                                                               
63 Resolution by the UN General Assembly on September 25, 2015 (A/RES/70/1, Transforming our world, 
http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/)  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
24 
   
water consumption because of valorisation of waste products which decreases manufacturing activities; SDG 
15 – Life on Land: reduction of contamination coming from landfilling and incineration;  
2. Social Dimension: SDG 1 – No poverty: creation of internationally replicable sustainable business models and 
new job opportunities; SDG 2 – Zero Hunger: creation of new food and feed sources from urban waste; SDG 3 – 
Good Health and Well -being: by providing a healthy env ironment and increasing the quality of life through a 
reduction of landfilled and incinerated waste and thus decreased air pollution; SDG 5  – Gender Equality: 
through gender -equality actions; SDG 10  – Reduced Inequalities: development of internationally re plicable 
business models related to waste management and valorisation. 
3. Economic Dimension : SDG 12  – Responsible Consumption and Production: simultaneous enablement of 
sustainable production and consumption patterns and consumer awareness through educationa l activities on 
sustainable consumption; SDG 8 – Decent Work and Economic Growth: improvement of existing value chains 
with new sustainable business models, thus generating new job opportunities; SDG 9 – Industry, Innovation 
and Infrastructure: encouragement of innovation and sustainable business models. 
4. Cross-cutting Dimension: SDG 17 – Partnership for the Goals: engagement, co-creation, advocacy and lobbying 
actions to be executed with quadruple helix stakeholders at all levels, from local communities to global policy 
makers, contributing to the World Alliance for Sustainable Development. 
Alignment with the FOOD 2030 Staff Working Document64:  
This document establishes 4 main challenges regarding the following topics: Nutrition & Health, Climate & 
Sustainability, Circularity & Resource Efficiency and Innovation & Communities, with research and innovation 
priorities assigned to the aforementioned challenges, in order to mitigate and/or solve them. SCALIBUR contributes 
to the accomplishment of R&I priorities assigned to the 4 challenges: 
 Nutrition & Health: SCALIBUR provides new sustainable and resilient protein sources by valorising HORECA and 
retail organic waste through the process described in WP5. In addition, increased social awareness regarding 
the accep tance of urban biowaste -derived products (including food and feed) will be achieved through 
stakeholder and citizen engagement activities. All of them will be implemented from the beginning, and 
continuously revised and improved during the course of the pr oject (as described in WP2). An enhanced 
perception of urban biowaste as a local resource will be achieved this way. 
 Climate & sustainability : SCALIBUR contributes to GHG mitigation, biodiversity conservation, soil, water and 
land remediation, and the growth and preservation of healthy plants and animals, by strongly diminishing 
urban waste landfilling and thus avoiding landfill effects. These effects include production of leachate, the 
emission of GHGs produced during waste degradation (landfill sites cont ribute 20% of the world’s 
anthropogenic methane emissions
65), ecological effects leading to landscape changes, loss of habitats and 
displacement of fauna. Moreover, the implementation of SCALIBUR results in biomethanation and wastewater 
treatment plants for obtaining high-value biobased products will capture around 12,264 Tonnes of CO2 per day 
per plant. The replicability of results, together with the project’s international approach will definitely lead to a 
huge GHG emission reduction.  
 Circularity & Resource Efficiency: SCALIBUR allows the use of food losses and waste through the valorisation of 
HORECA and retail organic waste and organic MSW (since these raw materials are used to obtain high -value 
biobased products), while increasing resource efficiency and circularity across the food system. 
 Innovation & Communities: SCALIBUR contributes in almost all R&I priorities established in this area: (1) boost 
innovation, (2) empowering communities and consumers in FNS (Food National Security), (3) boosting 
investment in public and private sector R&I FNS, (4) encouraging RRI in food systems, (5) Open Science and 
acces to data and information in FNS, (6) quadruple helix innovation, multi -actor and public engagement in 
food systems, (7) education, skills development and capacity building in FNS and food science, and (8) new 
business models and inclusive/open/eco-/sustainable innovation. 
Activities defined in WP2 aim to engage and empower citizens and stakeholders through co -creation activities and 
workshops and the participation of all relevant quadruple helix stakeholders (citizens and society –  represented by 
the Urban Biowasteclubs, universities and academia, industry –  and government – represented by the 
municipalities). SCALIBUR aims to influence policies at a National and European level through the creation of 
guidelines and new business and social innovation approaches related to the upgraded urban biowaste value chain. 
All project results will be accessible through the online Stakeholder Platform as developed in  WP7. All the resulting 
                                                                                                               
64 https://ec.europa.eu/transparency/regdoc/rep/10102/2016/EN/SWD-2016-319-F1-EN-MAIN.PDF  
65 Danthurebandara, M., Van Passel, S., Nelen, D., Tie lemans, Y., Van Acker, K. (2012). Environmental and socio -economic 
impacts of landfills. Linnaeus ECO-TECH 2012. 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
25 
   
biobased products will be characterized and validated, and a LCA/SLCA will be performed as stated in WP8. This 
way, SCALIBUR assures a sustainable and secure supply of the resulting biobased products and upgraded urban 
waste value chains, thus achieving the above-mentioned related challenges. 
Alignment with EU Bioeconomy Strategy 201266:  
SCALIBUR is completely aligned with the Bioeconomy Action Plan proposed in the EU Bioeconomy Strategy 2012. 
SCALIBUR’s consortium includes multi -disciplinary and cross -sectorial members. Stakeholders related to urban 
biowaste value chains will provide data obtained during the validation and follow- up of novel waste management 
techniques in the 3 pilot plants in 3 different EU countries to provide scie ntific evidence that will influence urban 
biowaste-related regulations. In other words, SCALIBUR will provide new knowledge on urban biowaste valorisation 
technologies that can be further used in training schemes. Universities are part of the project conso rtium and the 
data generated will be accessible to all stakeholders through the Stakeholder Platform (detailed in WP7), which 
guarantees data dissemination. The online Stakeholder Platform will be also used as a tool for the establishment of 
a Bioeconomy O bservatory, and the policy interaction of SCALIBUR will be reinforced by stakeholder engagement 
activities performed throughout the project (WP2). Moreover, SCALIBUR will address global challenges regarding 
food security and climate change by supplying pro teins through sustainable and reliable patterns.  SCALIBUR is 
aligned with action 2.3 of the Bioeconomy Action Plan “Enhancement of markets and competitiveness in 
bioeconomy” as well, since it establishes scale-up activities (the three main processes that will be developed in the 
pilot plants) and the above -mentioned stakeholder engagement activities (including the training and deep 
involvement of citizens/stakeholders in a sustainable production of new high-value biobased products). 
Alignment with EU’s Circular Economy Package 2015:  
This document includes four proposals amending the Waste Framework Directive, Landfilling Directive and 
Packaging Waste Directive for achieving circular economy in the EU. SCALIBUR is strongly aligned with the 
objectives included in the proposal amending the Landfilling Directive, which establishes a limit of 10% in the share 
of municipal waste landfilled and a target increase of 65% in the preparation for re -use and recycling of municipal 
waste by 2030. SCALIBUR directly contrib utes to the Landfilling Directive by substantially 
increasing the reuse of 
OFMSW through its valorisation (increase of 15 -41% depending on the municipality)  into high -value biobased 
products such as proteins, lipids, bioplastics and biopesticides. The proj ect will also provide huge economic and 
environmental benefits, as expected in the Circular Economy Package 2015, amongst others: 
 Direct creation of more than 130 jobs by 2022  (see Table 3.2.1j), and the indirect creation of 664,464 job 
positions (only in pilot municipalities) due to the incrementation of the  economic value of OFMSW by 300%, 
and considering a rate of job creation of 1 job per increase of 150,000 € of additional turnover in the upgraded 
biowaste value chain. 
 A decrease in GHG emissions of 21,79 Mt CO2 eq/year (only in pilot municipalities) due to the incrementation of 
OFMSW valorised, and by more than 12,264 Tonnes of CO 2 per day per every similar facility implementing 
SCALIBUR’s developed solutions (biomethanation & wastewater treatment plants). Thus, a potential saving of 
300 – 400 Mm3 emissions of CO2/year can be achieved by 2030. 
 An increase in the competitiveness of EU waste management, by integrating innovative valorisation systems 
into the existing urban municipal waste value chains, reducing dependency of the EU on raw material imports. 
 Moreover, SCALIBUR will reduce the huge existing differences in landfill and reuse of waste between EU 
Member States because of its international approach, since it develops replicable systems in municipalities of 3 
different Member States that can be applied and scaled-up in other EU locations.  
Alignment with the priorities of H2020 Challenge 2 
Additionally, SCALIBUR is also aligned with 4 out of the 5 main priorities established in the Food security, 
sustainable agriculture and forestry, marine, maritime and inland water research and the bioeconomy67:  
1. Addressing climate change and resilience on land and sea : achieved by significantly reducing GHG emissions 
(21,79 Mt CO 2 eq/year (only in pilot municipalities), plus around 12,264 Tonnes of CO 2 per day per fa cility 
implementing SCALIBUR’s results) through waste landfilling minimization, by creating new patterns to obtain 
food, feed and biobased products applying a circular economy approach. Furthermore, a new pattern to obtain 
chitin from biowaste will be defined against current methods for chitin extraction affecting crustaceans; 
2. Making the transition towards a circular bioeconomy : achieved by upgrading current urban waste and sewage 
sludge value chains (which valorise urban biowaste in the form of high -value biobased products), and 
                                                                                                               
66 http://ec.europa.eu/research/bioeconomy/pdf/official-strategy_en.pdf  
67 http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/wp/2018-2020/main/h2020-wp1820-food_en.pdf  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
26 
   
implementing internationally replicable and profitable business models related to the newly obtained 
bioproducts;  
3. Fostering functional ecosystems, sustainable food systems, healthy lifestyles : achieved by providing a 
sustainable and resilient protein and chitin supply system through the valorisation of urban biowaste.  
4. Boosting major innovations on land and sea – new products, value chains and markets: in this project, achieved 
by developing and implementing upgraded and innovative value chains to obtain food and feed, among others, 
while creating new jobs. 
SCALIBUR provides significant additional impacts, including environmental and sustainability impacts, societal 
impacts and policy impacts, which will help position Europe as a pio neer in urban biowaste recycling and 
valorisation into high value-added products, increasing its competitiveness as a whole.  
Environmental and sustainability impacts 
 COP21 Agreement Paris68:  The Paris Agreement, adopted through Decision 1/CP.21, addresses  crucial areas 
necessary to combat climate change, setting up key aspects. SCALIBUR contributes to the following key 
aspects: Long-term temperature goal (Art.2) and Global peaking (Art. 4)  – by significantly diminishing GHG 
emissions through a minimization  of waste landfilling ( 21,79 Mt CO2 eq/year (only in pilot municipalities)) and 
also by the implementation of SCALIBUR’s processes in waste management and wastewater plants (more than 
20,000 nm 3 CO2 per day per plant); Sinks and reservoirs (Art. 5)  – by bo osting MSW and sewage sludge 
valorisation, thus applying a circular economy approach and diminishing the need for raw materials; Climate 
change education, training, public awareness, public participation and public access to information (Art. 12)  – 
by perf orming citizen engagement activities to enhance waste collection and raise awareness for the 
acceptance of new biobased products obtained through valorisation processes, and by providing open access 
to all SCALIBUR relevant information shared through the Stakeholder Platform. 
 7th Environmental Action Plan 69: SCALIBUR promotes the accomplishment of the 7 th EAP’s objectives by 
diminishing environmental pollution and fighting climate change through the implementation of improved 
biowaste value chains. This inno vative biowaste management scheme valorises OFMSW and sewage sludge 
that is currently landfilled or burnt, thus achieving a significant reduction in GHG emissions, improving the 
quality of ecosystems affected by waste disposal and reducing dependence on ra w materials. The project 
results are oriented to achieve a circular economy related to biowaste management, thus making EU cities 
more sustainable and resource-efficient.   
 Alignment with Principle 10 of Rio Declaration70: As in Principle 10, SCALIBUR aims to promote awareness in the 
EU democracies and has a social dimension by: 
- Building trust in the adopted decisions that have been co-created together with the citizens themselves, 
- encouraging public awareness and knowledge related to the new valorisation ap proaches of urban 
biowaste management, 
- and involving citizens during the decision -making processes, including the development of policy 
recommendations. SCALIBUR will as well provide access to information and justice through the creation of 
a Stakeholder P latform, a user -friendly Cloud Platform tailored to the needs of different stakeholders, 
therefore promoting public engagement at all levels. This platform will be actively maintained and 
proactively updated after this project execution.  
Societal impacts 
EU 2020 strategy for the creation of growth and jobs 71: the strategy sets out its objectives in 5 target areas, 3 of 
which are contributed to by SCALIBUR, namely:  
 Employment: creation of more than 130 direct job positions as a consequence of the growth of the companies 
participating in SCALIBUR, and the indirect creation of 664,464 job positions in pilot municipalities 
 Research and Development: increased EU investment in R&D  
 Climate change and energy: diminished GHG emissions from landfilled waste degradation 
                                                                                                               
68 http://unfccc.int/paris_agreement/items/9485.php  
69 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/action-programme  
70 http://web.unep.org/stories/story/unep-implementing-principle-10-rio-declaration  
71https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/economic-and-fiscal-policy-coordination/eu-economic-governance-monitoring-
prevention-correction/european-semester/framework/europe-2020-strategy_en  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
27 
   
2.1.4 BARRIERS, OBSTACLES AND ANY FRAMEWORK CONDITIONS 
There are some identified barriers that may affect SCALIBUR’s impact and market success. The key barriers to focus 
on are related to market acceptance of the obtained high -value biobased products, as they are produced from 
non-typical sources like waste/sewage sludge, technological innovations and yields, related to the introduction of 
innovative processes and technologies (BES, use of insects, etc.), and regulatory, related to the consumption of 
obtained products as food and feed.  
Barrier type Description of barriers Measures to overcome the barriers 
Technical 
barriers 
Development of the fractionation plant (2 nd 
pilot plant) 
Early study of the project plant and identification of the technologies u sed 
in industry for fractionating similar substances 
Lack of adaptability of the project results to 
the situation of other countries/regions 
FCC operates waste management plants in several European countries such 
as Austria, Poland, Hungary, the UK or the Czech Republic 
Resulting yields when scaling up targeted 
products using the bioelectrosynthesis 
technology 
The scaling -up process will be performed by building several modular 
stackable BES systems, thus assuring high resulting yields 
The content of the organic matter of the 
urban biowaste collected is not aligned with 
the requirements of the applications to be 
developed 
Combination of other additional pre -treatments such as manual sorting 
(removing unwanted material) and sorting technologies (UV, Ter aHz, snap 
shooting, etc.) 
No possible up -scaling of the (integrated) 
solution at larger (pre- commercial or 
commercial scale) 
SCALIBUR processes will be integrated and virtually simulated. This will 
allow partners to study the technical hotspots in the pr ocess and to assess 
the scalability and feasibility of the process for future commercialisation 
and deployment of the biorefinery 
Regulatory 
barriers 
Waste transport, storage and processing Deep study of related EU regulations, early authorization request  (before 
obtaining the project funding) 
Approval for using insects in animal feed 
applications 
SCALIBUR will provide scientific evidence and validate all high -value 
biobased products in order to influence existing related regulations. 
Furthermore, the results will be shared in the Stakeholder Platform and will 
be accessible to everyone.  
End of waste criterium for PHA obtained from 
waste needs to be defined 
SCALIBUR will provide scientific evidence for a positive market value of the 
obtained PHA for a clear end-of-waste decision 
Market 
barriers 
Market penetration of bioproducts derived 
from biowaste 
Citizen and consumer engagement activities focused on the acceptance of 
the new biobased products will be perfomed throughout the project. In 
addition, evid ence-based scientific knowledge related to the new 
bioproducts obtained will be disseminated through the Stakeholder 
Platform and scientific events which will be open to the general public. 
Negative perception of the use of PHA 
obtained from waste in packaging materials 
SCALIBUR will provide scientific evidence to influence and convince end -
users about the high quality of the product 
Table 2.1.3 Barriers for SCALIBUR development and measures to overcome them
2.2 MEASURES TO MAXIMISE IMPACT 
2.2.1 DISSEMINATION AND EXPLOITATION OF RESULTS 
The measures described below will be taken to ensure full dissemination and exploitation of the project results as 
well as performance of the potential impact assessment of the project through validation of the results and 
engagement to build awareness in end-users and stakeholders. 
The project exploitation, dissemination 
and communication activities delivered 
by the consortium and its value chain 
are structured in such a way as to align 
the project within a strategic innovation 
context and to make the project 
outcomes scalable and replicable. 
Considering that the project will focus 
on TRL 7, follow -on activities and 
supporting actions will be planned as 
part of SCALIBUR to ensure the 
commercialization and impact potential 
of the results (see 
Figure 8). 
 Figure 8. Structure and relation of SCALIBUR’s exploitation, dissemination and 
communication activities 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
28 
   
A. PATH TO MARKET: ACTIVITIES DURING AND AFTER THE PROJECT 
Several steps will be planned to ensure that the foregrounds will receive the deserved attention and make a 
substantial impact on the EU  economy, society and environment. Exploitation of foregrounds will not happen only 
at the end of the project, but the actions will accompany the project during its life from ‘setting the foundations’ to 
the ‘dissemination of results’ and beyond. During the project, the knowledge developed will be communicated and 
disseminated by G!E (Dissemination Manager) through the defined activities and the use of the Stakeholder 
Platform as a key resource for maximizing the impact of the project’s results. Disseminati on is a key part of the 
exploitation strategy (leaded by G!E), following a strategy targeted for each type of stakeholder.  
SCALIBUR outcomes (see Table 3.2.1.g, Table 3.2.1.h and Table 3.2.1.i) will be propagated through dissemination 
and communication to ols such as exhibition fairs, press releases, social media, articles, scientific papers, visits to 
demonstration sites, training sessions, etc. They will be constantly updated through a feedback loop as a result of 
interaction with stakeholders and they will be available on the project’s website and Stakeholder Platform, updated 
until 5 years after project completion. The exploitation of results after the end of the project will happen through 
business plans developed under the market strategy of each product. The SCALIBUR project will make sure that the 
benefits of the demonstrated products will be recognized by the community and as consequence the products shall 
enter the market by following a business strategy dedicated to them. At that stage, participati on in events, 
especially exhibition fairs for the products will have an important role for increasing market visibility. 
Context characterization and interactions 
 Strong in -depth market and stakeholder analysis  to ascertain market potential, stakeholder wi shes and the 
desired features that no one has delivered yet. Our strong multi-disciplinary consortium has the ambition to be 
able to highlight the perspectives of the many different stakeholders (e.g., citizens, municipalities, system 
developers, policy makers and society in general) involved to provide benefits and alleviate issues for each of 
them. Their points of view will be ascertained through literature/report review, discussion with relevant 
umbrella organizations and expert interviews. By having a c lear vision of the desired features from the 
beginning we will direct the development and demonstration onto the right track early on. 
 Engagement of the stakeholder community.  Early in the development trajectory we will establish continuous 
feedback loops with the main stakeholder organizations (WP2). Details regarding the stakeholder community 
targeted are presented in Figure 2. This community will be informed, engaged and invited to major events, 
basically representing our Advisory Board. They will suppor t us in making sure that the developments are in 
line with their needs and can be considered as our first critical early adopters that could for instance assess 
limitations on a certain advancement, try samples, etc.  
 The market will be thoroughly analysed  to elucidate the potential and synergies to be exploited among other 
technologies, non -EU countries and regulatory contexts. This will then be the basis for developing business 
models and exploitation plans for each of the technologies and contexts. 
 Regulation. The implications of regulations both as limitations but also as opportunities for the biowaste origin 
biobased products market will be characterized and will serve as the basis for directing developments. 
SCALIBUR solutions and final products should be ready for global markets, and therefore, should overcome 
certain market constraints related to complying with environmental and safety standards. If during the project 
we identify aspects in the regulation that should be modified and addressed differently, we will discuss them 
with lobbying and cluster organizations and the EC representative.
 
Target groups Strategic objective Dissemination & Communication tool 
Waste and 
wastewater 
management 
companies 
To actively demonstrate to these potential users the 
new business opportunities coming from the 
implementation of SCALIBUR’s developed processes 
regarding the valorisation of OFMSW and sewage 
sludge 
European Workshops, Webinars, Presentations in 
key conferences and fairs, demonstration cases, 
events organisation, leaflets & newsletters, the 
Stakeholder Platform, social campaigns, product 
portfolio and Open Access publications 
Business and 
local service 
providers 
(waste, energy) 
To support in developing, testing & replicating new 
profitable business models along the entire urban 
biowaste value chain 
Stakeholder Platform, European Workshops, 
presentations in key fairs, demonstration cases, 
events organisation, leaflets & newsletters, 
product portfolio and Open Access publications 
Government 
municipalities 
To provide a new biowaste management scheme and 
boost its uptake in different EU municipalities and 
beyond. To reach citizens’ engagement with waste 
valorisation and best practices.  
Demonstration cases, pilot cases, Stakeholder 
Platform, events organisation 
Industry To reach industrial interested stakeholders as well as Conferences, Workshops 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
29 
   
associations potential investors in the developed technology and in 
the overall integrated biorefinery concept 
Academia, the 
scientific 
community 
To engage the scientific community and share the 
latest scientific and industrial progress in biowaste 
valorisation into bioproducts. To contribute to ongoing 
and future studies on the interaction among science, 
industry, and law in a circular economy approach 
Scientific papers, workshops, conferences 
Citizens To increase understanding and changing behaviour 
regarding collection and use of urban biowaste, 
increase acceptance of urban biowaste-derived 
products, reduce non-recycled biowaste rates 
Biowasteclubs, workshops, events, see, touch, 
taste experiences, visits to DSs, social campaigns 
(Social networks, videos, etc.) 
EU and national 
institutions 
To generate interest in and awareness of the limits that 
the law places on fulfilment of a circular economy and 
to show new patterns of biowaste management in 
order to boost desirable changes 
Direct contacts through formal letters and 
meetings; events; publications 
Other 
Stakeholders 
End-users of biobased and biodegradable polymers for 
the development of bioproducts: Retailers, hotels and 
restaurant chains, etc., should be involved as well. 
Associations of bioplastics (such as Assobioplastiche), 
Ellen Mac Arthur Foundation on Circular Economy, 
Clusters of Green Chemistriy, etc. 
Events organisation, social campaigns, product 
portfolio and Open Access publications 
Table 2.2.1a. Preliminary dissemination and communication plan 
 
Draft Plan for the dissemination and exploitation of the results (PEDR) 
We have established a draft plan for the exploitation and disse mination activities (PEDR). This plan includes 
management of these activities, policy and rules, strategy and objectives, and target groups. 
Impact, Engagement, Exploitation and Dissemination Policy and Rules:  
SCALIBUR impact will be continuously monitore d along the project. All innovation activities (including project 
impact itself, intellectual property, and exploitation and dissemination activities) will be managed by appointed 
individuals with high level of expertise. For further information, the struc ture of the consortium support 
exploitation is addressed in Section 3.2. We will organise Impact, Engagement, Communication and Dissemination 
reviews throughout the project on a 6 -month basis, in the shape of a session of the General Assembly meeting 
where all partners will present the progress of their work and the results obtained. Previous communication and 
dissemination, impact monitoring, stakeholders’ engagement, exploitation and IPR issues, etc., will be discussed 
(status, next actions, etc.) during this review, as well as the best strategy for dissemination, and monitored KPIs.  
The policy and rules for protection, exploitation and dissemination activities are based on the principles set out in 
the Annotated Model Grant Agreement (GA) and will be in compliance with the Consortium Agreement (CA), based 
on DESCA model, to be signed by all consortium partners before the signature of the GA. Main issues tackled in the 
CA will be: confidentiality, ownership of results, join ownership, background, access ri ghts, dissemination and use 
of results, in addition to the internal governance of the consortium (see section 3.2). 
Dissemination activities: expected results, target groups and exploitation routes 
Dissemination of project results will be ensured through the Stakeholder Platform (WP7), together with co-creation 
workshops, presentations in events and conferences, scientific presentations and a final multi -stakeholder event 
(WP2 and WP9). 
Engagement activities organised at neighbourhood district-level will be performed throughout the project (WP2) to 
raise awareness and involve stakeholders at multiple levels with a quadruple helix approach 72 (local, national and 
European engagement). Promising practices generated in Urban Biowasteclubs as a result will be coll ected and 
step-by-step manuals provided for further uptake in other cities and regions at national and EU level, thus 
guaranteeing project replicability.  
Specific objectives, target groups and means for the exploitation and/or dissemination of each project result will be 
defined in the PEDR (to be established in the project’s M6) and updated throughout the project in order to include 
new outcomes and updates. 
  
                                                                                                               
72 Using the Quadruple Helix Approach to Accelerate the Transfer of Research and Innovation Results to Regional Growth, Committe e of the Regions, 2016. 
http://cor.europa.eu/en/documentation/studies/Documents/quadruple-helix.pdf  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
30 
   
Dissemination, co-creation and science educational activities 
SCALIBUR dissemination activities aim to communicate the project results and raise consumer’s awareness and 
acceptance of urban biowaste -derived products by using the quadruple helix approach. To achieve the project 
results, traditional communication and dissemination activities are not en ough. Deep engagement processes, co -
creation and participatory strategies with a social innovation approach are considered key for project success, and 
as such are part of the core activities of SCALIBUR (included in WP2, WP3 and WP9). These activities inc lude co-
creation workshops with representative stakeholders of all the levels involved in this project, “see, touch, taste” 
experiences, direct citizen participatory activities about their current behaviour regarding biowaste classification, 
neighbour recycling levels, methodologies for biowaste collection etc. Science education activities are inherent to 
the co-creation process and will be further promoted within the involved municipalities by collaborators from the 
academia, industry and research partners . In addition, a policy brief (“Recommendations for urban biowaste 
treatment”) will be presented at the European Parliament explaining the outcome of this project in order to 
influence waste management regulations. Furthermore, a 
final interactive multi -stakeholder event will be held 
bringing together all Regional Urban Biowasteclub actors, external high -profile experts, policy and investment 
decision makers, environmental authorities, industries, NGOs, civil society organizations, citizens, and 
researchers.SCALIBUR partners will attend and present project’s results in the following sectorial conferences: 
 Partner Confereces to be attended 
ITENE 
Circular Economy European Summit (Barcelona, ES – 2018), European Food & Beverage Plastic Packaging Summit 
(2019), ANUGA FOOD TECH (2019), Alimentaria Barcelona (2020), Plastic Pouches (2019), IFAT (2019), 13 th Edition of 
the European Bioiplastics Conference (2018), IUPAC’s Macro World Polymer Conference (2020) 
CENER EUBCE (European Biomass Conference & Exhibition) TBC, 2020 and 2022 
EXERGY BioVale: Finding Value from unavoidable waste (York, UK – 2019), UK AD and World Biogas Expo (Birmingham, UK – 
2019) 
FCC London World Waste to Energy and Resources Summit (London, UK), Smart City Expo (Barcelona), Green Cities Málaga 
(Málaga, ES), Recuwatt (Mataró, ES), Municipalia (Lleida, ES), CONAMA (Madrid, ES), ECOFIRA (Valencia, ES) 
KOUR Global Bioeconomy Summit (Berlín, GER – 2020), ECOMONDO (Rimini, IT) 
NS EuroTier (Hannover, DE), VIV Europe (Utrecht, NL) 
NOVAMONT European Forum on Industrial Technologies (IFIB, EFIB), ECOMONDO fair, European Bioplastics Conference, 
International Forum on Waste Management, BBI-JU Workshops and events 
SMVAK 
EU-ISMET regional meeting (2020), International meeting ISMET 7 (Okinawa, JP – 2019), International Society of 
Electrochemistry (ISE) annual meeting (TBC), International Conference on Renewable Resources and Biorefineries 
(TBC), 16th International Specialised Conferences on Small Water and Wastewater Systems (Murdoch, AU –  2019), IWA 
World Water Congress & Exhibition (Copenhagen, DK –  2020), ISWA World Congress Bilbo 2019 (Bilbao, ES –  2019), XVI 
IWA World Conference on Anaerobic Digestion (Delft, NL –  2019), NYWEA’s 92th Annual Meeting & Exhibition (New 
York, USA – 2020) 
UNIMORE Global Bioeconomy Summit (Berlín, GER – 2020), ECOMONDO (Rimini, IT) 
VISUM Smart City Expo (Barcelona, ES - TBC), ECOMONDO (Rimini, IT) 
WBD IWA Sludgetech (London, UK – 2019), European Bioplasatics Conference (Berlin, GER – Annual) 
ZETADEC Symposium Edible  Insects (NL, 2020), International Conference “Insects to Feed the World (2022), FIAAP Animal 
Nutrition Conference (Koln, GER – 2019) 
Table 3.2.1b. Conferences for presenting SCALIBUR project and its results 
In addition, the following publications of project results in key sectorial scientific journals will be performed: 
Partner Journal 
ITENE 
European Polymer Journal, Journal of Polymer Science, Composite Science and Technology, International Journal of Life 
Cycle Assessment, Environmental Engineering and Management Journal, Journal of Cleaner Production, Biotechnology 
Journal, Biochemical Engineering Journal 
AERIS Bioresource Technology, Waste Management 
CENER EUBCE Proceedings 
FCC 
El Economista, IMU Ingeniería Municipal, Wastedive, Recycling Waste World, Renewable Energy from Waste (Wastetoday 
Magazine), Recycling Today, RETEMA (Revista Técnica de Medio Ambiente), EFE Empresas, Europa Press 
NS Journal of Animal Sciences 
SMVAK Environmental Science and Technology, Bioresource Technology, Water Research 
UNIMORE Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry, Food Research International, Local Journals and Newspapers 
VISUM International Journal of Environmental and Waste Management, Journal of Spectroscopy 
WETSUS Water Research, Bioresource Technology, New Biotechnology, Polymer Degradation and Stability 
WBD Water Science & Technology 
ZETADEC Journal of Insects as Food and Feed (2022) 
Table 3.2.1.c. Journals where SCALIBUR results will be published 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
31 
   
SCALIBUR dissemination activitie s (WP9) are in close relationship with engagement and co -creation activities 
envisaged in WP2, with the common objective of raising awareness on acceptance of urban biowaste as a local 
resource and encourage general society to implement a new scheme for ur ban biowaste management, in order to 
achieve a wide diminution of the amount which is incinerated or landfilled, while disseminating project results. The 
Dissemination and Communication Plan will ensure that all communication and dissemination activities a re 
performed to maximize SCALIBUR outreach in Europe and beyond, to all quadruple helix stakeholders with 
personalised key messages and objectives (see section 2.2.B.). More details on SCALIBUR dissemination activities 
are shown in the table below: 
Dissemination 
Activity 
Description 
Web-based 
platform: 
Stakeholder 
Platform 
The Stakeholder Platform will consist of a Cloud Platform and will be setup to allow consortium members to 
exchange information, generate discussion boards, interpretate the results, man age the consortium, the project and 
the project risks, maintain the project budget and communicate with coordinators and the European Commission. 
The Stakeholder Platform will give an overview of the project activities and progress, as well as practical ac cess to 
deliverables (marked PU) and links to the publications in open access. The Stakeholder Platform will have interactive 
user-oriented modules in order to achieve an easy access to the information for every internal or external 
stakeholder, including citizens/consumers, waste generators and managers, users of bioproducts and policy makers. 
The Stakeholder Platform will be feed with WP2 results: analysis and studies related to current urban waste 
management data, promising practices in social innovation  and existing business models, National action manuals 
for local uptake (for the integration of urban biowaste value chains into the existing local waste/wastewater 
management schemes), policy briefs and summary reports of multi -level stakeholder engagemen t (including 
gender). The Stakeholder Platform will be used as a tool for the transmission of project results and valuable 
information during and after the project, thus will allow to achieve a maximum impact at European level, aiming to 
an international r eplication of the generated innovative urban biowaste value chains and a deep engagement of all 
quadruple helix stakeholders. 
Open access 
publications 
Scientific publications are encouraged as a mean of dissemination. A provision for the cost of open acce ss publishing 
is planned in each partner’s budget. Scientific papers will be written targeting scientific journals (see Table 3.2.1.c).  
Co-creation 
workshops 
A series of co-creation workshops will be organised in WP2, in the ZITIES where case studies will be developed, to co-
design local methodologies for biowaste collection and validate the proposed methodologies for RRI uptake and 
Principle 10 implementation. The co -creation workshops will be addressed to Biowasteclubs and stakeholders 
(including other waste generators –  HORECA/retail organic waste generators - , waste managers and policy makers) 
and will allow them to co -create the most suitable methodologies for a local (and further national and international) 
uptake of new biowaste value chains. 
Interactive final 
multi-stakeholder 
event 
To disseminate the project results to the target stakeholders, including regional Urban Biowasteclubs actors, 
external high -profile experts on related relevant themes, policy and investment decision makers and researchers. 
The event will target specifically key policy makers from EU Member States and associated countries for offering an 
evidence-
based insight to enable an integrated innovative urban biowaste valorisation system approach in a city 
context. General and sector related media will be also engaged to maximize event’s impact.  
Conferences and 
scientific 
congresses 
Presentations in scientific international conferences and seminars will give partners the opportunity to present the 
achievements of the project. Con sortium members will participle in international and national conferences (see 
Table 3.2.1.b). 
Trade shows and 
fairs 
Appropriate forums for direct dissemination in Europe and beyond will be attended, such as ECOFIRA (Valencia, ES) 
or ECOMONDO (IT). 
Demonstration 
cases 
Guided visits to DSs will be scheduled to show citizens, policy makers, advocacy groups and waste/wastewater -
related industries SCALIBUR results in order to demonstrate the reliability of developed processes (WP4 -6) and to 
emphasize the role of citizens as a key (being the waste collectors/separators) to obtain final products. 
Project Website 
A regular project website will be created together with the Stakeholder Platform. Project website will contain 
general project information, description of the project progress and results. This website will enable a wide visibility 
and accessibility to the project information and promote and raise awareness of biobased products obtained 
through SCALIBUR valorisation processes and their benefits. 
Product portfolio 
A product portfolio including all obtained biobased products (bioplastics, biopesticides, proteins and chitin) will be 
created, once the products are characterized, in order to describe the high quality of the products and raise 
awareness and acceptance in potential end-users/consumers and waste/wastewater management industries, as well 
as in other interesting stakeholders.  
Training courses 
Academia and research organisation partners (UNIMORE, CENER) will be able to design and create training c ourses 
related to the new knowledge obtained and oriented to PhD, postdocs and industry -related professionals. Training 
courses will widely contribute to spread project knowledge and results, and to train new professionals focused on 
the innovative processes developed in SCALIBUR, thus increasing the implementation of them. 
Leaflets and 
newsletter 
A leaflet will be created at the project start and updated every year. Newsletters also will be generated throughout 
the development of SCALIBUR. Non -confidential information of SCALIBUR project, concept and results as well as 
socio-economic impact will be shared. The associated strategic dissemination objective is to increase the awareness 
of stakeholders, including general public about the project and to promote  the use of Stakeholder Platform and 
project website, as well as achieve an involvement of the different target audiences in the Stakeholder Platform. 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
32 
   
Pan-European 
Awareness Raising 
Campaign 
G!E will coordinate the organisation of a pan -European awareness raising campaign on urban biowaste sorting and 
recycling at the last stage of the project. This campaign will consist of events in public spaces in each Pilot City (as 
described in WP9), and will include a competition between citizens to select the most i nnovative social innovation 
idea for waste management, among those identified in WP2. 
Table 3.2.1d. SCALIBUR’s dissemination activities 
The dissemination KPIs defined to achieve the expected impact of SCALIBUR are shown in the table below: 
KPI Value Description 
Presentations of results in 
conferences and fairs At least 20 Presentation of project results (partial and final) in key sectorial fairs and conferences  
Project final conference 1 Organised by G!E (WP9) with the support of municipalities/municipalities association 
Scientific or technical 
publications At least 10 Scientific/technical publications regarding SCALIBUR’s new processes, technologies and 
obtained biobased products 
Citizen At least 100 Number of citizens actively involved in local engagement activities 
Local stakeholder 
engagement 
At least 3 / (year 
& pilot)  
Number of co-creation workshops, meetings and outreach activities with key quadruple 
helix external stakeholders  
Policy makers outreach At least 2 per 
country 
 Number of policy makers or environmental authorities engaged in the pilots at a 
national level 
Advisory Board (AB) 
Meetings At least 4 Number of meetings with the Advisory Board Members (1 per year) 
Meetings of Biowasteclubs 2 per year & 
Biowasteclub Number of meetings of Biowasteclubs, stakeholders and the partnership members 
Meetings with policy 
representatives 
At least 1 per 
year 
Number of meetings with policy representatives from European institutions and 
relevant sectorial associations to discuss regulatory barriers at EU level and promote the 
biowaste initiatives developed 
Workshops targeting 
schools and municipal 
staff 
At least 1 per 
school and per 
pilot 
Number of workshops performed to complement co-creation actions from WP2 for 
achieving a successful local dissemination 
Early adopter cities’ 
training Up to 5 cities Number of cities being trained with the developed training kit for integrate created 
business models into their local framework 
Entrepeneurs coached 10 Number of entrepeneurs introduced in the coaching programme to create or upscale a 
business in the urban biowaste valorisation sector 
Table 3.2.1e. Dissemination KPIs for SCALIBUR 
Preparing exploitation during development 
Many R&D project foregrounds enter the death- valley because it is not clear who i s the responsible/can benefit 
from its exploitation and there are not solid business models or plans for exploitation and commercialization. This 
will not happen in SCALIBUR. Indeed, there is a strong focus on the needed steps for reaching the market: 
 Competence assessment and matching of developments with customer/market needs . One of the most 
complex aspects when carrying out innovation is to find a great match between what are the desired and the 
delivered features/benefits. Therefore, as soon as the for egrounds are identified we will perform a SWOT 
analysis capable of highlighting extraordinary features and limitations. This will then support the Fit 
Assessment, basically the matching between the needs and the delivered features. 
 Protection of IPR and management of foregrounds. As soon as a foreground is identified, the involved partners 
with the support of G!E will start discussing agreements. Additionally, before dissemination starts, we will 
perform patent search, IPR protection and multilateral agreem ents among partners involved. Only after an 
innovation is fully protected and agreements (among consortium partners but also with external ones) are 
reached dissemination and commercialization will occur. The manager assigned for each foreground will 
receive great support by the exploitation expert (G!E) along all the steps. 
 Risk assessment and mitigation plan will be detailed to avoid undermining the full exploitation potential of the 
developments. Our project will take all the required steps to identify the risks (technical, economic, 
environmental, and social), define preventive and mitigation measures with different ambitions and scopes 
depending on the severity of the expected damage. The risk analysis will be periodically revised to adapt to the 
fast-changing nature of the topics involved. 
In order to guarantee the optimum exploitation and dissemination of project results five figures from different 
industrial partners have been created accordingly: 
 Antonio Dobón from ITENE as Impact Manager, who will m aximize this project’s positive impact and monitor 
success project indicators related to urban biowaste reduction, sustainable business and organisational 
models’ implementation and environmental impact, 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
33 
   
 Nora Brueggemann from CSCP as Engagement and RRI Manager, who will maximize the multi-level engagement 
of key stakeholders and municipalities,  
 Gosse Hiemstra from G!E (VMT) as IPR and Exploitation Manager , who will safeguard the protection and 
exploitation of this project’s results; 
 Valeria Mazzagatti from G!E as Communication and Dissemination Manager, who will optimize to increase the 
project’s outreach,  
 Inés del Campo from CENER as Scientific Manager, who will guarantee scientific excellence when addressing the 
valorisation of waste into high-value biobased products.  
Additionally, Post-project Impact Follow-Up Committee (PPIF). This board will be officially formed six months before 
the end of the project –  it will consist of members of the General Assembly and Advisory Committee. A chairman 
will be elected. 
Entering the market 
During SCALIBUR, the following actions to ensure the full exploitation of project results will be undertaken:  
 Solid exploitation plan and business models based on past experiences, stakeholder analysis and discussion 
among interes ted partners and relevant organizations will define appropriate business cases for each 
development and context. Draft exploitation plans and preliminary business models are already identified and 
will be optimized as soon as the features of the foregrounds are clearly assessed.  
 All the steps performed before, especially regarding market potential, the results from the demonstration and 
the 
feedback from the stakeholder community should ensure that our foregrounds will be well positioned to 
strongly enter the market. Commercialization and market uptake will be defined with ad -hoc discussion 
between technical, financial and marketing staff among the consortium supported by the expertise of the 
exploitation partner (G!E). Industrial partners will be our first , very critical and demanding clients that will help 
us in optimizing the products and clearly identifying excellence and limitations. The solidity of the results will 
allow the IP owners to strengthen their market position, which for the key technology pr oviders involved has a 
strong focus on internationalization. 
 Dissemination for market uptake will take part initially via the products portfolio and their application through 
the demonstration sites. Technology performance, results and outcomes will be fol lowed-up throughout the 
project targeting specific audiences with contribution from the consortium partners in order to incorporate 
feedback from stakeholders. This will be done mainly through the participation in conferences, webinars, 
training courses, workshops and roundtables in events, e.g. International Society of Electrochemistry (ISE) 
Annual Meeting, the Circular Economy European Summit, among others. Events will take part in collaboration 
with major associations, involving also regulatory bodies at EU and national levels. Once the business models 
are mature enough, we will pursue participation in sectorial fairs related to the bioproducts obtained, such as 
ECOFIRA (ES), IFAT or World Biogas Expo, where the SCALIBUR processes and biobased products ca n be 
introduced to the market. In addition, many of the involved organizations are leaders in their fields and have 
strong and established network with universities, regulatory bodies and the other stakeholders. 
A preliminary 
dissemination and communication plan is shown in Table 2.2.1.a, Table 3.2.1.d and in the next pages. 
 Training. It is necessary to provide confidence to the final users in the reliability and benefits of the biobased 
solutions provided. The successful implementation of SCALIBUR processes and bio -products in the DSs will 
allow the creation of use cases dedicated to training and knowledge exchange to promote the use of scalable 
technologies for urban biowaste recovery and valorisation. Interaction with municipalities, waste managers, 
academia, students, construction and engineering sector professionals (installers, chemical and industrial 
engineers, and end user companies) and also the general public, is foreseen in the shape of papers, trainings 
courses, webinars and visits to the DSs.  
 From TRL 6 to TRL 9. The project results are pre-competitive, so at least a further 3-year period will be required 
to turn them into commercial products (TRL 9). For this purpose, the PPIF will achieve the following  objectives: 
(1) to keep the momentum with exploitation, communication and dissemination over a sufficient period of 
time after the project’s completion in order to fully achieve the desired project impact, and (2) to investigate 
opportunities for follow-up activities. Continuous interactions with end users, Europe research community, and 
other relevant stakeholders such as EC will be targeted 
To reach the potential market, several partners will invest in technology, further adaptation of manufacturing 
processes, sales channels, marketing, etc. after the end of SCALIBUR. The source of financing might be own 
company funds or by requesting additional funding from regional/national/European programmes, such as 
H2020, 
SPIRE, BBI calls, Structural funds and National and regional calls. 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
34 
   
B. PRELIMINARY EXPLOITATION AND BUSINESS PLANS 
Market estimations for the new high-value biobased products 
A potential target to achieve 8% of the total market by 5 years after project conclusion and increasing the share in 
the following years, gives the industrial partners of SCALIBUR a possible starting market of around 32,270 M€. 
Thanks to its high performance, the need to use biowaste using a cascading approach, and the valorisation of a 
waste into a feedstock, SCALIBUR solutions are likely to be deployed by biowaste managers and by final producers. 
To allow the deployment biobased products from biowaste and the increase of European competitiveness in this 
field, the correct collection and logistics, followed by replacement of current landfilling and biometanization of 
biowaste is an unavoidable necessity. Biobased processes using biowastes are already being studied, but 
development is often still in the R&D stage and the performance has not yet been demonstrated on pilot or pre -
industrial scale involving citizen and municipal ities role from the very beginning. To successfully approach the 
demonstration of new process technologies on an industrial pilot plant scale broad knowledge is needed from all 
steps of the value chain, including technical but also social concerns such as citizen behaviours in the collection or 
consumer acceptance of final biobased products.  
SCALIBUR creates the opportunity of sharing both knowledge and costs between the consortium companies from 
different value chains and sectors following an open innovation approach within a wide range of partners and 
noteworthy advisors. The project partners will gain important additional insights in the field with a large potential 
for market application. This will permit the SCALIBUR consortium to develop processes tha t the partners alone 
would not be able to achieve on their own. The demonstration and application of novel integrated technologies 
among the consortium partners will not only facilitate and accelerate their adaption, transfer and take up, but also 
deepen the understanding of the new biowaste valorisation processes and allow an overall integration of needed 
knowledge within the consortium.  
Final products Market potential 
Bioplastics & biopolymers market potential 2,660 million USD73 (globally, 2015) 
Biobased pesticides market potential 718 million USD74 (globally, 2016) 
Biobased feed market potential 400,000 million USD75 (globally, 2016) 
Table 3.2.1f. Market potential of SCALIBUR’s final biobased products 
Proposed measures to achieve the expected impact of the project: Exploitation plan 
 Exploitation team.  The full exploitation value chain is available in the project to properly ensure an efficient 
exploitation of the results. SCALIBUR will appoint an Exploitation Manager (G!E), to properly manage the 
exploitation of project results (see Section 3.2.2). Exploitation rights and specific agreements between partners 
will be taken into account in the consortium agreement).  
 Exploitation strategy of all the partners. The competitiveness of organizations is increasingly depending on their 
ability to collaborate in networks, and for such collaborations (knowledge -based ones), strong IPR management 
is a prerequisite for efficient trade and transfer of IPR and technology. Detailed IPR rules and protection will be 
described in the Consortium Agreement. The adequate treatment of IPR should help the consortium to 
maximize the returns from research and investments, by selecting the best way to prevent the innovation being 
attacked by competitors. It should also be regarded in the context of appropriation of the innovation benefits. 
 Exploitation of the project results  will take place by the industrial partners as well as by transferring knowledge 
on valorization routes of biowastes to companies specialized in the field, or to  municipalities and biowaste 
managers, on the basis of non- exclusive licenses on the IPR generated during the project. A summary of the 
main outcomes that will be generated along the project as well as the way they will be protected is presented 
hereafter. However, it has to be noted that in terms of direct exploitation of SCALIBUR outcomes, it is expected 
that at the end of the project, all the different patents generated will be fully owned by consortium members 
and licensed or sold to end -users. The IPR & Exploitation manager of the project will carefully take care for the 
IP generated and the way it might be transferred at the end of the project. It must be noted that the knowledge 
and experience generated in SCALIBUR will benefit all partners and also the preliminary exploitation strategy for 
each partner.  
Detailed business plans for each final biobased product and new technology/process will be developed in WP10, 
and annexed to the PEDR, in order to provide details on how the project’s results will be used in commercial 
                                                                                                               
73 https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/biopolymers-bioplastics-market-88795240.html  
74 https://www.inkwoodresearch.com/reports/europe-biopesticides-market-forecast-2017-2025/  
75 http://www.ifif.org/pages/t/The+global+feed+industry  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
35 
   
exploitation activities, for training purposes, for licensing the technological valorisation processes, for the 
implementation of the new urban biowaste valorisation schemes in other municipalities and for influencing related 
regulations for achieving a successful exploitation. Generated relevant data for the exploitation of results in WP2, 
WP3 and technical WPs (WP4 -6) will be also inputs for WP10 and for creating the mentioned business plans. 
Further measures will be planned in the fram ework of this WP10 to increase the likelihood of continuity of the 
established ecosystem and value chains, as well as market uptake of SCALIBUR KERs for European industrial 
sustainability, competitiveness, growth and jobs.  
The main exploitable results of SCALIBUR are, in one hand, the final products, namely biobased polyesters and 
PHAs, chitin/chitosan, biopesticides, proteins and lipids. In the other hand, the exploitable results include all 
developed processes to transform biowaste and sewage sludge into the final biobased products named before. The 
business models drafted at this stage are based on two different strategies: 
(1) the direct commercialization of the 
obtained final biobased products; and (2) the protection of the developed processes and tech nologies and its 
exploitation through licenses and consultancy and assessment services for its implementation. These two strategies 
are represented in a CANVAS (
Figure 9). The consortium has experience with both business models.  
Key Partners 
 
 
 Agro-industries 
 Biopesticides 
companies 
 Chemical industry 
 Livestock farms 
 Packaging industries 
 Food & Feed 
industries 
 Waste Management 
Authorities 
 Waste Management 
Industries 
 Wastewater 
Management 
Industries 
 Citizenship 
 Distributors 
 Licensees 
 Public Authorities 
Key Activities 
 
 
 
 Direct commercialisation 
 Integration 
assessment/know-how 
transfer 
 Application consulting 
 Tendering processes 
Value 
Propositions 
 
 
 High value biobased 
products 
 Valorisation of urban 
biowaste and sewa ge 
sludge.  
 No need to landfill or 
incinerate waste 
 Scalable 
 Low carbon footprint  
 
 
Customer          
Relationships 
 
 Samples based trials for 
client engagement 
 Free initial application 
assessment for client 
capture 
 Direct marketing and Sales 
of the different products by 
the different partners 
Customer 
Segments 
 
 
 Packaging end -
users 
 Agro-industries 
 Food & Feed 
industries 
 Chemical 
industries 
 Waste 
management 
industries 
 Wastewater 
management 
industries 
 Municipalities 
 Environmental 
Engineering 
industries 
Key Resources 
•  
 
 Production infrastructures 
among partners 
 Engagement of end -users 
(citizens, municipalities 
and industrial sector) 
(WP2) 
 Technical & Sales force 
human capital 
 Financial capacity 
 Channels 
 
 
 Specialised tradeshows 
 Specialised events 
 DEM (Direct Email 
Marketing) 
 SEM (Search Engine 
Marketing) 
 End-user engagement plan, 
with the support of 
municipalities 
 Digital P.R. 
 
Direct targeting to current 
customers of the partners 
and new prospects 
Cost Structure 
•  
 
 Sales structure costs (including tech nical 
assessment) 
 Human capital costs 
Revenue Streams 
 
 
 Sales of chemicals (alcohols and carboxylic acids), bioplastics, food and feed. 
 Sales of enzymatic cocktails 
 Royalties on licensing (of the processes developed in SCALIBUR) 
Figure 9. SCALIBUR general CANVAS 
During project implementation, a specific CANVAS for each of the products obtained in WP4 to WP6 will be 
designed in WP10 as part of the Business Model.  
Exploitation strategy as a whole 
SCALIBUR’s consortium mobilises the necessary partners not only for the pilot scale production of new high -value 
biobased products, but also to validate them for their further applications in their respective markets (WP4 -6), 
including a complete analysis of their safety, reliability, accomplishment of regulatory issues, social acceptance and 
environmental impact through a LCA/SLCA and a techno -economic analysis performed throughout the project 
(WP8). A set of activities which are all highly relevant for future market exploitation will be defined during WP10.  
The exploitation strategy for the KERs that will be jointly exploited is shown in the next table: 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
36 
   
Exploitable results (products, 
technologies, services, data, 
information) 
Partners involved Exploitation routes End-users Timeframe 
 Methodology for cascading 
valorisation of OFMSW and 
residues produced in the 
process 
All SCALIBUR 
partners involved in 
OFMSW 
management 
End products validation at TRL 9 Biowaste managers 
and municipalities 
3 years post 
project 
 SCALIBUR process 
commercialised 
All SCALIBUR 
partners 
SCALIBUR concept integrated by 
biowaste management companies 
Biowaste managers 
and municipalities 
 6 years post 
project 
Table 3.2.1g. Main results, key benefits and future exploitation plans for KERs to be jointly exploited 
Exploitation strategy per partner 
The exploitation of SCALIBUR results will also be performed by every partner separately, with the obtained results 
to be exploited in their respective business areas. The preliminary plan that we have established foresees the 
following KERs, end-users, IPR protection methods and concrete measures undertaken to exploit these results. 
Exploitable results 
(products, technologies, 
services, data, 
information) 
Partners 
involved Exploitation routes 
IPR 
Protection 
Method 
End-users Time 
frame 
Enzyme cocktails for 
the treatment of 
OFMSW 
ASA  
Production, application and 
distribution of enzyme cocktail 
among waste managers 
Patent 
application Municipalities and waste managers 
 6 – 12 M 
post 
project 
Pilot plant for insect 
rearing on biowaste 
UNIMORE & 
KOUR  
Use of the pilot plant in other 
national and international projects; 
assistance services for 
industrialization of the process 
National 
patent & 
possible intl. 
extension 
Ourselves; Biowaste producers and 
waste management companies 3
rd year 
Pilot plant for insect 
fractionation on 
biowaste 
UNIMORE & 
KOUR  
 Use of the pilot plant in other 
national and international projects; 
assistance services for 
industrialization of the process 
National 
patent  
Ourselves; new companies/ start-ups 
interested in producing novel 
products from insects 
 End of the 
project 
 Legal knowledge UNIMORE  Request authorizations for further 
research 
 Not 
applicable Ourselves and the EU community  End of the 
project 
Stakeholder Platform VISUM  Licensing to users Copyrighted 
code  
Cities, waste managers, waste 
producers, etc. 
 1-2 years 
after post 
project 
Monitoring systems for 
biowaste treatment 
plant 
VISUM 
 Design, building and 
commercialisation of tailored 
monitoring systems 
Patentability 
will be 
studied 
Waste managing companies 
 2-3 years 
after post 
project 
Methodology for 
process optimization 
and scale up of 
biological processes 
CENER 
Direct contract work to set up 
methodologies and biological 
processes scale-ups: Set-up of 
open infrastructure to produce 
novel bioproducts (pilot production 
sets) 
  
BioTech Companies, other RTO’s 
and Univ.: reduce risks in the scale 
up process. BioTech 
companies&bioproducts users: 
generate sufficient material for 
further assays 
 End of the 
project 
Biopesticides produced 
from OFMSW 
CENER, FCC, 
ASA. AERIS 
Further research on biobased 
pesticides. Commercialisation of 
obtained biopesticides. 
  Agro food industry, biopesticides 
companies 
1 year post 
project 
Feed ingredients NS Commercialisation of feed 
ingredients Patent Livestock market 
1-2 years 
post 
project 
Sewage sludge pre-
treatment to enhance 
anaerobic digestion of 
sewage sludge 
SMVAK 
Commercialisation of process 
through partner’s sales channels 
(public and private bids, 
distributors networks and system 
integrators) and website 
  
Public administration (tenders), 
private sector (industries), 
contractors 
2,5 yr after 
the 
project’s 
start 
Bioelectrochemical pre-
treatment for biogas 
upgrading and high-
value compounds 
synthesis 
SMVAK 
Commercialisation of process 
through partner’s sales channels 
(public and private bids, 
distributors networks and system 
integrators) and website 
Extend our 
patent to 
other 
countries 
Public administration (tenders), 
private sector (industries), 
contractors 
2 years 
post 
project 
Technology for 
obtaining PHA from 
sewage sludge 
WBD 
Commercialisation of the process 
for production of PHA from sewage 
sludge 
Patent Wastewater managers, 
municipalities 
1-5 years 
from post 
project 
New Solid-State 
Fermentation (SSF) AERIS Direct commercialisation Patent Municipalities, waste/wastewater 
management industries 
1 year post 
project 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
37 
   
Process 
Best practices factsheets 
for urban biowaste 
selective collection 
ITENE, CSCP, 
FCC, 
Municipalitie
s 
Workshop with external 
municipalities 
Not 
applicable European Municipalities 
3 yrs after 
the project 
starts 
Nanochitin fibers from 
BSF ITENE 
Using as additive or reinforcement 
in plastic materials for packaging 
applications 
Patent Plastic manufacturers 1 year post 
project 
Chitosan PLA/PHB 
formulations ITENE Use as an antimicrobial, reinforcing 
or enhanced-barrier additive Patent Plastic manufacturers 1 year post 
project 
LCA databases about 
biowaste management 
and their related 
technologies 
ITENE Implementation into LCA databases Royalty LCA software developers 1 year post 
project 
Sensors for methane 
and sulphydric acid 
during waste treatment 
ITENE Commercialisation with waste 
managers Patent Waste managers 1 year post 
project 
New biobased and 
biodegradable 
polyesters from 
alternative sources of 
sugars from OFMSW 
NOVAM. 
Commercialisation of biobased 
materials to end-users for final 
application development and green 
public procurement.  
Following CA 
rules 
End-users of biobased and 
biodegradable materials or final 
application development 
2-3 years 
post 
project 
SCALIBUR integrated 
process model EXERGY 
Engineering services for further 
biorefinery projects and similar 
projects 
Know-how EPC, biobased industries, MSW and 
WW plants 
1 year post 
project 
Optimisation of 
characterization 
methods 
ZETADEC To be used internally Industrial 
secret ZETADEC End of the 
project 
Table 3.2.1h. Exploitable results per partner, including exploitation routes, protection method, end-users and the timeframe 
On the other hand, Research Centres and Academic partners will benefit mainly in terms of: 
 Advancement of knowledge on  the technological aspects linked to the SCALIBUR technological innovations, 
particularly on: biowaste characteristics and management, application of innovative integration concepts in 
hydrolysis and fermentation, insects feeding and extraction, bioelectro chemical solutions, novel bioproducts 
using biowaste, modelling and simulation of complex industrial processes, measurement procedures, etc.  
 Technology transfer of novel solutions, from lab-based prototypes and tests to pilot devices; 
 Exposure to relevant industrial counterparts, giving them the possibility to measure the point of view of final 
users of new strategies and technological solutions;  
 Development and provision of new services and consultancies to industry and end-users of SCALIBUR.  
 Beneficial effects on scientific productivity in terms of world ranking and scientific publications.  
 The knowledge developed with other partners will be used for teaching activities both for undergraduate and 
graduate students as well as doctoral, in Process Technology, Chemistry, Bio Science…  
Exploitable results (products, 
technologies, services, data, 
information) 
Partners 
involved Exploitation routes IPR Protection 
Method End-users Timeframe 
Improvement of quality and 
quantity of the OFMSW 
collected 
MADRID, 
CLUBE, 
LAZIO 
Social innovation and business 
plans for new products Not applicable 
Municipalities, waste 
managers, citizens, 
biobased industries 
End of the 
project 
Development of training 
courses and workshops CENER Development of training 
courses and workshops Copyright PhD, postdocs and 
pofessionals 
1 year post 
project 
Table 3.2.1i. Main results, key benefits and future exploitation plans for non-industrial partners 
During the proposal stage, each partner has communicated clear exploitation expectations (Table 3.2.1.j), as well as 
expected growth derived from the project in line with the share of the respective previously discussed overall 
growth of the sector he represents and that he could tap into. This will be planned in greater detail during WP10 to 
maximize the innovation impact.  
Partner Area of business Foreseen exploitable results/knowledge/benefits from the project Turnover 
increase 
Created jobs 
ITENE 
Research 
Centre, 
packaging 
solutions 
Best practices factsheets for urban biowaste selective collection. The 
implementation of those best practices in other cities will create new 
businesses for ITENE 
300,000 €/yr 2 
Nanochitin fibers from BSF 100,000 €/yr 1 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
38 
   
Chitosan PLA/PHB formulations 100,000 €/yr 1 
LCA databases about biowaste management and their related 
technologies 
Unique sale of 
20,000 € 
0 
Sensors for methane and sulphydric acid during waste treatment 50,000/yr 0,5 
AERIS 
Waste/wastewa
ter treatment 
technologies 
SSF devices can be directly marketed to interested end-users, as 
municipalities or industries 
+20% from 
2022 baseline 
 1 job 
position/yr 
KOUR 
Development of 
biogas plants 
Starting from the first pilot plant build for ValoriBio project, a new pilot 
plant for an organic waste valorisation with a final TRL 7 will be created. 
Scale-up of the process and release of the market first solution for 
organic waste conversion will be achieved thanks to SCALIBUR. 
   >10 
NOVAMONT 
Biochemicals 
and Bioplastics 
New biobased and biodegradable polyesters from alternative source of 
sugars from OFMSW 
Turnover not 
quantificable 
for the 
moment.  
60 skilled 
jobs/every 
1kton of 
produced 
bioplastics 
NS 
Food Science 
technologies 
Direct commercialisation of feed ingredients 25M€ 2 job positions 
at the end of 
project 
SMVAK 
Wastewater 
management 
Sewage sludge pre-treatment to enhance the anaerobic digestion of 
sewage sludge. Evaluation of all obtained products by early user 
involvement and networks involved (>200 DWTP and 300 WWTP for 
AQUA, 65 WWTP for SMVAK) can be fast followers in market uptake to 
allow quick job creation in wastewater sector. Utilities also will be used 
for benchmarking with others (EBC) to multiply the best practices, their 
replication and promotion of SCALIBUR model within and outside EU. 
 
12M€ in 5 
years after the 
project 
 
Bioelectrochemical systems for biogas upgrading and high-value 
compounds synthesis 
  
UNIMORE Academia/Unive
rsity 
Academic spin-off to produce novel products from insects and research 
practical support 
   >2 
VISUM 
Industry 4.0 We aim to partner with the consortium in upscaling and replicating the 
business models developed in the project in terms of processes and 
support platform 
    
WETSUS 
R&I in water/ 
wastewater 
management 
Obtained Intellectual Property that can be used by the research partners 
of WETSUS to commercialise PHA production technology 
  
WBD 
Water regulator Improved and cost-efficient process for PHA production compared to 
current situation making it possible to build a 5,000 ton PHA production 
facility 
80 M€ 50 
ZETADEC R&D Knowledge will be used to offer more services to their costumers + 20% 1 
Table 3.2.1j. Exploitable results and associated benefits in terms of turnover increase and job creation 
C. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION 
Knowledge and innovation management: RRI methodologies that have been designed by consortium members and 
specifically adapted for the project SCALIBUR will be tested and validated to co -create and co-design strategies for 
urban biowaste valorisation value chains and business models that can be further replicated, standardised and 
eventually influence related waste and food regulations. Therefore, new knowledge is expected to be generated 
and is thus susceptible to being protected. Our consortium will identify all project outco mes (new knowledge, new 
technological solutions, any data or business information) from the beginning until the end of the project (see 
Table 3.2.1.g, Table 3.2.1.h and Table 3.2.1.i), and establish, together with the partner(s) who generated the result, 
the most appropriate strategy to protect (IP, non -disclosure…), exploit (further research project as background, 
commercial agreements…; see Table 3.2.1.j) and disseminate (open access publications, international conferences, 
website, etc.) a result. The IP R & Exploitation Manager will be the responsible for coordinating actions related to 
the IPR management. The Consortium Agreement already sets the basic rules to manage ownership and access to 
key knowledge (IPR, research data, etc.) by referring to the terms and conditions of the GA, Annex II about 
ownership of background information and results and mutual granting of Access Rights. 
Open Access policy and measures: In a wider context of knowledge management, dissemination and exploitation 
activities, we will ensure compliance with Horizon 2020 rules regarding Open Access (OA) to scientific literature, by 
making freely accessible online any scientific publication for free under the scope of the project. Each beneficiary 
will choose the most suitable approach  (either “green” OA or “gold” OA) to peer -reviewed scientific publications 
that might result from the project. The publisher will be chosen amongst those who respect both the authors’ 
interests and accept the terms of open access publication (with an embargo period). Partners will use an open access 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
39 
   
repository, connected to the tools proposed by the EC (e.g. open AIRE), in order to grant access to the publications 
and a bibliographic metadata in standard format, including the information requested by the EC. 
Data collection and management: SCALIBUR project will provide access to project data through the Stakeholder 
Platform, a Cloud Platform accessible from the web and mobile devices, and tailored to different levels of internal 
and external stakeholders with a user -friendly interface. SCALIBUR tools (participatory, interactive, online, co -
creation and citizen science tools) will empower citizens/waste generators at all levels not only to access the data, 
but also to become data generators. Project data will be generated through the Urban Biowasteclubs, which will 
enable actors to actively and efficiently work together, by organizing workshops where all consortium members will 
be present. During these workshops, the following topics will be addressed and discu ssed about: 
(1) citizen 
behaviour changes regarding acceptance of urba -biowaste products; (2) new trends and promising practices in 
each municipality; (3) barriers and opportunities to enable the adoption of new policies, profitable business models 
and soc ial innovation activities; (4) how to adapt, develop and uptake new profitable business models; and (5) 
design-thinking workshops. Generated data during these workshops will feed the Stakeholder Platform and will be 
accessible to all represented actors, pr operly managed by the project members and coordinated by each manager 
depending of the related area (Impact, Engagement and RRI, IPR and Exploitation, Communication and 
Dissemination or Scientific area). All information about the do’s and don’ts regarding the full integration of the 
upgraded urban biowaste value chain into the existing local waste/wastewater management schemes, will be 
integrated into the stakeholder platform. This way we will provide transparency and make data available for waste 
generators, since they are key actors who provide the new waste fractions used during the innovative treatment 
processes here developed.  
Regulatory issues: All the tasks of the project will be designed and executed according to EU and national 
legislation, guideli nes and recommendations which prove often to be sketchy. The scientific and regulatory 
framework on by -products, waste and urban biowaste management will be taken into account throughout the 
project, as well as provisions and case law on the legal status o f sewage sludge and its use in agriculture. The EU 
Regulations on plant protection and any relevant provision that could help in understanding the legal status of 
biopesticides will be considered (lacking both a definition and a specific regulation on this  theme). The regulatory 
framework for bioplastics and materials intended to come in contact with food will also be taken into account. 
Provisions on food, feed, rearing and animal welfare will be considered too. 
2.2.1 COMMUNICATION ACTIVITIES 
SCALIBUR is a n interdisciplinary project which involves quadruple helix stakeholders. This fact is reflected in the 
communication activities in order to maximize visibility, support successful exploitation and impact generation and 
to establish continuity for the proje ct. According to Article 38 of the H2020 Grant Agreement, the beneficiaries 
“must promote the action and its results, by providing targeted information to multiple audiences (including the 
media and the public) in a strategic and effective manner”.  The communication activities of SCALIBUR will focus on 
ensuring a smooth information flow between the project partners and all relevant quadruple helix stakeholders 
and on raising awareness of the project activities and key results in a targeted and cost- efficient manner. The 
communication activities will be performed mainly via Stakeholder Platform (WP7), complemented with different 
media, forums and the consortium members’ extensive networks. These activities are defined in detail in WP9. 
The project will have a highly professional communication program running alongside the other work packages 
throughout the project, which will be defined in the Communication and Dissemination Plan. Core tools such as 
website, internal web portal, guidelines and generated susta inable business plans will be created by the 
consortium’s expert partners and will be used to build up platform for all consortium members to collaborate, 
share and transmit impactful communications. This platform (Stakeholder Platform) will serve as a tool to maximize 
the impact of communication actions. Therefore, this tool will generate and grant access to all relevant data (which 
will be open data), new sustainable business models for the project’s further replication, training and educational 
information, and project’s events and conferences. In essence, the SCALIBUR’s Stakeholder Platform will thus be a 
key tool that will allow, on the one hand to increase transparency, provide data and perform co -creation actions 
and engagement, and on the other hand to maximize the successful dissemination of project results. This will 
guarantee both the necessary continuous engagement actions and the interaction of all stakeholders involved.  
The Communication & Dissemination Manager will pay special attention to avo id common mistakes in 
communication (communicate without identifying the target audience, focus on the medium and not message, 
etc.). For each target audience, a distinct communication strategy using targeted messages, appropriate means and 
language will be set up with the aim of creating an innovative and replicable urban biowaste management scheme 
among quadruple helix stakeholders at local, national and European level; promoting the uptake of RRI actions and 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
40 
   
contributing to increase sustainability. The s pecific communication and dissemination objectives for each 
stakeholder group are: 
 Citizens and consumers: increase understanding & changing behaviour regarding collection and use of urban 
biowaste, increase acceptance of urban biowaste-derived products, reduce non-recycled biowaste rates  
 Municipalities: support the adoption of new policies (incl. logistic models), new profitable business models and 
social innovation initiatives. Identify areas of improvement in urban biowaste selective collection schemes.  
 Business and local service providers (water, energy, waste): support in developing, testing & replicating new 
profitable business models along the entire urban biowaste value chain 
 Policy makers: Pro-actively engage national and European policy representatives in the Urban Biowaste Clubs, 
participation in relevant conferences, fairs and policy dialogues, present the policy brief “recommendations 
for urban biowaste management” at the European Parliament. From the beginning of the project, SCALIBUR 
will foster the dialogue on the European level and involve policy representatives in order to create momentum 
for further uptake (and investment) of the urban biowaste initiatives. 
To reach our target audiences and communicate SCALIBUR key messages, our communication tools will be: 
 SCALIBUR Stakeholder Platform  – an interactive, tailored and user -friendly platform to compile all the 
information gathered and co -created related to the implementation of the innovative urban biowaste value 
chains (including new business models, results from the co-creation workshops, relevant news, partial and final 
open access results, media, regulatory aspects, action manuals (national/international replicability step-by-step 
manuals), and other relevant content generated as a consequence of SCALIBUR). The Stakeholder Platform will 
be accessible to all internal (project members, advisory board) and external (advocacy and policy groups, 
citizens, waste managers, waste generators, sectorial associations, etc.) stakeholders. 
 SCALIBUR dedicated social campaign : Social media, including short videos of SCALIBUR’s results (YouTube, 
Twitter, Facebook and LinkedIn) will be actively used to engage society at large and network with other EU 
related projects. E-mail campaigns based on the website registrations and RSS service will be performed.  
 SCALIBUR branding: project image, leaflets and other communication materials. 
 SCALIBUR newsletter: main news and results published in a 6 -monthly newsletter (plus press releases): waste 
management and valori sation related news, news on Urban Biowasteclubs, news from related waste 
management, biomaterials and circular economy projects, and other dissemination announcements. To be 
distributed in electronic version through mailing lists. 
 Events: presentation of project’s results in key sectorial events, as shown in Table 3.2.1.b. 
 Guided visits to DSs and the Best Performing Territory : The project will include scheduled visits for the 
Biowasteclubs representatives to demo plants where the SCALIBUR results will be validated: Las Dehesas 
(Madrid, ES) and the demo plant in Ostrava, CZ, as well as visits to Lund. The guided visits will have an 
educational purpose and will serve as an important communication channel for the citizenship, supporting the 
awareness raising and acceptance of biobased products obtained. 
 European Commission Communication channels: We will also use EC services to communicate largely on our 
project, its results and events: CORDIS News, CORDIS Wire, European Commission’s newsletters, EC’s event 
pages, the Europa website, the EU interactive platform for dialogue and discussion. This will be done in close 
coordination with our project officer and allow to reach a Europe-wide “qualified” audience. 
A set of success indicators will be put in place thus setting the basis for verifying whether the communication 
objectives have been met. For the online communication and dissemination data, a Google Analytics account will 
be set up linked to the proje ct Stakeholder Platform/project website whilst for all other social media, the available 
free analytics tool will be used (Facebook Insights, Twitter Analytics, etc.) 
TOOL KPI M24 M48 
Interactive website - Google Analytics 
  
  
SEO insights for Google Organic  1,000 5,000  
Link to contents  100 500  
Mobile Performance Analysis  20% 50%  
Linkedin - Group Analytics Group members  100 300 
Twitter - Analytics 
  
Followers on Twitter  300 600 
Mentions on Twitter   100 300 
Facebook Likes  500 1,000 
Other communication activities Video post on Youtube of the working pilot plants  3 9  
Table 2.2.1a. Communication KPIs for SCALIBUR 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
41 
   
SECTION 3: IMPLEMENTATION
3.1 WORK PLAN —  WORK PACKAGES, DELIVERABLES  
 
OVERALL STRUCTURE OF THE WORK PLAN 
A competitive work p lan has been created in order to deliver on the objectives of the SCALIBUR project, which is 
divided into 10 WPs, subsequently divided further into working tasks. This project is coordinated by ITENE; 
however, each WP and task has a leader that is responsible for progress and communication of results. The work to 
be carried out in SCALIBUR is structured considering three different types of activities: 
Implementation (WP2-WP7; to develop and integrate urban biowaste valorisation approaches on a city level ), 
Validation (WP8; to check SCALIBUR approach from a technical, environmental, economic and social point of view), 
and Market Launch (WP9-10; to boost the introduction of SCALIBUR approach in Europe). Considering this 
approach, the project has been structured in ten WPs briefly explained. 
WP1 Management, to lead the project towards the desired objectives. WP2 Stakeholder engagement, to increase 
quantity and improve quality of organic fraction collected. WP3 collection and pretreatment, to adapt quality of 
organic fraction to the subsequent valorization processes. WP4 biochemical conversion of OFMSW , to obtain 
biopolyesters and biopesticides ; WP5 biological transformation biowaste from HORECA, to obtain proteins, lipids 
and chitin. WP6 biochemical and bioelectrochemical transformation of USS, to obtain chemicals (alcohols and acids) 
and bioplastics (PHBV). WP7 Scalibur Biowaste platform , to obtain a cloud architecture tool to connect all 
stakeholders in the value chain. WP8 Sustainability and safety analysis; to evaluate economic, social, environmental, 
regulatory aspects as well as the risks associated to substances obtained in the project. WP9 Dissemination, 
communication and training; to transmit the results of the project within related stakeholders. WP10 Exploitation 
and IPR management, to manage the exploitation of SCALIBUR results transferring the R&D performers to industrial 
and public sector end-users. 
Interconnectivity of the work packages is displayed in the Pert diagram followed by the Gantt chart. Sub sequently, 
each working package and working task is described in detail. 
 
Figure 10. Pert diagram showing WP interactions 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
42 
   
 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
43 
  
WORK PACKAGE DESCRIPTIONS  
Table 3.1a: Work package description (Highlighted=WP Leader) 
 
WORK PACKAGE NUMBER  WP1 START MONTH – END MONTH M1-M48 
WORK PACKAGE TITLE Project Management 
PARTICIPANT NUMBER 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
SHORT NAME OF PARTICIPANT 
 
ITENE 
AERIS 
ASA 
CENER 
CLUBE 
CSCP 
EXERGY 
FCC 
G!E 
KOUR 
LAZIO 
LUND 
MADRID 
NOVAMONT 
NS 
SMVAK 
UNIMORE 
VISUM 
WBD 
WETSUS 
ZETADEC 
 
PERSON·MONTHS/PARTNER 24.0 1.0 1.0 3.0 1.0 5.0 1.0 3.0 6.5 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 4.0 3.0 4.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 
TOTAL PM: 65.5 
Objectives 
 To ensure smooth collaboration and apply personalised tools for efficient implementation of activities, decision making and steering 
 To anticipate, monitor and assess project progress vs. work plan and initiating if necessary prompt corrective actions  
 To assure timely reporting and communication with the project officer and the EC 
 To perform a Risk and Quality Management strategy as well as a Data Management Plan 
Description of work (underlined partner = Task Leader) 
Task 1.1: Administrative, Financial, Contractual, Legal Management (Partners Involved: ITENE) – M01-M48 
The Project Coordinator ITENE will lead the global project coordination and will be responsible for its tasks listed in the Grant Agreement  and 
the Consortium Agreement, both among the partners and with respect to the EC. The Coordinator will be mainly in charge of: 
 Establishing a Consortium Agreement prior to the project official starting date based on the DESCA H2020 model.76    
 Requesting and reviewing any reports, documents or information required by the EC and verifying their quality, completeness a nd 
correctness before passing them on to the EC. 
 Appropriate and timely allocating of EC grant to partners upon Grant Agreement and General Assembly (GA) decisions. Keeping t he 
records of the distribution of grant and informing the EC in due time. 
 Follow-up of management actions, project correspondence and day-to-day demands from partners. 
 Designing and maintaining partner specific templates (financial, technical, IPR, dissemination, exploitation, innovation, impact...)  
 Based on GA decisions, implementing changes in grant agreement for contractual amendment request. 
 Financial reporting: The Coordinator will consolidate and analyse financial data (evert 6M) to compare the actual costs vs. budget figures 
and anticipate any deviations (over or under consumption).  Coordinator will notify the due dates and provide support for the 
completion of the Periodic financial reports (and certificates on financial statements if relevant). Coordinator will: [1] pay attention that 
EC rules are respected for cost reporting on the basi s of the information provided by the partners; [2] check the quality (completeness, 
correctness, format...) of information from all partners and review all individual financial statements to ensure consistency  with the 
planned and real technical tasks and to verify each partners’ engagement; [3] take care of the reporting related to EC grant allocation. 
 Progress reporting: The Coordinator will ensure an efficient organization of Periodic activity reporting. In addition to the official Periodic 
reports, 6-monthly interim WP reports will be produced with contribution from the WP leaders. 
Task 1.2: Data Management Plan (Partners Involved: ITENE, All) – M01 – M48 
To analyse the main elements of the data management policy with regard to the datasets generated by the project. The DMP will be 
generated at the start of SCALIBUR and then evolve during the lifespan of the project. Data management will be a fixed agenda  item at all 
management meetings. The DMP will consider all the data the project will generate and use  and will detail whether and how it will be used, 
exploited or made accessible for verification and re-use; how and under what conditions it will be curated, preserved and shared; and how it 
will be interoperable with regard to specific quality standards. 
Task 1.3: Internal Communication (Partners Involved: ITENE, G!E, CSCP) – M06 – M48 
 The Coordinator will promote efficient communication flows within the consortium. 
 Ensure that each partner is well informed of the project progress, understands its role and  contractual obligations in the project, and is 
aware of the requests and information from the EC.  Documents will be shared on a secured collaborative internet platform provided 
and updated by coordinator for knowledge management, on-line reporting and information exchange, as well as email lists. 
 Prepare, execute and post-process all official project meetings (tasks: agendas, invitations, logistics together with the host, preparation, 
distribution and archiving of materials, minutes and action lists). 
 Chair both the Executive Board meetings and General Assembly, every six months. 
 Have a strategic role on both meetings preparation. In addition, regular technical meetings will be organized by the WP Leaders on WP 
level on project and inter-WP levels. 
Task 1.4: Quality and Risk Management (Partners Involved: ITENE, All) -  M1 – M48 
The Coordinator will set  a quality management policy validated by the GA covering all aspects related to practical management (document 
exchanges & internal workflows) of the project and adressing: project SWOT, technical and non -technical risk management incl. critical path 
of t he project and associated contingency plans, communication and quality control activities, gender, societal and ethical issue s. For 
instance, it will clearly state internal processes related to standards of documents, proof - reading, validation workflow fo r the approval of 
deliverables, reports, dissemination, exploitation and IPR items, etc. Key indicators will also be proposed to evaluate the p erformance of the 
project and its impact. 
Deliverables 
D1.1: Implementation of Project Management structure (ITENE; M3) 
D1.2: Data Management Plan (ITENE; M6).  
D1.3: Quality and Risk management plan (M9, ITENE). 
 
                                                                                                               
76 http://www.desca-2020.eu/latest-version-of-desca/ 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
44 
  
WORK PACKAGE NUMBER  WP2 START MONTH – END MONTH M1-M48 
WORK PACKAGE TITLE Stakeholder Engagement and social innovation actions 
PARTICIPANT NUMBER 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
SHORT NAME OF 
PARTICIPANT 
 
ITENE 
AERIS 
ASA 
CENER 
CLUBE 
CSCP 
EXERGY 
FCC 
G!E 
KOUR 
LAZIO 
LUND 
MADRID 
NOVAMON
T 
NS 
SMVAK 
UNIMORE 
VISUM 
WBD 
WETSUS 
ZETADEC 
PERSON·MONTHS/PARTNER 18.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.0 69.0 0.0 14.0 3.5 0.0 4.0 6.0 4.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 12.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
TOTAL PM: 136.5 
Objectives 
 Identify and engage key European quadruple helix stakeholders (at the local, national and EU level; objective: at least 100 
stakeholders), covering the whole value chain of  organic waste, and involve them in participatory and co -creation actions, to support 
the integration of urban biowaste valorisation approaches on a city level within each of the demo regions, allowing for social innovation 
and increased consumer awareness and acceptance of urban biowaste-derived products  
 Analyse the current value chain of urban biowaste in the best performing territory (identification of best practices and road map 
definition for replicability) and in the pilot cities (Madrid, Albano (LAZIO), Kozani (CLUBE)) 
 Identify the main barriers (political, economic, social, environmental and legal) for the implementation of urban biowaste va lorisation 
in an integrated way on city level 
 Generate the knowledge to be implemented in technological develop ment in WP3 on collection, transport, sorting and pretreatment 
with a view to improve quantity and quality of OMSW: Madrid (quantity 85%, quality 95% after the pilot), Albano (quantity 90%, quality 
97% after the pilot), Kozani (quantity 50%, quality 95% after the pilot), Europe in general (quantity 85%, quality 95% in 2030) 
Task 2.1 Stakeholder Identification, Data analysis and Engagement Plan (M1 -M48). Partners Involved: CSCP, FCC, VISUM, ITENE, UNIMORE, 
ZITIES, LAZIO, CLUBE 
The first task aims at developing a detailed Stakeholder Engagement Plan, building upon the following elements:   
Subtask 2.1.1 Tailored stakeholder analysis (CSCP, CLUBE, LAZIO, FCC): Based on the already existing work and networks in the 3 pilot cities, 
CSCP and the local partners wi ll be able to identify and map all relevant actors operating in the demonstrators’ regions, including 
local&regional authorities, waste generators (including HORECA, supermarkets and citizens), waste collection companies, waste /wastewater 
management utilities, energy providers, (biobased) industries, the scientific community, local SMEs, and local communities. The outcome will 
be a list of central actors combined with a detailed analysis of their operational settings, relationships, interests and mot ivations for each 
demo region. Additional information will be collected through direct exchange with the municipalities in each pilot, as well as key 
stakeholders in the local communities, who will help in the development of the engagement plan at local level.  
Subtask 2.1.2. Baseline analysis (ITENE, CLUBE, LAZIO, CSCP, Madrid, Lund): A baseline analysis of existing urban biowaste management for  
each pilot city participating (Madrid [ES], Albano [IT] and Kozani [GR]) with barriers and opportunities areas will be carried out to find out 
data on consumption behaviour and urban waste manangement. Data such as recycling rates, urban biowaste fractions separated, 
management routes, citizen engagement, etc., will help to identify gaps and inconveniences in their current  collection systems. Lund 
municipality (SE) will be the benchmark territory because of its high level of collection ( 98% for the whole city). B est practices in the 
selective collection of OFMSW and HORECA biowaste will be identified to be implemented in th e city pilots in WP2&3.  Visits to the four 
cities (Lund, Madrid, Albano and Kozani) will be requested to collect all the information ( CLUBE, LAZIO and Madrid will travel to the best 
performing territory as well), and projects from other regions across Europe and successful urban waste management plan will be also studied. 
A comparison and matching of the current data across the 3 pilot municipalities and the best performing territory is foreseen to assess 
initiatives that could be taken up where and inform necessary actions. This will provide the baseline for future analysis of the project actions 
results. 
As a result of the above activities, an Engagement Plan tailored for each municipality participating in the pilots, will be p roduced as well as 
an identification of best practises to be implemented in the pilot cities in WP3. 
Task 2.2: Local Stakeholder Engagement, Co -Creation and Participatory Actions (M7 -M44). Partners Involved: CSCP, ITENE, Madrid, LAZIO, 
CLUBE 
Subtask 2.2.1 Co-creation & local engagement process: Urban Biowasteclubs will be set-up for each of the demonstration areas, as the main 
tool for active engagement, which will comprise circa 16 to 20 pre -identified quadruple helix stakeholders at a local level. All Biowasteclub 
activities will be shaped according to a participatory approach, enabling actors to actively and efficiently work together, share information, 
and co-create knowledge. Meetings will happen regularly (at least 2 meetings per year per club) in physical spaces (e.g. public bui ldings, 
waste treatment facilities or alike) provided by the municipalities or involved stakeholders in the neighbourhoods participating in the pilots. 
To ensure that the citizens’ perspectives are well represented, the project will invite and/or nominate “local champions” to participate in the 
Biowasteclubs. “Local champions” are citizens known in the local communities already very active locally on the topics of sus tainability, 
neighbourhood improvement, social innovation, etc. These champions will act as  local ambassadors that facilitate the uptake of the project 
activities by further citizens. The project will support them both in motivating and engaging their personal local networks ( e.g. in their 
schools/ at work, friends+family+neighbourhood, etc.), but also in reaching a wider local audience (e.g. through social media, short footages 
in local news, and means such as meeting rooms and communication materials, actions in close collaboration with WP9). 
With a particular focus on the local context of each of the participating municipalities, the Urban Biowasteclubs meetings will aim to: 
 discuss how to increase and motivate understanding & changing behaviour regarding collection and use, acceptance of urban biowaste-
derived products (relevant for group Consumers / citizens) 
 discuss how to adapt, develop and uptake the new profitable business models tested in WP4 -6 along the entire urban biowaste value 
chain (relevant for business stakeholders), to define how they could be fully integrated into the existing l ocal waste/ wastewater 
management schemes of each municipality involved in the pilots (WP4-WP6) and to start taking the relevant steps.   
 discuss the role and need to adopt new policies (including logistic models), and to implement social innovation initia tives, in order to 
overcome specific barriers and benefit from opportunity areas for the implementation of an integrated system innovation approach  
(relevant for group Municipalities and consumers / citizens) 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
45 
  
 identify milestones and define a roadmap for country wide-local uptake as basis for National action manuals (see T2.3).  
Further engagement activities, involving wider groups of stakeholders  and informing the collaborative activities include: i) discussing in 
interactive citizens’ workshops their expectations/needs/questions about waste collection and use of biowaste products. The events will take 
place back-to-back with other local activities in public spaces (at least 1/yr·pilot). ii) conduct interactive online questionnaires among citizens 
of the respective municipality, made available thorugh the SCALIBUR stakeholder platform. iii) Engaging representatives of successful urban 
initiatives and promising practises from other municipalities, regions or countries as external speakers or advisors in the Biowasteclubs 
The results of these activities will be captured both in short outcome-reports and handbooks, as well as translated into different online formats 
(i.e. news items, interactive infographics), in order to support their uptake, in collaboration with WP9 actions and the partnering municipalities. 
Guidelines for replicability of the co-created business models in other municipalities at national and European level will be generated. 
Subtask 2.2.2 Participatory actions: To lift the stakeholder engagement on the next level, SCALIBUR aims to also take participatory actions to 
test and demonstrate pathways to support the integration of the urban biowaste valorisation approaches on a city level: 
 Start taking first steps to fully integrate the business models (=of the upgraded urban biowaste value chain) tested in WP4 -6 into the 
existing local waste/wastewater management schemes of each municipality involved in the pilots (WP4-WP6)  
 To support the above, and  based on the results of T2.1 and T2.2.1, the member s of the Biowasteclubs and the “local champions” will 
select the social innovation and enhancing active participation of citizens in urban biowaste collection ideas that fit most to their local 
contexts and take next steps to adapt / develop / scale-up them in their specific context. 
 Informed by the baseline analysis (2.1.2) on lifestyle trends and behaviour change, corresponding "See, Touch, Taste" experiences will 
be offered in framework of a neighbourhood activities (e.g. as cooperation with supermarkets , an engaging presentation back -to-back 
at existing citizen -events, or walking tours through the city exploring innovative start -ups, restaurants etc.) in order to increase 
consumers / citizens awareness and acceptance of urban biowaste-derived products. 
Task 2.3:  National & European Stakeholder Engagement (M24-M44). Partners Involved: CSCP, Madrid, ITENE, LAZIO, CLUBE 
Several national and European stakeholder engagement activities are foreseen to facilitate project replicability in other reg ions and 
countries, in close relationship with engagement actions described in WP9:  
 Biowasteclubs champions will be encouraged to act as national biowaste -ambassadors. Supported by CSCP and G!E, they will share 
their experiences with and engage their respective network s outside the pilot cities (e.g. representatives from pilot municipalities will 
engage neighbouring cities, service providers (waste, wastewater, energy) to implement the pilots in different cities, civil society 
representatives will engage their national organisations, citizens can share their experiences through the SCALIBUR stakeholder 
platform, etc.). 
 National action manuals for local uptake: experiences of the Biowasteclubs will be collected in a step -by-step manual that will allow an 
easy uptake in other cities and regions. CSCP, FCC, LAZIO and CLUBE will encourage national policy to foster the uptake in other regions 
and cities. The Scalibur -Biowasteclubs could then act in an advisory role as “helpdesks” for similar nationally funded initiatives beyon d 
the official project duration.  
Task 2.4: Evaluation of SCALIBUR multi -level engagement plan and activities, including gender (M20 -M48). Partners Involved: CSCP, VISUM, 
ITENE, Madrid, LAZIO, CLUBE 
The objective of the impact assessment and evaluation wil l be to assess, firstly, whether the perception of citizens on urban biowaste as a 
local resource has improved and citizens’ participation in its separate collection has increased thanks to social innovation initiatives and 
secondly, to assess whether the  consumer acceptance of urban biowaste-derived products, including food and feed ingredients, has indeed 
improved. These objectives shall be reached:  
 data collected in WP2 and WP3 (available through the SCALIBUR stakeholder platform) will allow to compare the baseline of citizens’ 
behaviour regarding waste in the 3 participating municipalities before, during and after the Scalibur engagement activities.  
 ex-ante & ex-post surveys of engaged citizens on collection & separation behaviour (combined with qualitative interviews of local champions).  
 all implementing activities (T2.2) will include both direct feedback mechanism (e.g. a short interactive poll after the “see,  touch, taste” 
experiences), as well as a comparative analysis of the participation and enga gement across time (e.g. how many people participate in 
the “experiences”, how many of those participants engage further afterwards (e.g. in the online platform, in setting up local  networks 
or similar), which (online) activities trigger larger discussions and follow-up, etc. 
 All the SCALIBUR engagement activities and the stakeholder platform will be designed to be gender inclusive, and gender balan ce will 
be sought through all project actions. A gender analysis with regard to engagement and participation i n each municipality will be made 
in M24&M48, allowing for introducing corrective measures in case that gender inclusiveness is not being achieved by M24. 
 Other impact indicators for quadruple helix stakeholders, including policy impacts, will be defined and analysed also in M24 and M48 to 
allow for corrective actions and maximization of project impact. The Public Engement MORRI indicators will be used ( D3.2 Metrics and 
indicators of Responsible Research and Innovation, H2020 MORRI project, December 2015). 
Deliverables 
D2.1 Stakeholder engagement plan per pilot municipality and identification of current best practices. (CSCP; ITENE; M10) 
D2.2 National action manuals for local uptake (M36, CSCP) 
D2.3 Policy brief “recommendations for urban biowaste management” and presentation at parliament (CSCP; M44) 
D2.4 Multi-level stakeholder engagement analysis, including gender, and impact analysis (CSCP; M24, M48) 
 
WORK PACKAGE NUMBER  WP3 START MONTH – END MONTH M1-M44 
WORK PACKAGE TITLE Collection, characterization and homogenization of urban biowaste 
PARTICIPANT NUMBER 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
SHORT NAME OF PARTICIPANT 
 
ITENE 
AERIS 
ASA 
CENER 
CLUBE 
CSCP 
EXERGY 
FCC 
G!E 
KOUR 
LAZIO 
LUND 
MADRID 
NOVAMONT 
NS 
SMVAK 
UNIMORE 
VISUM 
WBD 
WETSUS 
ZETADEC 
PERSON·MONTHS/PARTNER 35.0 0.0 0.0 17.0 10.0 0.0 0.0 49.0 0.0 0.0 3.5 3.0 2.0 36.0 0.0 9.0 10.0 37.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 
TOTAL PM: 212 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
46 
  
Objectives 
 Improving the qual ity and increasing the quantity of urban biowaste (OFMSW and HORECA) selectively collected in the pilots by 
implementing best practices to ensure a constant feedstock of biowaste materials with uniform quality  
 Physical and chemical characterisation and pr e-treatment of the OFMSW fractions, HORECA waste and sewage sludge UWWTP for 
subsequent treatment, optimization of the homogenization processes and for producing optimal mixtures for production of high -value 
products with the new processing technologies (WP4-WP6) 
 Definition of the pre-treatment criteria for each urban biowaste (sorting, stabilization, drying, etc.) 
 Stablishing the thresholds of composition of this waste streams for a feasible and successful valorisation 
Task 3.1: Improved methods for selective collection of urban biowaste (M6 – M44). Partners Involved: ITENE, CSCP, FCC, LAZIO, Madrid, CLUBE, 
Lund 
Sewage sludge is excluded from this task because it is automatically collected at UWWTP. 
Subtask 3.1.1. Improved selective collection of OFMSW (ITENE, FCC, CSCP, Madrid, LAZIO, CLUBE): ITENE, CSCP and FCC will seek for high-level 
technical best practices aimed to reach best quality and quantity of selective collected OFMSW. 
 Containerisation and deposit of the OFMSW (ITENE): Depot systems like bring -banks and door-to-door systems, as well as the different 
container systems will be analysed. 
 Communication and awareness of the citizens about OFMSW (CSCP): In cooperation with WP2, the main barriers to the collection and 
deposit of the biowaste will be checked, and technical solutions will be proposed. 
 Incentives to increase OFMSW collection (FCC): economic incentives like pay- as-you-throw (PAYT) methods, reduced taxation systems 
and the like will be analysed, which will allow for social innovation. 
Subtask 3.1.2. Improved selective collection of HORECA waste  (ITENE, FCC, CSCP, Madrid, LAZIO, CLUBE): Containerisation, communication, 
and incentives will be tackled with special focus on HORECA and the technical needs to separate high added value fractions be cause of their 
lower degree of contamination as compared to households. Together with WP2, where baseline values will be collected, technical barriers for 
best selective collection of HORECA waste will be analysed for the municipalities of LAZIO (IT), Madrid (ES) and CLUBE (EL). 
Task 3.2. Enhanced methods for transport & logistics of urban biowaste (M6– M44). Partners Involved: ITENE, LAZIO, CLUBE, Madrid, FCC 
Following T3.1, enhanced methods for transport & logistics of urban biowaste will be analysed for OFMSW & HORECA (excluding sewage sludge). 
Subtask 3.2.1. Improved logistics of OFMSW  (ITENE, FCC, Madrid, LAZIO, CLUBE): The best logistic methods to reduce collection times, 
avoiding transport steps and optimising the time to reach the treatment plants, will be analysed. Metaheuristic algorithms will feed from current 
statistical data about composition and quantities in selected areas of the municipalities. Tracking the vehicles used for col lection and the 
amounts of selectivelly collected OFMSW will give a  map of routes that will serve as basis for the heuristic calculation (FCC). Specific 
measurements of combined CH4, H2S and temperature sensors will be developed and integrated in the bins to reduce the degradation levels 
of the OFMSW.  
The information abo ut the logistic routes will be used to model the objective function and feed the heuristic logistic optimization method. 
Main boundary conditions will be established by the theoretical equations of degradation of waste as function of the time, te mperature and 
levels of H 2S and CH 4. Algorithms will be developed based on stablished ones, such as Clarke & Wright algorithm and using a GRASP 
methodology for improvements. The heuristic algorithm will then be implemented in pilot experiences afterwards with the di fferent 
municipalities to test the performance results (Task 3.5). 
Subtask 3.2.2. Improved selective collection of HORECA waste (ITENE, FCC, Madrid, LAZIO, CLUBE): The heuristic algorithm for OFMSW will be 
further refined for the specific case of the HOREC A waste, by adding new variable: location point, distance between them, and the schedule 
for collection vs. time of generation (i.e.: lunch, dinner, etc.). 
Task 3.3: Sorting & pre-treatment (M1 – M42). Partners Involved: FCC, Aqualia, ITENE, SMVAK, CENER, VISUM, LAZIO 
This task will tackle the main processes for the sorting & pre- treatment of the collected urban biowaste prior to entering the new processing 
technologies in WPs4-6. Specific treatments will be developed for each one of the types of biowaste. The pre -treatment of sewage sludge is 
considered, since it has to be pre-treated prior the biogas production. 
Subtask 3.3.1. Sorting and pre -treatment of OFMSW, [DS 1] (FCC, CENER, ITENE, VISUM): The FCC plant of Las Dehesas (Madrid, ES) will be 
used as DS  in which the selective collected OFMSW coming from the Madrid municipality will be separated and optimised to reach the 
required conditions to be feed in WP4 (enzymatic hydrolysis of OFMSW). The process for optimising the desired conditions for WP4 will 
consist on: 1) A biowaste monitoring system  (VISUM) based on state of the art optic and spectroscopic methods for the detection of 
contaminants inside the organic waste granules in combination with chemometrics. This system will be installed in the conveyo r belt by FCC 
using commercial components for waste characterisation; 2) A manual separation (FCC); 3) Primary trituration (FCC); 4) Trammel for separation 
of high density materials (FCC); 5) Electromagnetic separator to remove metals (FCC); 6) Homogenisati on, aimed at giving a constant 
composition of organic waste (proteins, fats, carbohydrates, mineral content). For such purpose, different rich fractions wil l be stored and 
mixed giving the right balance in carbohydrates for hydrolysis (FCC, CENER); 7) Stab ilization and hygenisation, in which the biological activity 
of the waste will be inhibited in order to avoid further decomposition. Sterilization will be made at 121ºC for 1h. The sorted and pre -treated 
OFMSW will be supplied in insulated containers at a particle size of 10 mm to fulfil the requirements of the subsequent enzymatic attack for 
the hydrolysis (FCC); 8) Drying of the stabilised OFMSW in an oven dryer (CENER) to minimize the water contents necessary for the high-solid 
hydrolysis. FCC will be re sponsible of supplying 20 tons of stabilized OFMSW obtained in this WP to CENER  in different batches along the 
course of this subtask. Based on the conclusions obtained and the identified critical points, existing technological alternat ives will be 
explored (FCC). A test plan will be established as well as an economic viability study for the selection of the optimal solutions (F CC, CENER, 
ITENE). 
Subtask 3.3.2. Sorting and pre -treatment of HORECA  (LAZIO, UNIMORE, ITENE): The most suitable blends of HORECA w aste capable of 
meeting the requirements for insect rearing (right balance of nutrient-enriched waste for optimum larvae growth) will be sought.  
Subtask 3.3.3. Sorting and pre -treatment of sewage sludge [ DS 6] (SMVAK, Aqualia, ITENE, WETSUS, WBD): Sewage sludge collected from 
SMVAK UWWTP (CZ), from primary settlement and biological treatment, will be pre- treated through homogenisation, based on giving the 
right balance between the necessary nutrients and feed to keep the bioelectrochemical process develope d in WP6, aimed at the production 
of commodity chemicals, running. Optimised mixing of fractions from the primary and secondary treatments will be studied to r each such 
objective. In addition, the homogenised sewage sludge will be hydrolysed, and fats and oils will be removed.  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
47 
  
In the specific case of WETSUS UWWTP ( NL), the sludge will be collected from secondary treatment (activated sludge), so that it will be 
explored how to keep a feedstock culture with constant activity for PHBV production. The option o f mixing secondary activated sludge from 
UWWTP with regionally sourced residual organic waste materials will also be explored. 
ITENE will visit the two participating UWWTP in Czech Republic (SMVAK) and The Netherlands (WETSUS, WBD). 
Task 3.4: Characterisation and monitoring of urban biowaste ( M1 – M44) [DS 1]. Partners Involved: ITENE, FCC, CENER, UNIMORE, VISUM, 
Madrid, CLUBE, LAZIO, Aqualia, SMVAK 
In this task all the biowaste fractions will be physically and chemically characterised for the optimisation of the compositions to be fed in 
WP4-6. A specific characterisation protocol will be developed, which will include two different types of characterisation methods: 
Subtask 3.4.1. Streamlined characterisations  (ITENE, FCC, Madrid, CLUBE, LAZIO): Streamlined characterisations made at collection points 
(households, HORECA establishments,  retailers etc.) consisting in a calculation of the biodegradable content and the type of contaminants 
and inert materials (plastics, glass, metal, etc.) contained, including t he effect of seasonal changes per month. This will serve as the basis to 
compare the improvement levels reached by the implementation of best practices in the municipalities participating in the pil ots. Such 
characterisations will exclusively apply to OFMSW and HORECA waste. 
Subtask 3.4.2. Detailed characterisations (FCC, CENER, UNIMORE, Aqualia, SMVAK): Detailed physical and chemical biowaste characterisations 
will be made at the reception point of the sorting & pre -treatment sites prior to their treatment  in WP6-8. The detailed characterisations 
apply to all the urban biowaste fractions, including OFMSW, HORECA/ROW and USS from UWWTP. In the specific case of HORECA/ROW used 
for insect rearing, the detailed characterization will be useful to understand the variability of different biomasses on insect growth rate and 
influences of insect diet on their yield. The physical and chemical parameters to be analysed for OFMSW and HORECA biowaste are: 
Type of waste Parameter Method # samples Partner 
OFMSW 
Celulose, hemicelulose, lignin (Insoluble Acid + 
Soluble Acid) and ash LAP 002 NREL 20 FCC 
Dry weight UNE-EN-ISO 18134-2:2015 20 FCC 
Ashes UNE-EN-ISO18122:2016 20 FCC 
Proteins 
Elemental analysis (factor 
6,25) UNE -EN-
ISO16948:2015 
20 FCC 
Determination of wate r insoluble solids 
insoluble solid (WIS) content  LAP method 20 FCC 
Determination of xylose D-Xylose Assay kit test 20 FCC 
Sugar and organic acid content HPLC-IR 20 CENER 
Xylose in soluble fraction Enzymatic kit 20 CENER 
HORECA 
Dry weight UNE-EN-ISO 18134-2:2015 
TBD UNIMORE 
Ashes UNE-EN-ISO18122:2016 
Proteins Kjeldahl analysis 
Lipids Soxhlet analysis 
Polyphenols Folin-Ciocalteau method 
Carbohydrates By weight difference 
SEWAGE 
SLUDGE 
Density Weigth and volume 
40 SMVAK 
Organic content  
Elemental composition Spectroscopic technics 
Biomethane potential BMP tests 
Solids content By weight difference 
Moisture By weight difference 
Task 3.5: Pilot implementation of improvements on selective collection, transport, sorting and pre-treatment (M13 – M44). Partners Involved: 
ITENE, CSCP, FCC, Madrid, LAZIO, CLUBE 
Best practices already identified within WP2 and technical improvements developed in WP3, related to the selective collection  of the 
OFMSW from households and HORE CA, will be implemented in this task during 24 months in specific neighbourhoods/areas of the pilot 
municipalities (Madrid, LAZIO, and CLUBE ) in order to improve their selective collection (ITENE, CSCP).  After those 24 months, the main 
outcome will be a factsheet for each best practice already implemented, which will include a clear description, the success case and the main 
results after the implementation in terms of quality, citizen engagement and relation with final products (bioplastics, biope sticides, food and 
feed animal). The monitoring of the implementation of those best practices will be also carried out to avoid deviations and g et the expected 
quality and quantity of biowaste targeted by WP3-6 through KPIs based on the characterisation parameters defined in Task 3.4.  
The pilots will include 2 -week visit periods  ITENE to the participating municipalities for the testing of the improvements proposed in the 
above-mentioned fields, and more specifically on: 
 City of Madrid (ES): Implementation of social  awareness best practices on collection of OFMSW (with Madrid and FCC), as well as 
sorting, pre -treatment and characterisation of OFMSW (with FCC). ITENE will seek also for the opportunities to meet the best 
requirements for the production of biopolyesters and biopesticides. 
 LAZIO (Albano, IT): Implementation of best practices for collection, transport & characterisation of OFMSW and HORECA waste 
 CLUBE (Kozani, EL): Implementation of best practices for collection, transport and characterisation of OFMSW and HORECA waste 
Deliverables 
D3.1 Most suitable technical methods that allow improved selective collection of OFMSW and HORECA waste (ITENE, FCC, LAZIO; M8) 
D3.2 Development of a metaheuristic algorithm for the logistic optimisation and reduced degradation of waste based on routes and a 
combined sensor (CH4, H2S, T) (ITENE; M20)  
D3.3 First and final Characterisation of OFSW, HORECA and sewage sludges with current systems of collection, transport, sorti ng and pre -
treatment (FCC, Aqualia, SMVAK, UNIMORE, CENER, VISUM; M6 & M42) 
D3.4. Optimised homogenization methods of OFMSW, HORECA waste, sewage sludges (Aqualia, FCC, UNIMORE; M6) 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
48 
  
D3.5: Monitoring system for the detection of unwanted fractions at the entrance of the biowaste treatment plant (VISUM; M30) 
D3.6 Best practices factsheets and performance analysis of the improved systems on selective collection, transport, sorting and pr e-
treatment during the pilot implementation in municipalities (ITENE; M44) 
 
WORK PACKAGE NUMBER  WP4 START MONTH – END MONTH M1-M46 
WORK PACKAGE TITLE Biochemical conversion of organic fraction of MSW into biodegradable polyesters and biopesticides 
PARTICIPANT NUMBER 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
SHORT NAME OF PARTICIPANT 
 
ITENE 
AERIS 
ASA 
CENER 
CLUBE 
CSCP 
EXERGY 
FCC 
G!E 
KOUR 
LAZIO 
LUND 
MADRID 
NOVAMONT 
NS 
SMVAK 
UNIMORE 
VISUM 
WBD 
WETSUS 
ZETADEC 
PERSON·MONTHS/PARTNER 20.0 24.0 21.0 101.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 10.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
TOTAL PM: 176 
Objectives: To demonstrate the biochemi cal conversion of the OFMSW in biobased and biodegradable polyesters and biopesticides  by 
enzymatic hydrolysis and fermentation processes. Validation from pilot to demo scale in an operational environment.  
 Demonstrate the production of fermentable sugars from the OFMSW in an operational environment. 
 Validate the robustness and performance of specific enzymatic cocktails prepared for OFMSW. 
 Verify an improvement of subsequent fermentation yields.  
 Validate and demonstrate the production of biobased and biodegradable polyesters from OFMSW. 
 Validate and demonstrate the production of bacterial biopesticides from the OFMSW by SSF. 
Task 4.1: Production and design of enzyme preparations (M1 – M24, Initial TRL 5/6). Partners Involved: ASA, CENER, FCC 
Subtask 4.1.1: Design and selection of enzyme cocktails for the disintegration and saccharification of OFMSW : Single enzyme cocktails as 
cellulases, hemicellulases, pectinases, amylases, proteases and lipases will be produced by ASA  at pilot scale and tested for the de gradation 
of OFMSW. Then, different combinations of the selected enzyme cocktails will be developed in order to optimize the release of  sugars from 
particular fractions of OFMSW.  
Subtask 4.1.2: Validation of selected enzyme mixtures for the treatment of OFMSW: OFMSW supplied from WP3 will be treated with enzyme 
cocktails under varied conditions. Resulting mono-, di- and oligosaccharides will be detected by HPLC.  
Subtask 4.1.3: Production of the most efficient enzyme preparations for runs and demonstration at CENER’s plant: The best enzyme cocktails 
will be produced and provided to CENER to test their efficiency at pilot scale (200 L). 
Subtask 4.1.4: Characterization of the enzyme mixtures  in terms of enzyme activity spectrum, pH and temperature activity an d stability, 
storage stability, substrate specificity, protein composition and further biochemical properties. 
Task 4.2: Enzymatic hydrolysis of the OFMSW for the production of sugars (M6 – M36, Initial TRL 6, [DS 2]). Partners Involved: CENER, AERIS, 
ASA, FCC, NOVAMONT 
The enzymatic hydrolysis process will be carried out at high solid loads (20 -25%) and demonstrated in a 3,000 L bioreactor. A liquid sugar 
enriched fraction will be separated through a series of unit processes (T4.2.3) and the recovered unhy drolysed solid fraction and other 
organic components will be split in two batches: a) processed with the urban sewage sludge (USS) in WP6 and b) used in T4.4 for SSF to produce 
biopesticides. The sugars available in the liquid fraction will be concentrated  to get a more enriched media suitable for the submerged 
fermentation processes (T4.4&ST4.4.1). 
Subtask 4.2.1. Validation of enzymatic hydrolysis at pilot scale  (CENER): Temperature, pH, agitation, residence time, enzymes and enzyme 
dosage will be validate d either at lab and bench scale. Key parameters such as soluble sugars, proteins -aminoacids, lipid-fatty acids will be 
monitored for calculating overall yields. A validation stage will be carried out at a scale of nearly 200 L.  
Subtask 4.2.2. Validation of enzymatic hydrolysis at demo scale (CENER): A complete operating process will be carried out at demo scale (up to 
3000L) using the best enzymatic cocktail supplied by T4.1. Analysis and quantification of the main parameters (described in 4 .2.1) will be 
monitored. 
Subtask 4.2.3. Downstream and upgrading of the hydrolysate (CENER, AERIS, NOVAMONT): The hydrolysate produced in the former subtasks 
will be subjected to flocculation, coagulation and concentration. Concentration of the sugars in the hydrolysate is done to obtain an enriched 
syrup guaranting significant sugar levels in the media for the further fermentation processes for biopolyesters and biopestic ides production. 
Additionally, the solid fraction will be used as feedstock for: a) SSF  to produce biopesticides (ST4.4.2), b) anaerobic co-digestion with sewage 
sludge in WP6. 
Subtask 4.2.4. Demonstration of enzymatic hydrolysis, downstream and purification and production of hydrolysate  (CENER): Operating 
conditions for these runs will be previously sele cted in ST4.2.1 and the scaling up of the process in ST4.2.2 will provide with more accurate 
information about biocatalyst behaviour at higher scales. Subtask 4.2.3 results will help to demonstrate the whole performanc e of the 
conversion process.  
Task 4.3: Fermentation into building blocks for formulation of biodegradable polyesters (M24 –48, Initial TRL 6, [DS 4]), Partners Involved: 
NOVAMONT, ITENE, CENER, ASA 
Sub-task 4.3.1. Validation of OFMSW into 1,4 bio -BDO production (NOVAMONT, CENER, M6-M24): Experimental tests will be done at pilot 
scale to validate the production of biobased 1,4 BDO by direct fermentation of sugars produced by CENER (T4.2). Fermenter volumes (from 
1L up to 100 L) will be done for validation. Feedback on potential contaminants and  inhibitors of fermentation will be provided to CENER in 
order to effectively adjust the sugars purification protocol.  
As a benchmark, commercial sugars (1st generation sugars) will be used for fermentation tests in order to compare productivit y, titter and 
yield obtained from 1st to OFMSW derived sugars. This phase will allow monitoring and analysing at pilot scale the main opera tional 
parameters and KPI before the demonstration at larger scale. Separation and purification steps of broth containing BDO ob tained from 2nd 
generation sugars will be verified and compared to that of the benchmark. Micro and nanofiltration, ion exchange will be appl ied. Type and 
concentration of (relevant) impurities in biobased monomers will be determined and compared to indust ry-references in order to identify 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
49 
  
possible deviations. Process strategies for the optimization of 2nd generation sugars preparation, fermentation and/or purifi cation and 
separation processes will be identified in order to meet demand side requirements and to guarantee high purity biobased monomers. 
Sub-task 4.3.2. Polymerization of 1,4 biobased BDO into biobased polyesters and their compounding for the targeted applications (NOVAMONT, 
M6-M30): The initial target will be focused on the optimization of the s ynthesis of biobased polyesters, starting from the bio- BDO produced 
in ST4.3.1. Hence, the evaluation will be started using a two -stage polymerization method based on transesterification and polycondensation 
comparing several catalytic systems (organometal lic compound of metals such as titanium, tin…). Di -carboxylic acids will be used in 
polycondensation reaction to synthesize polyesters and co- polyesters. Chemical-physical properties, mechanical and rheological properties, 
performances in aging, permeabili ty, biodegradability and their environmental impact will be determined. The characteristics of the bio - 
polymers obtained from the different biobased monomers will be compared to the benchmark, i.e. petrochemical based polymer. 
Polymerization conditions will be optimised (temperature, catalyst, molecular weight regulator, etc). Products will be fully characterized and 
tested. The most promising biobased polyesters will be compounded with other biobased materials to improve mechanical and thermal 
properties.  
Sub-task 4.3.3. Demonstration (NOVAMONT, M24-M48) of bio-BDO production (at 1 m3 scale) in batch mode, to demonstrate the robustness 
of the fermentation and of the downstream process at demo scale. Combination with 1st generation sugars will be also evaluated in order to define 
a proper mix based on techno -economic evaluations. The obtained bio -BDO will be then used to demonstrate the production of biobased 
polyesters and compounded polyesters. The biopolyester will be subjected to reactive extrusion with  organic and/or inorganic additives, bio- 
based polymers (e.g. starch) to obtain the right quantity and quality of biobased polymers to be validated into the targeted final applications. 
Subtask 4.3.4. Production and validation of the new biopolyesters obtained (ITENE, NOVAMONT) (M36-48): An evaluation of the processability 
of these new biopolymers and a complete characterisation of the materials will be carried out keeping in mind the requirement s of a future 
industrial scale. To validate their processabil ity, ITENE will produce films and sheets of the different formulations produced by NOVAMONT . 
One application will concern the development of biobased and biodegradable films for organic waste collection bags as well as  food 
packaging materials in view of f urther enhancing the market uptake of the new biobased and biodegradable polyesters applications. Final 
properties of the films and sheets prototypes, such as mechanical performance (tensile strength, compression strength, and pu ncture 
resistance tests), b arrier properties (Grease, OTR and WVTR), thermal resistivity and profiles by using a thermogravimetric, differential 
scanning and melt flow index equipment’s, will be evaluated. NOVAMONT  will carry out biodegradability and compostability tests of the 
developed applications according to EN13432 standard. 
Subtask 4.3.5. Food contact validation/certification (ITENE, NOVAMONT) (M36-48): The compliance with the Framework Regulation (EC) No. 
1935/2004 on materials and articles to come into contact with food will  be demonstrated. In this regard, the new polyesters will be 
evaluated according to the European Regulation (EU) No. 10/2011 on plastic materials to be in contact with foodstuff. To demo nstrate the 
inertia of the material, overall migration test of the fin al material will be performed in food simulants and selected conditions according to 
EN 1186-1:2002. The specific migration tests will be performed according to the European standard EN 13130-1:2005 and Regulation (EU) 
No. 10/2011.  
Task 4.4: Bacterial biopesticides production through fermentation (M36-M48, Initial TRL 5, [DS 2&3]) Partners involved: CENER, AERIS 
Production of bacterial biopesticide from sugar hydrolysate and part of the unhydrolysed solids through 2 different fermentat ion 
technologies (submerged & solid state) from pilot to demo plant. The activity of the biopesticide will be tested by standard toxicity bioassays on 
insects’ larvae. 
Subtask 4.4.1. Demonstration of bacterial biopesticide production through submerged fermentation (CENER): The sugar enriched hydrolysate 
produced in ST4.2.4. will be used as a carbon source to grow Bacillus thuringiensis sp. To validate the process at pilot scal e (100 L), an 
exhaustive control of the process conditions and nutrients available in the media will be done. Samples will be collected and toxicity against 
target pest analysed. After the validation at pilot scale the process will be reproduced in a 1,000 L bioreactor. Process conditions and nutrients in the 
media will be monitored. Once validated, a series of biopesticides production runs will be carried out in 1,000 L bioreactor. The biopesticide 
will be extracted from the liquid phase in the form of crystal proteins by centrifugation, separating the Bacillus thuringiensis sp spores & cells. 
Subtask 4.4.2. Demonstration of bacterial biopesticide production through solid-state fermentation (AERIS): Part of the solid fraction obtained 
after the enzymatic hydrolysis will be subjected to a SSF process. The solid organic material will be submitted to SSF in a p ilot plant that will 
be designed and developed specifically for this project. Optimal conditions of the process in terms of temperature, rate of a eration, mixing, 
etc. and best inoculation method will also be studied. A maximum rate of biopesticide producti on will be established to extract the 
biopesticide from the solid matrix by means of successive washings with Ringer solution.  
D4.1. Report on design and selection of enzymatic cocktails  (ASA, M24), optimized protocol and demonstration for the production  of sugars 
from the OFMSW by enzymatic hydrolysis (CENER, M24&36)  
D4.2. Report on optimized protocol for bio-BDO and polyester production from OFMSW sugars (NOVAMONT; M24&M30) 
D4.3. Report on demonstration trials of biopolyesters (NOVAMONT; M40) + validation trials for packaging materials (ITENE; M 36, M48) 
D4.4. Report on optimized protocol for the production of bacterial biopesticide production from OFMSW) (CENER and AERIS; M48)  
 
WORK PACKAGE NUMBER  WP5 START MONTH – END MONTH M1-M48 
WORK PACKAGE TITLE Insects to valorise organic waste from ROW   
PARTICIPANT NUMBER 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
SHORT NAME OF PARTICIPANT 
 
ITENE 
AERIS 
ASA 
CENER 
CLUBE 
CSCP 
EXERGY 
FCC 
G!E 
KOUR 
LAZIO 
LUND 
MADRID 
NOVAMONT 
NS 
SMVAK 
UNIMORE 
VISUM 
WBD 
WETSUS 
ZETADEC 
PERSON·MONTHS/PARTNER 28.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 44.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.0 0.0 42.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 30.0 
TOTAL PM: 150 
Objectives: The main objective is to obtain high-value products from Black Soldier Fly (BSF) reared on retail organic materials and OFMSW. In 
more specific terms the ways to address the above-mentioned challenge are:  
 to mass rearing insects on organic waste by optimization of pilot plant and integration of the INPUT stage for substrate preparation 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
50 
  
and the OUTPUT stage for insect treatment and stabilization.  
 to extract proteins and lipids from insects reared on organic waste by a chemical/physical approach. The extraction process will be 
developed in small scale and then will be scale up by realization of a prototype. 
 to characterize the insect substrate composition. Monitoring the quality of the substrate as source of energy and body mass. 
 to characterize the litter/compost to verify the quality of the substrate in terms of fertility elements. 
Description of work 
Task 5.1. Integration of new parts in the pilot plant (M3-M23, Initial TRL 6, [DS 5]). Partners involved: UNIMORE, Kour Energy 
The prototype of pilot plant of UNIMORE must be optimized to run with HORECA waste by adding new components : one part for automatic  
substrate preparation (INPUT stage) another for automatic treatment and stabilization of the insects at the end of process (OUTPUT stage).  
Subtask 5.1.1. Automatic preparation of substrate for rearing insect starting from organic waste  (INPUT stage) (UNIMORE, KOUR): Substrate 
preparation is crucial for insect rearing: the physical and chemical properties of substrate (density, composition, water con tent) should be 
uniform to guarantee the perfect function of the pilot plant. To ensure the optimum substrat e, a multi-step system will be developed with 
the following stages: milling, water excess removal, homogenization, automatic transportation inside the rearing pilot plant. 
 Technical specifications of the part for substrate preparation will be defined. A si mple model will be developed for calculating the 
technical parameter of the plant (actuators, sensors, electrical power, mechanical power) on the basis of the input parameters.  
 The mechanical projects of defined parts will be collected and the 3D model (d esign software Autocad Inventor) will be done. 3D 
models of the single parts will be “virtually” assembled in a single 3D project of the system. Electrical schematic will be d esigned and 
verified by using Elpan software. From these schemes the list of components will be compiled.  
 Realization of the single components and assembly and test of the components. The single components will be tested singularly . Some 
functional tests will be done on the whole assembled system and the INPUT stage part will be integrated in the pilot plant.  
Subtask 5.1.2.  Automatic system for  insect treatment and stabilization at the end of the process  (OUTPUT stage) (UNIMORE, KOUR): The 
OUTPUT stage is important to ensure the stabilization of insects. A pre- treatment is required i n order to physically separate the larvae from 
the substrate, to kill the insects and to clean the larvae from any residual of substrate (hot and cold water). These treatme nts could affect 
the fractionation process. For this reason, the general treatment and stabilization process has to be defined in collaboration with UNIMORE. 
 Definition of the technical specifications of the system on the basis of the details provided by UNIMORE.   
 Technical project of the components (mechanical and automation project) of  the insect treatment and stabilization part. The 
mechanical project and electric schematic will be done in the same way of the INPUT stage Task 5.1.1.  
 Realization of the single components and assembly and test of the components  
Task 5.2. Insect rearing on the pilot plant (M6-M42, Initial TRL 6, [DS 5]). Partners involved: Kour, UNIMORE 
Subtask 5.2.1. Insect rearing (UNIMORE, KOUR): The activity will start by using the original pilot plant of UNIMORE. Once the new integrated 
pilot plant is ready (M23), th e rearing of insects will continue in the final pilot plant. The rearing of insect will be done in an operational 
environment (UNIMORE) and the rearing conditions (humidity, temperature, feeding rate, density of larvae/cm2, mean larvae weight) will be 
optimized during the project. The larvae density (number of larvae / cm2) has to be maximise to increase the production capacity of the pilot 
plant, which depends directly on the rearing condition, the feed rate (substrate/day) and feed quantity per larva. The se two parameters will 
be optimized and compared with those reported in literature for substrates with the same composition.   
Subtask 5.2.2. Optimization of the pilot plant for rearing insect (KOUR, UNIMORE): The original pilot plant of UNIMORE for rearin g insect will 
be optimized for the conversion of organic waste material. For increasing the TRL from 6 to 7 some small components will be m odified 
during the validation in the operational environment.  
 Analysis of the pilot plant and functional tests. KOUR M6-M23  
 Optimization of the pilot plant and modification of components. KOUR M6-M42 
Task 5.3. Insect fractionation (M1-M42, Initial TRL 4, [DS 5]). Partners involved: UNIMORE, Kour, Zetadec 
Subtask. 5.3.1 Protein, lipid and chitin extraction and purificat ion (UNIMORE, Zetadec) Biomasses consisting of insect larvae will first be 
characterized. The protein content (by Kjeldahl analysis) and amino acid composition (by HPLC analysis), 77 in order to define the nutritional 
value of the protein fraction will be do ne. Based on this chemical composition, a preliminary evaluation of the properties of the biomass will 
be carried out. 
Various purification techniques will be tested on laboratory scale (max 1Kg) to identify the best procedure to apply to the n ew pilot plant. 
Lipids will be separated with organic solvents and subsequently characterized (see Task 5.3.2). A solventless approach will b e also tested. 
The residue of lipid extraction will be treated with aqueous systems (acids, bases, saline solutions, hydroalcoh olic solutions) or with enzymes 
to extract and purify the protein fraction. The insoluble residue will then be demineralized to obtain the purified chitin fraction. 
The composition of the protein fraction will be evaluated to understand its nutritional val ue in terms of essential amino acids, in order to be 
used as a high protein content supplement with high nutritional value in feed. The chitin fraction will be quantified as it r epresents an 
additional source of useful substances in several fields (e.g. fo od technologies and packaging applications). The lipids that will inevitably be a 
by-product deriving from the purification of proteins will be characterized for lipid composition by GC analysis of fatty acid m ethyl esters. 78 
We will have an evaluation of the quality of the lipids obtained, helping to define their possible use: food, feed and energy. 
Subtask 5.3.2.  Design and development of a prototype for automatic insect fractionation  (KOUR, UNIMORE) : The fractionation process 
developed by UNIMORE (Task 5.3.1) for the separation of proteins and lipids will be implemented in a prototype for automatic fractionation 
by Kour Energy. The prototype for fractionation will be designed to be industrial scalable and cost-effective.  
 Identification of the best technologies for fractionating that are both industrial scalable and comparable of those used in the lab.  
 The mechanical projects of defined parts will be done as described in tast 5.1. From the electrical schematic and the list of  components 
required the I/O list will be done and a proper controller (PLC) will be identified. The software for the automation will be developed on 
the basis of the fractionating process (reactions time, reaction steps). 
 Realization of the single components on the basis of the technical project and assembly and test of the components. 
Subtask 5.3.3. Validation of the prototype for fractionation (UNIMORE, KOUR): The prototype for fractionation will be validate by Kour Energy 
                                                                                                               
77 Food Chemistry, 121, 69-77, (2010) 
78 Food Chemistry, 121, 809-814, (2010) 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
51 
  
and UNIMORE, the output proteins and lipids of the prototype w ill be compared with those isolated in lab. On the basis of the analysis the 
prototype will be optimized during the validation and some components or some part of the automation software code will be modified. 
Task 5.4. Validation and characterization of the chitin fraction (M6-M46, Initial TRL 5, [DS 5]). Partners involved: ITENE, UNIMORE 
Subtask 5.4.1. Production and validation of chitin nanofibers/nanowhiskers as material reinforcement  (ITENE, UNIMORE): Chitin samples 
produced as byproduct in T5.3 will b e treated by chemical, enzymatic and mechanical procedures to obtain chitin nanowhiskers. Their 
chemical properties, average size (by atomic and transmission force microscopy), thermal resistance and rheology will be dete rmined as well 
as yield. The chitin nanowhiskers will be evaluated as a reinforcement material. ITENE will use developed chitin nanowhiskers to produce two 
different materials and test to define future prototypes: a) Coating materials : A polymer coated with the chitin nanofiber gel. For the  
evaluation of the processability of the coating applications different trials, will be performed with a pilot scale coater; b ) Composites 
materials: Biocomposites will be produced by extrusion cast technologies, and their main formulations will be used to  produce different 
probes by injection moulding. 
Coated materials will be studied in terms of adhesion to substrate (ISO 2409:2013 cross cut test), optical properties and oth ers, like the 
coefficient of friction (ISO 8295:1995). Injected materials main properties will be evaluated and compared with non -reinforced polyesters 
produced in WP4. Characterization will include: thermal analysis (DSC, TGA), mechanical (tensile strength, delamination, roughness…), and 
barrier properties (Grease, OTR and WVTR) of the composite films and coated materials will also be evaluated.  
Subtask 5.4.2. Production, characterization and validation of chitosan as raw material for plastic packaging (ITENE, UNIMORE): Production of 
chitin will be performed in order to obtain varying degrees of chitosan. It will be subjected to an exhaustive analysis of physicochemical (FTIR 
and SEM analyses), mechanical (tensile and dynamomechanical analyses), thermal (TGA) and barrier (grease, oxygen and water va pour 
transmission rate) properties to evaluate its quality. Different blends of chitosan with various polymers, such as PHB or PLA will be prepared. 
The biopolymers will be processed by means of pilot extrusion and/or injection equipment in function of their properties to o btain flexible 
films and/or rigid packages such as pots. The properties of the new materials will be evaluated and compared with the conventional ones. 
Evaluation of the processability of these new biopolymers and a complete characterisation of the materials including mechani cal, thermal, 
optical, antimicrobial and barrier properties will be carried out keeping in mind the requirements of a future industrial scale. 
Deliverables 
D5.1: Detailed technical documentation of the INPUT and OUTPUT stage system. UNIMORE; M25 
D5.2: Video of the working plant. UNIMORE; M38 
D5.3: Detailed technical documentation of the fractionation prototype: UNIMORE; M32 
D5.4: Report on valorisation of chitin in nanowhiskers and chitosan polymers. ITENE; M20 
 
WORK PACKAGE NUMBER  WP6 START MONTH – END MONTH M1-M48 
WORK PACKAGE TITLE Bioconversion of sewage sludge and OFMSW through biochemical and bioelectrochemical routes 
PARTICIPANT NUMBER 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
SHORT NAME OF PARTICIPANT 
 
ITENE 
AERIS 
ASA 
CENER 
CLUBE 
CSCP 
EXERGY 
FCC 
G!E 
KOUR 
LAZIO 
LUND 
MADRID 
NOVAMONT 
NS 
SMVAK 
UNIMORE 
VISUM 
WBD 
WETSUS 
ZETADEC 
PERSON·MONTHS/PARTNER 18.0 14.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 35.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 64.0 0.0 0.0 14.5 43.0 0.0 
TOTAL PM: 188.5 
Objectives: This WP proposes a “s tart to end” valorisation process where feeds are majorly pre -conditioned in WP3 to obtain ready -to-use 
products. Two prototypes will be built to demonstrate the feasibility to obtain high -value products from raw biowastes (OFMSW and USS). 
This process wil l be validated in prototypes operated in three demonstration sites: MSW ( DS 1, ES) and USS ( DS 6 (CZ) and 7 (NL)). Special 
attention will be given to the key operation parameters and system design for the production of target valuable end -products to be adapted 
at DSs. Specific objectives of WP6 are: 
 Scale up from pilot plants to demo level of units based on BES and biochemical treatment of USS 
 Design, construction and integration of the demo plants 
 Overall process operation, optimization and validation at DSs 1, 6 and 7 
Task 6.1: Pre-treatment techniques evaluation (M01 – M12). Partners Involved: SMVAK 
Pre-treatment of sewage sludge is necessary to break- down complex molecules into simple monomers, to increase solubilization of organic 
material and improve  the efficiency of the following anaerobic step. The selected homogenization and pre- treatment procedures in WP3, 
will be evaluated in Task 6.1. Proposed pre-treatment will be tested with raw materials and mixtures defined in WP3, whose feasibility will be 
evaluated and optimized at prototype scale. Biodegradability tests of single and mix substrates will be also performed as a b asic tool to 
determine possible undesirable inhibitory or toxic effects and establish appropriate load, feed mixtures ratios and o peration conditions to be 
used at prototype scale at DS  1 (ES), 6 (CZ), and 7 (NL). Additional pre -conditioning actions will be carried out with USS, which will be 
partitioned to improve its valorisation in SCALIBUR. Fats, oil and grease waste present in w astewater (currently disposed in landfill) will be 
separated in this task to be valorised in Task 6.2 as cosubstrate in the advanced anaerobic bioconversion step.  
Task 6.2: Sewage sludge advanced anaerobic conversion (M07 – M24, Initial TRL 5, DS 1 & 6). Partners Involved: SMVAK, AERIS 
Subtask 6.2.1. Design and construction of prototypes  (M7 – M11, SMVAK, AQUA, Aeris) of the  SCALIBUR prototype for the anaerobic 
bioconversion of sewage sludge into high -value compounds. It will include the engineering of the  anaerobic reactor and the design of fluid 
flow system including flow meters, pumps, valves, pipe work feed and receipt vessel (if needed), as well as the implementatio n of the 
automation and control system. Optimized design of advanced anaerobic digestion  with pre -treatments/homogenization to maximize 
products yield and quality will be done. Mechanical stress and chemical resistance test will be performed for each component of the 
prototype to assure the optimal construction and performance. Several partne rs will participate ( SMVAK, AQUA, Aeris) to assure a properly 
functioning prototype, with an innovative process for the collection, conditioning and feed of the pre -treated materials to the advanced 
anaerobic step. Validation tests will be carried out with  USS collected from other sites, including the addition of other residual materials to 
enhance the process performance. Prototypes will be erected in DS s 1&6, where the whole process (homogenization, pretreatment, 
bioconversion and downstreams) will be ope rated. Feed and the resulting fractions (liquid, solid and gas) upon anaerobic step will be 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
52 
  
monitored and available to be subsequently treated in cascade downstream to fulfil the quality standard of the end-products targeted.  
Subtask 6.2.2. Installation and start-up of integral process (M12 – M14, SMVAK, AQUA, Aeris): The SCALIBUR prototype will be installed and 
operated in the facilities at DS  1 (FCC), to be completed and deployed at month 12, and 6 ( SMVAK). The reception of the integral system 
including all the elements of the prototype will be accordingly adapted. T he advanced anaerobic bioconversion prototype unit will also 
include instrumentation and other additional equipment, together with a dewatering unit that allows the solid -liquid fractions separation in 
order to fulfil the standards defined for the subsequent downstream, required to obtain target end-products.  
Subtask 6.2.3. Operation and optimization of pre -treatment and anaerobic bioconversion performance (M15 – M24, AERIS, AQUA, SMVAK): 
Long-term performance of the SCALIBUR prototype will be assessed under real conditions. On the other hand, actions to implement different 
methods for securing the long -term homogeneity (proposed in WP3) of the feed will be applied. Operation strategies will be explored in 
order to expand the flexibility of the system, and facilitate transformation of pre -treated sewage sludge into target end -products. Evaluation 
will be carried out by AQUA with the local support from SMVAK  at DS 6.  Initially, optimization of t he prototype will be performed in batch 
mode. After that, mixtures with greater potential will be continuously fed to optimize the physical and biological units in the integral process. 
During the bioconversion process, LCFA and VFA accumulation will be co ntrolled to assure a stable process performance. The remote 
monitoring and control functionalities will facilitate the process monitoring and resolution of possible problems. 
Additional actions will be carried out focused on fats, oil and grease separation  and used as co -substrate to enhance the efficiency of the 
SCALIBUR solution and the resulting products. The separation process (chemicals dose, reaction time, mixing rates, etc.) and mixtures ratios 
will be optimized. The advanced anaerobic bioconversion process will be adapted to assimilate new sources of biowastes. 
Both installations in Spain and Czech Republic will be characterized by in -depth analysis of energy consumption, chemicals consumption, 
bioconversion rate and extension, for the production of target end-products.  
T6.3. Bioconversion of steering CO2 fermentation with bioelectrochemical systems (BES) (M1 – M36, Initial TRL 5, demos sites 1 & 6). Partners 
involved: AQUA, FCC, Aeris, ITENE, SMVAK 
Subtask 6.3.1. BES prototypes design and construction for bioconversion of OFMSW (DS 1) and USS (DS 6) into high-value compounds (M01 – 
M09, AQUA, SMVAK, Aeris) will be done. Prototype design will include the engineering of the whole BES prototype with pre- treatment and 
the design of fluid flow system. Mec hanical stress and chemical resistance test will be performed for each component of the prototype to 
ensure the optimal construction and performance. All partners involved in this task will participate to ensure the design of a properly 
functioning prototy pe. AQUA will provide a BES unit including instrumentation for process monitoring. Aeris will collaborate in the 
adaptation of the current process for biogas collection and conditioning to be fed into the BES prototype. If necessary due t o impurities of 
the gas, AQUA, SMVAK and FCC will provide the required pre-treatment steps previous to the BES.  
Subtask 6.3.2. Development of microorganisms inoculum pre -culture (M10 – M33) AQUA: In order to accelerate the start -up of the BES 
prototype, AQUA will provide a n enriched and highly -active inoculum of bioelectrogenic consortium. AQUA will collaborate with the 
University of Girona as subcontractors, where existing bench scale facilities are available, and have demonstrated the feasib ility of the 
process proposed i n previous R&D joint actions. This ensures the source of ready -to-use inoculum in case of destabilization of the BES 
prototypes. In addition, this strategy will facilitate the selectivity towards the production of target compounds with the different feeds. 
Subtask 6.3.3. Installation and start -up of integral BES process  (M10 – M12, M22 – M24) AQUA: The BES prototype will be installed and 
operated in the facilities provided by FCC ( DS 1) and SMVAK (DS 6), which are responsible of the preparation of the DSs for the reception of 
the integral system including the BES prototype. The BES prototype will be completed and deployed at month 12 (DS 1) and 24 (DS 6). 
Subtask 6.3.4. Operation and optimization of BES prototypes performance (M13 – M21, M25 – M33) SMVAK: Long-term performance of the 
BES prototype will be assessed and stability of microorganisms’ biofilm will be also monitored. On the other hand, actions to  implement 
different methods for securing the long-term homogeneity of the transport properties of the e lectrodes will be applied. Operation strategies 
will be explored in order to avoid adverse clogging effects by the biofilm. Evaluation will be carried out by AQUA. FCC and SMVAK will provide 
local support at DS s. The main parameters that will be analyzed are pH, cathode potential, partial pressure of CO 2, and application of feast -
famine conditions. The partners involved will prepare technology transfer documents and safety assessment, in coordination with WP8. 
Subtask 6.3.5. Evaluation of prototype performa nce, products quality and suitability for bioplastics production  (M16 – M21, M28 – M33, 
SMVAK, FCC): DSs 1&6 will be characterized by in -depth analysis of carbon and electron balances, and the energy requirements for the 
production processes using CO 2 from the two selected sources. The CO 2 conversion rates, and the resulting product spectrum will be 
investigated to identify the process limiting factors, and improve the overall performance. Energy and chemical requirements will be 
determined. CAPex and OPex studies will be compared with state -of-the-art OFMSW valorization ways. Special attention will be given to the 
key parameters and system design for the production of valuable organics such as long chain fatty acids and alcohols. The con sortium will 
build a prototype to demonstrate the feasibility of BES to obtain high-value products. This study will be replicated in two demonstration sites 
for the sake of comparison and validation in different scenarios (CZ and ES), the quality of the resulting effluent fro m SCALIBUR will be fully 
assessed in order to guarantee that it accomplishes with the requirements of target compounds standards as end -product and raw material 
for further polishing. CAPex and OPex studies will be compared with state-of-the-art OFMSW and USS valorisation ways. 
Task 6.4. PHBV production from sewage sludge (M1–M48, Initial TRL 5, DS 7). Partners involved: WETSUS, WBD, ITENE 
Surplus full -scale activated sludge for biomass supply and regionally available liquid fraction of fermented OFMSW will  be used as the 
substrate. The biomass will be accumulated in bi -weekly batch production campaigns to yield PHA at 100 to 200 gPHA/batch in PHA -rich 
biomass. The batch-to-batch materials will be dried, assessed as a “semi-product”, assembled and master batched. The master batched PHA-
rich biomass will be purified to nominally 98 % pure polymers.  
Subtask 6.4.1. Production process design, construction and commissioning WETSUS, WBD (M1-12): Facility and infrastructure for processing 
raw materials (activated s ludge and regional organic biowaste from municipal will be realized and implemented. This facility will include 
process steps of acidogenic fermentation, PHA -accumulation, biomass drying, and polymer solvent extraction. The goal is to establish a 
production line and to manage and handle materials within a relevant up-scalable context. Especially, previous experience of PHARIO piloting 
polymer recovery will be applied and advanced to bring the polymer recovery methods from TRL 4 to 6. 
Subtask 6.4.2. Biopolymer Production Campaign I (Operation and Tuning) WETSUS, WBD (M12-24): The process will be brought into a mode or 
routine operation and polymer production. Variability of process and raw material quality will be monitored towards defining and tuning 
process with respect to influence on production efficiency and product quality, with a goal to produce between 8-16 kg of product. Materials will 
be supplied to the downstream T6.5  partners for preliminary evaluations and collaboration on questions of quality wit h respect to the 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
53 
  
product end use. 
Subtask 6.4.3. Biopolymer Production Campaign II (Products for Downstream Developments)  WETSUS, WBD (M24-30): Based on the results 
and experience of T6.4.2, the facility should now be operated as a production facility from  raw materials to semi-products to polymers. This 
period of operation should define the achieved TRL and the current state of the art for product and product quality control. It is the goal 
during this period that between 4 and 8 kg of PHA as product be produced for T6.5.3 critical downstream evaluations. 
Subtask 6.4.4. Production Optimisation and Value Engineering (Innovating for Scale up)  WETSUS, WBD (M30-36): Subsequent to anticipated 
critical goal -oriented evaluations of materials from T6.4.3, the proce ss will be evaluated with an eye for improving performance and 
economics with respect to questions of production efficiency and product quality. Since the recovery process is known to repr esent the 
greatest burden for investment, a principal objective will  be to evaluate innovative ways to reduce recovery costs and achive economy of 
scale. This will be done in a value engineering approach in cooperation through a subcontract with an engineering contractor with 
experience in designing solvent extraction plants. It is also the goal during this period that between 4 to 8 kg PHA will again be produced. 
Task 6.5. Evaluation of products quality for biopolymer production (M30 – M36). Partners involved: ITENE, WETSUS, AQUA, FCC 
Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) will be obtained from sewage sludge within the process performed at Wetsus facilities. Bioplastic composition 
and properties of both tasks will be assessed to validate its suitability for future uses.  
 Production and evaluation as raw materials for plastic: A full characterization of the new biobased polyesters will be performed to select 
best grades for producing the packaging product prototypes. To validate their processability, ITENE will process the biopolymers by 
means of pilot extrusion and/or injection equipm ent in function of their properties to obtain blow films and/or rigid packag es such as 
cups of the different formulations produced by Wetsus. 
 Food contact validation/certification of developed biomaterials: The compliance with the Framework Regulation (EC)  No. 1935/2004 on 
materials and articles to come into contact with food will be demonstrated for the new packaging materials, as decribed in Task 4.3.5. 
Deliverables 
D6.1 – Final design of the two prototypes and pilot at TRL7 (SMVAK; M20) 
D6.2 – Validation results at the DSs in Czech republic (a) and Spain (b) (SMVAK; M36) 
D6.3 – Report on feasibility bioconversion of OFMSW into high-value products by bioelectrochemical systems (SMVAK, M30) 
D6.4 – Operational conditions to obtain high-value products from sewage sludge (SMVAK, WETSUS; M18) 
D6.5 – Validation of the suitability for bioplastics production and uses as packaging material (ITENE; M36) 
 
WORK PACKAGE NUMBER  WP7 START MONTH – END MONTH M1-M48 
WORK PACKAGE TITLE SCALIBUR interactive stakeholder platform  
PARTICIPANT NUMBER 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
SHORT NAME OF PARTICIPANT 
 
ITENE 
AERIS 
ASA 
CENER 
CLUBE 
CSCP 
EXERGY 
FCC 
G!E 
KOUR 
LAZIO 
LUND 
MADRID 
NOVAMONT 
NS 
SMVAK 
UNIMORE 
VISUM 
WBD 
WETSUS 
ZETADEC 
 
PERSON·MONTHS/PARTNER 5.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 0.0 2.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 1.0 0.0 2.0 0.0 0.0 69.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
TOTAL PM: 85 
Objectives: During this WP, we will leverage the SMAC Technology stack (Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) to design and build an 
interactive Cloud Platfor m that will allow the integration of data streams and specific user -oriented modules that is readily accessible over 
the web and mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets. The functionalities and information given, as well as a user -friendly interface, 
will be tailored to the different levels of internal and external stakeholders, such as citizens/consumers, waste generators and managers, 
users of bioproducts and policy makers. It will be used for facilitating quadruple helix stakeholder engagement, p romoting social innovation, 
showcasing project data from the pilots, creating and demonstrating new business models for high -value biobased products derived from 
urban biowaste, promoting the new technologies, increasing awareness, showing the project tech nical and social impacts, or providing best 
practices and policy recommendations for project replicability. 
To achieve this objective, a number of modules will be developed and integrated to allow quadruple helix stakeholders to have access to an 
“all-in-one” environment for the implementation of sustainable urban biowaste valorisation into new bio -based products. The work will be 
carried out according to “ SCRUM” and Test -Driven Development (TDD) Agile methodologies , which have been successfully exploited b y 
VISUM for developing other complex software platforms for waste management and circular economy, such as in the Sharebox proj ect 
(http://sharebox-project.eu/) or the Agrocycle project (http://www.agrocycle.eu/). As a programming methodology oriented to c ode 
“reliable-by-design” software, TDD is particularly necessary for efficiently developing “almost-bug-free” large software Cloud platforms.  
Task 7.1: Definition of the Cloud Architecture (M1 – M12). Partners Involved: VISUM, ITENE, CSCP, NS, MADRID, LAZIO, CLUBE, Lund, FCC 
During this task, we will define the User Requirements of the Platform. Scoping sessions will be organised with a focus group  that will be 
recruited from the relevant quadruple helix internal and external representatives. We will use a selection of methodologies to establish the 
user requirements, specifications and features, functionality and desired User Experience. The first meetings of the Urban Bi owaste Clubs 
will also allow for co-designing the main characteristics of the smart modules of the SCALIBUR stakeholder platform (T7.2). An in-depth analysis 
of existing technologies will be performed to find out which are the ones that best match the requirements for each functionalit y. Based on 
the results of the scoping sessions, the in -depth architecture (backend, middleware, intelligence, database, etc: layers structures) will be 
defined for the SCALIBUR Cloud Platform. The architecture has to be flexible in terms of single -tenant or multi -tenant deployment, 
guaranteeing that it is abl e to highly perform when running the intelligence layer. Therefore, it will be designed how to address the 
envisaged computational workload and established how all the modules will work and seamlessly interact. Particular importance will be given to 
establish software quality measures prior to commencing the platform development work. A Quality Analysis (QA) methodology will be in 
place (in keeping with software quality management: ISO 9126 -3 and the subsequent ISO 25000:2005 quality model) to ensure consis tent 
and standardised implementation. As such, a set of metrics and key performance indicators will be fixed to be used to validat e the quality of 
the software. According to sued agile methodologies, all the individual tasks defined will include Unit or Fu nctional Tests. The outcome of 
this task will fuel D7.1.  
Task 7.2: Development of the different smart modules of the SCALIBUR interactive stakeholder platform (M6 – M48) Partners Involved: VISUM, 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
54 
  
ITENE, CSCP, NS, MADRID, LAZIO, CLUBE, Lund, FCC  
Information on the do's and dont's of the (full ) integration of the upgraded urban biowaste value chain into the existing local 
waste/wastewater management schemes , derived from actions in T2.2, will be integrated in the stakeholder platform to provide 
transparency and make data available for the waste generators, which are the key actors providing the new biowaste fractions for the 
innovative treatment processes. Like this, they will be able to check the results of their actions (new added value products from urban  
biowaste) thanks to the innovative waste management at the source. The different modules defined in the previous task for eg. tracking of 
data and action effects, communication, marketplace, mapping, etc., will be defined in terms of inputs and outputs an d processing 
requirements, involving a data scientist when necessary. In particular, but not limited to, the following modules will be inc luded in the 
SCALIBUR platform: 
 Quadruple-helix engagement modules at local level: Specific modules will be created to facilite engagement with the communities where 
the three pilots will take place, each one in the local languages, as well as for the best performing territory that will ser ve as model, 
informing about the performance of the local waste management. The mod ule will also contain interactive questionnaires/ 
experiments/games and tools for methodology evaluation (WP2). 
 New processing technologies modules: Data and news regarding the new technologies will be shared and visualised to promote their 
further uptake. Models from WP3 will also be integrated and accessible by the cities and other users to test further optimisation scenarios. 
 New high-value biobased products modules: The new business models created for each produced biobased product will be integrated 
and a market place will be made available for promoting the new products sales. 
 Social innovation module: Social innovations achieved at each of the communities will be shared and showcased as a way to promote 
the return of value to each community, in the spirit of the very definition of circular economy, and their replicability.  
 Awareness raising module: Product acceptability will be sought through this interactive module. The results obtained in WP8 in relation 
to the environmental impacts, economic benefi ts, social impacts, regulatory issues, etc., will be shared for increased transparency and 
awareness raising in the use of biobased products. 
 National and European engagement module: The results of the application of best practices in each of the pilots wi ll be shared in the 
form of interactive factsheets, as obtained in WP3 for each one of the pilots, to promote replicability.  
Task 7.3. Development of the Backend (M10 – M48). Partners involved: VISUM, ITENE, CSCP, NS, MADRID, LAZIO, CLUBE, Lund, FCC  
This task involves backend programming activities (coding) to implement the architecture defined in Task 7.1. The work will be bro ken down 
into backlogs that will be developed in Sprints of typically 2 to 3 weeks in duration. A data warehouse will be developed  to store, integrate, 
retain and process results for data gathered by the waste managers and other stakeholders along the value chain. The source i nformation 
will be analysed in terms of source data structure, connection methods and data gathering strategy  required (either access to existing 
databases, import or import and synchronisation). Validation documents with unit tests will be created to ensure that data ar e correctly 
accessed/imported/synchronised. Based on this analysis, data models will be designed to store new information. A cloud web server with the 
INPUT API will be running and ready to receive data and it will be verified that new stored data fits the validation document  and that unit 
tests are working successfully. After passing the INPUT API , the data gathered will flow between the different layers of the architecture 
before reaching the database, where it will be stored. 
Task 7.4. Development of the Front-end (M10 – M48). Partners involved: VISUM, ITENE, CSCP, NS, MADRID, LAZIO, CLUBE, Lund, FCC 
This task also involves programming activities (coding), as well as graphical design and User Experience, both for PC -based and Mobile based 
GUI for each level of users. Screenshots or ‘mock ups’ of User Interface concepts will be made available to the consortium for discussion and 
approval prior to front-end coding. The front-end will be designed to be gender inclusive. 
Task 7.5. Software integration (M15 – M48). Partners involved: VISUM, ITENE, CSCP, NS, MADRID, LAZIO, CLUBE, Lund, FCC 
This task will involve the integration of the different modules, front end and back end as will have been defined in the architecture 
established in Task 7.1. As such, our Scrum Teams of developers will discuss backlogs with the relevant partners so that codi ng work can be 
executed. Again, according to the Scrum Methodology, backlogs will be developed in iterative Sprints each ending with a demo to the parties 
concerned.  
Task 7.6. Testing and Optimisation work (M18 – M48). Partners involved: VISUM, ITENE, CSCP, NS, MADRID, LAZIO, CLUBE, Lund, FCC 
According to established QA, Functional Testing followed by Non -Functional Testing will be carried out. A test environment that virtually 
simulates will be built for debugging and validating the functionalities of the SCALIBUR C loud Platform. The Simulator will allow testing 
automatically the main modules as standalone units as well as the whole system in defined cases study. The Simulator is consi dered an 
internal development tool which will not be delivered but finished and use d according to the specific schedule for the programming work. 
Each platform release will be run through a series of regression tests (system, performance, etc.) to detect undiscovered or developer -
introduced defects, and will involve cloud assessment, moving of data, moving of applications, leveraging the cloud (improved security etc.) and 
optimization.  
An online User Manual will be delivered, along with online tutorials. Furthermore, during the last year, a training workshop will allow 
introducing in liv e the platform more in depth to different users especially in terms of its smart modules such as multi actor optimisation 
modelling tools whereby practical cases will be covered at the Urban Biowaste Clubs. 
Deliverables: 
D7.1 Architecture for the SCALIBUR Cloud Platform including planed quality measures (VISUM; M10)  
D7.2 SCALIBUR Platform Alpha release (VISUM; M22)  
D7.3 SCALIBUR Platform Online User Manual and result of quality testing (VISUM; M32)  
D7.4 SCALIBUR Platform Beta release (VISUM; M47) 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
55 
  
 
WORK PACKAGE NUMBER  WP8 START MONTH – END MONTH M1-M48 
WORK PACKAGE TITLE Environmental, techno-economic, social impacts and safety Assessment 
PARTICIPANT NUMBER 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
SHORT NAME OF PARTICIPANT 
 
ITENE 
AERIS 
ASA 
CENER 
CLUBE 
CSCP 
EXERGY 
FCC 
G!E 
KOUR 
LAZIO 
LUND 
MADRID 
NOVAMONT 
NS 
SMVAK 
UNIMORE 
VISUM 
WBD 
WETSUS 
ZETADEC 
 
PERSON·MONTHS/PARTNER 37.5 1.0 1.0 20.0 1.5 0.0 38.0 2.0 2.0 1.0 2.0 0.0 1.0 5.0 10.0 2.0 4.0 3.0 1.0 0.0 1.0 
TOTAL PM: 133 
Objectives: To assess environmental, techno -economic, social impacts and safety aspects of SCALIBUR processes . The approach used will 
follow the findings and methologies proposed by STAR-ProBio (Sustainability Transition Assessment and Research of Bio -based Products) 
funded under H2020 BBI-01-2016: Sustainability schemes for the bio-based economy. The overall sustainability assessment will integrate the 
synergies and trade-offs of the project, and will present the information complementing that produced in STAR- ProBio project, including the 
democases based on biowaste to bioproducts supply chains. Specific objectives are: 
 deliver an environmental and techno-economic evaluation of the whole SCALIBUR processes.  
 report on the potential contribution to renewable energy and GHG emission reduction targets derived from SCALIBUR implementation 
 report on social benefits (such as the creation of highly skilled jobs, social innovation, urban biowaste management in citie s, and the 
policy implications and recommendations) will be carried out. 
 Safety and regulatory assements for all products produced. 
 Demonstrate sustainability of the developed processes. 
Task 8.1: Definitions, settings and system description (M1-M16). Partners Involved: ITENE, All 
T8.1 will provide the goal and scope of the assessment as well as all initial settings, including technological parameters, for inputing T8.2 to 8.8. 
 Information on current collection, transport and final disposal  of the OFMSW, USS and HORECA and ROW in the pilot municipalities, as 
compiled in WP2. LCA of the selective collection for these fractions will be done with information from all partners.  
 A LCA of SCALIBUR supply chains  requires data of the full lifecycle of biobased products production, which will include all the necessary 
steps, from cradle-to-grave, for the production and final use of the biobased products in corresponding applications. The lifecycle may 
consist, depending on the specific scenario, of the following steps: feedstock generation, transportation modes, conversion p rocess to 
intermediate feedstocks, transportation to plant, processing, bio -based product transportation & distribution / use. When specific data 
gaps have been identified, suitable proxies will be selected and used. 
 ITENE and CENER will prepare and send to all partners guidelines and templates for data collection. They will carry out the collection of 
the main information related to the LCA of the processes developed within WP4 -6. Afterwards, they will produce qualitative process 
flow diagrams (PFDs) of SCALIBUR supply chains. 
 After that, ITENE and CENER will build the life cycle of current and new management systems. Results obtained from the life cycle analysis in 
terms of GHG emissions for the current disposal of the organic solid waste, will be used to compar e the current situation with the 
valorisation processes developed during SCALIBUR, which will define the baseline for sustainability assessment on environmental, economic & 
social issues.  
Task 8.2: Modelling and integration of the SCALIBUR process (M1 – M48). Partners Involved: EXERGY, all 
T8.2 will integrate the three processes developed in WPs4 -6 into one process. The overall concept will be demonstrated through simulations 
by using commercial software (AspenOne \  SuperPro). The objective of this task is  also to prove the technical, and later economic feasibility 
of the SCALIBUR concept in order to progress towards future commercialization of the process. A detailed flowsheet will be pr epared which 
will be used as the basis of process simulation once proc ess data has been collected from the previous work packages. Each individual 
module from Wps4-6 will be simulated separately first. Integration of all three modules (where possible) into one process will be followed. 
The process parameters in the integrated model will be optimized and the heat & mass balance will be carried out. The simulation results will 
allow the comparison between theoretical and empirical data (from the pilot / demo plants), which will provide an insight int o process 
equipment design, and will be beneficial for future development such as pilot / demo plants trouble shooting and sensitivity studies. A 
potential scale -up case study, an industrial scale simulation model and basic engineering for the main equipment and streams will be 
described. The outcome of this task will be used to evaluate the environmental and economic impacts of the project in terms of ene rgy and 
mass streams.  
Task 8.3: Techno-economic assessment of the processes (M1 – M48). Partners Involved: EXERGY, all 
This task will analyze and optimize, where possible, the economic feasibility of the proposed process and the different biobased product s on 
the outputs from previous WPs and the process simulation results from T8.2. The results of the techno -economic assessment will  be 
assessed through a sensitivity analysis as well as a risk analysis (which will identify favorable and non -favorable scenarios, such as price 
variations in the market) in order to determine potential hot spots in the process which can affect the feasibi lity of the technology and to 
determine if it is better to commercialize the process as a whole or in modules. The TEA will also provide sufficient informa tion to compare 
the proposed process with current solutions from an economic perspective by using met hods such as cost -benefit analysis and discounted 
cash flow, and by determining information such as cost of production and minimum sell price.  
Task 8.4: Environmental Life Cycle Assessment (M4 – M48). Partners Involved: CENER, ITENE, NOVAMONT 
Environmental impacts associated with the value chains identified in T8.1 in comparison to their reference systems will be evaluated and 
periodically updated along the project. The environmental sustainability assessment will follow the next approach: 
 Identification of environmental impacts to be considered. According to processes/technologies studied in this project, highly relevant 
environmental impacts that will be evaluated in detail are: fossil energy consumption and GHG emissions.  
 Definition of indicators and methodologies to evaluate environmental sustainability criteria of the environmental impacts.  
 References for the definition of sustainability methodologies include Guidelines of ISO 14040/14044 on product life cycle assessment, 
RED Directive (including subsequent ILUC Directive, and future RED II Directive); Standards and criteria established by Working Group 4 
“Sustainability criteria, life cycle analysis and related issues” of CEN/TC 411 “Bio-based products”. 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
56 
  
 Evaluation of environmental sustainability  of t he supply chains developed in the project by LCA methodology. The LCAs will be 
performed using dedicated software (SIMAPRO) and the Ecoinvent database. 
 Sensitivity analysis, to identify key points & assess sustainability results changes by modifying proces ses/products parameters and/or 
methodologies.  
 Updates of sustainability assessments, according to future modifications on processes/products considered in the project. 
 The LCAs will be performed using dedicated software  (e.g. SIMAPRO software) and the Eco invent database for a selected set of raw 
material (urban biowaste)/production process/product, taking into account use and disposal or re-use, i.e. ‘from cradle-to-grave’. 
Results will be interpreted and presented to the partners, who will work in the def inition of strategies to minimize the environmental 
impacts of the developed processes. CENER will conduct the LCAs for WP4, while ITENE will carry out the LCAs related to WPs5&6. 
Task 8.5: Social evaluation (M4 – M48). Partners Involved: ITENE, all 
The social analysis of the final products assesses the social and socio -economic aspects of materials or processes and their potential positive 
and negative impacts along their life cycle. These aspects assessed in are those that may directly or indirectly affec t stakeholders, including 
workers, local community, consumers, value chain actors and society. SLCA also follows a life cycle approach, but the impacts  in this case are 
related to socio-economic processes and comprise human rights, working conditions, heal th and safety, socio-economic repercusion, and so 
forth. This task is intimately related with T2.4, where the project impact will be analysed. 
Therefore, social analysis will be focused on the acceptance of SCALIBUR concept by users and citizens. Initially  ITENE and CENER with the 
collaboration of the partners will develop the list of indicators, based on the UNEP -SETAC guidelines on SLCA, to be taken into account in the 
social analysis. Based on these indicators, questionnaires will be prepared and sent to  the partners as well as citizens of municipalities 
involved in the SCALIBUR project. The questionnaires will also be available at the interactive SCALIBUR stakeholder platform (WP7) and 
promoted through the project communication actions (WP9) so as to rea ch wider audiences. Information will be compiled, analysed and 
modelled with a view to obtain the SLCA models, which will be periodically updated. Finally, results will be interpreted and presented to the 
partners, and definition and discussion of strategies to improve the social viability and consumer/social acceptance will be done. 
Task 8.6: Safety assessment (M4 – M48). Partners Involved: NS, all 
The presence of mycotoxins and pesticides in project outcomes will be measured by chromatographic methods. LC /MS methods will be 
applied for the detection of common mycotoxins and GC -MS multi-residue method will be applied for determination of the main classes of 
pesticides found in the resulting products in WPs4 -6. The presence of antibiotics will also be measur ed by LC/MS and GC/MS. The presence 
of Salmonella and Enterobacteriaceae, E. coli and Enterococcus and heavy metals (As, Pb, Hg) will be determined as well. 
Task 8.7: Regulatory assessment (M1 – M48). Partners Involved: UNIMORE, NS, all 
T8.7.1 Legal support in authorisation procedures and in any other task of the project  (M1-M48). The legal unit will  overview the applicable 
provisions, in order to offer support to the technical units in obtaining or extending the required administrative authorisat ion for re search 
on byproducts and waste. Legal advice will be provided in any issue that will arise during the whole project performance. 
T8.7.2 Waste and byproducts: legal aspects  (M1-M5). Desk research on the EU provisions on waste and byproducts will be carried out, 
through the study of binding acts, soft law, case law and literature, in order to understand how the EU provisions cope with the international 
framework and how EU Member States have implemented supranational law (Antonini -Andreozzi, 2012; Benozzo, 20 13; Alabrese, 2014;). 
Differences among legislations that could hinder the implementation of the research results will be pointed out. The results will help to 
evaluate the opportunity to submit a proposal for an EU Regulation on waste. 
T8.7.3 Insect rearing: legal aspects (M6-M10). Through a desk research the unit will collect all the EU useful provisions that could apply to 
insect farming but that were adopted for other animals, in order to evaluate their suitability for this new type of farming. Aims of the task 
are identifying the weak points of the existing provisions and suggesting some improvements in a regulatory draft. 
T8.7.4 Products from biowaste: legal aspects (M21- M42).  
For all the bio -based products obtained in SCALIBUR value chains: bioplast ics, biopesticides, compounds for food and feed, and other 
compounds from insects, an overview of the EU and national legislation will be analysed. Amending proposals will be suggested , with the 
aim of improving EU and national laws, taking into account the development of new technologies. 
T.8.7.5 Use of compounds originated from insects in food  (M16-M20). The novel food Regulation and the subsequent implementing 
Regulations of December 2017, as well as literature and possible case law, will be analysed in order to understand the legal status of 
compounds originated from insects. Notification and authorisation procedures will be monitored.  
T.8.7.6 Use of compounds originated from insects in feed (M21-M23). According to the technical research that will be ca rried out, the legal 
units will offer support in investigating the applicable provisions on the use of insects in feed and submitting a possible a pplication for 
amending the EU feed catalogue. Case law and academic contributions will be taken into account. 
T.8.7.7 Other uses of compounds originated from insects  (M27-M32). The last part of the investigation will focus on other possible uses of 
compounds originated from insects and on applicable provisions. Amending proposals will be suggested, with the aim o f improving EU and 
national laws, taking into account the development of new technologies.  
T.8.7.8 Bioplastics (M33-M39). An overview of the applicabile provisions on bioplastics will be carried out in order to obtain a complete 
framework on the topic. This will allow to support any involved units in carrying out their activities. 
T.8.7.9 Biopesticides (M40-M44). A deep investigation on the provisions applicable to pesticides will be performed, in order to evaluate the 
suitability of the products obtained to be placed on the market.  
T.8.7.10 Enzymes (M45-48). The regulatory framework on the use of enzymes in industrial processing other than the food ones will be 
investigated in order to understand if it limits in any way the project outcomes. 
Task 8.8: Sustainability assessment (M1 – M48). Partners Involved: ITENE, all 
This task is focused on an integrated analysis of the results obtained in the environmental, economic and social study, to bu ild a complete 
sustainability assessment. Comparative analysis will be done between the initial disposal of urban biowaste and the final valorisation processes. 
Deliverables 
D8.1. Life cycle definition and description (ITENE, M16) 
D8.2. First sustainability report: Environmental, Economic and Social LCA (ITENE; M24) 
D8.3. Techno-economic analysis of the SCALIBUR value chains (EXERGY; M48) 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
57 
  
D8.4. Environmental Life Cycle Assessment (CENER; M42) 
D8.5. Social Life Cycle Assessment (ITENE; M48) 
D8.6. Safety Assessment (NS; M48) 
D8.7. Regulatory Assessment (UNIMORE; M48) 
D8.8. Sustainability Assessment (ITENE; M48) 
D8.9. Simulation of the system and Heat & mass balance (EXERGY; M48) 
 
WORK PACKAGE NUMBER  WP9 START MONTH – END MONTH M1-M48 
WORK PACKAGE TITLE Communication, Dissemination and Awareness raising 
PARTICIPANT NUMBER 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
SHORT NAME OF PARTICIPANT 
 
ITENE 
AERIS 
ASA 
CENER 
CLUBE 
CSCP 
EXERGY 
FCC 
G!E 
KOUR 
LAZIO 
LUND 
MADRID 
NOVAMONT 
NS 
SMVAK 
UNIMORE 
VISUM 
WBD 
WETSUS  
 
 
PERSON·MONTHS/PARTNER 3.0 1.0 1.0 7.0 4.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 19.0 2.0 11.0 3.0 1.0 1.5 2.0 1.0 4.0 6.0 1.0 6.0 1.0 
TOTAL PM: 80.5 
Objectives: The main objective of this work package is to conduct focused dissemination and replication actions towards key quadruple hel ix 
stakeholders in the urban biowaste value chain, specially in relation to cities, waste generators and managers. Specific objectives are: 
 To ensure effective branding of SCALIBUR and disseminate key results to a large community of users, including municipalities,  
waste managers, investors, current and future entrepreneurs, as well as citizens and local communities. 
 To raise awareness on biowaste collection and recycling solutions and foster the replication of good practices at all levels 
Task 9.1. Communication strategy and tools (M1 – M48). Partners involved: G!E, VISUM, All 
Subtask 9.1.1 – Communication and Dissemination plan: A detailed awareness and communication plan at the beginning of the project (M6) 
outlining the target audiences, key messages and communication channels for the project w ill be produced. Based on the stakeholder 
mapping carried out in WP2, the plan will include a first mapping of the project’s expected results and the identification of  relevant 
audiences and communication channels. The consortium will be regularly consulted to adapt the planned activities to actual results’ delivery. 
This plan will outline WHO (target audiences) will receive WHAT (key messages), HOW (communication channels) and WHEN 
(implementation and time planner) with updates in M24 and M48. G!E will dev elop a professional communication package at the beginning 
of the project, a final logo, a tagline, a visual identity, document templates, definition of key messages and project written identity. As the 
main landing page for the project, the website –  to b e developed by IRIS/VISUM, in close coordination with G!E  –   will present: project 
objectives, expected results, project’s progress, reports and recommendations, relevant events, and a dedicated media space. It will be 
directly linked to social media (Twi tter, Facebook, LinkedIn and YouTube), where SCALIBUR will actively promote the project’s outcomes to 
both professional and public networks. The project website will integrate the Stakeholder Platform. Website content will be m anaged and 
updated by G!E on a regular basis and the structure will be adapted throughout the project to reflect project’s achievements. 
Subtask 9.1.2 – Communication material: A comprehensive set of communication material, comprising a project leaflet, to be produced in 
English, for use at EU -level activities and international conferences, as well as a poster template, that can be used and adapted by project 
partners for targeted events. Five roll -up banners, including one in English and one in each of the local languages of the Pilot  Cities will be 
integrated in this package for local and international dissemination events. To foster dissemination within the Pilot Cities,  a flyer template, 
will also be produced. Sustainable printing options, such as the use of recyclable or compostable paper, and bio-based ink will be selected.  
Additionally, a set of 3 one-minute animated videos will be produced to raise awareness on the 3 main valorisation lines. Videos will be used 
for wider promotion on social media and other online platforms. As t he main landing page for the project, the website (to be developed by 
IRIS/VISUM, in close coordination with G!E) will present: project objectives, expected results, project’s progress, reports a nd 
recommendations, relevant events, and a dedicated media sp ace. It will be directly linked to social media (Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn and 
YouTube), where SCALIBUR will actively promote the project’s outcomes to both professional and public networks. The project w ebsite will 
integrate the Stakeholder Platform and  will be designed to be gender inclusive. Website content will be managed and updated by G!E on a 
regular basis and the structure will be adapted throughout the project to reflect project’s achievements. 
Task 9.2. Communication activities (M1 – M48). Partners involved: G!E, All 
Subtask 9.2.1 – Media relations will be key to raise awareness of the general public. The project will engage in a local and international media 
relation strategy. At the beginning of the project, a database of European and national media contacts will be established with the 
cooperation of all partners. This database will be updated on a regular basis, and throughout the whole duration of the proje ct, journalists 
identified will be engaged via social media content, news and press rel eases. Targeted communication tools, (media space on the project 
website) and the distribution of a designed media pack containing pictures, captions, data visuals and infographics, as well as key quotes and 
figures, will facilitate journalists’ access to information about the project and its major outcomes.  
Subtask 9.2.2 – Online communication: As SCALIBUR results are being published, a series of interviews and feature articles will be published 
on the project website, distributed on EC communication chan nels and to selected media, and translated in national languages, whenever 
relevant. From M18, G!E will circulate a project newsletter to interested stakeholders on a regular basis.  
Social media are a strategic communication channel to reach out to a wide  number of stakeholders. To tap their full potential, G!E will 
integrate a dedicated social media strategy to the project’s communication and awareness plan. This will include recommendati ons to 
ensure the correct usage of social media platforms by project  partners, and a detailed content plan. Infographics, data visuals, key quotes as 
well as short video interviews with SCALIBUR local champions will be used to maximise audience and interaction on social networks.  
Subtask 9.2.3 – Pan-European awareness raising campaign: To maximise communication impact towards the end of the project, G!E will also 
coordinate the organisation of a pan-European awareness raising campaign on urban biowaste sorting and recycling between M42 and M44. 
During the campaign, which c omplements actions in WP2, each Pilot City will organise happening events in public spaces such as markets 
and supermarkets, to raise awareness on biowaste collection and new products developed from biowaste recycling. Live intervie ws with 
famous “ambassadors” for waste collection and sorting, as well as with local champions and citizens, will be organised and retransmitted on 
social media via live streaming during the events. These events will be the opportunity to assess and test citizens’ awareness throu gh mini-
questionnaires.  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
58 
  
Throughout this campaign, citizens will be invited to participate in a competition to select the most innovative social innovation idea for waste 
management, among those identified in WP2 and showcased in SCALIBUR stakeholder platf orm that they would like to be implemented in 
their city. Users will be invited to interact and to campaign for their favourite idea on social networks via a dedicated has htag. Each 
participating citizen will be offered to take part in a raffle to win prom otional gifts. The most popular social innovation idea/business model 
selected through this competition in each city will be presented at the occasion of the final event in Brussels. 
Subtask 9.2.4 – Conferences and networking: SCALIBUR will engage dialogue with policy representatives by face to face meetings with representatives 
from European institutions and relevant sectoral associations to discuss potential regulatory barriers at European level and promote the 
biowaste initiatives developed. Furthermore, project partners will participate in relevant conferences, events and fairs to promote SCALIBUR 
to various stakeholders, including business owners, investors and researchers, throughout the whole duration of the project.  
Task 9.3. Dissemination activities (M6 – M48). Partners involved: G!E, All 
Subtask 9.3.1 – Local dissemination will ensure successful implementation of SCALIBUR project’s solutions in the Pilot Cities and wider 
replication throughout EU. In each Pilot City, dissemination workshops targeti ng schools and municipal staff, complementing co -creation 
workshops in WP2, will be organised to foster the replication of best practices with at least 1 intervention in a school and 1 workshop / Pilot.  
Subtask 9.3.2 – Scientific dissemination: The project will also produce 10 plus articles and scientific presentations. Open access articles will be 
published in peer -reviewed and/or technical publications (national and international) journals to share the results with the scientific 
community. Scientific presentations will be delivered on the occasion of relevant sectorial events, which list will be collectively established in 
the first 6 months of the project and updated annually as part of the awareness and communication Plan (see initial list in Section 2.2).  
Subtask 9.3.3 – Final multi-stakeholder event: In M46-M48, G!E will organise a Final EU-level multi-stakeholder event in Brussels (approx. 100 
participants) dedicated to lessons learned and policy recommendations towards wider replication. The event,  to be organised in cooperation 
with a relevant sectoral association (such as Municipal Waste Europe, or ACR+) at the Committee of the Regions or the Europea n Economic 
and Social Committee, will bring together high -profile experts, local, national and European decision -makers, investors, as well as members 
from all Regional Urban Biowaste clubs and representatives from Early Adopter Cities. This event will allow sharing results on integrated models 
for urban biowaste valorisation, and discuss regulatory and  market barriers, while launching the project’s policy recommendations. Relevant 
international & national media contacts will be invited to take part in a press conference focusing on the project’s results and recommendations.  
D9.1 Communication and Dissemination Plan, materials and website (G!E; M6, M24, M48) 
D9.2 Project videos (G!E ; M18) 
D9.3 Report on pan-European awareness raising campaign (G!E; M45) 
 
WORK PACKAGE NUMBER  WP10 START MONTH – END MONTH M1-M48 
WORK PACKAGE TITLE Exploitation and replication 
PARTICIPANT NUMBER 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
SHORT NAME OF PARTICIPANT 
 
ITENE 
AERIS 
ASA 
CENER 
CLUBE 
CSCP 
EXERGY 
FCC 
G!E 
KOUR 
LAZIO 
LUND 
MADRID 
NOVzm 
AMONT 
NS 
SMVAK 
UNIMORE 
VISUM 
WBD 
WETSUS 
ZETADEC 
PERSON·MONTHS/PARTNER 3.0 1.0 1.0 8.0 1.5 0.0 2.0 2.0 55.0 2.0 1.0 0.0 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.0 4.0 3.0 1.0 6.0 1.0 
TOTAL PM: 98 
Objectives: To define a durable exploitation strategy for each result and develop replicable business plans to ensure successful market 
uptake of the technologies and products to be created within the project. Specific objectives of this work package are: 
 To produce a detailed exploitation plan and develop adapted business models for each project result to secure their market uptake; 
 To explore and report o n further research opportunities and develop policy recommendations to facilitate market uptake and unlock 
potential barriers to commercialisation beyond the project’s end; 
 To conduct targeted capacity-building activities to ensure Europe-wide deployment of urban biowaste management strategies; 
Task 10.1. Exploitation strategy and tools (M1 – M48). Partners involved: G!E/VMT, all 
Subtask 10.1.1 – Exploitation plan: This plan will define joint exploitation and marketing activities by the consortium aiming to  leverage 
impact by streamlining individual market exploitation efforts towards concerted activities (first version by M12 and a consol idated version by 
M46):  
 Definition of the exploitable results and their routes to market. 
 Development of joint business models by using the business model canvas.  
 Market appraisal: existing and currently emerging markets, competitors and competing solutions. Inclusion of new applications & markets. 
 IPR analysis and agreement of (joint) exploitation interests of partners and on IP ownership in compliance with freedom to operate. 
 Market deployment strategies for SCALIBUR products including branding, lobbying, advertising, and other promotion activities. 
 Standardisation and development of specifications for SCALIBUR products and intermediates. 
 Most suitable site locations/integration options for operation plants. 
 Realisation of single processes of the process chain versus a series of processes with mutual integration. 
 Economic competition between different applications of SCALIBUR products and intermediates. 
 Funding and financing models and opportunities for first installations. 
 Exploitation risks analysis. 
 Key market and regulatory barriers and recommendations to overcome these barriers. 
 Further research opportunities beyond the end of the project. 
Subtask 10.1.2 – Validation and refining of exploitation strategies : VMT will act as coach and coordinator for all exploitation tasks. Annual 
Exploitation Workshops involving all partners will be organized with project meetings to reduce costs and ensure maximum involvement: 
 Initial Exploitation Workshop (M6): Introduction to exploitation challenges, methodologies and identification of exploitable results. 
 Mid-term Exploitation Workshop (M24): Clarification of exploitable results, dev elopment of exploitation options and identification of 
uncertainties (risks and opportunities). Pre-assessment of the market potential of key results and of exploitation options. 
 Final Exploitation Workshop (M42): Risk Response Plan and consolidation of draft business models and plans for each key exploitable result. 
Subtask 10.1.3 (Lead G!E) – Research and policy uptake : In close cooperation with the Urban Biowaste Clubs and WP2 actions, policy 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
59 
  
recommendations will be developed (see D2.3) and integrated in  the Final Exploitation plan at the end of the project, and presented at the 
European Parliament. The report will also include further research opportunities for project sustainability.  
Task 10.2. Business case definition (M1 – M48). Partners involved: G!E/VMT, All 
Subtask 10.2.1 – Market analysis : To define what new innovative applications for SCALIBUR products, intermediates, services and 
technologies would be the most attractive beyond the project’s end. The Exploitation leader will follow up emerging d evelopments and 
markets, including both novel applications and markets emerging from scientific and technological progress. If relevant, iden tified 
opportunities will be integrated in the exploitation strategy. Additionally, concrete business cases will be  developed and integrated into the 
final Exploitation Plan.  
Subtask 10.2.2 – Value proposition will be implemented to assess the value for money for each function offered by SCALIBUR products and 
services, by looking at what constitutes the real value of such products/services for their potential end -users, asking three main questions: (i) 
What users’ problems could be solved with SCALIBUR new products and services? (ii) What functionalities would need to be added or modified 
to meet users’ needs? and (iii) What functionalities can be reduced or eliminated, as they do not add any value for users? 
This will increase SCALIBUR products’ and services’ suitability for market exploitation and allow developers to better allocate the investment 
where its market potential is the highest. Secondly, a value analysis will be performed to quantify the value of the new products, followed by 
an assessment of users’ willingness to pay based on estimate costs for each of the different functions. Finally, the prices i dentified will be 
compared with development, industrialisation and marketing costs to assess financial sustainability and potential profit margins. 
Subtask 10.2.2 – IPR protection and agreements: The IPR management strategy will help avoid future conflicts among t he partners regarding 
(Joint) Ownership, Access Rights and Freedom to Operate, issues related to the dissemination of research Results versus secre cy for 
commercial/competition purposes, and standardisation issues. G!E/VMT will discuss what protection stra tegy fits the best for each 
Exploitable Result. The project will include an IP directory, chaired by G!E/VMT as Exploitation Leader, listing all relevant  IP brought in and 
developed by project partners, which will allo for a proactive and regular dialogue on IP related issues to facilitate the development of 
agreements on Use and Access Rights and to develop the market uptake strategy as soon as possible. The findings and recommendations will 
be included in the exploitation plan.  
Task 10.3. Business modeling and business plans (M24 – M48). Partners involved: G!E/VMT, All 
Subtask 10.3.1 – Development of business models and plans for each key result: Based on the functional analysis in T10.2, a market appraisal 
will be performed by G!E/VMT with input from pro ject partners to further define the market conditions for each exploitable result, and 
provide an overview of future market trends and competing products and technologies. Building on the findings, the consortium  will develop 
business models and business plans for each KER after the mid-term exploitation workshop, to be integrated in the final Exploitation Plan. 
Subtask 10.3.2 – Testing and validation of the business models with end-users: This task focuses on early interactions with future customers to 
otain early feedback by testing and validating the business model options in a three-step approach: 
 Clarifying the “specifications” of the targeted end-users (via phone and email contact) 
 “Recruitment” of the potential end -users capable of becoming realistic early adopters, including request for feedback (through 
questionnaires), and invitation to participate in replication and training activities. 
 Capture and strategic analysis of feedback, leading to a review and update of the value proposition and business models. 
The Advisory Board will also be periodically invited to provide feedback on the Exploitation Plan, in particular to help to v alidate the 
characterisation of exploitable results and the draft business models. 
Task 10.4. Standardisation (M1 – M48). Partners involved: ITENE, All 
To safeguard the potential of the products developed within the project for commercialisation, functional requirements for th eir 
standardisation will be established, based on results from LCA. Novel laboratory and field test me thods developed by SCALIBUR will reported 
in the form of feedback to the CEN standardisation process. Results will be integrated into the final Exploitation Plan.  
Task 10.5. Replicability actions (M1 – M48). Partners involved: G!E, All 
Subtask 10.5.1 – Early Adopter Cities (Leader: G!E; Participants: All)  To foster large- scale replication of the solutions developed within the 
SCALIBUR project, a small group of Early Adopter Cities will be constituted in the first half of the project. Interested cities will  be invited to 
join the club of Early Adopter Cities. 
Subtask 10.5.2 – Training kit for municipalities, communities and entrepreneurs (Leader: G!E/GEO; Participants: All), including sets of slides with 
speaking notes, detailed documentation about the techn ologies developed within the project and associated business models, citizen 
engagement strategies, as well as information on regulatory compliance and performances, will be developed by M30, and will b e the basis 
for the development of a e-learning platform. To be developed in a Responsive Web Design (RWD) and maintained by G!E/GEO, the e -
Learning platform will have an easy-to-follow structure with clear, gender-inclusive graphics, focusing on presenting the value of the content 
with interactive exercises.  
The e-Learning platform will include a set of online courses divided into two training modules that will be made available beyond t he end of 
the project: one oriented towards potential replicating municipalities and local communities, while the other wil l target future and current 
entrepreneurs. The platform will also include downloadable reference documents and useful links, an “Ask the Tutor” function,  and a Forum 
area to allow users to interact, ask questions and leave comments. A registration procedur e will be set up in order to monitor the feedback 
based on the type of users and evaluate eLearning effectiveness, to complement the engagement analysis in WP2.  
Task 10.6. Capacity building (M1 – M48). Partners involved: G!E, All 
To secure replication of the business models identified within the project, G!E/VMT will develop a common concept for the organisation of 
replication and capacity building activities with potential end-users, both for the social innovation business models for municipalities, and for 
business models related to the innovative technologies developed within the project.  
Subtask 10.6.1 – Training workshops (Leader: G!E; Participants: All): For the municipalities, G!E will organise training workshops in Early 
Adopter Cities, with repres entatives from the project’s Pilot Cities, as well as members from the club of Early Adopter Cities and regional 
Urban Biowaste Clubs, to present the social innovation business models and advice cities on how to replicate these business m odels and 
integrate them in their local framework, using the results from WP2. Using the material developed for the training kit, G!E/VMT/GEO w ill 
give a dedicated and personalised training to up to five Early adopter Cities.  
Subtask 10.6.2 – Coaching programme (Leader: G!E/VMT; Participants: All): G!E/VMT will develop a coaching programme for 10 entrepeneurs 
from different countries wishing to create or upscale a business in the urban biowaste valorisation sector. The entrepreneurs  will be 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
60 
  
supported in the creation of their own business plans and will provide feedback on the business models developed within the project.   
D10.1 Mid-term exploitation plan (G!E/VMT; M12) 
D10.2 Final exploitation plant, policy recommendations and standardization (G!E/VMT; M46) 
D10.3 Replication and capacity building strategy (G!E; M24) 
D10.4 E-learning platform (G!E/GEO; M36) 
 
Table 3.1 b: List of work packages. 
No. Work Package Title WP Leader PM Start 
Month 
End 
Month 
1 Project Management ITENE 65.5 1 48 
2 Stakeholder Engagement and social innovation actions CSCP 136.5 1 48 
3 Collection, characterization and homogenization of urban biowaste FCC 212 1 48 
4 Biochemical conversion of OFMSW into biodegradable polyesters and biopesticides CENER 176 1 48 
5 Insects to valorise organic waste from ROW UNIMORE 150 1 48 
6 Bioconversion of sewage sludge and OFMSW through biochemcial and BES SMVAK 188.5 1 48 
7 SCALIBUR interactive stakeholder platform VISUM 85 1 48 
8 Environmental, techno-economic, social impacts and safety Assessment ITENE 133 1 48 
9 Communication, Dissemination and Awareness raising G!E 80.5 1 48 
10 Exploitation and replication G!E 98 1 48 
 TOTAL 1,325   
 
Table 3.1 c: List of Deliverables  
No. Deliverable name WP No. Typ
e 
Diss. 
level Delivery 
D1.1 Implementation of Project Management structure WP1 R CO M3 
D1.2 Data Management Plan WP1 R CO M6 
D1.3 Quality and Risk Management Plan WP1 R CO M9 
D2.1 Stakeholder engagement plan per pilot municipality and identification of current 
best practices. 
WP2 R PU M10 
D2.2 National action manuals for local uptake  WP2 R PU M36 
D2.3 Policy brief “recommendations for urban biowaste management” + presentation 
at parliament  
WP2 R PU M44 
D2.4 Multi-level stakeholder engagement analysis, including gender, and impact 
analysis  
WP2 R PU M24, M48 
D3.1 Most suitable technical methods that allow improved selective collection of 
OFMSW and HORECA waste 
WP3 R CO M8 
D3.2 Development of a metaheuristic algorithm for the logistic optimisation and 
reduced degradation of waste based on routes and a com bined sensor (CH4, H2S, 
T) 
WP3 R CO M20 
D3.3 First and final Characterisation of OFSW, HORECA and sewage sludges with 
current systems of collection, transport, sorting and pre-treatment 
WP3 R CO M6, M42 
D3.4 Optimised homogenization methods of OFMSW, HORECA waste, sewage sludges WP3 R CO M6 
D3.5 Monitoring system for the detection of unwanted fractions at the entrance of the 
biowaste treatment plant 
WP3 R CO M30  
D3.6 Best practices factsheets and performance analysis of the improved systems on 
selective collection, transport, sorting and pre -treatment during the pilot 
implementation in municipalities 
WP3 R PU M44 
D4.1 Report on design and selection of enzymatic cocktails, optimized protocol and 
demonstration for the production of sugars from the OFMSW by enzymatic 
hydrolysis  
WP4 R CO M24, 36 
D4.2 Report on optimized protocol for bio -BDO and polyester production from 
OFMSW sugars  
WP4 R CO M 24, 30 
D4.3 Report on demonstration trials of biopolyesters + validation trials for packaging 
materials  
WP4 R CO M 36,40, 48  
D4.4 Report on optimized protocol for the production of bacterial biopesticide 
production (from OFMSW) 
WP4 R CO M48 
D5.1 Detailed technical documentation of the INPUT and OUTPUT stage system. WP5 R CO M25 
D5.2 Video of the working plant.  WP5 DEC PU M38 
D5.3 Detailed technical documentation of the fractionation prototype WP5 R CO M32 
D5.4 Report on valorization of chitin in nanowhiskers and chitosan  WP5 R CO M46 
D6.1 Final design of the two prototypes and pilot at TRL7 WP6 R CO M20 
D6.2 Validation results at the DSs in Czech Republic (a) and Spain (b) WP6 R CO M36 
D6.3 Report about feasibility bioconversion of OFMSW into high -value products by 
bioelectrochemical systems  
WP6 R CO M30 
D6.4 Operational conditions to obtain high-value products from sewage sludge WP6 R CO M18 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
61 
  
D6.5 Validation of the suitability for bioplastics production and uses as packaging 
material  
WP6 R CO M36 
D7.1 Architecture for the SCALIBUR Cloud Platform including planed quality measures  WP7 OTH CO M10 
D7.2 SCALIBUR Platform Alpha release  WP7 OTH CO M22 
D7.3 SCALIBUR Platform Online User Manual and result of quality testing  WP7 OTH CO M32 
D7.4 SCALIBUR Platform Beta release  WP7 OTH PU M47 
D8.1 Life cycle definition and description  WP8 R RE M16 
D8.2 First sustainability report: Environmental, Economic and Social  WP8 R PU M24 
D8.3 Techno-economic analysis of the SCALIBUR value chains  WP8 R CO M48 
D8.4 Environmental Life Cycle Assessment  WP8 R CO M42 
D8.5 Social Life Cycle Assessment WP8 R CO M48 
D8.6 Safety Assessment WP8 R CO M48 
D8.7 Regulatory Assessment WP8 R CO M48 
D8.8 Sustainability Assessment WP8 R CO M48 
D8.9 Simulation of the system and Heat & Mass balance WP8 OTH CO M48 
D9.1 Communication and Dissemination Plan, materials and website  WP9 R RE M6, 24, 48 
D9.2 Project video WP9 DEC PU M18 
D9.3 Report on pan-European awareness raising campaign  WP9 R CO M45 
D10.1 Mid-term and final exploitation plan, G!E/VMT WP10 R CO M12 
D10.2 Final exploitation plant, policy recommendations and standardization WP10 R CO M46 
D10.3 Replication and capacity building strategy WP10 R CO M24 
D10.4 E-learning platform WP10 DEC PU M36
3.2 MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE AND PROCEDURES  
ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE AND PROCEDURES 
The management structure of SCALIBUR is pr esented below, considering the development of this project to 
produce bio-based products from biowaste. ITENE will play a central role as project coordinator. SCALIBUR involves 
5 management bodies consisting of General Assembly (GA), an Executive Board (EB ), Innovation Committee (IC), 
The Advisory Board (AB), and the project coordinator. 
 
Figure 11. SCALIBUR Management structure 
The responsibilities and decision -making structures will be defined in more detail in the Consortium Agr eement, 
covering different aspects of the project (such as. management issues, intellectual property aspects, licensing rights 
of the project, including ownership of knowledge, protection of that knowledge and access rights).  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
62 
  
The General Assembly (GA) is chaired by the Coordinator (ITENE) with a representative of each partner, as a 
decision-making and conflict resolution body. The GA will be responsible for the overall strategic orientation 
and policy of the project, as well as ensuring that the adopted strategy is respected to reach excellence. The 
General Assembly will meet physically at least every 6 months, exceptional sessions (telephone or web 
conference) may be called upon and organized when needed or requested. Before making any decision, 
quorum of at least 50% of the GA members will be necessary and simple majority will do ruling. The 
coordinator will have casting vote. 
An Executive Board (EB) is in charged of monitoring the effective and efficient implementation of the project. It 
will be chaired by the Coordinator and completed by the WP leaders. EB will also benefit from the support of a 
management team (MST) to ensure day to day operational project management and will meet face-to-face at 
least every 6 months. Regular meetings by teleconference/Skype will be organized once per month, or when 
needed/requested. Quorum of at least 50% of the EB members will be necessary before taking any decision 
and simple majority will apply. The coordinator will have casting vote. The members of the EB will be validated 
by the members of the GA. 
The Innovation Committee (IC) will deal with the innovation activities, namely Impact management, RRI & 
engagement, IPR & exploitation, Communication & Dissemination, Data Management and Scientific 
management. Appointed managers will constitute the Management Support Team (MST). The IC will meet 
face-to-face at least twice a year, and additional meetings by teleconference/Skype will be organized when 
needed or requested. Quorum of at least 2/3 of the IC members will be necessary before taking any decision, 
and decisions will be taken by 2/3 majority. The following Innovation Managers are appointed: 
 The Impact Management will be Antonio Dobon (ITENE), as leader of WP 1 and 8, in charge of maximising 
the impact, monitoring of success project indicators at all levels, and promote maximum policy influence 
through advocacy actions, policy-society dialogues and other actions 
 The RRI and Engagement Management will be Nora Brueggemann (CSCP), as leader of WP2, in charge 
of maximising the multi-level engagement of key stakeholders and communities, monitoring the success 
project indicators at community level, and maximising the outreach of all RRI dimensions in relation to 
project execution.  
 The IPR and Exploitation managers will be Gosse Hiemstra, Van der Meer & Van Tilburg  (G!E), managing 
IPR and project exploitation (plan and implementation) beyond the project lifetime. 
 The Communication and Dissemination Manager will be Valeria Mazzagatti  (G!E), leader of WP9 and 10, 
who will be totally aligned with the project multi-level engagement plan for increased outreach. 
 The Scientific Manager will be Ines del Campo (CENER), leader of WP4, in charge of scientific validation, 
guaranteeing scientific excellence when addressing socio-environmental biowaste issues and scientific 
dissemination from the project results. She will guarantee objectivity and scientific soundness in the 
standardisation of the valorization methodologies. Moreover, she will define the impact criteria to be used 
as a base of future regulations. 
The Advisory Board (AB). By involving quadruple helix stakeholders, including policy makers and environmental 
authorities at different levels, odour emitting activities, research and academia, European Working Groups in 
biowaste management, NGOs and CSOs, influencing the policies is intended. An external Advisory Board will be 
formed from representatives of these categories and independent experts. The AB will be constituted in the 
first 6 months of the project by the project Coordinator. In Section 4, # letters of support from different 
stakeholders expressing their interest in joining SCALIBUR Advisory Board can be found, including national and 
regional governments, environmental authorities, academia, industry, municipalities associations, 
environmental journalist networks, city networks, research centres and civil organisations. 
The Project Coordinator will serve as an intermediary between the partners and the EC. It will ensure daily 
communication between partners and compliance with the internal quality processes. All tasks assigned to it 
will be described in the Grant Agreement Model, including the monitoring the compliance by the partners with 
proper project implementation, submitting the deliverables and reports to the EC, and ensuring that all 
payments are made without unjustified delay. 
SCALIBUR coordinator is Dr. Susana Aucejo. She has large experience in the development of innovative packaging 
materials and nanotechnology. She is an expert for the development of bio-based polymers, with more than 15 
years of experience working at ITENE. Currently, she is the R&D director at ITENE and has more than 10 years’ 
experience working with European projects. She has participated in over 50 research projects (national and 
European). Till date she has been responsible for 27 of these projects related to the development of innovative 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
63 
  
solutions from bio-based products (e.g. OPTINANOPRO where new materials are validated for diverse applications 
in nanotechnology). She is co-author of more than 30 peer-reviewed scientific articles and is regularly involved in 
dissemination activities, being active in organizing national and international scientific conferences and symposium. 
She has also participated in several experts committee at both national and European level. 
MILESTONES AND PROCEDURES FOR MONITORING PROGRESS STATUS  
Technical and financial assessments of the whole project will be performed by the corresponding manager, and the 
final reports will be dis cussed in the GA meetings. During these meetings, the GA will assess the status of the 
project. Frequently monitoring of the operational the WP leaders will do a progress reports. Project achievements 
will be reviewed during GA meetings, as well as possibl e technical, financial and executive problems that may arise 
from the evolution of SCALIBUR. Periodic reviews will be also implemented as it is stated in the Grant Agreement. 
These reviews will be organized by the GA involving all participants and the EC when necessary. 
A more detailed list of rules for this consortium will be described in the Consortium Agreement to be evaluated and 
concluded prior its signature of the Grant Agreement. SCALIBUR Consortium Agreement will be based on the 
DESCA-2020
 model for large projects to balance and reflect the interests of all participants.  
A list of important milestones has been identified for SCALIBUR implementation (Table 3.2a) a nd will be monitored 
by the corresponding WP leaders and project coordinator. Milestones assessment will be reviewed upon the date 
of its achievement, and a report will be issued. In the case that a milestone has not been achieved on the expected 
date, the impact of this milestone in the WP and the course of SCALIBUR will be assessed. All these issues will be 
reviewed by the EB and, subsequently, they will report to the GA. 
Table 3.2.a: List of Milestones  
No Milestone name Related WP Due date (mo) Means of verification 
MS1 Validation of SCALIBUR multi-level engage   WP2 20 Preliminary report 
MS2 Monitoring of the quality and quantiy of   
and HORECA selectively collected in the p  
WP3 24 Characterization of biowaste samples  
selectively in the three pilots 
MS3 Characterization of raw materials and  
techniques proposal 
WP3 18 Report with values of main parameters charac  
MS4 Validation of enzymatic hydrolysis and 
solid state fermentation 
WP4 48 Report with valorization outcomes 
MS5 Verification of the fractionation pilot 
plant. 
WP5 36 Report on e valuation of the efficiency of 
the fractionation at the plant. 
MS6 Validation of USS valorization by 
biocehemical and BES routes 
WP6 48 Report on outcomes from the valo rization 
progress 
MS7 SCALIBUR Platform  WP7 42 Report on quality testing 
MS8 First regulary assessment WP8 9 Preliminary report 
MS9 Initial version of the platform online WP9 42 The platform, including main modules 
defined with the end users, is availa ble for 
the partners to test it 
Knowledge management and communication (3.2.3): Project documentation will be stored and exchanged through 
the use of a private, password protected secure and confidential platform administrated by the Project 
Coordinator. All project members will be registered. Draft documents will be edited and stored following the 
project proposed templates. This platform will allow data and information exchanges between project members 
without unnecessary risk of external disclosure. SCALIBUR project will contribute to the Open Research Data aiming 
at improve and maximise access to and re-use of research data generated by projects. The consortium will make an 
inventory and review options for sharing of research data in a Data Management P lan (WP1). G!E will organize the 
dissemination of SCALIBUR results that will be reported and published in numerous ways (WP9).  
Intellectual Property Management: For optimum exploitation of the results, procedures addressed to the protection 
of IP will be considered for all significant new findings. All material published externally will be released by the EB 
and the quality will be assessed prior to publication. Moreover, all relevant information will be published (internally 
and externally) on the project website. 
CRITICAL RISKS FOR IMPLEMENTATION AND RISK MANAGEMENT  
As part of the project management, risks assessment is an essential task; therefore, it will be part of the internal 
reports and will be discussed in all meetings to analyse the potential ris ks and to manage them. For these tasks 
SCALIBUR counts with the following strategies to mitigate the possible risks (Table 3.2b):  
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
64 
  
Table 3.2b: Critical risk for implementation 
Description 
 
WPs  Level of  
likelihood 
Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
Lack of cooperation of local stakeholders in the 
Urban Biowasteclubs.  
WP2 Low The consortia are well balanced and are led by institutions with a 
lot of experience and a broad regional network.  
Barriers and obstacles for full integration of 
business models in existing waste management 
schemes. 
 
WP2 Medium Municipalities and technical partners are themselves project 
partners and will be supported by the transparent and open 
stakeholder engagement process in the early identification of 
barriers. Co -creation of the collaborative activities is meant to 
assist in overcoming potential implementation problems.   
Dissemination and communication activities 
have lower impact than expected. 
 
WP9 Low The communication strategy largely builds on existing channels 
from research networks, sectoral organisations and the biowaste 
sector. WP9 will regularly measure the success of the 
dissemination and communication activities. 
Not enough supply of raw material  
WP3&4 Low Another sources of material have been identified both fo r 
replication and back -up sources; e.g. FCC operates in Barcelona, 
Álava and  Valladolid (ES).  
Heterogeneity of raw material 
WP3&4 High FCC will dedicate efforts to the characterization of the initial 
material and at intermediate stages so that the pre -treatment line 
can be adapted to any heterogeneity or property variation. 
Contamination of stabilized material during 
transport 
WP3&4 Low Adequate packages will be utilized in order to avoid this issue. 
 
Delay on permits Wp3&4 Low FCC has relevant of proc edures as a part or its activity. 
Additionally, the Municipality of Madrid is a partner. 
Potential new social conflicts to be created 
Wp2&3 High A climate of trust between the project participants and 
stakeholders will be created through generating proces ses of 
consensus. Authorities, general public and stakeholder will be 
informed and managed through the Biowaste Clubs activities. 
Inhibition of single enzymes by compounds 
contained in the OFMSW 
WP 4&5 Medium Removal of inhibitors by other enzymes or chem ical means and 
improvement of single enzymes by genrecombinant measures. 
Low rate conversion of organic waste  
 
WP5 Low Optimization of substrate composition and homogeneity. 
Optimization of rearing conditions for organic waste substrate  
Low efficiency in the production of lipids, 
proteins and chitin 
WP5 Medium Optimization in the fractionation and insect treatment processes. 
Characterisation instruments with too low 
limitis of detection 
WP5 Low Ensure the highest possible purity of products 
Simulation software is insufficient to simulate, 
scale-up and model some parts of the process 
or the entire process 
 
WPs4-6,  Low A deep research of the most accurate thermodynamic models for 
the simulation of the process will be carried out regarding each 
part of t he process and the components involved in it. If not 
sufficient yet, manual calculations can be developed. The model 
will be then integrated into the AspenPlus or the required 
simulation software to have a unique final simulation flow-sheet. 
Expensive hom ogenization and/or pre -
treatment 
WPs3& 6 Low Trials of different cosubstrates and optimize 
homogeneization/pretreatment process 
Difficulties in anaerobic bioconversion to 
obtain valuable products 
WP6 Low Pre-treatment, including homogenization, processes will be 
installed to adapt substrates to the anaerobic biological process 
Techno-economic analysis reports low 
feasibility of the SCALIBUR integrated 
processes at larger scale 
 
WP8 Low TEA assessment will determine the feasibility of the processes and 
products developed throughout the SCALIBUR project execution. It 
will be developed in parallel to the simulations of the entire 
process to up-scale it at larger scale. Further sensitivity analysis will 
be carried out with the aim to study the influence of var iations in 
key parameters in the feasibility of the plant 
Limited amount of users to the platform due to 
low visibility or other. 
WP9 High Partner with cities so they can act as multipliers towards local 
users and build on the success cases from the project.
3.3 CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE 
SCALIBUR consortium is a balanced combination of 6 SMEs (AERIS, ASA, EXERGY, KOUR, NS  and ZETACED), 3 large 
companies (FCC, NOVAMONT, SMVAK), 2 research organizations ( ITENE, CSCP, WETSUS), 2 non -profit associations 
(ITENE, CLUBE), 1 association (G!E), 3 companies (NS, VISUM, ZETADEC), 1 municipality (Lund), 2 public bodies 
(Madrid, LAZIO), 1 water authority (WBD), and  university (UNIMORE). Partners come from 9 different EU member 
countries: Spain, Italy, Germany, Ireland, The Netherlands, Greece, Sweden, Belgium and Czech Republic, 
SCALIBUR consortium covers the whole value chain, from biowaste recovery to valorization and characterization of 
the final bio -based products (proteins, lipids, chemical commodities, bioplastics, and biopestecides). The strategy 
followed in this project is focus on the exchange of knowledge, where all participants are involved through the 
whole value chain and life cycle of the project. Knowledge and know ‐how of the consortium covers all relevant 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
65 
  
aspects of SCALIBUR vision. Large experience on EU -projects by most of the partners is beneficial to reach 
excellence (see Table 3.3a). Indeed, a network of partners has been created, including all relevant stakeholders at 
the European level to obtain all the n ecessary resources to achieve SCALIBUR objectives. Co -creation of new 
strategies and business models involving citizens, 3 municipalities and relevant stakeholders will complete the 
circle, aiming also at new waste management policies.  
3.4. RESOURCES TO BE COMMITTED 
The financial resources mobilized by the 21 partners of the SCALIBUR project represent a total budget of 
12,005,922 €. The requested grant to carry out the proposed activities is 9,999,390 €. This relatively high budget is 
related to the ambition of the project and the large product portfolio to be obtained. 
Figures below show the budget distribution per cost category and per and per type of partner. 
 
  
 
Personnel costs [55% of total budget] 
A total of 1,32 3 person-month are foreseen, which gives an average of 28 people (or 1.3 persons per partner ) 
working full time for the project during its 4 years of duration. The average cost of the person -month is 5,021 
€/month, a very reasonable amount despite large differences exist among the personnel costs of partners (due to 
different costs per countries and different degree of specialisation of the work force required). 
Table 3.4a: Summary of staff effort 
Nr  Participant WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 WP8 WP9 WP10 Total 
1 ITENE 24.00 18.00 35.00 20.00 28.00 18.00 5.00 37.50 3.00 3.00 191.50 
2 AERIS 1.00 0.00 0.00 24.00 0.00 14.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 42.00 
3 ASA 1.00 0.00 0.00 21.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 25.00 
4 CENER 3.00 0.00 17.00 101.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 20.00 7.00 8.00 156.00 
5 CLUBE 1.00 6.00 10.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 1.50 4.00 1.50 25.00 
6 CSCP 5.00 69.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 0.00 2.00 0.00 78.00 
7 EXERGY 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 38.00 2.00 2.00 43.00 
8 FCC 3.00 14.00 49.00 10.00 0.00 35.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 119.00 
9 G!E 6.50 3.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 19.00 55.00 86.00 
10 KOUR 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 44.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 2.00 2.00 50.00 
11 LAZIO 1.00 4.00 3.50 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 2.00 11.00 1.00 24.50 
12 LUND 1.00 6.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 15.00 
13 MADRID 1.00 4.00 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 11.00 
14 NOVAMONT 1.00 0.00 36.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.00 1.50 1.50 45.00 
15 NS 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.00 0.00 2.00 10.00 2.00 2.00 22.00 
16 SMVAK 4.00 0.00 9.00 0.00 0.00 64.00 0.00 2.00 1.00 2.00 82.00 
17 UNIMORE 3.00 0.00 10.00 0.00 42.00 0.00 0.00 4.00 4.00 4.00 67.00 
18 VISUM 4.00 12.00 37.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 69.00 3.00 6.00 3.00 134.00 
19 WETSUS 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 43.00 0.00 0.00 6.00 6.00 56.00 
20 WBD 1.00 0.00 0.50 0.00 0.00 14.50 0.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 19.00 
21 ZETADEC 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 30.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 34.00 
  TOTAL 65.50 136.50 212.00 176.00 150.00 188.50 85.00 133.00 80.50 98.00 1,325.00 
 
Subcontracting costs [4% of total budget] 
Subcontracting costs are detailly explained in section 4.2. Only 9 partners have foreseen subcontracting tasks. In all 
cases, they are non-core tasks of the project and are duly justified. 
Direct personnel 
costs
55%
Other direct 
costs
22%
Subcontracting 
costs
4%
Indirect costs
19%
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
66 
  
Indirect Costs [19% of total budget] 
All partners applied the mandatory flat rate of 25% of all direct cost except subcontracting. 
Other direct costs [22% of total budget] 
The following tables show the detail of other direct cost for each partner (and linked third parties when applicable). 
Each tavle shows the Cost category, the amount (in €) and the description/justification of each cost item. 
 
 
ITENE 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels 95,000 
WP2: 4 travels to visit municipalities for data recovering. (4x1500=6.000 €) 
WP3:  3 travels to each municipality and wather authorities (4+2) for the sampling and characterization 
of the organic waste fraction. (3x6x1500= 27,000 €)  
WP3: 1 travel to each munucipality and water authority (4+2), 2 weeks per travel.  
(2,000x2x4=24,000€) 
WP4+ WP6: 4 travels for the collection of samples of the bioplastics (1500x4=6,000 €) 
WP9: attendance to the D&D and explotation workshops (8x1,500=12,000€), attendance to fairs, 
coferences and seminars (inscriptions+travel) (8x2,500=20,000€) 
Other 
Materials  90,000 
WP4+WP6: Lab consumables: chemicals, additives, solvents: 15,000 €, Lab/pilot plant equipments: 
17,000 €, food contact certification: 40,000 € 
WP3: electronic material for sensors development that will meassures the methan and sulfhydric 
10,000 €. Lab consumables: 5,000 €; spare parts for lab equipment: 3,000 €.  
IPR Costs 6,000 Protection of chitosan PLA/PHB formulations and Nanochitin fibers from BSF 
Publications 
OA 4,500 3 publications (3x1,500= 4,500 €) 
Audit 
certificate 5,000 Mandatory certificate on cost statements  
IT costs 3,000 Sima Pro license 
Total other direct costs 217,000  
AERIS 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels   
Other 
Materials  36,000 
Sensors, structure and additional devices for a new pilot plant for SSF, including tubing, valves, 
fittings, etc. (25,000 €). Reactants for enzymatic tests and culture media, solvents for bioproduct 
extraction, etc. (5,000 €). Laboratory glassware and plastic materials (3,000 €). Consumables for 
chromatography (3,000 €) 
Dissemination and 
marketing costs 6,000 Preparation and shipping of dissemination and promotional material (brochures, pens...) to 
relevant stakeholders 
IT costs 4,000 Programming of the enhanced pilot plant for SSF 
Total other direct costs 59,500  
ASA 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels 1,500 CENER demonstration event 
Other 
Materials  42,000 Enzyme production material, bioreactor components, filtration membranes, laboratory 
chemicals and consumables 
IPR Costs 5,000 Fees and costs related to patent magagement 
Publications OA 2,000 Gold way publications 
Disisemination and marketing 
costs 10,000 Stands in fairs and dissemination material. 
Total other direct costs 74,000  
CENER 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels 3,000 Attendance to other demonstration events (650 € per event; 4 events) 
Other 
Materials  14,500 Consumables: 12,500€  
Simapro Software Licence: 2,000€ 
Equipment 42,000 Auxiliary equipment renting 
IPR Costs 3,000 3 publications (3x1,500= 4,500 €) 
Dissemination and marketing 
costs 1,000 
Stands in fairs, SEM/SEO, rental of venues, dissemination material, website design, 
website translations…)  
Attend EUCBE 2019, 2020, 2021. 4 posters and 2 oral presentations 
Audit certificate 1,500 Mandatory certificate on cost statements  
Small services 6,000 Organization of 1 project meeting in Pamplona: bus, catering and dinner (1.000€) 
Delivery of hidrolizate sugars to partner NOVAMONT (3 deliveries. 5,000€) 
Residues management 22,000 2.000 € per trial to removal residues 
Total other direct costs 106,500  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
67 
  
 
CSCP 
Travel 
Travels  23,900 
Trips to attending General Assemblies and  to dissemination events/ to the 3 pilot 
municipalities for hosting the biowaste-clubs, citizen workshops etc/ to Brussels to 
present at EP/ to Lund for study tour (approximately 16 trips, 1,494€ per trip) 
Other Audit certificate 7,000 Mandatory certificate on cost statements  
 Materials 4,000 Promotional material 
 Small services 7,000 Set-up of surveys, online tools / proof-readings of publications  /  print materials for 
citizen workshops (e.g. banners) 
Total other direct costs 41,900  
EXERGY 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other Materials  22,000 Aspen Open suite for 1 year 
Dissemination and marketing costs 4,000 Dissemination material and events 
Total other direct costs 39,500  
FCC 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels 9,900 
BES Training in CZ (1,500 €), Dissemination and communication (1,200 €), WP4 tests (1,200 €), 
congresses (1,500 €), stakeholder meetings (2,000 €), networking with other projects (1,000 €), 
kick-off meeting (750 €), final seminar of the project (750 €) 
Other 
Materials  85,000 
Adjustment of the electromechanical installation for WP3:15,000 €; Materials and maintenance 
parts: 35,000 €; Fungibles: 20,000€; Adjustment of the installation for the connection of the 
replica of the BES in WP6: 13,000 €;2 Containers 1m3: 2,000 €. 
Equipment 40,000 Hygienizer 60.000 € (24 MONTHS, 100%, 8 years useful life): 60,000*0.25 = 15,000 €; Shredder: 
80,000 € (24 MONTHS, 100%, 8 years useful life): 100,000*0.25 = 25,000 € 
Dissemination and 
marketing costs 34,500 Dissemination-communication material WP and 3: 22,500 €; Video of the project: 10,000 €; 
Congress registration: 2,000 €. 
Audit certificate 5,000 Mandatory certificate on cost statements  
Small services 16,000 15 shipments of 1t of samples to CENER WP3 and 4: 7,000 €; 15 shipments of 1l of by-products 
WP6: 5.000 €; Transport of prototype BES from CZ to ES: 4,000 €  
Other costs 69,500 
Permissions: 5,000 €; BES engineering project: 10,000 €; terrain adecuation for stabilisatio n: 
5,000 €; terrain adecuation for BES: 5,000 €; Electromechanical assembly of prototype BES: 
12,500 €; External characterisation campaign for organic matter received in Las Dehesas: 32,000 
€. 
Total other direct costs 273,400  
G!E (including GEO and VMT third parties) 
Travel Travels to GA 40,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip x3).  
Other travels 14,000 Attendance to capacity building workshops (5) 
Other Dissemination and 
marketing costs 50,000 
Communication package (12,000 €), Audio-visual material (3 one-minute videos, 20,000 €), Final 
EU-level event (8,000 €), Layout and packaging of the training kit (4,000 €), Prizes for the raffle 
(1,000 €) , attendance to dissemination events (3,000 €), training material (1,000 €)  
Total other direct costs 104,500  
KOUR 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels 10,000 Attendance to other demonstration events 
Other 
Materials  10,000 
1 PLC ( 2,500 € ), temperature and humidity sensors (600 €), Electronic 
boards and electronic components (2,900 €), consumables (1,300 €), 
ABS 3D printer filaments (800 €); metal parts (1,900 €) 
IPR Costs 5,000 Costs for one/two patents (at least one in collaboration with 
UNIMORE) 
Dissemination and marketing costs 5,000 Stands in fairs, one workshop organized in collaboration with 
UNIMORE 
Small services 5,000 Update of website (with project information) and small consultancy 
Total other direct costs 48,500  
LAZIO 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels 4,000  
Other 
Dissemination and 
marketing costs 10,000 Local dissemination events (stands, gadgets and printed materials), SEM/SEO, rental of venues 
during the meetings, website design and website translations. 
Small services 9,928 Small consultancy for the activity of a local facilitator at the municipality and related to the 
pilot actions /and catering services during the dissemination events/stakeholders meetings 
Total other direct costs 37,428  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
68 
  
 
 
 
 
LUND 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels 15,000 Attendance to demonstration events. Presenting best practice to pilot 
cities and following municipalities, both locally and in conferences. 
Other 
Dissemination and marketing costs 6,000 Communication material. Attendance to conferences. 
Small services 10,000 Organization of study tours, e.g. venue location rent, bus rent, 
catering, etc. 
Total other direct costs 44,500  
MADRID 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels   
Other Materials  3,400 Communication material 
Total other direct costs 16,900  
NOVAMONT 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels 2,500 Attendance to other demonstration events 
Other 
Materials  100,000 
1G sugar as benchmark, solvents, medium for fermentation, consumables for downstream of bio-
BDO; solvent, monomers, catalysts, additives for polymerization and reactive extrusion; 
consumables for biodegradability tests 
Equipment 160,000 
Depreciation of pilto and demo fermenters (up to 1 m3 scale), depreciation of lab and pilot 
equipment for polymerization and reactive extrusion, depreciation of demo plant in Terni for 
polymerization and reactive extrusion (1 ton/batch) 
Audit certificate 7,000 Mandatory certificate on cost statements  
Total other direct costs 283,000  
NS 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels 5,000 Visit to donwstream processing units in WP5, in order to advise on comptibility with 
feed and food 
Other 
Materials  80,000 Quality and Value evaluation of project outcomes from WP5 
IPR Costs 5,000 To patent together with other partners on added 
Publications OA 1,000 Contribution to OA publications together with other partners on added value outcomes 
from the project 
Dissemination and marketing 
costs 2,500 Preparation of dissemination materials for our dissemination activities 
Total other direct costs 107,000  
SMVAK (including AQUA – third party) 
Travel Travels to GA 27,000 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels 10,500 Conferences, technical meetings with partners and suppliers, travel to DSs supervision 
Other 
Materials  245,500 
Materials, spare parts and system for lab-scale trials and prototype development, construction of 
the Scalibur prototypes. Maintenance and modification in prototypes (supplementary valves, 
piping, tanks for feed and products storage, structures needed in the demo locations). Laboratory 
and analytical consumables for feed and products characterization. Reagents, materials, spare parts 
and instrumentation (valves, piping, deposits) for lab-scale tests and prototype construction and 
operation.  Laboratory and analytical consumables for streams characterization 
Equipment 87,000 Pretreatment equipment based in physical-mechamical hydrolysis of sewage sludge, 18 months, 
100 % of use for the project. Biogas scrubbing system, 24 monthrs, 100% of use for the project. 
IPR Costs 12,000 EU and PCT fees, IPR agent 
Dissemination and 
marketing costs 12,000 Materials for dissemination and participation in trade fairs, conferences. 
Audit certificate 2,750 Mandatory certificate on cost statements  
IT costs 15,000 Civil and mechanical contractors for the modification of plants to install Scalibur prototypes. 
Samples delivery to partners and/or analysis. 
Total other direct costs 411,750  
UNIMORE 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels 8,000 Attendance to demonstration events 
Other Materials  250,000  
Audit certificate 5,000 Mandatory certificate on cost statements  
Total other direct costs 276,500  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
69 
  
 
  
VISUM (including IRIS - third party) 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels 11,000 Attendance to demonstration events 
Other 
Materials  90,000 
Cost of materials and consumables to build a customised equipment 
for urban biowaste monitoring (optomechanical and electrical 
components 30,000 €; optical sensors 40,000 € ;  components for 
integration, 20,000 €) 
Dissemination and marketing costs 3,000 Conference fees and diseemination materials. 
Audit certificate 6,000 Mandatory certificate on cost statements  
IT costs 20,000 Software licence and hosting server costs 
Total other direct costs 143,500  
WBD 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels 5,000  
Other Dissemination and marketing costs 15,000 
Preparation and printing of the information brochure that can be used 
to inform the politicians within all the Dutch water authorities and 
other European municipalities within the project about the potential 
for bioplastics production from sewage. An iconic bioplastics product 
will be made that can be shared as a promotional gift. 
Total other direct costs 33,500  
WETSUS 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels 4,000 Working visits at wastewatertreament plants and other SCALIBUR partners 
Other 
Materials  50,000 Consumables to develop, build and operate the bench-scale PHA plant (incl. chemicals, 
tubing and reactor vessel). Consumables to analyse samples 
Equipment 90,000 Equipment for bench-scale PHA plant (pumps, mixers, controllers, data acquisition system) 
IPR Costs 10,000 Patent office fees and service of patent attorney for two patent applications 
Publications in Open-
access 5,000 Two times journal fee for gold way publication 
Dissemination and 
marketing costs 4,000 Dissemination material for stands, presentations and online depostion 
Audit certificate 5,000 Mandatory certificate on cost statements  
Total other direct costs 182,000  
ZETADEC 
Travel Travels to GA 13,500 9 trips to attending General Assemblies (1,500 € per trip) 
Other travels 1,000 Attendance to a Conference (VICTAM) 
Other 
Materials  25,000 Lab products for analysis 
Equipment 40,000 HPLC or other equipments 
Dissemination and marketing costs 1,500 Dissemination material and website translations 
Total other direct costs 81,450  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
70 
  
 
SECTION 4. MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM
4.1 PARTICIPANTS 
1. ITENE 
 
 
Instituto Tecnológico del Embalaje, Transporte y Logística 
Technical Institute of Packaging, Transport and Logistics 
http://www.itene.com/ Country: Spain Type: Non-profit 
association 
Short 
Name: ITENE Participant No.:  1 
Organisation description 
 
INSTITUTO TECNOLOGICO DEL EMBALAJE, TRANSPORTE Y LOGISTICA ( ITENE) is a non -profit 
research centre specialized in packaging technologies, transport, logistics and circular economy. Our 
main activities are Research and development, Innovati on, Tests and advanced services, Market 
research and R&D Management. We are unique as we provide business solutions from a holistic 
vision along supply chain.  
ITENE has participated in 39 projects from FP6 and FP7 (some of the are currently in execution) and 
is currently involved in 10 H2020 projects. We will provide knowledge and expertise as a 
coordinator and will also make a robust contribution as a technical partner and key stakeholder for 
dissemination and communication purposes.    
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
ITENE uses 7,000 m2 of its installations as laboratories and experimentation facilities, equipped with 
the latest technology for research and testing, and product and services development. R&D 
activities are carried out in the following la boratories: Nano Additives and Nano Clay Pilot Plant, 
New Material Processing Pilot Plant, Nano Safety Laboratory, Chemical Laboratory, Physical 
Laboratory, Packaging Manufacturing Pilot Plant, Packaging Pilot Plant, Microbiology Laboratory, 
Packaging Eval uation Laboratory, Transport Simulation Centre, RFID Pilot Plant, and Packaging 
Waste Pilot Plant. 
Software: SimaPro software and access to the Ecoinvent database, two -well recognized sources for 
Life Cycle Assessment. 
The main areas ITENE is involved in the Scalibur project are: 
Overall coordination. ITENE will act as project coordinator, having been selected for its great 
experience. 
Sustainability: this department will lead the management WP and hence the project. Within the 
WP2 ITENE will participate in  social engagement activities, especially in those that affect the 
municipalities and the waste managers. ITENE will directly work with the municipalities to define 
the real situation regarding the collection of organic waste and its quality. We will suppo rt WP7 by 
designing together with the municipalities and the External Support committee the acceptance 
campaigns of the waste -based products and the selective collection awareness actions. ITENE will 
also lead the WP8 developing the LCA LCC and SLCA.  
Transport & Sustainability: Support in WP3 to define the waste requirements for treatment in the 
four technological lines of the project (drying, stabilization of waste). Development of actions to 
improve the collection logistics, the waste quality and its use  in the treatment processes to obtain 
products with high added value.  
New advanced Materials: This department will participate in WP4 and WP6 with the production and 
validation for packaging applications of the biopolymers obtained in the processes develo p within 
these WP, biopolyesters and PHA, respectively. A full characterization, the evaluation of the 
processability and Food contact certification of these new biobased polymers will be performed. 
Regarding WP5, ITENE will produce chitosan and chitin nan owiskers for the reinforcement of 
biocomposites for packaging applications. 
Technology Transfer / Business development :  Support in dissemination activities and product / 
technology exploitation plans within the WP10 
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Susana Aucejo, PhD (Female). Currently works as R&D director at ITENE. She has s PhD in Chemistry 
from the University of Valencia. Thesis based on the Studying and Characterization of the humidity 
effects on the barrier properties of the Hydrophilic polymeric struct ures. She worked from 2002 to 
2011 as the Head of Packaging Division and Head of New Materials Division. Her work was focused 
on the developments and modification of nanofillers & nanocomposites, blends, as well as active 
materials. R&D projects related to the food industry both at national and international level. 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
71 
  
 
Miriam Gallur (female): Chemistry Degree, Polymer/Plastics Engineering (Universidad de Valencia). 
Renewable Materials Engineering Master of Science (MSc), Renewable Polymers, 
bionanocomposites and nanostructured materials (Universidad del País Vasco). Laboratory of 
Pulp&Paper Sciencies and Graphics Arts, LGP2, Biomaterials. Institut national polytechnique de 
Grenoble. She has more than 10 years of experience in developing and designing new mate rials 
applied to packaging. She has a vast experience in the management of national and international 
R&D projects, leading large multidisciplinary and multicultural teams. 
 
Antonio Dobon Lopez (male). MSc in Environmental Nanotechnology by the Universit y of Zaragoza 
(Spain) and Graduate in Chemical Engineering by the Polytechnic University of Valencia (Spain). He 
is currently Manager of Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) Projects at the Sustainability Area of ITENE. He 
has more than 12 years of expertise in pro jects related to LCA, carbon footprint, sustainability, eco -
design and eco -efficiency at national and international level, providing leadership of LCA related 
tasks and as a project coordinator. He has a wide experience as a critical reviewer of LCA studie s.
 
 
Silvia Martinez (female)  holds a degree in Environmental Science by the University of Cordoba 
(Spain). She has been working as a HSE technician at REPSOL and as corporate sustainability 
technician at NH Hotel groups. Currently, she works as sustainab ility technician at ITENE. One of the 
main tasks in which she is working is the life cycle assessment of products and processes among 
other tasks such as eco -design and eco - efficiency at national and international level. Participation 
on European and nati onal projects in waste management and LCA.  Main areas of expertise: LCA, 
carbon footprint, eco -efficiency, environmental impact, eco -design, sustainability, water footprint, 
waste management and environmental legislation.  
 
Cristina González Buch (female). Chemical Engineer (Polytechnic University of Valencia -  UPV), has a 
PhD in Engineering and Industrial Production (Polytechnic University of Valencia –  UPV) and a 
Master’s degree in Packaging, Logistics and Transport (ITENE). She worked for 4,5 years as a 
researcher in the UPV developing materials for the sustainable hydrogen production by means 
alkaline water hydrolysis as an energy vector to replace fossil fuels. She has been working in the 
ITENE for 1 year as a part of the sustainability area, partici pating in EU level projects mainly in life 
cycle assessment and life cycle costing. 
 
Pilar Albaladejo (female):   R&D Technician at ITENE  in the New Advanced Materials area with 
experience in national and international R&D projects related with the devel op and design of new 
materials applied to packaging. Chemical Engineer by Alicante University and master Degree in 
packaging, transport and logistics technologies by ITENE. Experience as a research assistant in 
Alicante University and in Alcoa in the surfaces and lubricants department. 
 
 
Relevant publications  
and/or products, services 
  
     
 Gallur et al, "Nanostructured biodegradable thermoplastic blends based on poly (L -D-lactic 
acid) and a poly (L -lactic acid -b-Ɛ-caprolactone) diblock copolymer Macromolecular Rapid 
Communication submitted December 2015) 
 Polymers & Starch Blends Reinforced W ith Cellulose Nanowhiskers And Nanoclays For 
Biopackaging Conference Paper Jan 2008Proceedings of the Polymer Processing Society 24th 
Annual MeetingProceedings of the Polymer Processing Society 24th Annual Meeting. Miriam 
Gallur. 
 Zhang H., Hortal M., Dobón  A., Bermudez J., Lara M. (2015). The Effect of Active Packaging on 
Minimising Food Losses: Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) of Essential Oil Component Enabled 
Packaging for Fresh Beef. Packaging Technology and Science. Accepted for publication. 
February 2015. 
 The sustainability of communicative packaging concepts in the food supply chain A case study: 
part 1. Life cycle assessment. Dobon A., Cordero P., Kreft E., Ostergaard S.R., Robertsson M., 
Smolande M., Hortal M. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessme nt Volume 16, Number 2, 
168-177, DOI: 10.1007/s11367-011-0257 
 EP13382126. Composition for the Preparation of a Nanostructured Biodegradable Polymeric. 
Material, the Material Obtained and its Applications. Inventors: Ana Guadalupe Galet 
Domingo, Maria Jorda Beneyto, Mercedes Hortal Ramos, Miriam Gallur Blanca, Natalia 
Ortuño, Susana Aucejo Romero. 
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 FOODWASTETREATMENT: Integrated process for a sustainable and cost -effective Food Waste 
Treatment. - LIFE+ 2011. ITENE is leading th e environmental, economic and social analysis of 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
72 
  
the new technology and process through LCA. Moreover, ITENE is leading the development of 
new processes for the valorisation of inorganic residues derived from the new process.  
 VALOR PLUS : Valorisation of b iorefinery by- products leading to closed loop systems with 
improved economic and environmental performance (VII FP KBBE).  
 AGRIMAX: Agri & food waste valorisation co-ops based on flexible multi-feedstocks biorefinery 
processing technologies for new high added value applications (H2020-BBI). 
 PLASTICIRCLE: Improvement of the plastic packaging waste chain from a circular economy 
approach. 20 pan -European partners, led by the Packaging and Logistics Research and 
Innovation Center (ITENE), are working to reinven t the plastic packaging treatment process, 
making recycling more accessible, cost -effective and profitable for both citizens and 
professionals in the field. Were ITENE is the coordinator.  
 LCA to go : Boosting Life Cycle Assessment Use in European Small and  Medium-sized 
Enterprises: Serving Needs of Innovative Key Sectors with Smart Methods and Tools (VII FP 
ENV) 
 International Patent WO2012/017025 A1 “Polymer Nanocomposite comprising polylactic acid 
reinforced with the modified phyllosilicate ” Authors: Aucej o Romero, Susana. Jorda Beneyto, 
María. Alonso Soriano, Jose María. Gallur Blanca, Miriam. Bermudez Saldaña, Jose María and 
Hortal Ramos, Mercedes. 
 European Patent EP 2787040 “Composition for preparing a nanostructured biodegradable 
polymeric material, the  obtained material and uses thereof ” Authors: Gallur Blanca, Miriam. 
Ortuño Mansilla, Natalia, Aucejo Romero, Susana. Jorda Beneyto, Maria. Hortal Ramos, 
Mercedes 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
73 
  
2. AERIS 
 
Aeris Tecnologías Ambientales S.L. 
Aeris Environmental Technologies Ltd  
http://www.aeris.es/ Country: Spain Type: SME Short 
Name: AERIS Participant 
No.:  2 
Organisation 
description 
 
AERIS is a spin-off of the Autonomous University of Barcelona comprising experts from the GENOCOV 
research group (U AB) aimed at helping industries and public entities to improve the environmental 
quality of their emissions. AERIS has a large experience designing and building highly automated pilot 
plants for research purposes. These are always developed according to th e specific customer needs. 
This includes fermenters, air -lift reactors, sequencing batch reactors (SBR), photobioreactors, etc. 
Also, other of AERIS main business areas is the optimization of the biological and/or physico -chemical 
depuration of natural and  industrial liquid streams containing nutrients, COD and/or recalcitrant 
compounds. In this field, numerous R+D and technological implementation projects have been 
carried out in the last years, mostly in paper-producing, tannery and food industries. 
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
Despite being a company with less than 10 years of life, Aeris has great experience in participating in 
publicly funded projects. Aeris currently participates in 5 projects financed by the EU (three RISE, one 
CIRC and one SMART), integrated in different aspects of the environmental field. Aeris has the ability 
to develop tailor-made pilot plants, with a high level of sensorization and autonomy, valid for 
research in the environmental field.  
Within the the SCALIBUR project Aeris will execute the tasks of obtaining high added value products 
from the solid fraction obtained from the hydrolysis of the OFMSW. 
Key personnel curriculum 
 
 Dr. Óscar Prado (male), Director of AERIS, holds a degree in Marine Sciences and a PhD in Chemi cal 
Engineering, with PhD Extraordinary Quality Prize. His areas of expertise include the design and 
operation of biological reactors for biomass production and related products and for degradation of 
pollutants. He has published more than 30 references in  these fields and has wide experience in 
management and development of both national and European projects.  
 
Prof. Javier Lafuente (male) is the President of AERIS and the Director of the Technology Centre Bio -
GLS (Red TECNIO). His professional experienc e of more than 30 years covers many areas within the 
utilization and energy optimization and production of high added value compounds of biological 
origin. He has more than 140 publications in international scientific journals and has participated as 
principal investigator in many national and international R & D projects. 
 
 Dr. Josep Torà (male) is a Chemical Engineer and holds a PhD in Environmental Sciences. It has over 
10 years’ experience in the field of design and maintenance of biological and physi co-chemical 
reactors for different applications to pilot and industrial scales, with numerous publications related to 
these lines of work. Additionally, he has advanced knowledge of systems design monitoring and 
control of reactors, which will be especially useful for this project. 
 
Dr. Albert Bartrolí  (male) is a Chemical Engineer and holds a PhD in Environmental Sciences. It has 
over 15 years’ experience in the field of design and maintenance of biological systems for biomass 
production, both at laboratory and pilot scales. Within the present project he will be the main person 
in charge of the development of the pilot plant. 
Relevant publications 
and/or products, 
services 
 Prado, Ó. J., Popat, S. C., Chen, G., Walker, S., Lafuente, J., Gabriel, D.,  Deshusses, M. A. 2009. The 
effect of packing hydrophilization on bacterial attachment and the relationship with the 
performance of biotrickling filters. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 103: 1060-1067.  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
74 
  
       Hernández, J., Lafuente, J., Prado, Ó. J., Gabriel, D. 2012. Simultaneous removal of H2S, NH3 and 
ethylmercaptan in biotrickling filters packed with poplar wood and polyurethane foam: impact of 
pH during startup and crossed effects evaluation. Water, Air, Soil Pollut., 223: 3485-97. 
 Alfonsín, C., Hernández, J., Omil, F ., Prado, Ó. J., Gabriel, D., Feijoo, G., Moreira, Mª T. 2013. 
Environmental assessment of different biofilters for the treatment of gaseous streams. J. Environ. 
Manage. 129: 463-470.  
 Hernández, J., Dorado, A. D., Lafuente, J., Gamisans, X., Prado, Ó. J., Gabriel, D. 2017. 
Characterization and evaluation of poplar and pine wood in twin biotrickling filters treating a 
mixture of NH3, H2S, butyric acid and ethylmercaptan. Environ. Prog. Sustainable Energy, 36: 
171–179. 
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 DECISIVE. A DECentralIzed management Scheme for Innovative Valorization of urban biowastE. 
ID 689229. Call H2020-WASTE-2015-two-stage. 2016-2020 
 NANOREMOVAS. ADVANCED MULTIFUNCTIONAL NANOSTRUCTURED MATERIALS APPLIED TO 
REMOVE ARSENIC IN ARGENTINIAN GROUNDWATER. I D 645024. Call H2020- MSCA-RISE-2014. 
2015-2019 
 C_FOOT_CTRL. Developing on line tools to monitor, control and mitigate GHG emissions in 
WWTPs. ID 645769. H2020-MSCA-RISE-2014. 2015-2019 
 PTQ-11-04473. Feasibility of the use of advanced filling materials and specific inoculums in the 
biological purification of complex gaseous emissions. Optimization of operation parameters. 
Spanish Ministry of Science and Education. 2012-2015 
 BioQUIM_RESCUE. Desenvolupament i integració de tractaments BIOlògics i d’oxidació QU IMica 
per a la REducció Sostenible de micro -Contaminants en aigÜes rEsidualsRD12 -1-0018.  
Generalitat de Catalunya-Catalan Government. 2013-2015 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
75 
  
3. ASA 
 
ASA Spezialenzyme GmbH 
ASA Special Enzymes GmbH 
http://www.asa-
enzyme.de/ 
Country: Germany Type: SME 
Short 
Name: ASA Participant 
No.:  3 
Organisation 
 description 
 
The business activities of ASA Spezialenzyme GmbH are the development and production of 
enzymes, microbial mixed cultures and other biotechnological products. 
The product range covers the fields of application food and feed processing, bioenergy 
(bioethanol, biogas), organic synthesis, analytics, biosensors, textile industry and paper industry.  
Since the foundation in the year 1991 several research projects were carried out in the area of 
enzymatic degradation of renewable raw materials resulting in new cellulase and hemicellulase 
products for the utilization in the production of biodiesel, bioethanol and biogas. Furthermore 
ASA was engaged in several r&d -projects dealing with the conversion of organic waste materials 
(e.g. lignocellulytic material as grain stillage), whereby ASA developed several new cellulases, 
hemicellulases, pectinases etc.  Moreover  within the scope of a r&d -project AS A developed 
hydrolases for the degradation of organic compounds of municipal wastes, which might be useful 
for the SCALIBUR project.
  
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
Fermentation: incubation chambers for flask shake cultures, pilot to industrial scale a utomated 
stainless steel bioreactors (10 L, 20 L, 100 L, 300 L, 1.000 L) 
Downstream processing: ultrasonic cell disruptor, glas bead mill, ultrafiltration systems from 
laboratory to technical scale, chromatography columns up to pilot scale, freeze dryer  
Gene technoology: PCR, electrophoresis systems, electroporator  
QC and analytics: electrophoresis systems, UV/Vis scanning spectrophotometers, 2 analytical 
HPLCs, 1 preparative HPLC 
Key personnel curriculum 
 
 
Dr. Arno Cordes (Male), Head of research and de velopment. Founder ASA Spezialenzyme GmbH, 
1991. Technical University Berlin, Diploma in Biotechnology. Technical University Braunschweig, 
Ph.D. in Biotechnology Eng. Biotechnology by Technical University Munich. Project leader; 
genetic engineering; management, LCA 
 
 
Dipl.-Eng. Petra Hoferichter  (Female). Head of production, deputy head of research and 
development. With ASA since May 1996. University Ostfriesland, Chemistry/ Biotechnology 
Expert in downstream processing of enzymes; development of enzyme cocktails. 
 
 
M. Eng. Kai-Arne Klotz (Male), Process engineering, project management, electrical engineering. 
With ASA since February 2016. University Ostfalia, Expert is energy -systems-technology Project 
engineer; scale-up of fermentation processes; production of enzymes 
Relevant publications 
and/or products, services 
      
 Products: Special enzymes, cellulases, hemicellulases, amylases, proteases, lipases 
 Services: contract manufactoring, contract research 
 Cordes, A., Kunze, G., Dornig, D.: Development o f an enzymatic process for the 
improvement of biogas yield and quality from plant and animal biomass. Research report, 
Fachagentur Nachwachsende Rohstoffee.V., FKZ 22011504 (2006) 
 Bischoff, Felix, et al. "Three new cutinases from the yeast Arxula adeninivo rans that are 
suitable for biotechnological applications." Applied and environmental microbiology 81.16 
(2015): 5497-5510. 
 Tonin, Fabio, et al. "Comparison of different microbial laccases as tools for industrial uses." 
New biotechnology 33.3 (2016): 387-398. 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
76 
  
Relevant projects and  
patents 
 The BERBION - Project: Efficient material & energy recovery from Organic waste and waste 
water in the Hamburg district Bergedorf (BMBF, 2009-2013) 
 Valor plus : Development of processes for the production of polyhydroxyalca noates ( EC-
FB7; 2013 – 2017) 
 Biotechnological recycling of electronic waste: Development of processes for the 
production of polyhydroxyalcanoates (EC-FB7; 2013 – 2017) 
 ARBOCAR: Enzyme design and enzymatic modification of lignin for the refining of 
thermoplastic lignin compounds for car interiors (BMBF, 2008 – 2011) 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
77 
  
4. CENER 
 
Fundación CENER-CIEMAT 
CENER-CIEMAT Foundation  
http://www.cener.com/ Country Spain Type: SME 
Short 
Name: CENER Participant No.:  4 
Organisation description 
 
The National Renewable Energy Centre (CENER) is a technology centre specialized in applied 
research, and the development and promotion of renewable energies. It is highly rated and has 
acknowledged national and international prestige. CENER, as a foundation, is an organization 
destined to support renewable energies sector competitiveness in order to help companies to 
reach their R&D needs. It offers high added value services and activities and transferring 
technology by means of a cutting -edge technological infrastructure, with t he most modern 
laboratories and facilities in Europe. Staff is approx. 200 people, where around 80% are 
technical organized in 6 Technical Departments: Wind Energy, Photovoltaic, Solar Thermal, 
Energy Building, Grid Energy Integration and Biomass Energy.  
CENER´s Biomass Energy Department  is composed of a multidisciplinary staff, over 19 people, 
some of them with more than ten years’ experience in biomass and bio -based products, with 
specific knowledge in biology, chemistry, agronomy and chemical engineerin g. Biomass 
Department has been working since 2002 in the conversion of lignocellulosic biomass into 
biofuels and bioproducts and since 2012 it owns and operates the “Second Generation Biofuel 
Centre”.  This is a semi -industrial pilot scale test facility, a ble to develop advanced biofuel and 
bio-based products production processes based on raw materials that are not competitive with 
the food industry (specially lignocellulosic materials and municipal solid waste), through the 
implementation of different conv ersion routes (thermochemical, biochemical and/or 
enzymatic) and also the application of biorefinery concepts.  
In CENER laboratories and pilot plant premises a wide kind of bioconversion processes  
(feedstock preparation, pretreatment, enzymatic hydrolysis , fermentation, etc) are carried out 
and optimized. These are focused on bio-based products production  such as bio -pesticides, 
building blocks based on furfural compounds, and fractionation & separation of lignocellulosic 
biomass in order to get more valuable bio -products.Besides, CENER is specialized on 
LCA 
assessment (at least GHG and energy balances) of the processes/products developed in its 
premises. 
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
CENER, as WP4 leader, will be focused in:  
 Set the optimum condition s for the OFMSW to be used as feedstock in the enzymatic 
hydrolysis process. 
 Demonstrate at TRL 7 the production on fermentable sugars from OFMSW.  
 Generate a solid fraction to be valorized together with sewage sludge in WP6. 
 Demostraste biopesticides production at TRL7 from the fermentable sugar 
liquid fraction of OFMSW. 
Also, CENER will be in charge of environmental sustainability evaluation of WP4 value chains by 
means of Life Cycle Assessment in WP7. 
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Mrs Irantzu Alegria (F, M Sc in Biology). From September 1998 to December 2001, she was 
research fellow at the Inmunology Dpt. of the Deutsches Primaten Zentrum. Göttingen, 
Germany. As researcher of the Biomass Department since 2002, Irantzu Alegría works on the 
development and coordination of R&D projects related to biochemical conversion of biomass 
into biofuels and/or bio -based product. Her main research lines are associated with biomass 
fractionation, enzymatic hydrolysis, fermentation and compositional analysis.  
 
Ms Inés del Campo (F, Msc in Chemical Engineer). From October 2002 she has been working 
in CENER Biomass department, nowadays as Senior R&D Engineer in advanced biofuels and 
biobased products production projects. Her main background is in the following areas: 
advanced biofuels technologies (biochemical & thermochemical), advanced biofuels plant 
design (biochemical route), R&D project management and technical advisor in technical 
issues, policy and regulations about biofuels, biomass characterisation, biomass 
pretreatment, enzymatic hydrolysis, fermentation, biofuel characterisation and use. She also 
actively participates in the EERA Joint Program on Bioenergy.  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
78 
  
 
Ms Mercedes Munárriz (F, MSc in Biology).  As researcher of the Biomass Department since 
2003, she works on the development and coordination of R&D projects related to 
microbiological processes scaling for obtaining compounds of interest at pilot scale, as well as 
in biodiesel production from microalgae. 
 
Goizeder Barberena (F, Agronomist Engineer). Working in CENER Biomass Department since 
2007, she focuses on the development and coordination of biomass sustainability related 
R&D projects, both in EU and nation al funded, and industrial environments. She is expert on 
bioenergy & bio -based products sustainability as well as on biomass resources assessment, 
and has supported biomass sustainability management systems of different companies in 
biofuels sector. 
Relevant publications  
and/or products, services 
      
 I.del Campo, I. Alegría, E. Otazu. “Enhanced bioconversion of agricultural residues 
through cascading use”. 25th European Biomass Conference.  Stockholm, June 2017 
 G. Wolter, V. Daioglou, G. Barberena, “ Study Report on  Reporting Requirements on 
Biofuels and Bioliquids  Stemming from fhe Directive (EU) 2015/1513” . DG Energy 
Repository. September 2017. 
 Alegría, I.; Garcia, L.; Ortigosa, I; Del Campo, I.Sánchez, D.; Munarriz, M.; Iruretagoyena, 
J. “Development of a biorefinery concept design for the Navarre region . 23 th European 
Biomass Conference. Vienna. June 2015. 
 Toledano. A. Alegria, I, Labidi, J. “ Biorefining of olive tree (Olea europea) pruning” . 
Biomass & Bioenergy. 2013.59 (503-511) 
 I.del Campo, I. Ale gría, M. Zazpe, M. Echeverría and I. Echeverría. “Diluted acid 
hydrolysis pretreatment of agri-food wastes for bioethanol production”. Industrial Crops 
and Products Vol 26 (2006), 214-221 
 Barberena, G., Otazu, E., Sánchez, D., Alonso, B., Echeverría, I. “ GHG Emissions Assessment 
of Biofuels Cultivation Stage in EU -27”. Proceedings at the 18 th European biomass 
Conference & Exhibition Lyon, May 2010. 
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 BRISK II (2017 -2022). H2020. Aiming at sharing biofuels research infrastructur es for 
sharing knowledge. CENER is LCA task leader and offers transnational access to its bio -
based products pilot plant. 
 PERCAL (2017-2020) H2020-BBI. Aims at producing chemical building blocks from versatile 
MSW biorefinery”. CENER develops novel biosurf actants by employing the lipid and 
protein fraction remaining after the fermentation processes to ethanol, LA or SA, of 
pretreated and hydrolyzed MSW. 
 BIORESCUE (2016-2019).  H2020- BBI. Focused on the enhanced bioconversion of 
agricultural residues through  cascading use. CENER coordinates de project and works on 
the LCA of the value chains identified. 
 ButaNexT (2015-2018). H2020. It is focused on developing next generation technologies 
for biofuels and sustainable alternative fuels. CENER is the scientific coordinator and is the 
responsible partner for the integration and scale -up of all the process stages at its pilot 
plant. 
 ENER/C1/2015-438/4 (2016 -2017). DG ENER. Providing technical assistance to the EC 
concerning the reporting requirements on biofuels an d bioliquids stemming from the 
Directive (EU) 2015/1513. CENER coordinates de projects and works on technical ILUC 
sustainability. 
 Biorefinery in Navarra project (2014 -2015). Navarra Government through regional 
development funds with contract nº IIM14193.R I1. CENER has carried out hydrothermal 
pretreatment assays using different types of local feedstocks.  
 Industry/Private companies (2007- 2016). CENER has been supporting European biofuels 
industry for the last 10 years in the development and maintenance of biofuels 
sustainability schemes.  
 Patent: Europe Patent Office 11382133.4-1225 and US 20120290220: 
System and method 
for calculating greenhouse gas emissions in the production of raw material for obtaining 
bioproducts. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
79 
  
5. CLUBE 
 
Cluster of Bioenergy & Environment of Western Macedonia (CLUBE) 
http://www.clube.gr/ 
 Country: Greece Type: Non profit 
Short 
Name: CLUBE Participant 
No.:  5 
Organisation description 
 
The Cluster of Bioenergy and Environment of Western Macedonia  (CLUBE) is a non -profit company 
established under the Greek Law among local actors and stakeholders of the Region of Western 
Macedonia.  
CLUBE is developing R&D and business activities in the fi elds of bioenergy and environment, in 
order to reinforce bio, green and circular economy in the region and the neighboring area, namely 
through: 
 Energetic exploitation of woody and other biomass for household and industrial use and 
especially for district heating systems for small, medium or large towns 
 Increasing the share of biofuels in the energy mix of transportation fuels 
 Co-firing with lignite in existing power stations and/or future heating plants  
 Optimization of heating systems 
 Improvement of energy efficiency for households, public and private buildings 
After being legally established in February 2014 as a non for profit association, the cluster currently 
includes 34 triple helix members covering the public sector, academia and business sector, 
including wood companies, forest and agricultural cooperatives, etc. Regarding urban wastes CLUBE  
has a strong collaboration with two of its members, the Waste Management Company of Western 
Macedonia (DIADYMA SA) and the Municipalities of the region through th e Regional Association of 
Municipalities of Western Macedonia. In the Region of Western Macedonia there is an integrated 
system for urban wastes with separate selection of recyclable material in 4 different bins. 
Furthermore, in pilot scale, there are two more projects. A separate collection of bio -wastes in 
small areas of two Municipalities, Kozani and Voio (in 2018 it will expanded to another 5 
Municipalities of the Region). 
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
The members of CLUBE and its staff have a vast  experience in the fields of biomass, bioenergy and 
environment. They manage and successfully completed several European and Transnational 
Projects in the field of research and dissemination of knowledge and have assist the regional 
business sector promoting and fostering entrepreneurship in Western Macedonia. 
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Dr. Yannis Fallas, Director of CLUBE, male, senior expert. 
He holds a PhD in Clusters in Traditional Sectors of the Economy from the Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki and is a Dipl. Mining Engineer of Athens Technical University. He has long experience 
with Cross -border and interregional cooperation projects (FP7, H2020, Interreg, Med, Black Sea, 
etc), among which he has been the Project Manager of the Regional Innovatio n Strategy Projects 
(RIS and RIS+) and the “Knowledge clusters” Innovative Actions Program of Western Macedonia, 
coordinator of the Regional Innovation Pole and the Regional Innovation Office of Western 
Macedonia, national Coordinator of the Strategic Med project “PROFORBIOMED”, external expert 
on innovation issues of FOROPA South East Europe project, etc. He coordinated several foresight 
exercises and has cooperated with a large number of SMEs (feasibility studies, project proposals 
and implementation, etc ). He is currently the national member of the European Bioeconomy Panel 
of the European Commission (DG RTD) 
 
Nikolaos Ntavos, CLUBE Manager, male, expert.  
He holds a degree in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Western Macedonia (UoWM) 
and he is a PhD candidate in the area of bioenergy and biofuels at the same University. Since 2008 
he has been working as an external project manager for different EU Programmes (Horizon, FP7, 
IEE, Interreg, MED, LIFE) to several organizations like the Region of  Western Macedonia, the 
Regional Development Fund of Western Macedonia, the University of Western Macedonia, 
CERTH/CPERI and the Waste Management Company of Western Macedonia on different projects 
related to energy, bioenergy, industrial symbiosis, urban a
nd rural development and 
entrepreneurship. 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
80 
  
 
Katerina Tsepoura, female, junior expert. 
She holds a degree in Civil Engineering from the Democritus University of Thrace. She finishes her 
master in Engineering Project Management at Hellenic Open University.  She has been recently 
involved in all the activities of CLUBE , as a member of the working team of SecureChain Project, 
supporting all the operational and administrative functions of the Cluster. 
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 STARDUST “Holistic and Integ rated Urban Model for Smart Cities”,Duration: 2018 -2022; 
Website: http://www.s2biom.eu/en/ 
 SecureChain “Securing future-proof environmentally compatible bioenergy chains” 
Duration: 2015-2018; Website: http://www.securechain.eu 
 Regional Innovation Pole of West Macedonia - Energy Sector; Duration:2006-2008 
 BIOCLUS. Developing Research and Innovation Environment in five European Regions in 
the field of Sustainable Use of Biomass; Duration:2009-2012;  
Website: http://www.bioclus.eu/en/ 
 BioEnArea. Improve regional policies for bio-energy and territorial development; 
Duration:2010-2013; Website: http://www.bioenarea.eu/ 
 PROFORBIOMED. Promotion of residual biomass in the Mediterranean basin; 
Duration:2011-2014; Website: http://www.programmemed.eu 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
81 
  
6. CSCP 
 
Collaborating Centre on Sustainable Consumption and Pr oduction 
gGmbH                                                                         
https://www.scp-
centre.org/ Country: Germany Type: Research 
Organisation 
Short 
Name: CSCP Participant 
No.:  6 
Organisation  
description 
 
The Collaborating Centre on Su stainable Consumption and Production (CSCP) gGmbH is a Think and 
Do tank that works with businesses, policy makers, partner organizations and civil society toward a 
sustainable planet. The United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) and the Wuppertal Institu te for 
Climate, Energy and Environment jointly founded us in 2005. As a non -for profit and focuses, we 
focus on the promotion of sustainable patters of consumption and production (SCP). The CSCP 
adopts a holistic approach to foster SCP involving all actor groups and stakeholders. It has expertise 
in the areas of Products and Services, Cities & Infrastructure, Policy, Lifestyles & Behavior and 
Business & Entrepreneurship. Within these areas, it provides both ‘think’ and ‘do’ services in 
collaboration with it s partner organizations across the globe. The CSCP specializes in discovering, 
developing and replicating sustainable practices in the above topic areas in order to achieve a 
resilient and sustainable future for all. The CSCP has successfully acquired and implemented a range 
of EU funded projects including the projects funded under EU’s 7th Framework of Programme (FP 7) 
and Horizon 2020. In these, it has provided expertise on stakeholder mapping, outreach, dialogue, 
policy advice, sector sustainability road map development and translating sustainability in areas such 
as food and agriculture, Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), housing, mobility and 
health. 
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
The CSCP will support and ensure the efficient and succ essful implementation of the Urban 
Biowasteclubs in Spain, Italy, Sweden and the Czech Republic of the regional SCALIBUR partners by 
involving CSCP colleagues with respective language skills if needed. Thanks to its multidisciplinary 
and multinational team experienced Italian, Spanish, Swedish native-speakers can be involved. 
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Nora Brüggemann (female). Nora’s expertise lies in the field of sustainable consumption, sustainable 
lifestyles and communication. Focussing on policy and civil society organisations, she has valuable 
experience in working with multiple stakeholders. Nora coordinates the CSCP contributions to 
European Topic Centre on Waste and Materials in a Green Economy, co -manages the German 
REFRESH activities on food was te and works with producers and retailers in the food sector. She 
moderates and facilitates stakeholder meetings on various topics, and supervises the organization of 
numerous international events and workshops across Europe. 
 
Carina Diedrich (female). Carina is Project Manager in CSCP's Sustainable Infrastructure, Products and 
Services Team. Carina is experienced in the management of national and international research 
projects in the fields of environmental politics and sustainable food production and c onsumption. 
Furthermore, she is interested in corporate social responsibility and the influence of civil society in 
shaping and promoting sustainable lifestyles.  
 
Janpeter Beckmann (male). Janpeter is an economist and specialized in resource economics. At CSCP 
he focusses on economic and sustainability -related analyses and modelling. Prior to joining the CSCP 
in 2015, he worked as a project manager and scientific employee dealing in particular with techno -
economic evaluations in regard to the material us e of renewable resources. In this context he 
focused on value chain analyses and market entry strategies as well as on market framework 
analyses and Green Premium.  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
82 
  
 
Francesca Grossi (Dr., female). Francesca’s main focus lies on eco -innovative business p ractices and 
policies, sustainable business models, as well as energy and resource efficiency and the circular 
economy. Francesca has actively worked on the development of training programmes, workshops 
and general guidelines for financial institutes, and SMEs. Francesca holds a Master of Art in 
International Relations and Diplomacy from Leiden University and a PhD in Science and Management 
of Climate Change at the Ca ́Foscari University Venice.  
 
 
Relevant publications  
and/or products, 
services 
  
     
 Bygrave, K., Rogers, D., (WRAP), Eisenhauer, P., Brüggemann, N., (CSCP), Timmermans, T., 
(Wageningen Food and Biobased Research), Cseh, B., (Hungarian Food Bank), Lopez -i-Gelats, F., 
Díaz-Ruiz, R., (CREDA -UPC-IRTA). (2017). Frameworks for Action: Selection P rocess. A 
deliverable within the REFRESH Project 
 Staatsen, B., Strube, R., Guillen -Hanson, G. et. al. (2017): “Exploring triple -win solutions for 
living, moving and consuming that encourage behaviour change, protect the environment, 
promote health and health equity”, Brussels 2017.  
 Van Beers, D., Kiørboe, N., Brüggemann, N., Grossi, F. (2014): Reflections and Lessons Learnt 
from EEA’s Work on Innovative Business Models for Sustainable Lifestyles. Prepared by the 
ETC/SCP. 
 Coles, N., Xhelili, A., Kessler, A. (2016). SUPPLY CHA!NGE in European Food Chains. Business 
Forum Report. Wuppertal.  
 Anggraeni, K., Tunçer, B. (2013). Sustainable Supply Chain Initiatives: Strategies and Lessons 
Learnt from the SWITCH -Asia Programme -  Scaling-up Study 2013. Prepared by th e SWITCH-
Asia Network Facility. 
 
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 REFRESH – Resource Efficient Food and dRink for the Entire Supply cHain (H2020, 2015 -2019) is 
an EU research project with 26 partners taking action to reduce avoidable waste and improve 
valorisation of food resources in line with SDG 12.3. The CSCP is responsible for the 
implementation of REFRESH in Germany including research on consumer behaviour regarding 
food waste (incl. moderation of focus groups) and the development of a German roadmap t o 
reduce and avoid food waste. A group of 15 organisations from business, civil society, science, 
and politics, moderated by CSCP, is working collaboratively together to create and negotiate 
this document as well as to implement innovative projects resulting from the discussions.  
 R2π (H2020, 2016-2019) – Transition from Linear to Circular focusses on enabling organisations 
and their value chains the transition towards a more viable, sustainable and competitive 
economic model. R2π examines the shift from th e broad concept of a Circular Economy (CE) to 
one of Circular Economy Business Models (CEBM) by tackling market opportunities and failures 
as well as policy opportunities and failures. Its innovation lies in having a strong business- model 
focus as well as in the role of policy development. R2π unfolds in diverse contexts with a strong 
emphasis on stakeholder involvement and exchange. The CSCP coordinates this project. CSCP 
supports the project on the selection of Circular Economy Business Models case studie s in 
sectors as e.g. food waste, Biomass/bio-based, circular raw material. 
 
 SPREAD – Sustainable Lifestyles 2050 (FP7, 2011 -2012) was a European social platform project 
addressing the challenge of improving quality of life with the help of social innovatio n. The 
project, coordinated by CSCP, examined the key lifestyle impact areas of consuming, living, 
moving, health and society. The consolidation of existing knowledge on sustainable lifestyles 
enabled SPREAD to prepare a roadmap for strategic action for po licy makers and to deliver 
innovative ideas for business, research and society on how to enable sustainable lifestyles in 
European society. 
 INHERIT – Intersectoral Health and Environment Research for Innovation (H2020, 2016 -2019)  
examines effective inter -sectoral policies, interventions and social as well as technological 
innovations that encourage individuals and communities across Europe to lead healthier and 
more environmentally sustainable lifestyles.   The CSCP contributes with its expertise in impact 
areas of and promising practices for sustainable lifestyles and will lead a foresight process on 
ideal futures for sustainable and healthy lifestyles in 2030.  
 ETC/WMGE- European Topic Centre on Waste and Materials in a Green Economy (2014 – 2018, 
EEA) is a consortium contracted by the European Environment Agency (EEA) to supply thematic 
expertise, and facilitate efficient communication and interaction among policy makers, 
administrative agencies and the scientific community to drive the transition towards a low -
carbon and circular economy in Europe. To ensure an interactive cooperation among member 
countries, the CSCP organizes annual EEA workshops, webinars and conferences and high -level 
meetings on SCP, waste management, and the circular economy.   
 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
83 
  
7. EXERGY 
 
EXERGY Netherlands B.V 
http://www.exergy.uk.c
om  Country: Netherlands Type: SME 
Short 
Name: Exergy  Participant 
No.:  7 
Organisation 
description 
 
EXERGY is a leading engineering and technology company that inspires innovative solu tions across 
the globe that contribute to its goal of a low carbon, sustainable future in two main areas: Green 
Building and Cities and Sustainable Processes.  
For over 5 years, EXERGY has been in the sustainable industry playing a major role in the 
development of sustainable and energy efficient engineering systems, including more than 20 
projects in UK and Europe, in collaboration with partner organisations and expanding to other 
countries around the world. Actually, the head company of EXERGY is based in  Coventry (UK) and 
apart from that, there are 3 branches in Netherlands, Colombia, and USA.  
EXERGY’s approach is based on a collaborative and innovative model where citizens, businesses and 
governments are a fundamental piece of its sustainable value chain . The technologies are developed 
through R&D efforts, that once proved, are incorporated in the products and services maintaining a 
dynamic and always cutting-edge value. 
Operating across a range of innovative low -carbon sustainable technologies, EXERGY’s capabilities 
cover everything from project planning to construction and from operation to reuse throughout the 
project life cycle to achieve target sustainability ratings and benchmarks. EXERGY is also member of 
SPIRE and BIC. 
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
EXERGY counts with senior staff with more than 10 years of experience in the industry, which 
contribute to the know-how of the company, as well as the latest technology support for the Process 
Design and Evaluation of Impacts in the Process Engineering Industry. 
Sustainable Processes team leads the engineering support to the industry and SMEs from concept 
design to scale -up and commercialisation of industrial biotechnology, biorefining and circular 
projects. Exergy counts on a specialised team with expertise in: 
- Engineering process development and design 
- Concept design, scale-up, simulation of processes 
- Technology integration, preparation of process flows diagrams 
- Development of mass and energy balances 
- Techno economic feasibility to put together the business case 
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Gustavo Valente (Male): Head of Sustainable Processes, Gustavo is a Chemical Engineer with more 
than 14 years of technical and commercial experience developing processes and processing 
technologies, within the chemical, pharmaceutical, biotechnology, bioenergy, and biofuels industries, 
together with an active network in the industry, academia, and public sector. Gustavo has 
successfully delivered a range of projects from process concept design, front -end engineering  to 
construction, successful commissioning and handover. He has broad experience in developing, 
testing and scaling up processes and technologies ensuring health, safety and environmental 
compliance, as well as collaboratively developing process models, fe asibility studies, technology 
assessment reviews, market research, technology roadmaps, and evaluation of commercial 
feasibility. 
 
Rocio Roldan (Female): Chemical Process Engineer, Rocio is a Chemical Engineer by the Complutense 
University of Madrid and holds an Interuniversity Master’s Degree in Chemical Engineering from 
URJC and Autonoma University of Madrid. Her expert area is related to the modelling and simulation 
of chemical processes and unitary operations. She has developed and enhanced other stro ng skills 
along with her professional experience together with further training in the petrochemical area, 
biotechnology and circular economy. 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
84 
  
 
YaYing Chen (Female): PhD, MEng, AMIChemE. PhD in Chemical Engineering from the University of 
Cambridge, Master of Engineering in Chemical Engineering with Management from the University of 
Birmingham. In Exergy, her main expertise areas are related to process simulation, optimisation and 
modelling using Aspen and general process engineering activities such as mat erial balances, 
equipment sizing and technical drawings (P&ID and PFD etc). Her recent involvements are mainly 
within projects related to the valorisation of biomass into valuable products and circular economy. 
She is responsible for all technical engineer ing activities as well as project management for these 
projects. 
Relevant publications  
and/or products, 
services  
 
      
 M.S.R. Abbott, C.M Brain, A.P Harvey, M. I. Morrison, G. Valente Perez. Liquid culture of 
microalgae in a photobioreactor (PBR) based  on oscillatory baffled reactor (OBR) technology –  
A feasibility study. Chemical Engineering Science, Volume 138, 22 December 2015 
 J. Molto, 2016. Scale -up and design of an optimised spirulina microalgae process for lipid 
extraction and biogas production. 
 Hayton, R. Roldan, J.Molto, 2015. Simulation of the Chemical Pre -treatment Process. Liquid and 
gas Fischer -Tropsch fuel production from olive industry waste: fuel from waste.  November 
2015. 
 M. S. R. Abbott,, A. P. Harvey, G. Valente Perez, M. K. Theodorou . Biological processing in 
oscillatory baffled reactors: operation, advantages and potential. Royal Society Publishing, 
Interface Focus, December 21, 2012 
 Galileo Eye’s Methodology. Revolutionary Universal Sustainability Performance Rating. The 
universal s ustainability performance rating methodology, Galileo’s Eye, was developed to 
produce a comprehensive, unbiased scientific rating that takes into account all resources and 
all emissions for a product, service, or a community of systems, of any size or comp lexity. 
Projects: Thermo -Environmental Systems Simulation (Twin Cities, USA), Alternative Design 
Study for Duluth District System (Duluth, USA). Landfill site and WasteWater Plant (Medellin, 
Colombia). 
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 URBIOFIN – “Demonstration of an integrated innovative biorefinery for the transformation of 
Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) into new BioBased products”. BBI 2016 D6 No 745785. 
https://www.urbiofin.eu/  
 PERCAL – “Emerging technologies for con version of the organic content of Municipal Solid 
Waste and improving waste -to-chemicals value chains”. BBI 2016 R8 No 745828. 
http://www.percal-project.eu/  
 Waste2Bio – “Valorization of urban WASTEs to new gen eration of BIOethanol”. ERA -NET 
BESTF3. http://www.waste2bio.com/the-project/  
 AGROCYCLE - “Sustainable techno-economic solutions for the agricultural value chain”. H2020 
No. 690142. http://www.agrocycle.eu/  
 AgriMax - “Agri and food waste valorisation co -ops based on flexible multi -feedstocks 
biorefinery processing technologies for new high added value applications”. http://agrimax-
project.eu/ 
 
 
8. FCC 
 
FOMENTO DE CONSTRUCCIONES Y CONTRATAS S.A. 
PROMOTION OF CONSTRUCTIONS AND CONTRACTS S.A. 
http://www.fcc.es/ Country: Spain Type: Large 
Company 
Short 
Name: FCC Participant 
No.:  8 
Organisation  
description 
 
FCC was founded in 1992 following the merger of two companies: Construcciones y Contratas 
(1944) and Fomento de Obras y Construcciones (1900). Since then, we have worked to become a 
company that provides high -quality services for citizens on a daily basi s. FCC is a publicly traded 
company on the Spanish stock exchange and one of the biggest and oldest waste management 
companies in the world, starting with its first contract for environmental services for 
municipalities in the city of Barcelona in 1901.  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
85 
  
 
FCC is the parent company of one of Europe's leading citizen services groups, operating in sectors 
such as environmental services, water, and infrastructure. FCC is one of the world’s largest waste 
management and recycling companies with a presence in 55 countries. FCC obtained $7.906,75 
Billion in revenues in 2014, of which 44% came from international markets, mainly Europe and 
America. FCC's more than 63,000 employees worldwide. Over 100 million people in more than 
5,000 municipalities around the world b enefit from the services we provide. By employing the 
most advanced technologies we continuously improve our ability to manage the thousands of 
tons of solid waste collected every day in some of the world’s most important cities. More than 
25 million tons of refuse are collected per year. 
Our policies on corporate responsibility and continuous innovation in environmentally -friendly 
techniques have given rise to cleaner and more sustainable cities. And this is not all we have 
achieved. By diversifying our se rvices, we have helped to increase public satisfaction and made 
people's lives easier. We employ a variety of collection systems according to each city’s needs, 
using a combination of vehicles and containers designed to maximize efficiency and minimize the  
environmental footprint in terms of noise and emissions.  
FCC has over 200 centres that handle 24 million tonnes solid waste per year. This waste is treated 
through thermal, composting, biomethanisation, recycling or incineration processes, and the use 
of sanitary landfills. 
FCC’s Waste Treatment Department 
Our waste management activities include collection, treatment and elimination of solid urban 
waste, sewer system maintenance, treatment and elimination of industrial waste, Biomass or 
Waste to Energy re newable energy generation, street cleaning, park and garden maintenance, 
and full -service water management. We provide the whole range of environmental activities: 
collection, cleaning, and grounds maintenance, all types of waste treatment, recycling, ener gy 
from waste and final disposal. In Spain, we provide services to over 27.8 million inhabitants in 
3,456 municipalities. We collect 7 million tons of waste per year and over 8 million tons of waste 
is either treated and/or disposed. This waste is treated using processes such as heat, composting, 
biomethanisation, recycling, incineration, and use of controlled landfills and tips. To this end we 
have 60 treatment and disposal facilities run by over 31,000 employees.  
At FCC we treat waste as a resource, reus ing and recycling everything possible and making use of 
the energy value of the remaining fraction when feasible. 
In many locations, multiple technologies are combined to ensure the most complete waste 
recovery possible. 
More than 130 sanitary landfills re ceive the fraction of waste left after recycling and energy 
recovery. Biogas is captured from the landfills to produce energy and the company is installing 
wind turbines at landfill sites to further increase energy production. 
 Waste Treatment, Recycling, Energy Recovery and Disposal services in numbers:  
 24 million tonnes waste per year 
 Delivering services to 59 million people 
 More than 200 treatment, recycling and disposal facilities 
 10 existing Waste -to-Energy projects, with 2.6 million tonnes annual proc ess capacity 
and more than 300 MWe power output. 
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
In SCALIBUR, we will mostly work at the mechanical biological treatment (MBT) facility of Las 
Dehesas (Madrid, Spain) 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
86 
  
 
Las Dehesas facility 
The contract for the MBT includ ed Design, Building, Financing and Operation for 4 years (then 
extended 14 years more until 2026) Las Dehesas Biomethanation plant.   
The facility serves some of the boroughs of Madrid. FCC was awarded the contract in September 
2005 after winning the biddi ng process organised by Madrid City Council. The Project received 
funding from the European Union (cohesion funds). It was commissioned in December 2008 and 
operation end date is June 2026. Madrid City Council owns the plant site and obtained the 
planning permission for it. The JV made sure that the industrial equipment met international 
standards and complied with Spanish legislation. 
The plant receives 218 ktpa (kilo tons per annum) of mechanically pre -sorted organic fraction 
from municipal solid waste. I t has facilities to receive, bulk, condition and anaerobically digest 
waste, in order to treat it properly and extract valuable energy from it.  
Plant facilities are grouped into three treatment stages: 
 Pre-treatment area (two 33t/h lines), where waste cond itioning takes place (prior to 
digestion). 
 Biomethanation area, where the mesophilic (40ºC) anaerobic fermentation of the waste 
organic fraction takes place (biogas is produced). It can process up to 160ktpa. 
 Process water treatment area, where pre -treatment, aerobic digestion of active sludges, 
sludge treatment, ultrafiltration and reverse osmosis is undertaken.  
 Environmental aspects have been of paramount importance when designing the plant. A 
deodorization system has been implemented in the facilities t o avoid emissions to the 
atmosphere. 
Key parameters of the facility are: 
 Land area 19.900 m2  
 6,608 m2 industrial premises 
 Capacity of the reception and pre-treatment area can be extended 
 Five 3,600-m3 digesters, one 280-m2 biofilter which can process 48.210 Nm3/h,  
 Leachate biological treatment system which can process 192 m3/day.  
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Mr. Sylvain Cortes (male)  has a degree on Industrial Engineering (École Central de Nantes, 
France). He has worked as the Waste Treatment Department D irector for 27 years, supporting 
FCC business areas on waste treatment systems, presenting public tender submissions and 
preparing executive projects and participating in the engineering, procurement and construction 
and commissioning phases of waste treatment facilities.  
 
Mr. Gabriel Gómez Carvajal (male)  has a degree in MENg Industrial Engineering  (University of 
Málaga (Spain) -University of Guelph (Canada)) and postgraduated degree Promotion and 
Management of International R&D Projects and Actions  (Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 
UPM). He works as European Projects Manager (administrative and financial) for R&D Projects. 
He is currently the Project Coordinator for project LIFE14 CCM/ES/000865 LIFE METHAmorphosis . 
He has relevant experience with manag ement and follow -up of the administrative and financial 
side of the projects, from negotiation until their final report. Some of his tasks are: validation of 
partners eligibility, Consortium Agreements, management of amendments, financial Reports, 
etc.) He has 
 the PMP (Project Management Professional)  certification by PMI (Project Management Institute)  
and an Advance Certificate in Project Management (CESMA Business School). 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
87 
  
 
Mr. Alfredo Vigre Maza (male) has a degree in Agricultural Engineering (Universidad Politécnica de 
Madrid, UPM). He has been working forin the Waste Treatment Department for seventeen years. 
His expertise lies in the engineering, procurement and construction of waste treatment facilities 
in Spain and overseas, taking an active role i n the optimization of processes. He has the PMP 
(Project Management Professional) certification by PMI (Project Management Institute)  
 
Mr. Olivier Malet (male). Has a degree in Mining Engineering (École Central de Saint -Etienne, 
France). He has more than  23 years of experience in the waste treatment sector. He worked in 
several projects focused on engineering, procurement and construction of waste treatment 
facilities. Nowadays, he is focused in national and European projects in the field of municipal sol id 
waste treatment processes. 
Relevant products, 
services 
 
Smart Service Sewage Maintenance in Barcelona city 
 The service recently implanted offers avant -garde solutions based in new, efficient and 
interconnected technologies 
 Introduces of robotization with the drone named ARSI (Aerial Robot for Sewer Inspection)  
 Interconnectivity between information systems and interoperability with Smart City 
platform for the execution and supervision of the inspection and cleaning sewage 
services. 
FCCPAD  S.E.E.E.U.S® System: System for Environmental Efficiency Evaluation of Urban Services 
Development in digital open source of a computer application S.E.E.E.U.S.® (System for 
Environmental Efficiency Evaluation of Urban Services ). A new and integrated system of 
monitoring, calculation and communication of environmental information with a double 
functionality:  
 Tool for assistance to an environmental counselling service,  
 Tool to establish indicators to assist the decision (KPIs) in favour of a sustainable 
environmental management of the services provided.  
SICCAR® Project (Service to boost an Environmental Responsible Citizen Behaviour) 
Demonstration pilot project developed in digital source within the SmartKalea initiative for the 
Foment of San Sebastián. The SICCAR proje ct aims to detect and measure the possibilities and 
limits to impulse changes in the behaviour of the citizenship, through awareness campaigns, 
participation and measurement of the citizen perception, in order to influence the 
improvement of the environmen tal quality of the city as well as in the efficiency of the street 
cleaning service.  
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 Project LIFE METHAmorphosis (LIFE 14 CCM/ES/00865) : LIFE Programme. Waste streams 
treatment for obtaining safe reclaimed water and biometh ane for transport sector to 
mitigate climate change. Consortium: FCC, FCC aqualia, SEAT, GAS NATURAL, AMB (Área 
Metropolitana de Barcelona), ICAEN (Insitut Catalá d’Energia). Duration: 2015-2019. 
 Projet BIO+ (CDTi: IDI-20090788) Eco-efficiency technologies applied to Municipal Solid Waste 
treatment. CAMBI Thermal hydrolysis unit prior to the biomethanation process. (2009- 2012). 
 Project INDALOS (MITYC): Modelling of anaerobic digestión. Environmental sustainability 
indicators. Stage of sedimentation pilot unit. (2010). 
 Project IISIS (CDTI: INNPRONTA 2011) Sustainable Islands. Self -sufficient isolated complex in a 
marine environment. (2011- 2015). Consortium: ACERINOX, FCC AQUALIA, BERENGUER, CPV, 
FCC CO, OBEKI, PRAINSA, VINCI, CSP Sunless, FCCSA 
 Project VEMTESU (CDTI: CIEN 2014-18) Development of vehicular, modular and auto -bearing 
platforms with high efficiency electric traction for urban services. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
88 
  
9. G!E 
 
Greenovate! Europe                                  http://www.greenovate-europe.eu 
www.greenova
te-europe.eu/ 
 
Country: Belgium Type: Association 
Short 
Name: G!E Participant 
No.:  9 
Organisation  
description 
 
Greenovate! Europe (G!E) covers all parts of the innovation value chain, bringing together the 
expertise required for technology and service developers to successfully transfer research to 
market, and for policy -makers to create an environment in which eco -innovative business can 
thrive. To this end, G!E brings together over 500 experienced innovation ad visers and 2,000 
technical experts from 14 countries, providing all of the expertise needed to support the 
innovation process.  
G!E focuses on green innovation comprising all technologies and processes with a positive life -
cycle impact such as the bio -economy, bio -based construction materials, the integration of 
renewable energy sources and the circular economy (waste and waste water management). 
Particular emphasis has been on the bio -economy, where G!E has been developing tailor -
made communication and dis semination activities for several European projects in the fields 
of bioenergy, circular economy, bio-based construction materials and biofuels. 
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
Since its foundation in 2007, G!E has acquired extensive experience in the c oordination and 
management of EC-funded projects and has been Dissemination and Exploitation WP leader in 
over 20 European projects. During its participation in the projects EuroPruning (“Development 
and implementation of a new and non -existent logistic ch ain for biomass from pruning”) and 
BIOrescue (“Enhanced bioconversion of agricultural residues through cascading use”), 
Bio4Products (“Creating sustainable resources for process industries)” and Rubizmo 
(“Replicable Business Models For Modern Rural Economi es”), G!E has had the opportunity to 
work on the development of new bio -based value chains and business models. Through its 
involvement in 3 EU funded smart cities projects (EU -GUGLE, SINFONIA, STARDUST), G!E has 
also demonstrated its expertise organising and leading replication and knowledge exchange 
activities in and between cities , engaging with municipal, industry, R/D and civil society 
players.  
In SCALIBUR, G!E will lead two workpackages. WP9, on Dissemination and Communication, 
and WP10 on Exploitat ion and Replication. In WP9, in particular, G!E will be responsible for 
the development of the dissemination and communication strategy, for the organisation of 
the project’s dissemination events and knowledge sharing activities, the networking with 
related European projects. In WP10, G!E will coordinate the capacity building activities and 
develop recommendation for policy and scientific uptake as part of the Exploitation tasks.  
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Ms. Astrid Severin (female) holds an MBA in Business Administration with a focus on 
leadership and change management (United Business Institute Brussels, 2004) and an MA 
(University of Leipzig, 1990). Since 2007, she has been Managing Director at Greenovate! 
Europe. In that framework, she leads the dissemination activities and coordinates the 
exploitation work in the FP7 and H2020 funded projects. She previously worked as a Policy 
Officer for Eco-Innovation Policy Development (DG GROW) and as a senior consultant from 
1994 to 2004 at Saatchi&Saatchi Business Communication, where she coordinated and 
managed communication and dissemination projects for the European Commission, NATO 
and UNICEF.
 
 
Mr Guillaume Corradino (male)  is Head of European Programmes. He holds a Master’s in 
European Policies (Sciences P o Aix, 2006). He has led the dissemination activities and 
coordinates the exploitation work in the FP7 and H2020 funded projects dealing with smart 
cities and bio -based products. He is also responsible for quality and financial management of 
EU funded proj
ects. Prior to G!E, Guillaume was Project Officer within the European 
Commission’s Capacity Building unit of DG ELARG, where he was responsible for the 
implementation of the TAIEX instrument in the transport sector. 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
89 
  
 
Ms Valeria Mazzagatti (female) is Manager Events & Communications. She holds a Master’s in 
International Relations (Luiss Guido Carli University, 2011) and a Bachelor in International and 
European Political Studies and Journalism (Università degli Studi di Messina, 2008). She is an 
experienced communication professional and has created and implemented communication 
strategies and managed communication channels including publications, websites, social 
media and video production. She is responsible for quality management of project 
communication activities within the organisation.  
 
Ms Bénédicte Julliard (female) holds a Master’s degree in European Affairs (Sciences Po Lille, 
2016) and is a project manager, with experience in working on circular economy and Smart 
City related topics. She is man aging the dissemination and exploitation work package of the 
BIOrescue project, funded by the Bio -based Industries Joint Undertaking under H2020. 
Additionally, she is working on the dissemination and exploitation work package of the H2020 
funded ADVANCEFUE L project aiming to facilitate market access for renewable fuels 
Bénédicte, as well as on the smart cities projects EU-GUGLE, SINFONIA and STARDUST.  
 
 
Relevant publications  
and/or products, services 
  
     
 Design and implementation of Dissemination and exploitation strategies: G!E experts 
have designed and implemented Dissemination and Exploitation plans for numerous EC -
funded projects, including EuroPruning (Development and implementation of a new, 
and non -existent, logistic chain on biomass from prunin g; 
www.EuroPruning.eu), 
ButaNexT (Next Generation Bio -butanol; www.ButaNexT.eu), Bio4Products 
(demonstrating a flexible value chain to utilize biomass functionalities in the processing 
industry; wwwBio4Products.eu), BIOrescue (Enhanced bioconversion of agricultural 
residues through cascading use; www.BIOrescue.eu), ECO-SEE (Eco-innovative, Safe and 
Energy Efficient wall panels and materials for a healthier indoor environment; 
www.eco-see.eu) and ISOBIO (Highly Insulating, Construction Materials from Bio -
derived Aggregates; www.isobio.eu). 
 Knowledge exchange and replication strategies for sustainable cities . G!E is leading 
replication activities in 3 smart cities projects: EU -GUGLE (www.eu-gugle.eu), SINFONIA 
(http://sinfonia-smartcities.eu/ ) and STARDUST. This involves mapping all project 
results and organising tailor made knowledge exchange activities in view of fostering 
the uptake of sustainable solu
tions at EU level. This includes the creation and 
management of a Replication Cluster of cities ( http://sinfonia-
smartcities.eu/en/replication-cities) bringing together more than 40 citie s interested in 
receiving knowledge from pioneer cities in view of replicating innovative energy 
solutions.   
 Project and stand-alone Events: G!E has deep expertise in organising events targeting EU 
institutions and European -level stakeholders, arranged bo th within EU -funded projects 
and as stand -alone events. These include networking sessions for the ProBIO project 
(www.probio-project.eu) and high -level conferences for the Innovation for Sustainable 
Development Network (www.inno4SD.net). 
 Management of project websites and social media : As WP leader for dissemination in 
over 20 E U projects, G!E is actively responsible for the management and animation of 
over 10 project websites, as well as the InnovationSeeds and inno4SD websites, 
previously mentioned. G!E promotes projects results over social media, including 
Twitter and LinkedIn , where it maintains the group, ‘Green Knowledge for Industry and 
Politics’. 
 
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 ProBIO“Professional support to the uptake of bioeconomy R&D results towards market, 
further research and policy for a more competitive European bioeconomy”. WP Leader 
Networking and Knowledge Exchange. 2015-2017 (H2020) 
 Green.eu “European Global Transition Network on Eco -Innovation, Green Economy and 
Sustainable Development”. Leading communicat ions activities and organisation of 
international symposia. 2015-2019 (H2020) 
 BIOrescue“Enhanced bioconversion of agricultural residues through cascading use”. WP 
Leader Dissemination and Exploitation. 2016-2019 (H2020) 
 Bio4Products “4x4, demonstrating a flexible value chain to utilise biomass functionalities 
in the processing industry”. WP Leader Dissemination and Exploitation. 2016 -2020 
(H2020) 
 SINFONIA “Smart initiative of cities fully committed to invest in advanced large -scale 
energy solutions”. WP Leader Dissemination and Exploitation. 2014-2020 (FP7) 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
90 
  
10. KOUR 
 
KOUR s.r.l. 
http://www.kourenergy.com/ Country: Italy Type: SME Short Name: KOUR Participant No.:  10 
Organisation description 
 
KOUR is a small Italian company founded in 2012 with the objective  of developing and managing 
Bio-gas plants for converting organic and livestock waste. During the past three years KOUR  has 
also focused his business on the industrial field, especially thanks to Marco Benassi's experience, 
it concentrated in revamping ind ustrial plants such Power plants, ceramics manufacturing and 
Agrifood Industries. 
KOUR is also involved in the export of Italian technology to West Africa and, since one year, 
KOUR can count on an operative office in Dakar (Senegal) in order to develop new  projects in 
Africa. 
Kour is always open to create new technologies and innovative solutions and, for this reason, 
Kour is one of the main partner of the project ValoriBio for developing new technologies for 
rearing insects in collaboration with BIOGEST SITEIA. 
Coming from one of the most industrialized Italian regions, Kour has consolidated expertise in 
industrial plant and automation. 
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
KOUR is a very dynamic engineering/project developing and consulting company, specializ ed in 
developing prototypes. Not only Kour can count on a wide and strong network of farms and 
associates, but also it has access to different labs regionwide.  
KOUR's headquarters has offices dedicated to the project development and management.  
As to the realization and production of prototypes (assembling and testing) KOUR  owns a large 
hall where forklift trucks, overhead travelling cranes as well as assembly systems are available.  
The realization and testing of the automation parts and electronic compon ents as well as the 
research and development take place in a prototyping laboratory. In this laboratory there are 3D 
printers, 3D cutters, machines for the realization and testing of electronic boards, mechanical 
design and programming software. In this ki nd of laboratory, it is possible to develop many 
innovative parts of the industrial prototypes designed by Kour. 
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Mr. Giovanni Andrea Ferrari (male), is the CFO and Administrative Officer of KOUR  srl. Giovanni 
Andrea Ferrari, bo rn in 1965, has gained a great experience in business management and in 
creating business networks thanks to the numerous positions he has held during many years. 
Worth emphasising is that Mr. Giovanni Andrea Ferrari has been for 10 years the president of 
the board of directors of TIL S.r.l., a well -known and established municipal company of Reggio 
Emilia which has been promoting innovative mobility solutions with low environmental impact 
since 1999 (above all electric mobility).
 
 
Mr. Marco, Benassi (male), is the CTO (Chief Technical Officer) of KOUR s.r.l. Mr. Marco Benassi is 
an electronic engineer, born in 1956, always active in the field of industrial automation; in his 
career he has created several innovative plants in different industrial sectors of  interest to our 
region: agrifood (i.e. Barilla), Ceramic manufacturing (i.e. Marazzi, Keope). Since 1998 Marco has 
been the technical director of Euroelettra sistemi S.p.A, an automation company specialized in 
revamping power plants (i.e. Emerson and ENEL  Power). Thanks to his great experience in the 
industrial automation sector Mr. Marco Benassi has acquired all the skills required to develop 
large innovative industrial projects. 
 
PHD, Giacomo Benassi (male) is responsible for the research and developme nt of KOUR . 
Giacomo Benassi, born in 1986, has a training in physics of the subject and has obtained a PhD in 
Science and Technology of Innovative Materials at the University of Parma specializing in the 
growth of semiconductor crystals. Once he had obtain ed his PhD, Giacomo Benassi started 
working on applied research projects, realizing different prototypes for important research 
institutions and universities such as: ESA, ASI, CNR, INAF -IASF, INFN, University of Modena and 
Reggio Emilia, University of Parma. Since 2015 Giacomo is collaborating with KOUR  and Unimore 
for the development of technology for insect mass rearing. This product will incorporate some 
parts that are covered by the patent that we have summited (see the description below).  
 
Relevant publications and/or 
products, services 
 
 KOUR has not yet relevant publications or services/products relevant to the call content. 
KOUR is working for developing the first product for insect rearing plants that   
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
91 
  
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 KOUR is a strategic partner in ValoriBio project, in collaboration with UNIMORE, funded by 
POR-FESR 2014-2020 program. During the project KOUR  has designed and developed the 
pilot plant for rearing black soldier flies (BSF).  Thanks to this project (that is almost 
finished) Kour has acquired experience in design and development of new technologies 
for insect mass rearing. 
 KOUR and UNIMORE have summited a joined patent related to some innovative parts of 
the pilot plant developed in ValoriBio project. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
92 
  
 
11. LAZIO 
 
Associazione Regionale dei Comuni del Lazio 
Regional Association of Municipalities of Lazio     
http://www.ancilazio.it/ Country: Italy  Type: Public Body  Short Name: Lazio  Participant No: 11 
Organisation description 
 
ANCI LAZIO is a body governed by public law in the meaning of art 2.4 of Directive 2014/24/EU of 
26 February 2014 on public procurement and repealing Directive 2004/18/EC (please specify: Lazio 
Regional Association of Cities and Municipalities). 
ANCI Lazi o is active at national and regional level to promote LAs interests and specificities (in 
particular those of small municipalities), providing also specific support to its members and 
participating with its own representatives in institutional debates wher e decisions concerning local 
autonomies interests are discussed.  
ANCI LAZIO will operate to contribute the sustainable implementation of local plans for waste 
management by virtue of its experience to coordinate a thematic group on waste management 
linked between the City of Rome and all the Municipalities in the Metropolitan area with the aim of 
improving the waste-recycling rate in Lazio Region 
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
ANCI LAZIO will operate to contribute the sustainable implementation of loca l plans for waste 
management by virtue of its experience to coordinate a thematic group on waste management 
with the aim of improving the waste-recycling rate in Lazio Region.
 
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Mr. Andrea Vignoli: (male) is a Project Manager. Si nce 1997 he provides consulting and assistance 
to numerous private and public organizations at Regional, National and European level, in many 
fields ranging from research & development, waste management, energy efficiency, sustainable 
energy, sustainable g rowth, active citizenship and cultural issues. He co -operates with Universities 
on energy policies issues and provides assistance and consultancy about best practices in waste 
management, energy efficiency, renewable energy and E -government services to Mun icipalities of 
Lazio Region. Has great experience in technology transfer area, business innovation and project 
management. He is responsible, since 2005, for the management of Regional and European 
projects for ANCI Lazio. 
 
Mr. Maurizio Angeli Felicioni: (male), is a Financial Manager - Management consulting in the field of 
Research and Development, Low interest financing, budgeting and project coordination (research 
and innovation). In the last 10 years he has been the financial manager of more than 15 E uropean 
Projects in ANCI Lazio. 
https://it.linkedin.com/in/maurizio-angeli-felicioni-1b908113 
 
Mr. Claudio Francia: (male) he is an expert in an economist expert in waste sector and he has been 
member of the Italian Observatory for Waste Management and h as got more than 30 years of 
expertise on waste collection, waste management and separate collection of wastes. In particular 
he has got a specific expertise on Territorial Analysis and Pilot Implementation.  
https://it.linkedin.com/in/claudio-francia-00964aa1 
 
 
Mr. Claudio Bordi:  Architect /Urban planner with a Master in Urban Planning and Regional 
Development at the European Institute of Architecture and Urban planning, University of Rouen, 
France (1994 -1995). For over 20 years involved in European Projects: his activities concern the 
promotion, development and management of EU funded projects for territorial cooperation, in the 
field of sustainable urban development, urban regeneration, Smart City, sustainable tourism, 
citizen participation processes, protection of the historic urban heritage and environment. 
https://it.linkedin.com/in/claudio-bordi-a43b8118 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
93 
  
 
Mr. Giorgio Scavino:  (male), is a Communication manager, he has been working for 2003 in 
technical assistance activities and general support to c ooperation and projects initiated with EU 
funding for public and private bodies. He took his degree in Fine Arts Academy in Rome, and he has 
a certificate as a Psychodynamic Counsellor, playing the role of facilitator and technical advisor.  
https://it.linkedin.com/in/giorgio-scavino-000b5346 
Relevant publications   “Guida per gli amministratori locali” (Guideline for local administrators) A useful tool for the 
governance of the territories, updated to the Italian law "Delrio" n.56/2014 
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 Open DOORS - Designing a network of cOOperating cReative communities for developing a 
Sharing economy, under Interreg Mediterranean Programme (1/9/2016 –  28/2/ 2018); Total 
budget: €600.000,00; (ANCI Lazio: €130.000); Role: Lead partner.  
 RATIO – Regional Actions to Innovate Operational Programmes, under Interreg Europe 
Programme (1/4/2016 -  31/3/2020; Total budget: €1.569.978,00, (ANCI Lazio: €176.650,00); 
Role: Partner. 
 Sha.p.e.s. – Sharing prior excellence and support for the MED creative asset , under Interreg 
Mediterranean Programme (1/7/2013 –  31/12/2014); Total budget: €1.295.200,00, (ANCI 
Lazio: €200.900,00); Role: Lead partner.  
 LOCAL4GREEN - LOCAL Policies for GREEN Energy, under Interreg Europe Programme 
(1/11/2016 - 30/4/2019); Total budget: €2.013.423,15, ANCI LAZIO: €242.925,00);   
 ANCI Lazio in cooperation to Lazio Region is setting up a technical committee to support 
municipalities to improve innovative actions on waste management and managing public tender 
procedures. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
94 
  
12. LUND 
 
LUNDS KOMMUN   
CITY OF LUND                           
www.lund.se/ 
Country: SWEDEN Type: Municipality Short Name: LUND Participant No.:  12 
Organisation 
description 
 
Lunds kommun (a.k.a. City of Lund) is a municipality in the Scania region (Region Skåne) in southern 
Sweden. It covers approx. 443 km² and has more than 120,000 inhabitants. Lund is a centre of higher 
education in the southern parts of Sweden and the city is expanding in high speed with the transition into a 
smart sustainable city.  
Lund has long been an active local government with strong dedication to sustainable development. The city 
is the founder and host of the Swedish, nationwide, association Climate Municipalities with 37 members. 
Lund is currently invol ved in several projects with European funding, through Horizon 2020, FP7 and the 
Interreg programmes. The involvement in the collaborative and innovative Smart City projects presents an 
excellent experience and platform for the execution and dissemination of the SCALIBUR project.  
The decision to place the European Spallation Source (ESS) in Lund underlines the city’s ambitions in being 
at the forefront of innovative research and education. Around the ESS and Max IV (a Swedish national 
laboratory providing s cientists and industry with the world’s highest quality X -
rays for research and 
development), the Brunnshög area is being developed, with high sustainability targets.  
Capabilities and 
role in SCALIBUR 
The City of Lund is responsible for the administration  of the municipality and for the development of the 
city. The city is also responsible for the collection of household waste. The political leadership have set up 
six overarching goals for the city. One of them is: The impact on the climate and environment  from the City 
of Lund should be significantly reduced. This goal is then broken down into comprehensive targets and 
achievements in the environmental programme and in the waste management plan.  
The Cleansing Department in Lund has developed a system for sorted household waste collection called 
“the four compartment bins”. It is not only the bins that have been developed but also the collection 
vehicles that can automatically empty the bins in a single step. This system is now spreading in Sweden with 
more than 20% of the municipalities using it. Most households in Lund have two bins, which means that 
eight fractions of waste is collected at every house. One of the fractions is food waste and now we have 
achieved a purity of 97% of the waste (determined as correctly sorted waste). The food waste is then 
transported to a biogas plant where biogas and bio -fertilizer is produced and the biogas is upgraded to 
vehicle gas for the use in cars and busses. In 2017 Lund was awarded the price for the best recycling 
municipality in Sweden and in 2016 Lund was awarded “best waste management services by a Swedish 
municipality”. 
The main task in the project is to share our experiences in separated organics waste collection and to 
actively participate in the development of new solutions with a higher valorisation.  
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Dr. Markus Paulsson: (male) is an energy strategist and project manager at the Department of strategic 
development at the City Office (Kommunkontoret) at the City of Lund. He has a lon g experience of working 
with EU projects and with waste related issues. He has been leading projects concerning new methods of 
treating park and yard waste as well as new methods for waste water treatment and sludge management.  
 
 
Mr. Erik Rånlund : (male ) is the Managing Director of the Cleansing department in the City of Lund since 
2003. He has implemented the four compartment bin system in the entire city. He has also implemented 
the environmental and quality systems (ISO 14001 & 9001) in his organisation 
 
 
Relevant 
publications  
and/or products, 
services 
  
     
 LundaEko II 2014-2020, the environmental strategy for the municipality (including the goal to be nearly 
carbon neutral in 2050). 
https://www.lund.se/globalassets/lund.se/bygg_bo/klimat-miljo-och-
hallbarhet/miljosmartkommun/slutversion-lundaeko-ii-antagen-av-kf-2014-05-23-version-2.pdf  
 Waste management plan 2016-2020. 
https://www.lund.se/globalassets/regelsamling/renhallning_och_vatten/avfallsplan-2016-2020-
beslutat-av-kf-2016-06-15.pdf 
 Fastighetsnära insamling av förpackningar och returpapper i SAMSA-området (2016) 
https://www.avfallsverige.se/kunskapsbanken/rapporter/rapportera/article/fastighetsnara -insamling-
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
95 
  
av-forpackningar-och-returpapper-i-samsa-omradet/  
 Paulsson et al. (2015) Park and garden waste – a solid fuel and biogas resource. 
https://pub.epsilon.slu.se/12587/  
 Persson, Thulin & Paulsson (2016) The warm and clean city 2 (Final report).  
http://www.swedenwaterresearch.se/publikation/slutrapport-den-varma-och-rena-staden-inkl-
delrapporter/  
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 The development of the curb side collection system with four compartment bins and four c ompartment 
waste collection vehicles. Funded by own means, ca. 1995-2008.  
 Biochar as a solution and a product in the circular and viable society. Funded by the Swedish Innovation 
Agency, 2017 -. https://www.vinnova.se/p/biokol-som-losning-och-produkt-i-framtidens-uthalliga-
samhalle/  
 Park and garden waste –  a solid fuel and biogas resource . Funded by Region Skåne et al. 2013 -2015.  
https://pub.epsilon.slu.se/12587/ 
 Fremtidens intelligente energi - og ressourcesystem. Funded by Interreg -ÖSK, 2018 -2021. 
http://interreg-
oks.eu/projektbank/projekt/fremtidensintelligenteenergiogressourcesystem.5.1dbd59341602b7503f12
1aa3.html  
 The warm and clean city. Funded by the Swedish Innovation Agency, 2012- 2016. 
http://www.swedenwaterresearch.se/projekt/den-varma-och-rena-staden-2/  
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
96 
  
13. MADRID 
 
Ayuntamiento de Madrid   
Madrid Council Town 
www.madrid.es/ 
portal/site/munimadrid/   Country: Spain Type: Public Body  Short Name: MADRID  Participant No.:  13 
Organisation description 
 
The municipality of Madrid is the public body in charge of the administration of the city  
of Madrid. MADRID has an integral system for solid urban waste treatment:  
 
Waste management of the municipal solid waste in Madrid is carried out at Valdemingómez 
Technology Park in the south of the city, at Vallecas district. It comprises the following 
installations: 
- 3 waste treatment plants (La Paloma, Las Lomas and Las Dehesas) with 2 b iometanation 
plants (La Paloma and Las Dehesas) 
- 1biogas upgrading plant 
- 2 waste -to-energy plants (one valorising the rejects of Las Lomas plants and the other 
valorizing the biogas from La Galiana landfill) 
In 2016,  1.248.180 tons of municipal solid waste  was treated at Valdemingómez Technology Park 
(with 67.060tons of material recovery, 78.756tons of selective collection of recyclables and 
4.449tons sold of stabilized material production) 
Waste-to-energy plants produced 245.314MWh of electricity (covering  5.62% of Madrid’s power 
consumption) and 74.958 thermal megawatts exported to the national grid. 
MADRID has also collaborated in an environmental education program with 9.729 visitors to 
Valdemingómez Technology Park from schools, business associations an d national and 
international public bodies 
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Mr. Jose Luis Cifuentes Sastre (male) has a degree in MENg Industrial Engineering (Universidad 
Politécnica de Madrid). He works as Madrid City Council Officer. He is currently Director  of 
Promotion and Information of Valdemingomez  Technology Park. He was the former Head of Unit 
at the Investors Support Office of Madrid Emprende (Internationalization department) and also 
experience in social awareness since we was Head of Unit of Cultur al, Youth, Sports and 
Participative Democracy unit. He has also worked as Project Manager of the first comprehensive 
Odour control Study done in the City Council of Madrid, which will lead to obtain corrective 
measures to reduce the impact of waste managem ent and water treatment. Still in progress and 
also a project to tackle the 2020 and 2030 objectives of the Circular Economy Package. Madrid 
Waste Strategy. 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
97 
  
 
Mrs. Rosalía Esteba de Caso (female) has a degree in Chemical Engineering (Universidad Autónoma 
de Madrid). She is also a doctor in Science (Universidad Politécnica de Madrid) She is currently the 
Deputy Assistant Director -General for Valdemingómez Technology Park. She has worked as Head 
of Unit of Solid Urban Waste – to- Energy Valorisation al Las Palomas biometanation plant and also 
as Project Engineer as Waste Treatment and Elimination Dpeartment Director. She has 
management experience since she worked as a counsellor to the Councillor of Environment of the 
municipality of Madrid. 
 
Mr. Miguel Ángel Magaña Loarte (male) has a degree in Agricultural Engineering (Universidad 
Politécnica de Madrid).He is currently Director of Valdemingomez  Technology Park. He has 
worked as Head of Unit of Solid Urban Waste Valorisation Department at L as Lomas and La 
Galiana waste treatment plants in Madrid. He has been in charge of the European Projects 
Department and managed an INTERREG project regarding cooperation between European 
countries. He worked as external assistance expert for project Twining in Poland and Romania 
 
Mrs. Rosalía Esteba de Caso (female) has a degree in Law (Universidad Complutense de Madrid). 
She works as Administrative Assitant for Valdemingómez Technology Park. She has experience in 
administration in the Urban Planning Depa rtment in the Municipality of Madrid, processing 
licenses. She has experience in administrative and financial management at the Business Tax 
Assessment Department. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Relevant publications  
and/or products, services 
      
 SECURED Demonstration project with the goal of providing a set of tools to improve safety in 
urban transport in large cities (EMT participated to take advantage of its On -Board video 
surveillance systems) www.secur-ed.eu   
 WISETRIP Multimodal travel planner (multimodal integration in transportation planners). The 
project aims to aims to improve the possibilities for individual planning, booking and making 
multimodal journeys. The system is designed to take into consideration all user needs, 
multiple trip criteria, environmental impact and personal preferences http://www.wisetrip-
eu.org/  
 ELIPTIC: Project on electrification of public transport. Currently ongoing (11 cities are 
participating: Barcelona, Bremen, Brussels, Eberswalde, Gdynia, Lanciano, Leipzig, London, 
Oberhausen, Szeged and Warsaw). EMT participates on behalf of Madrid City at the "twining 
programme" for the transfer of knowledge. 
http://www.eliptic-project.eu/  
 IKAAS: Horizon 2020 Programme project (currently ongoing) which aim is to develop a secure 
Smart City platform (open platform and architecture) based in Big Data and cloud operations 
for collecting information from different sensors (Int ernet of Things, etc.). It is intended to 
install sensors on the buses to get real -time information that complements the information 
provided both from Madrid City Council and Madrid Regional Government. http://ikaas.com/  
 CIVITAS ECCENTRIC: This project is part of the CIVITAS initiative led by the Madrid City Council. 
The cities of Stockholm (Sweden), Munich (Germany), Turku (Finland) and Ruse (Bulgaria) also 
participate. The objective of this project is to propose innovat ive solutions for sustainable 
mobility in peripheral areas of cities and to achieve a low -emission urban distribution of 
goods in the urban centre. It has started in September 2016 and over the next four years will 
test the feasibility of integrated and in clusive urban planning approaches, innovative policies 
and emerging technologies to achieve sustainable urban mobility objectives. Each city will 
propose different solutions of this type in a "laboratory" area of its periphery, all of them 
subject to a hig h population growth and an increasing pressure on the current networks of 
public transport. http://www.civitas.eu/eccentric  
 STARS: The European project STARS (Sustainable Travel Accreditation and Recognition  for 
Schools) gathers nine implementation partners around one common goal: to increase the 
number of pupils cycling to and from school, who would previously have been escorted by car. 
How do we get pupils out of cars and onto their bikes? This is the main question that the 
STARS project intends to answer in order to change the current situation. 
http://starseurope.org/overview.php  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
98 
  
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 COSMOS 7FP project aimed at enhancing the sustainability of smart city applications by 
allowing IoT based systems to reach their full potential. COSMOS will enable things to 
evolve and act in a more autonomous way, becoming more reliable and smarter, including 
those aspects related to safety and security. http://www.iot-cosmos.eu/  
 GAMBAS The overall objective of Gambas 7FP project is the development of an innovative 
adaptive middleware that allows preserving privacy, using automatic based on previous 
user behaviour, adapted independently of the context of these services (calling context to 
set of their customs and preferences) http://www.gambas-ict.eu/  
 MOVE-US: 7FP project, completed by the end of 2016, aimed at de signing, implementing, 
piloting and also to evaluate, disseminate and exploit new ICT tools for intelligent mobility 
in the context of "Smart Cities", which directly address the needs of real users, while 
promoting a change of habits in your daily life. Mo bility and demand management is 
directly linked with citizens daily mobility habits: smart crossing systems, bus priority at 
traffic lights, etc. It was awarded last December’16 with the “Thinking Cities Award, 2016” 
at the POLIS Annual Conference in Rotterdam. www.moveus-project.eu   
 CITYMOBIL2: project on automated public transport vehicles. EMT has participated at the 
stakeholders group, attending the different site visits and workshops. 
http://www.citymobil2.eu/en/  
 New Bus fuel: Horizon 2020 programme project called "Engineering Studies for Large 
Scale Bus Refuelling". Given the experience of EMT Madrid in European projects related 
to hydrogen buses (i.e. HyFLEET C UTE), this will help to study the necessary refueling 
infrastructure, operation and maintenance activities of a large scale hydrogen bus fleet 
 EVUE: (Electric Vehicles in Urban Europe), collaborative EU project (URBACT II 
programme) focussed on the develop ment of integrated, sustainable strategies and 
dynamic leadership techniques for cities to promote the use of electric vehicles.  
 MADEV: Project of the ELENA program of the European Investment Bank to favor 
investments of both public and private sector in c harging infrastructure and electric 
vehicles. 
 FREVUE: Seventh Framework Programme project which aim is to demonstrate the 
viability of electric vehicles in the urban freight distribution. It includes the establishment 
of a freight consolidation center for the last mile distribution in the old fruit and 
vegetable market of Legazpi (EMT cooperates in this project with Madrid City Council to 
provide technical assistance and administrative management) http://frevue.eu/  
 CITYMOBIL2: project on automated PT vehicles. EMT has participated at the stakeholders 
group, attending the different site visits and workshops. http://www.citymobil2.eu/en/  
 “Transport Equity Analysis: assessment and integration of equity criteria in transportation 
planning (TEA)”. TEA COST initiative (COST is the longest -running European framework 
supporting trans-national cooperation among researchers, engineers and scholars across 
Europe), and more in particular in the action called “Transport Equity Analysis: 
assessment and integration of equity criteria in transportation planning (TEA)”. 
http://www.cost.eu/COST_Actions/tud/TU1209 
 BEST (Bioethanol for Sustai nable Transport). This project dealt with the introduction and 
market penetration of bioethanol as a vehicle fuel,  and the introduction and wider use of 
flexible fuel vehicles and ethanol cars on the market. http://www.stockholm.se/best-
europe . 
 MARES: UIA01-598, From November 2016 to November 2019 "MARES de Madrid: 
resilient urban ecosystems for a sustainable economy", is an European project 
coordinated by the General Direction for Economy and Public Sect or of the Madrid City 
Council, within the framework of the European Commission ’s Initiative "Urban Innovative 
Actions"(UIA).The City Council of Madrid counts on the following partners for the 
implementation of the project: The Agency for Employment of Madr id, Dinamia S. Coop., 
Tangente, SIC Architecture and Urbanism, VI C, Todo por la Praxis, the Action Against 
Hunger Foundation and ECOOO. MARES has a budget of € 5,999,508.95, co -financed by 
80% with FEDER. 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
99 
  
14. NOVAMONT 
 
NOVAMONT S.P.A.                                
www.NOVAMONT.com/ Country: Italy Type: Large Enterprise 
Short 
Name: NOVAMONT Participant 
No.:  14 
Organisation 
description 
 
NOVAMONT S.p.A is an Italian industrial company whose roots lie in the Montedison School of 
Materials Science and which was set up to implement the ambitious project of some researchers from 
the chemical corporation: to integrate chemistry, agriculture and the environment. Founded in 1989, 
it is now worldwide leader in the sector of bioplastics and involved in the development of bioproducts 
such as biolubricants, biochemicals and cosmetic ingredients from renewable sources.  
NOVAMONT’s mission is to develop materials and biochemicals through the integration of chemistry 
and agriculture, by starting up biorefineries in the local areas and providing application sol utions that 
ensure efficient use of resources throughout their entire life cycle, with advantages for the social, 
economic and environmental system. 
Its model of development aims at building bridges between different sectors and creating new value 
by colla borating with all the stakeholders in the value chain: from agriculture to research, from 
industry to waste management, from local institutions to civil society. 
Guided by these principles, NOVAMONT  promotes an approach to bioeconomy based on the efficient  
use of renewable resources and on the regeneration of local areas, building world -first plants based 
on proprietary technologies and revitalising industrial sites that are decommissioned or no longer 
competitive to create new industries, new products and new jobs. Examples are Mater -Biotech, the 
company born from the reconversion of a decommissioned industrial site in north -east Italy into the 
first dedicated industrial plant at world level to produce biobutanediol through fermentative 
processes and the Matrìca biorefinery, the 50:50 joint venture between NOVAMONT and Versalis (Eni) 
to reconvert a part of a preexisting petrochemical site in Sardinia. A further example is the subsidiary 
Mater-Biopolymer, in central Italy, producing biopolyesters in a plant r econverted using a 
NOVAMONT’s proprietary technology. 
Besides being an industrial company, NOVAMONT  is also a research centre which covers a wide range 
of expertise and specialisations, with equipment and facilities ranging from laboratory scale activities 
to innovative pilot plants. Over the years it has developed four proprietary and integrated 
technologies for the production of bioplastics and bioproducts, creating synergies between the 
different areas of study (Bioplastics, Biotechnology, Agronomics and Organic Chemistry). 
Moreover, NOVAMONT regularly implements training programmes for young and experienced 
researchers, in collaboration with partners from the public and the private sector (more than 300 
activities since 2000). 
MATER-BI is the innovative family of bioplastics developed by NOVAMONT  research. It is 
biodegradable and compostable according to the European standard EN 13432 and other 
international standards and has characteristics of use very similar to those of traditional plastics.  
MATER-BI provides solutions for specific environmental problems while combining product quality and 
performance with an efficient use of resources. In particular, MATER -BI has been conceived for 
applications in which biodegradability and compostability represent an added value, such as shopping 
bags that can be reused to collect organic waste or foodware products “contaminated” with leftovers, 
or serve a function, such as mulch films. The main fields of application are: separate waste collection, 
agriculture, large retail sector, disposable foodserviceware, packaging. 
With 600 people, NOVAMONT  group posted sales of €170 million in 2016 and made continuous 
investments in research and development activities: 7.4% of its  turnover, around 20% of people (2016 
consolidated financial statements). It has a portfolio of around 1,000 patents. The group has its 
headquarters in Novara, a production facility in Terni and research laboratories in Novara, Terni and 
Piana di Monte Verna (CE). NOVAMONT ’s subsidiaries are based in Porto Torres (SS), Adria (RO), Terni 
and Patrica (FR). It has a representative office in Brussels (Belgium), foreign seats in Germany, France 
and the United States and operates through own distributors in Benelux.
  
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
NOVAMONT plants involved in SCALIBUR project are: 
 research laboratories and pilot plants (monomer and polymer synthesis, rheology, mechanical 
characterization, physical and chemical characterization, plastic materials transformation 
technologies, biodegradation, che mistry applied to vegetable oils, carbohydrates and 
lignocellulosic materials, biotechnology applied to chemicals, ecology of products and 
environmental footprint, engineering, agronomy), located in Novara; 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
100 
  
 demonstration plant (Mater-Bi® grades and Origo-Bi® polyesters from vegetable oils), laboratories 
(process engineering, quality control), reactive extrusion technology, oil treatment, polymer 
synthesis at a pilot plant level, located in Terni. 
 Biotechnology research centre in Piana di Monte Verna: resear ch centre forming part of the 
NOVAMONT Biotechnology Platform for the integration of chemical processes and industrial 
biotechnologies. 
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Mrs. Cecilia GIARDI  (female), Chemistry Degree (University of Pisa). Mrs. Giardi is Group Program 
Financing Manager Officer within NOVAMONT’s Division “Strategic Projects and Institutional 
Communication” (‘Strategic Projects’). She has a deep experience in research, development and 
innovation projects in the field s of bio-based chemicals and related production processes. Mrs. Giardi 
has deep experience in coordinating large national as well as international projects, involving both 
research and industrial partners.  
 
Mr. Luigi CAPUZZI (male), Chemistry Degree (University of Perugia). R&D Director within NOVAMONT 
S.p.A. Previous Mr. Capuzzi’s experiences point out to him having been a researcher at Istituto Guido 
Donegani, and Isagro. He has been responsible of R&D of Sipcam -Oxon group working in formulation, 
Quality Control, synthesis of pesticides and fine chemicals, green chemistry, biofuels, and Intellectual 
Property management. His current activities and competences for the project refer to his actual 
responsibility as NOVAMONT’s R&D Director. 
 
Mrs Tiziana MILIZIA (female), Chemistry Degree (University of Naples). Mrs. Milizia is Bioplastics Area 
Manager with focus on biopolymer synthesis from vegetable oil and process implementation. Her 
previous experience was  in the field of biopolymer synthesis were she was head of the laboratories 
and directly involved in the scale up of the polymer synthesis process at medium and large scale.  
 
Mrs Maria DANI (female), Biology Degree (Univer sity of Genova) -  Post Doctoral Fellowship at Johns 
Hopkins University, USA. Director of NOVAMONT ’s Biotechnology Area. In her previous experiences 
Mrs. Dani has been project leader at Tecnogen S.p.A., responsible of molecular biology laboratory at 
Agrimont S.p.A, Researcher at Farmitalia- Carlo Erba S.p.A. Her expertise comprehends molecular 
biology and genetic engineering of bacteria, plants and mammalian cells, GMP production, upstream 
and downstream processes. 
Relevant publications 
and/or products, 
services 
  
 In the years NOVAMONT developed a family of innovative bioplastics based on plant components 
and biodegradable polymers totally or partially obtained from renewable energy sources under 
the trademark Mater-Bi®. NOVAMONT concentrates its application development activities in fields 
in which its products can make a tangible contribution to the efficiency with which the resources 
are used. As concrete proof of its constant research, NOVAMONT  counts a portfolio of about 
1,000 patents. 
Relevant projects and 
patents 
 REHAP (H2020-SPIRE-2016) - Systemic approach to Reduce Energy demand and CO2 emissions of 
processes that transform agroforestry waste into High Added value Products. The main objective 
of REHAP is the transformation of agroforestry residues int o new sustainable and eco -efficient 
derivatives, which comprise building blocks (2,3 - and 1,4- BDO), high -performance additives 
(superplasticizers and flame retardants) and biobased polymeric resins (biophenolics and NIPUs), 
through innovative cost-effective processes to demonstrate their potential use in several products 
at an industrial level and their application in sectors like Construction.  
 CIRCK-PACK (CIRC-01-2016) - Towards circular economy in the plastic packaging value chain. CIRC -
PACK project aims at more sustainable, efficient, competitive, less fossil fuel dependence, 
integrated and interconnected plastic packaging value chain. To this end, the project develops 
three case studies so test and validate better system -wide economic and environmental outcomes 
by i) decoupling the chain from fossil feedstocks, (ii) reducing the negative environmental impact 
of plastic packaging; and (iii) creating an effective after-use plastics economy. ( 
 EMBRACED (BBI -D6-2016) - Establishing a Multi -purpose Biorefiner y for the Recycling of the 
organic content of AHP waste in a Circular Economy Domain. Within the project, a first of its kind, 
integrated biorefinery will be established in order to valorise in a relevant environment scenario 
three different fractions (cel lulose, PP/PE and superabsorbent polymer) derived from (Absorbent 
Hygiene Products (AHP) waste towards the production of bioproducts of commercial interest.  
 BIO-QED (FP7): Validation of the production of bio-based 1,4-butanediol at pilot test scale (TRL5-6) 
from byproducts of first generation sugars in combination with second generation sugars obtained 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
101 
  
by organsolv pretreatment method on forestry residues. Separation and purification of BDO 
tested at small scale through solvent extraction and melt crystalli zation process. Application of 
bio-BDO for the synthesis of thermoplastic polyurethane and PBT. 
 REBIOCHEM (co-funded by the Italian Ministry for University and Research): The synergy with this 
project will be established with regards to the identification of suitable lignocellulosic residues on 
the national territory suitable for the obtaining of second generation fermentable sugars as well as 
for the identification of cocktail of commercial enzymes providing high yields in terms of simple 
sugars for fermentation. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
102 
  
 
15. NS 
 
Nutrition Sciences N.V. 
www.nutrition-
sciences.com/-i Country: Belgium Type: Company  Short Name: NS Participant No.:  15 
Organisation  
description 
 
Nutrition Sciences N.V. (NS) is a Belgian private company (26 collaborators) belonging  to the 
Nuscience-group (1125 collaborators) and is well known for its R&D activities in animal production 
and spends much attention to the introduction of new feed ingredients, concepts, services and 
technologies in animal livestock production for its cus tomers. Their innovation -driven attitude 
enables them to supply sustainable and economically viable solutions for the efficient production of 
animal feed and feed ingredients within the food value chain. Main focus today is developing 
concepts and services  for (1) reduction of raw material depletion and (2) lowering the dependency 
for antibiotics in livestock production.  
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
Nutrition Sciences N.V. has its own laboratory, in order to perform and validate novel feed 
technologies as well as novel and sustainable feed concepts. For evaluation of feed concepts, specific 
bioassays on feeds and samples can be performed. In this respect, demonstration and validation of 
production processes with novel feed ingredients can be performed . Finally, Nutrition Sciences N.V. 
has access to different trade fairs for demonstration of outcomes of the project and is (co)organising 
different workshops and trainings for different stakeholders in the food chain.  
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Dr. Geert Bruggeman PhD (Male) is an expert in animal nutrition. In his current position, he is 
responsible for the company innovations and for its strategic research for the development of novel 
functional feed ingredients and concepts related to improvement of ra w material usage and 
reduction of dependency for antibiotics in livestock production. Geert Bruggeman has profound 
expertise in coordinating of national and international research and innovation projects, participated 
as a partner or coordinator in projects in Eureka, FP4, FP5, FP6, FP7 and H2020 and acts as a member 
of several advisory boards 
 
Dr. Stefanie Versringe  PhD (Female) has a degree in animal feed processing and has a profound 
knowledge on (functional) feed ingredients in terms of their economics, markets and specific quality 
control / quality assurance requirements for successful implementation in the market via different 
validation models. 
Relevant publications 
and/or products, 
services      
 Alakomi, H-L., Höhl, A., Horvatek Tomic, D., Thomas, M., Bruggeman, G., Tassis, P., Prukner-
Radovcic, E., Tzika, E., Axelsson, L., Kneifel, W. & Saarela, M. (2016). Antimicrobial Resistance 
and Residues in the EU – Current Situation and Possible Countermeasures, Emphasis on 
Campylobacter and Salmonella. Quality Assurance and Safety of Crops & Foods, 8(3), 399-413. 
 Hoorfar, J., Bang -Berthelsen, I., Jones, F.T., Häggblom, P., Bruggeman, G. & Zentek, J. (2011). 
Emerging Safety and Quality Issues in Compound Feeds with Implications for Human Foo ds. In: 
HOORFAR, J., JORDAN, K., BUTLER, F & PRU GGER, R.  (Eds.), Food Chain Integrity: A Holistic 
Approach to Food Traceability, Safety, Quality and Authenticity, Woodhead Publishing, 130 -
143. 
 Jordan, K., Dalmasso, M., Zentek, J., Mader, A., Bruggeman, G., Wallace, J., De Medici, D., Fiore, 
A., Prukner-Radovcic, E., Lukac, M., Axelsson, L., Holk, A., Ingmer, H. & Malakauskas, M. (2014). 
Microbes versus Microbes: Control of Pathogens in the Food Chain, Journal of the Science of 
Food and Agriculture, 94(15), 3079-3089. 
 MOLATOVÁ, Z., SKŘIVANOVÁ, E., BARÉ, J., HOUF, K., BRUGGEMAN, G. & MAROUNEK, M. (2011). 
Effect of coated and non -coated fatty acid supplementation on broiler chickens experimentally 
infected with Campylobacter jejuni. Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal  Nutrition, 95, 701-
706. 
 Binter, C., Straver, J., Häggblom, P., Bruggeman, G., Lindqvist, P.A., Zentek, J. & Andersson, G. 
(2011). Transmission and Control of Salmonella in the Pig Feed Chain: A Conceptual Model. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 145, S7-S17. 
Relevant projects and 
patents 
 InDirfect (BBI, www.bbi-indirect.eu) “Direct and Indirect biorefinery technologies for conversion 
of organic side -streams into multiple marketable products” (responsibl e for in vitro testing of 
project outcomes in livestock production ). In this project Nutrition Sciences is WP leader on 
validation of nutritional feed concepts suitable for reduction of dependency for antibiotics in 
livestock production as well to counteract the global depletion of raw materials. 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
103 
  
 National project LESSantibiotics “Reducing antimicrobial use and resistance in the food chain by 
innovative nutritional interaction at animal feed level” (coordinator)  
 PiGutNet (www.pigutnet.eu) “Antibiotics as a factor of dysbiosis and spread of antibiotic 
resistance genes”. Nutrition Sciences N.V. is are co -chairing the WG dealing with “Antibiotics as 
a factor of dysbiosis and spread of antibiotic resistance genes” 
 NOWaste (FP7 project, www.noshan.eu ) “Upgrading by-products from vegetables and fruits in 
the animal feed” (responsible for in vitro testing of project outcomes in livestock production). In 
this project Nutrition Sciences is WP  leader one extraction and validation of nutritional feed 
concepts suitable for reduction of dependency for antibiotics in livestock production. 
 Relevant Patents: 48 relevant patents 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
104 
  
16. SMVAK 
 
Severomoravské vodovody a kanalizace Ostrava a.s.    
Severomoravské water supply and sewrage system Ostrava                                 
www.SMVAK.cz  Country: CZ Type: Large Company  Short Name: SMVAK Participant No.:  16 
Organisation  
description 
 
Severomoravské vodovody a kanalizace Ostrava a.s. ( SMVAK) was founded in 1992 as a joint -stock 
company. The majority of shares were owned by the municipalities from the Moravian -Silesian 
Region. SMVAK Ostrava operates in the districts of Frýdek -Místek, Karviná, Nový Jičín and Opava, with 
water also being delivered as per contract to the cities of Ostrava, Hlučín, Studénka and other 
municipalities. The entity supplies the drinking water for more than 730,000 people in 76 
municipalities through 130,000 service pipes (total length: 771 km). It also supplies drinking water to a 
part of the Olomouc Region (Lipník nad Bečvou, Přerov, Hranice na Moravě) and to a border territory 
in Poland (Jastrzębie -Zdroj). It also operates 65 wastewater treatment plants (61 mechanical -
biological and 4 mec hanical WWTPs) with the total capacity of 279,682 m 3 per day (973,210 ep). The 
length of the sewage system is 1,774 km. More than 521,000 people are connected to the SMVAK  
Ostrava’s sewage system. In addition to the core business, SMVAK Ostrawa provides other services.  
The core business is production and supply of drinking water as well as discharge and treatment of 
wastewater. 95% of drinking water is produced from central resources managed by Povodí Odry (the 
river basin authority) in three main water tr eatment plants in the Ostrava Area Water Network The 
water treatment plants are located in Podhradí u Vítkova, Nová Ves u Frýdlantu nad Ostravicí and  
Vyšní Lhoty near Frýdek -Místek. Raw water is taken from the Kružberk Dam in the foothills of the 
Jeseníky Mountains and Šance Dam and Morávka Dam in the Beskydy Mountains. 
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
Infrastructures & facilities : Operation of 65 wastewater treatment plants with a total capacity of 
279,682 m3/d in 76 municipalities where SCALIBUR actions will be carried out. This as sures a constant 
supply of sewage sludge to be treated during the project execution. The strong background of SMVAK  
in drinking water production and supply,as well as treatment and discharge of wastewater will 
facilitate the successful execution of SCALIBU R SMVAK will participate actively in several WP, whose 
main role is: 
 To contribute in WP1, leading activities and WP towards the desired objectives. 
 To contribute in WP2 actively engage all relevant stakeholders and support the integration of the 
urban bio waste valorisation approaches, designing the roadmap for the implementation of the 
SCALIBUR vision at a regional scale, since. SMVAK operates in different districts in Czech Republic.  
 In WP3 SMVAK will participate in the logistical optimization of the rou tes aimed at the desired 
synergistic effects by treating different wastes. It will also provide detailed analysis of sewage 
sludge generated in WWTPs located in Czech Republic. 
 SMVAK will lead WP6 to verify the feasibility of SCALIBUR process as a cost -competitive 
alternative for sewage sludge and mixtures treatment to obtain high -value compounds. It will 
promote the collaboration between partners involved in WP6 for an effective implementation of 
the process as well as verification of performance and end-products quality. 
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Marcela Zrubková (F). WWTP operations manager. She has experience on process design, control, 
operation and management of municipal wastewater treatment plants, WWTP upgrading and 
optimisation, development of bi ological and physicochemical wastewater treatment systems, 
preparation of treatment plant control, operation and maintenance manuals and evaluation and 
design of process systems for the handling, conditioning, dewatering and disposal of wastewater 
treatment plant sludge. 
 
Pedro Miñarre Perete (Male). Member of the Supervisory Board of Severomoravské vodovody a 
kanalizace Ostrava a.s. ( SMVAK a.s.). Member of the Investment Commission of Severomoravské 
vodovody a kanalizace Ostrava a.s. ( SMVAK a.s.). Managing Director of aqualia infraestructuras 
inženýring s.r.o. (until 2010). Official Representative of Tratamiento Industrial del Agua S.A. in Czech 
(Trainasa cz). 
 
Martin Veselý (Male). Technical Director of SMVAK, University of Technology in Brno, graduation from 
the Faculty of Civil Engineering –  “Ing.” Brno and “MBA”, UK, University of Technology in Brno, Faculty 
of Business and Brno Business School 2002 - 2005 Nottingham Trent University. 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
105 
  
 
Mr. Frank Rogalla (Male) is the Director of the Department of Innovation and Technology. He has been 
working for 30 years on technology transfer, managing large projects for major water companies and 
engineering consultancies in France, US, UK, and Brazil (Veolia, Severn Trent Services, Metcalf & Eddy, 
and Black & Veatch). Holder of many patents in advanced water and waste water technology. Leader 
of around 25 people involved in R&D Programs/Projects in synergy with the regional and international 
activities of FCC Aqualia, being responsible for a budget of circa 25 M€ in external fund ing for projects 
co-financed by the European Union (FP7 and Life programs), the Spanish Ministry for Economics and 
Competitiveness and Regional Funds from various sources.  
 
Ms. Icaran Lopez, Pilar (Female): Project Manager in 5 different projects about anaerobic digestion, 
co-digestion, nutrient removal and RO membrane recovery in Aqualia Innovation and Technology Dpt. 
and previous work as Technical/ economical responsible WWTP’s operation in East Zone. Pilar began 
working in the water sector in 1994, as  a technical assistant to improve WWTP in Catalonia. She has 
spent the last 25 years building teams, training and focusing biological processes. She has a great deal 
of expertise dealing with biological scum and bulking problems, improving settling tanks p erformance, 
retrofitting plants with selectors and implementing odor control tools. Last eight years as a Project 
manager in Aqualia, works in R&D projects like Innpronta Itaca and LIFE+ Remembrane developing 
new and innovative technologies and helping to improve the sustainability of water processes. 
Currently is involved in activities to transform waste into biomethane that we can use as fuel for 
vehicles, among many other innovative tasks developed in CIEN SMARTGreengas project.  
 
Dr. Monsalvo Garcia , Victor M . (Male) i s Head of the Eco -efficiency Area at the Innovation and 
Technology Department of FCC Aqualia (third party of SMVAK ). After his PhD in Chemical Engineering 
from University Autonoma de Madrid, he was Assistant Professor in Chemical Eng. Department from 
2005 to 2014, and visiting researcher in different Universities: Leeds, Cranfield, Sydney and Aachen. 
He was hired as Director of Water Area by Abengoa Research in 2015. Victor leads an active research 
team working in water treatment and reuse, membrane technol ogies and desalination, and has been 
involved in more than 25 research projects (public and private funded). He (co) authored 6 patents 
(national and international), around 50 journal and referred conference papers, 2 book chapters and 
edited 4 books. He h as participated in evaluation committees in the PARTNERSHIPS Programme Joint 
Applied Research Projects (2011-  2014) Ministry of Education (Romania) and in the National 
Committee for Evaluation for the Ministry of Economy and Competiveness (Spain).  
 
Ms. d el Castillo Parra, Beatriz  (Female) is a European Projects Manager of the Department of 
Innovation and Technology. Master in Business Administration (MBA) at University Camilo José Cela 
and Master's Degree in Forest Engineering at Madrid Polytechnic Univer sity. She worked for 14 years 
as manager of a Spanish Entrepreneur Association dealing with stakeholder activities, as sector 
representative in other Spanish and European Institutions, forums, High level groups, etc. She also has 
17 years experience workin g on international projects, co -financed by the European Commission, in 
various  programs (H2020, FP7, Life, LEONARDO, INTERREG) and national projects the funded the 
Spanish Ministry for Economics and Competitiveness, Environmental Ministry, Education Mini stry and 
other various sources. As I+D senior consultant she has also developed the Smart Specialisation 
Strategy Galicia-Northern Portugal (RIS3T), the R&D Galician Strategic Plan 2014-2020 
Relevant publications  
and/or products, 
services 
      
 VWTP in Opava is more efficient now in treatment of sludge. ( www.SMVAK.cz/web). The system 
uses thermophilic anaerobic stabilisation where sludge is heated up to 55 C. This removes 
undesired substances and fulfil health standards, as well as more biogas is produced. 
 SMVAK has initiated actions to increase the energy efficiency in water treatment and 
management facilities. 
 3. SMVAK takes special measures to reduce its carbon foot print. 5,500 tons of CO 2 is not 
released each ye ar because SMVAK  has been using residual gas in cogeneration units and the 
hydro energy potential of water in small hydraulic power plants.  
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 SMVAK has initiated innovation actions to reduce the environmental impacts caused b y water 
and wastewater management. In recent years, retrofitting in wastewater treatment plants allow 
the production of energy by recycling the organic content in wastewater. Related projects:  
 Action Plan Regional Innovation Strategy of the Region of Morav ia-Silesia. SMVAK participates in 
this national R&D project in the field of modern membrane systems for the use of water from 
mining and post-mining activity for future water supply. 
 
17. UNIMORE 
 
Università degli studi di Modena e Reggio Emilia 
Modena and Reggio Emilia University of Studies  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
106 
  
www.unimore.it     Country: Italy Type: University  
Short 
Name: Unimore Participant 
No.:  17 
Organisation  
description 
 
UNIMORE (1176) is third oldest University in the world and has always been ranked among the first 
Italian universities for quality of teaching and research since 2007. UNIMORE is a networked campus 
located in the towns of Modena and Reggio Emilia. It counts about 20000 students, including 3500 
postgraduates, 900 f aculty members, 13 PhD schools. UNIMORE has over 300 international exchange 
agreements and cooperation programs to encourage students and researcher to actively interact in a 
globalized world. The University has a strategic commitment to promote research i n the following 
major areas: Mechanics and Mechatronics, Logistics, Molecular and Regenerative Medicine, 
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, ICT and Neuroscience. 
UNIMORE has excellent international network being part of, among the other, Biobased industries, ETP 
Nanomedicine, EARPA -  Transport networks including academic and industrial players. The University 
project portfolio comprises 45 on -going Horizon 2020 projects, more than 50 running FP7 projects, 
ARTEMIS, Ecsel, and ENIAC Joint Technology Initiatives included, plus several projects financed by 
other international donors. UNIMORE is part of the High Technology Regional Cluster, involving all the 
Universities in the Emilia -Romagna Region, and offers cutting -edge facilities for technology transfer in 
the sectors of regenerative medicine, advanced materials, mechanical engineering, mechatronics, ICT 
in business applications. 
Research Office provides RTD advisory, project management services, training and capacity building in 
transferable skills supporting t he building of transnational collaborative projects and industry -
academia partnerships. A dedicated Industrial Liaison Office supports spin -off and provides IPR tech -
transfer advisory. 
In addition, UNIMORE have recently been accredited by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). 
At UNIMORE research is conducted both at the 14 Departments and research centres, the latter may 
involve multiple departments in the development of interdisciplinary research activities. The 
Department in charge of the implementat ion of the project is the D Department of Life Sciences and 
the Department of Law. 
The Department of Life Sciences  originated from the aggregation of three Faculties (Agriculture, 
Biosciences and Biotechnology and Pharmacy). Over the years it has achieved very important results in 
agricultural, food and environmental technologies. 
The Department of Law is hosted in a building that has recently been renovated. It has been equipped 
with the most up -to-date research tools. Researchers who obtained outstanding results in the field of 
environmental and agrifood law and the relevant systems of sanctions work within the department . 
Capabilities and role 
in SCALIBUR 
Interdipartimental Centre for Large Instruments CIGS  http://www.cigs.unimore.it/ The C.I.G.S. 
laboratories plays a role of reference and exchange of experiences on different themes and 
applications for researchers of different origins. The service that the CIGS has always tried to provide 
to the University's re searchers is not only the availability of new and constantly updated scientific 
instruments, but also the support of specialists in the various instrumental techniques, an 
indispensable element to satisfy the always new, more specific and complex research needs.  
Interdepartmental Centre for the Improvement and Enhancement of Agri -Food Biological Resources  
BIOGEST – SITEIA http://www.biogest-siteia.unimore.it/site/home.html It offers compan ies specialized 
services for industrial and applied research in the agri -food supply chain. It promotes and coordinates 
sectoral research in the field of plant productions and their transformation processes and studies on 
the organization and management of innovation in the agri-food sector. 
The Centre has the ownership of the pilot plant for rearing insects. 
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Prof. Andrea Antonelli: (male) is the responsible of WP5. He is a food technologist involved in food 
innovation and sustainability of food production. He has also a relevant experience in food analysis. He 
is P.I. of Italian projects focusing sustainability of viticulture and enology and on the use of insects in a 
circular economy perspective. 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
107 
  
 
Dr Francesca Masino: (female) is Researcher in Food Science and Technology with expertise in food 
analysis and sensory study. Technological aspects and their influence on food composition, safety and 
sensory quality are the main topics of her activit y. She is involved also in the enhancement of food 
waste and recovery of interesting molecules by technological processes. 
 
Dr. Lara Maistrello: (female) is Researcher qualified as Full professor in General and Applied 
Entomology, responsible for the Laboratory of Applied Entomology. Expertise in mass rearing of insects 
and biology and management of invasive insect pests. She is P.I. of projects focusing on the use of 
insects in the circular economy perspective, as resources for the valorization of organi c substrates of 
various kinds, obtaining useful biomolecules for industrial purposes in the agri -
food and biomedical 
fields. 
 
Dr. Enrico Francia: (male), principal investigator of the Crop Production group of UNIMORE, integrates 
agriculture genomics and sustainable intensification approaches to improve crop production. Cereals 
and horticultural crops are main targets of basic and applied research as well as comparative 
characterization of agriculture by-products. 
 
Dr. Justyna Anna Milc (female), Technician of the Crop Production group of UNIMORE with expertise in 
agriculture genomics and genetics applied to cereals and horticultural species in basic research and 
technology transfer. 
 
Prof. Luigi Foffani: (male) Dean of the Department of Law, is Full Pr ofessor of Criminal Law. He holds 
several courses. He is Vicesecretary -general of the “International Society of Social Defence”, member 
of the Expert Group on EU Criminal Policy , named by the European Commission (Commission Decision 
2012/C 53/05), member o f the international group “European Criminal Policy Initiative”, co -author of 
the two “Manifesto on European Criminal Policy” (2009 and 2013) and author of more than 100 
publications. 
 
Prof. Silvia Manservisi: (female) is Associate Profe ssor at the Department of Law, with expertise in 
Agrifood Law and EU Environmental Law. Her research focuses mainly on the legal profiles of 
environmental sustainability and circular economy, at an international, EU and national level, in 
relation to the agrifood chain. 
Relevant publications 
and/or products, 
services 
      
 De Paola E.L., Montevecchi G., Masino F., Antonelli A., Lo Fiego, D.P. (2017). Single step 
extraction and derivatization of intramuscular lipids for fatty acid Ultra Fast GC analysis: 
application on pig thigh. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 54 (3), 601-610 
 Caligiani A., Marseglia A., Leni G., Baldassarre S., Maistrello L., Sforza S. (2018) Systematic 
approaches for extraction and fractionation of biomolecules from black soldier f ly prepupae 
(2018) FOOD RESEARCH INTERNATIONAL, 105: 812– 820. Doi: 10.1016/j.foodres.2017.12.012 
 Maistrello L., Vaccari G., Caruso S., Costi E., Bortolini S., Macavei L., Foca G., Ulrici A., Bortolotti 
P.P., Nannini R., Casoli L., Fornaciari M., Mazzoli G.L., Dioli P. (2017). Monitoring of the invasive 
Halyomorpha halys, a new key pest of fruit orchards in northern Italy. 90: 1231-1244. JOURNAL 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
108 
  
OF PEST SCIENCE. doi:10.1007/s10340-017-0896-2 
 Manservisi S. ( - 2017) Verso un uso sostenibile dell’energia, il mi glioramento dell’efficienza 
energetica e la creazione di modelli di produzione e di consumo sostenibili anche nel settore 
alimentare. Rivista di diritto agrario, I, 297-341. 
 D. Ronga, M. Zaccardelli, S. Lovelli, D. Perrone, E. Francia, J. Milc, A. Ulrici, N. Pecchioni (2017). 
Biomass production and dry matter partitioning of processing tomato under organic vs 
conventional cropping systems in a Mediterranean environment. Scientia Horticulturae 224: 163-
170 
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 SOSTINNOVI-Sostainability and innovation along the enoviticultural value chain 
(http://www.sostinnovi.eu/). 2016-2018; funded by “2014- 2020 ROP ERDF”, Emilia -Romagna 
Region. A. Antonelli is coordinator. 
 BIECO-FLIES -Valorisation of by -products of vegetable supply chains through insects: new 
solutions for food, agronomic and energy uses. 2017 -2019; funded by the Emilia Romagna region 
within the Rural Development Plan 2014- 2020 Op. 16.1.01 –  GO EIP-Agri - FA 5C, L. Maistrello is 
P.I. 
 ValoriBio-Organic waste valorization by insects to obtain biomaterials for agricultural use 
(http://www.valoribio.eu/). 2016- 2018; funded by “2014 -2020 ROP ERDF”, Emilia -Romagna 
Region. L. Maistrello is coordinator. 
 Genbacca-Search for new genotypes tolerant to biotic and abiotic stress for sustainable 
management of vineards and processing tomato cultivation ( http://genbacca.it/) 2016-2018; 
funded by “2014-2020 ROP ERDF”, Emilia-Romagna Region. E. Francia is WP leader. 
 SMARTWHEAT -Identification of wheat varieties with low -impact on patients genetically 
vulnerable to coeliac disease for the development of food products able to prevent its onset. 
http://www.smartwheat/eu). 2016-2018; funded by “2014 -2020 ROP ERDF”, Emilia -Romagna 
Region. E. Francia is WP leader. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
109 
  
 
18. VISUM 
 
Visum Limited  
www.seeingnewdata.com Country: Ireland  Type: Company  
Short 
Name: VISUM Participant 
No.:  18 
Organisation description 
 
VISUM (www.seeingnewdata.com) is an optical engineering company from Dublin that 
specializes in the development and commercialization of Near Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS) -
based portable and inline analyzers and measurement systems for process monitoring and 
quality control applications in the food, pharmaceutical and chemical applications. The 
company was established in 2014 and currently employs 9 staff from its facilities in Nexus 
UCD (technology park at the University College Dublin campus). In 2016, the company 
launched the VISUMPalm (a handheld NIR measurement instrument) and has secured first 
sales. An integration platform (VisumNIR) for the inline version is currently under 
development in coop eration with early adopter clients from the food processing industry 
(dairy, meat and olive oil) and pharmaceutical industries. VISUM Ltd. is an SME Champion -
awarded a Phase 1 and a subsequent Phase 2 Grant under H2020’s SME Instrument.  
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
VISUM will lead the WP 7 with support from its 3 rd party IRIS, they will also provide key 
monitoring technology for the biowaste treatment plant in WP3. 
VISUM will also contribute to the transversal tasks like IPR management, dissemination and 
exploitation planning.
  
The optical engineering and smart systems teams at VISUM Ltd. have specialized expertise in 
sensor integration, optical engineering, chemometrics, data analytics, cloud infrastructures 
and data management systems.
 
Key personnel curriculum 
 
DR. TIMOTHY KEHOE (Male) PhD in Engineering, University College Cork, Ireland- developed an 
IR photometric measurement system for thermal diffusivity in anisotropic materials.  Masters 
in Optoelectronics, Queens University Belfast. Designed a n Echelle spectrometer while based 
at Andor Technology Ltd.  Worked at Tyndall National Institute, Cork, and Catalan Institute of 
Nanotechnology, Barcelona, developing diffractive optical and acousto -optical metrology 
techniques for nanotechnology applicati ons, in particular for characterision of nanoscale 
structures fabricated by nanoimprint lithography and directed self -assembly. Other research 
activities: quantification of ordering in self -assembled structures by image analysis techniques 
and optical sensors using hydrogel materials. Tim is the VISUMPalm Product Manager, as well 
as the Technical Lead at VISUM Ltd.  
 
DR. SEVERINE PHILIPPE (Female) graduated with a 1st class Hons. B.Sc. in Applied Sciences 
(Physics and Physics Technology) from Dublin Insti tute of Technology, Ireland, in 2002 and 
received her PhD in Physics from Trinity College Dublin in 2007, for the study of polarisation 
effects in semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOA). She went on to work on the development 
and characterization of low no ise SOAs, as well as THz generation by multimode lasers and 
their detection using four wave mixing in SOA, both in the Semiconductor Photonics Group, 
Trinity College Dublin, and the School of Electronic Engineering, Dublin City University. She 
previously w orked as a R&D technician for the plastics industry and in quality control for 
electronic appliances. She joined VISUM in 2014 as an optical engineer and is currently 
involved in projects including various microscopy techniques, planar waveguide technologi es 
and MIR spectroscopy.  
 
NIKOLINA MIKULCIC (Female) User Interface Designer. Nikolina comes from web design and 
development background with more than 15 years of experience in this field and she is an 
expert on UI/UX design strategy and front -end development (CSS/HTML). She studied graphic 
design and she started to learn web design due to her deeply interested for digital world. 
Since joining VISUM in September 2016, she has been creating a new User Interface for the 
VISUM product lines. Prior to VISUM,  she has an extensive experience in the online world, 
having worked in companies such as EuroArt93 –  digital agency, BlueBOX IT, Biroval. She also 
was a founder of design studio In Love With Blue and she worked as Project Manager, UI/UX 
designer and front -end developer. She was leader numerous digital projects for different 
clients as Erste Bank, Unicredit Bank, Telenor Bank, Komb Bank, ZAMP etc
. 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
110 
  
 
MARIE CALLANAN (Female) Project Manager at Visum has an Electronic Engineering Degree 
from "Trinity College",  Dublin, and a Masters in Business Administration from the European 
University Barcelona. Marie comes from an engineering background with more than 15 years 
experience in monitoring and control. She specialised in modelling system dynamics of 
engineering p rocesses with particular expertise in wind, fuel cell, space and environmental 
applications. Marie has led and participated in many R&D projects in the fields of energy, 
environment, materials development and process monitoring.   She has managed projects 
funded under national and international programmers and has expertise in best practices in 
the European Framework Programme project management going back to FP5.   As a project 
manager Marie is adept at interpreting   and communicating requirements,  team building and 
risk management. 
 
MEABH GARRICK  (Female) Optical Engineer. M.Sc Photonics, Friedrich Schiller Universität, 
Jena, Germany, B.Sc Physics with Medical Physics, National University of Ireland, Galway she 
worked as a research scientist at the Fraunh ofer IOF in Jena, Germany after completing my 
Master Thesis at the institute. I specialised in the area of spectrally resolved laser -induced 
damage testing using a high -power tunable OPO laser system as well as angle resolved 
scattering (ARS) from surfaces  and the unique combination of both techniques. My work was 
presented at the OSA Interference Coatings conference (June 2016).She speak Irish, German 
(and English). Motivated, teamorientated person with a flair for problem solving. She was 
awarded a scholarship to study at the Abbe School of Photonics, Friedrich Schiller Universität, 
Jena where she spent almost four years. 
 
Dr. Ing. ELODIE BUGNICOURT , (Female) PMO Officer at IRIS (linked third party of VISUM) 
Masters in Material Science & Engineering (2002), PhD in Polymers and Composite Materials 
(2005), both from National Institute of Applied Science (INSA), Lyon, France. Leader of the 
Eco-Materials business unit in IRIS since 2009. Coordinated several European projects in the 
fields of bio -based packaging materials development, process monitoring, surface treatment. 
Previous industry experience: R&D in chemical industry especially related to reactive polymer 
formulations: i) Arkema (ex. Cray Valley, 2002, Spain) in the field of polyester powder coating; 
Wacker Chemie (2002- 2005, Germany and France), Silicone division that funded her PhD 
thesis: development of nanocomposites based on an epoxy matrix and silica; iii) Ashland 
(2006-2009, located sequentially in US, Spain and France) in the Composite Polymers division, 
focussing on bio -sourced resins, flame retardant resins, SMC resins, PU and epoxy structural 
adhesives. Led and participated in many R&D projects aimed at developing new formulations, 
understanding mechanisms and structure -properties relationships, developing new analytical 
methods and modelling (for improved quality management); as well as collaborations with 
academic labs and other players in the supply and value chain. Author of several papers in 
peer-reviewed and technical journals, and has p resented her work in numerous international 
conferences. 
 
IVAN PAQUICO RODRIGUEZ  (Male). Scrum Master. Telecommunications Degree from 
University Polytechnic of Catalonia and a Joint Degree in Multimedia Development from LUAS 
(Finland). Final thesis, 'Aug mented Reality Chess and Application to Detect Chess Moves', 
implemented by using Computer Vision, Augmented Reality and Artificial Intelligence 
techniques, has won several awards: Best Final Thesis of the UPC and Best Final Thesis of 
Spain (received from Vodafone Spain and Universia foundation). Professional Scrum Master 
certified by Scrum.org, and an official iOS and Android Developer since 2010. Since then he 
has created numerous social network Apps for Mobile Platforms with experience 
programming with i OS SDK from Apple, Couchbase database technology, and using different 
programming languages such as C, C++, Objective C or Java, 8 bits embedded and real time 
systems. He has expertise in multimedia methodologies ranging from Virtual Reality 
programming te chniques to 3D/2D modelling software such as OpenGL, Quest3D, Autodesk 
Maya, Autodesk 3DS Max or Adobe Photoshop. He is currently working as a Scrum Master in 
IRIS, and is leading a number of software scrum teams working in internal, commercial and 
collaborative R&D projects in the development of the software for advanced monitoring 
systems, sensor integration, wireless sensor networks, among others.
 
Relevant publications  
and/or products, services 
      
 Development and commercialisation of the VISUM instr uments- NIR spectroscopy 
devices- in-pipe, handheld  
 On 08/02/2016, VISUM was awarded the Seal of Excellence form the European 
Commission  
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 PREVIEW- PREdictiVe system to recommend Injection mold sEtup in Wireless sensor 
networks. (Grant Agreement number: 636892). VISUM Ltd. is responsible for the 
development of the Data Acquisition System and in in developing the Signal 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
111 
  
Conditioning, its integration with the ARM main board, as well as implementing a 
prototype. 
 Phase 1 SME Inst rument: An IR -spectroscopy-based platform for the rapid integration 
and customisation of affordable, real -time monitoring solutions for the food and 
pharmaceutical industry (Grant Agreement number: 684767). 
 Phase 2 SME Instrument: Cloud -enabled IR spectros copy platform for the rapid 
integration and customisation of affordable, real -time chemical monitoring solutions for 
food and pharmaceutical industries (Grant Agreement number: 731043) 
 PERCAL -  Chemical building blocks from versatile MSW biorefinery.  (BBI-2016 -R8 Grant 
Agreement number: 745828) VISUM Ltd.  will develop and test novel advanced sensors 
for monitoring selected process parameters.  
 URBIOFIN - Demonstration of an integrated innovative biorefinery for the 
transformation of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) into new BioBased products (URBIOFIN) 
(BBI -2016 – D06 Grant Agreement number. 745785) VISUML Ltd. will develop data 
mining tools to produce relevant decision support tools for optimally controlling 
production based on relevant process data. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
112 
  
 
19. WBD 
 
Waterschap Brabantse Delta                                  
Water Authority Brabantse Delta                                  
www.brabantsedelta.nl Country: NETHERLANDS Type: Water Authority 
Short 
Name: WBD Participant 
No.:  19 
Organisation description 
 
Waterschap Brabantse Delta (WBD) is  the regional water authority for the West Brabant 
region in the Netherlands. The Dutch regional water authorities are decentralised public 
authorities, responsible for flood protection, regional water management and treatment of 
urban wastewater in the Netherlands. Water authority Brabantse Delta maintains the water 
quality for 8,100 km of ditches, canals and rivers and maintains 568 km of dykes for flooding 
protection. There are in total 17 sewage treatment plants in  the region and these plants 
together treat the wastewater from 1.2 million people equivalents. 
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
BD has been consortium leader for the PHARIO project that involved 10 months of pilot testing 
at the WWTP Bath of Brabantse D elta and is also leading a consortium of Dutch water 
authorities (Fryslan, Scheldestromen, De Dommel and Hollandse Delta) that together have the 
ambition to demonstrate the PHARIO approach at a larger scale as proposed in the Scalibur 
proposal. Scalibur wi ll support these ambitions by making it possible to involve end -users in 
the larger scale by supply of materials and through optimization studies.  WBD will ensure that 
these other water authorities are kept updated on the outcomes of Scalibur and together  they 
intend to invest in further expansion and promotion of the PHA production as intended in 
Scalibur. 
WBD will make available the knowledge and contacts they have developed for PHA production 
from sewage sludge. The WWTP Bath has shown to have very good  capabilities to produce 
PHA in an efficient way and WBD will make this sludge available for PHA production in the 
Scalibur project. 
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Etteke Wypkema (female) is innovation manager for WBD. Etteke has initiated and coordinated 
various innovation projects within WBD. Examples of such projects are pilot testing of cold 
Anammox (UNAS system), thermophylic digestion and dynamic filtration of sewage sludge. 
Etteke has 25 years of experience in sewage treatment processes.
 
 
 
Relevant publications  
and/or products, services 
  
     
 S Bengtsson, A Werker, C Visser, L Korving, PHARIO: stepping stone to a sustainable value 
chain for PHA bioplastic using municipal activated sludge, STOWA report 2017 -15, 
978.90.5773.752.7 
 Seuntjens, D., Bundervoet, B. L., Mollen, H., De Mulder, C., Wypkema, E., Verliefde, A., ... 
& Vlaeminck, S. E. (2016). Energy efficient treatment of A-stage effluent: pilot-scale 
experiences with shortcut nitrogen removal. Water Science and Technology, 73(9), 2150 -
2158. 
 Bluemink, E. D., van Nieuwenhuijzen, A. F., Wypkema, E., & Uijterlinde, C. A. (2016). Bio -
plastic (poly-hydroxy-alkanoate) production from municipal sewage sludge in the 
Netherlands: a technology push or a demand driven process?. Water Science and 
Technology, 74(2), 353-358. 
 De Vrieze, J., Smet, D., Klok, J., Colsen, J., Angenent, L. T., & Vlaeminck, S. E. (2016). 
Thermophilic sludge digestion improves energy balance and nutrient recovery potential in 
full-scale municipal wastewater treatment plants. Bioresource technology, 218, 1237 -
1245. 
 Roest, K., Daamen, B., de Graaff, M. S., Hartog, L., Zandvoort, M. H., Uijterlinde, C. A., ... & 
van Loosdrecht, M. C. M. (2012, May). Energy production from wastewater: dynamic 
filtration of A-stage sludge. In IWA World Congress on Water, Climate and Energy (pp. 13 -
18). 
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 WBD is consortium leader for the PHARIO initiative that firstly involved 10 months testing 
of PHA production at pilot scale at the WWTP of Bath of WBD and now aims to further 
scale up. WBD was responsible for project management and pilot plant operation. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
113 
  
 
20. WETSUS 
 
Stichting Wetsus, European Centre Of Excellence For Sustainable 
Water Technology 
www. wetus.eu  
 Country: NETHERLANDS Type: Research 
institute 
Short 
Name: WETSUS Participant 
No.:  20 
Organisation 
description 
 
Stichting Wetsus, European Centre of Excellence For Sustainable Water Technology, is  a research 
institute dedicated to sustainable water technology. At WETSUS, a unique environment is created 
where over 100 companies and 16 European universities participate in creating innovative 
solutions to water-related problems. The institute carries out multidisciplinary research performed 
by 60 PhD students and postdoctoral researchers who are mostly located in the WETSUS 
laboratories in Leeuwarden, the Netherlands. WETSUS is part of WaterCampus Leeuwarden. The 
WaterCampus houses facilities and services to develop new water technologies and bring them to 
the market, including piloting and demonstration sites. 
WETSUS will be the main Scalibur partner to design, build and operate the demonstration scale 
facility for polyhydroxyalkanoate production from organic residuals (PHARIO)  
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
The work of WETSUS on polyhydroxyalkanoate production from organic  residuals in the SCALIBUR 
project will benefit from the more fundamental research in the WETSUS theme on Bioplastics. This 
work will be coordinated by Dr. Alan Werker, highly qualified for this work, as he drove the 
development of this process from fundamental laboratory scale to its current stage. Experiments to 
support the demonstration work can be done in the WETSUS laboratories. WETSUS has not only 
the personnel, expertise and facilities to carry out these tasks, as an organisation connecting 
universities and companies, it’s also ideally suited to support companies in the development and 
up-scaling of novel technologies. WETSUS is dedicated to transfer the generated IP to the 
participating companies and support them to reach the commercial phase. WETSUS ’ research 
facilities are very well equipped and adapted to multidisciplinary projects. The researchers have the 
support of very competent technicians and analysts. WETSUS is located at the water campus where 
it has access to facilities for piloting and demonstration of water treatment installations. 
   
Facilities at WaterCampus Leeuwarden to realise the PHARIO demonstration facility  
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Dr. Alan Werker  (male) is the leader of the recently initiated Bioplastics theme at WETSUS. This 
theme will, to start with, employ two PhD researchers with academic enrolment at Delft University 
of Technology. Plans are also to support the technology developments in the practical 
demonstration efforts of SCALIBUR. Alan is an environmental engineer  with 30 years of experience 
in both academic and industrial research and development efforts. For the past 14 years, he drove 
the devil in the detail from fundamental laboratory scale R&D all the way to bioprocess 
development in piloting proof of concept for producing biopolymers from residuals management 
services. Value added biopolymers (polyhydroxyalkanoates) can be produced as an integrated 
outcome to the treatment and management of industrial and municipal wastewater and sludge 
streams. In the most recently completed project, it was shown in a 10- month production campaign 
that municipal activated sludge can be a raw material to make commercial quality polymers for the 
bioplastics industry. Alan led a trans- disciplinary team that peaked at 12 research e ngineers and 
scientists. Through this work he engaged in national and international academic, corporate, and 
public/private collaborations in basic research, thesis supervision, EU Consortium Projects, and in 
practical business development challenges for r enewable resource value chains. As well as being 
the WETSUS Bioplastics theme leader, Alan is a co -owner and consultant with Promiko AB, a 
Swedish SME, and an Adjunct Professor, School of Chemical Engineering, at the University of 
Queensland.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
114 
  
 
Leon Kor ving (male), Theme Coordinator at WETSUS and owner of Aiforo has 20 years of 
experience in environmental engineering, sewage sludge treatment and phosphorus recovery from 
sewage. Examples of projects by Leon Korving within the scope of Aiforo are: project manager for a 
consortium of seven companies (public/private) for a 10- month pilot plant operation to produce 
PHA bioplastic using activated sludge, project coordinator for bench scale and pilot plant trials for 
gasification of sewage sludge in supercritical water at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology and 
development of a characterization method for poly -electrolyte flocculants together with Groningen 
University. 
 Vacancy for an engineer/researcher (m/f) with 4 years of relevant work experience and a MSc  
degree on Process engineering, (Bio)chemical engineering or equivalent. 
 
 
Relevant publications 
and/or products, 
services 
  
     
 Bengtsson, S., Karlsson, A., Alexandersson, T., Quadri, L., Hjort, M., Johansson, P., Morgan -
Sagastume, F., Anterrieu, S., Arcos-Hernandez, M., Karabegovic, L., Magnusson, P., Werker, A., 
(2017) A process for polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) production from municipal wastewater 
treatment with biological carbon and nitrogen removal demonstrated at pilot -scale. New 
Biotechnology 35: 42-53. 
 Morgan-Sagastume, F., Valentino, F., Hjort, M., Werker A.G. (2017) Acclimation Process for 
Enhancing Polyhydroxyalkanoate Accumulation in Activated -Sludge Biomass. Waste and 
Biomass Valorization : 1-18. 
 Chan, C.M., & Vandi, L. -J., Pratt, S., Halley, P., Richardson, D., Werker, A, Laycock, B. (2017). 
Mechanical Performance and Long-term Indoor Stability of Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA)-based 
Wood Plastic Composites (WPCs) Modified by Non -reactive Additives. European Polymer 
Journal 98: 337-346. 
 Bengtsson, S., & Werker, A., Visser, C., Korving, L. (2017). PHARIO -  stepping stone to a 
sustainable value chain for PHA bioplastic using municipal activated sludge. Technical Report 
STOWA 2017-15, ISBN 978.90.5773.752.7. 
 Temmink, B.G., Ajao, V.O. (2017) Method and system for production of natural 
polyelectrolytes such as microbial extracellular polym eric substances. Patent on biopolymer 
production from sludge, NL2019171. 
Relevant projects and 
patents 
 The Wetsus research theme on Bioplastics was launched in 2017. The theme is sponsored by 
PAQUES (http://en.paques.nl), STOWA (www.stowa.nl), and Slibver werking Noord -Brabant 
(www.snb.nl). The theme was strongly motivated by the compelling and positive outcomes 
from the project PHARIO. 
 PHARIO was financially subsidised from the Topsector Energy program of the Dutch ministry 
of Economic Affairs (TKI Biobase d Economy). The project brought together a public -private 
sector co-development effort. It confirmed that surplus full -scale municipal activated sludge 
can be a robust raw material to make biopolymers of predictable and high quality for the 
bioplastics industry when combined with fermented regionally available organic residuals. The 
techno-economic feasibility for a regional bioplastics value chain was demonstrated and this 
progress continues with proposed next steps of increasing TRL in SCALIBUR.  
 EIT RawMaterials upscaling project coordinated by WETSUS on a novel magnetic route for 
phosphorus and iron recovery from sewage sludge (ViviMag). This project is being done in 
cooperation with TUDELFT (NL), Outotec (FI), ICL (IL) and Kemira (FI). 
 H2020 project coor dinated by WETSUS on Storage and recovery of renewable electrical 
energy by reversible salt water dissociation (BAoBaB), Grant number: 731187  
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
115 
  
21. ZETADEC 
 
ZETADEC B.V                                
                                 
www.zetadec.com Country: The Netherlands Type: Company 
Short 
Name: ZETADEC Participant 
No.:  21 
Organisation 
description 
 
Zetadec is a R&D and consultancy company in the field of feed raw materials  processing and 
design of new feed, food and biomass forms. As such, Zetadec assi sts in development of new 
products, product formulation and conceptualization of manufacturing lines. The main focus is on 
the interaction between raw materials and (feed) processing equipment. Zetadec has experience in a 
large number of unit -- operations e.g. grinding, mixing and forming operations like pelleting, 
extrusion or high --shear granulation. Zetadec has access to its own lab where "proof -of-principle" 
experiments are performed. Also, 2 cabinets are available within the Zetadec facilities for shel f life 
trials. In addition, Zetadec is one of the founding fathers of ‘the Insect Center’ a non -profit branch 
organization with respect to production of insect for food and feed applications. The customer base 
is globally oriented and includes large multin ational companies in the field of feed manufacturing, 
raw materials manufacture and commodity training. In addition, Zetadec provides services for SME 
companies who develop new innovative feeding methods and concepts. 
Capabilities and role in 
SCALIBUR 
The laboratory consists of two units; one unit is used for developing products andconsists in part of 
(traditional) wet- chemistry analytical tools and procedures (as particle size distribution analyses, 
DSC, spectrophotometer, …). The other unit is used to bu ild and install (prototypes of) lab -scale and 
pilot equipment used in milling, extruding, granulating and coating the various products Zetadec is 
working on. Also, equipment for distillation, extraction and spheronisation of ingredients are 
available. 
Key personnel curriculum 
 
Oriane Guerin (female): MSc in Animal Sciences, MSc in European Animal. Management and MSc in 
agriculture. She is Senior Research and worked with protein technology: agglomeration (wet 
agglomeration and spheronisation), feed technology science and data  mining. 
 
Dr. Menno Thomas (male): MSc in Animal Sciences and Postgraduate Diploma in Feed technology. 
He is the project manager for Zetadec. More than 20 years of experience in the field of raw materials 
processing and development of feed formulations. Expertise: agglomeration technology (pelleting, 
extrusion, injection moulding, etc.). Design of feed evaluation tests and optimization of full scale feed 
manufacturing equipment. 
 
Dr. Lucian Miron (male): He worked at the Division of Bioprocess Engineering, Wageningen 
University & Research. He did research in Fo od Science, Bioengineering and Biotechnology. His 
technical skills and competencies are: Product/Process Development, Downstream Processing; (Bio) 
Refinery and extraction techniques: Supercritical CO2 extraction, Pressurized liquid extraction (PLE), 
Enzyme- assisted extraction, Bead milling; Pulsed electric field (PEF), Conventional extraction 
techniques; Analytical techniques; In vitro assays for determination of proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, 
polyphenols, essential oils, antioxidant capacity, antimicrob ial activity, prebiotic effect ; Formulation 
and purification of proteins; Feed manufacturing: Extrusion, Pelleting, Vacuum coating, Physical 
quality of pelleted feed, Post pelleting application of additives; Statistical Analysis: Design and 
Analysis of Experiments, Response Surface Methodology, Modelling, R-programming language. 
 
Marcel Van Culemborg (male): MSc in Plant Sciences. He is plant scientist, sparring partner for 
development team on plant feed insects interactions. 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
116 
  
 
Stijn Duitshof (male) has just graduated at Wageningen University, on which he completed his 
Master in animal nutrition. As part of his Master he wrote a major thesis entitled, ”Maize silage, a 
comparison of different sampling techniques with gas production, NIR and particle size analysis” Stijn 
is going to reinforce the current team of researchers. 
 
 
Relevant publications  
and/or products, 
services 
  
     
 Thomas, M. Physical quality of pelleted feed: a feed model study, 1998. 
 Thomas, M. Van Zuilichem, D. & Van der Poel, A. Physical quality of pelleted animal feed. 2. 
Contribution of processes and its conditions. Animal Feed Science and Technology, Elsevier, 
1997, 64, 173-192 
 Thomas, M.; van Kol, E.; Tamminga, S.; Verstegen, M. W. & van der Poel, A. F. Effects  of water, 
steam and shear conditioning on the protein quality of soy grits. Journal of the Science of Food 
and Agriculture, Wiley Online Library, 1997, 74, 392-400. 
 Miron TL, Olivieri G, Barbosa MJ, Wijffels RH, Eppink MHM. Mild disintegration of the gree n 
microalgae Chlorella vulgaris using bead milling Postma PR, Bioresource Technology 184 
(2014), 297-307 
 Miron TL, Herrero M, Ibáñez E. Enrichment of antioxidant compounds from lemon balm 
(Melissa Officinalis) by pressurized liquid extraction and enzyme-assisted extraction. Journal of 
Chromatography A 1288 (2013), 1-9. 
Relevant projects  
and patents 
 Extraction of insect proteins 
 Extraction and valorisation of plant extract 
 Coating with protein biofilm 
 Valorisation of waste sulphur as fertilizer 
 Optimisation of processing lines 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
117
4.2 THIRD PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE PROJECT (INCLUDING USE OF THIRD 
PARTY RESOURCES)  
 
1. ITENE 
No third parties involved 
2. AERIS 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks? YES 
Subcontractor: To be selected on a best value for m oney basis, possibly Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB) and/or 
Laboratoris Jané 
Tasks: The tasks are basically analytical, aimed at chemically characterizing both the feedstock and the bioproducts 
generated. The specific tasks to subcontract will depe nd on the amount, nature and characteristics of the feedstock and of 
the bioproducts. It is likely that some or all of the following will be included amongst these:  
- Elemental Analysis (C, N, O, H, S) 
- Biochemical characterization (protein content, lignin content, fat content…)  
- NMR analysis to characterise sophorolipid structure 
- Microbial identification tests 
Maximum cost: 15,000 
3. ASA 
No third parties involved 
4. CENER 
No third parties involved 
5. CLUBE 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  YES 
Subcontractor:  CERTH/CPERI 
Tasks: Support to our participation in  WP2 and especially to the "Task 2.3: National & European Stakeholder Engagement" 
and to "Task 2.4: Evaluation of SCALIBUR multi -level engagement plan and activities, including gender ", in  WP3 and 
especially to the "Task 3.1: Improved methods for selective collection of urban biowaste", "Task 3.2:  Enhanced methods for 
transport & logistics of urban biowaste" and "Task 3.4: Characterisation and monitoring of urban biowaste"  
The Centre f or Research and Technology -Hellas (CERTH) founded in 2000 is one of the leading research centres in Greece 
and listed among the TOP -20 E.U. research institutions with the highest participation in competitive research grants.  CERTH 
has important scientific and technological achievements in many areas including: Energy, Environment, Industry, 
Mechatronics, Information & Communication, Transportation & Sustainable Mobility, Health, Agro -biotechnology, Smart 
farming, Safety & Security, as well as several cross -disciplinary scientific areas. CERTH includes five institutes among them is 
the Chemical Process & Energy Resources Institute (CPERI) with facilities in the city of Ptolemaida, Prefecture of 
Kozani. CPERI's mission is to conduct high caliber basic and appl ied research, to develop novel technologies and products 
and to pursue scientific and technological excellence in selected advanced areas of Chemical Engineering, including Energy, 
Environment, Materials and Process Technologies, in response to the needs o f the Greek and European industrial and 
productive sector. 
Maximum cost: 20,000 
6. CSCP 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  YES 
Subcontractor:  To be selected on a best value for money basis 
Tasks:  
- expert social innovation/ representatives of local start-ups, for the delivery of the "see, touch, taste" experiences in 
WP2, 500€ per pilot municipality 
- creative support (video, design etc.)  
Maximum cost: 4,000 € 
7. EXERGY 
No third parties involved 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
118 
  
8. FCC 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks? YES 
Subcontractor: Universitat de Girona 
Tasks: Technical assessment for replication of BES in Madrid 
Maximum cost: 90,000 € 
9. G!E 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties? YES 
G!E will participate with 2 linked third parties: (i) Van Der Meer & Van Tilburg West BV (VMT) and (ii) Geonardo Environmental 
Technologies Ltd (GEO) 
VMT Description: 
Van der Meer & van Tilburg was founded in 1979. The core of their activities consists of  
consultancy on innovation and commercialization of new technologies. The executives have backgrounds in both business 
strategy and technology. A distinguishing characteristic of Van der Meer & van Tilburg is the combination of skills in Strate gy, 
Technology, Marketing an d Organisation. Clients include governments, branch organisations, regional development 
organisations, small and medium sized enterprises and knowledge institutions. In national and international research projects  
Van der Meer & van Tilburg collaborate wit h partners to fill the gap between the research and the commercialisation by 
companies. 
VMT helps explore the market to find commercial possibilities for new knowledge of institutions and  universities. VMT has 
also developed instruments to map knowledge and development demands of companies and branches and use the results for 
feedback to research and educational institutions. VMT explores future developments by means of tools such as technology 
roadmaps and knowledge position studies. VMT masters different methodologies to develop business models and business 
plans. 
VMT has been involved in several EU -funded projects as exploitation leader and has conducted some dissemination projects 
for the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs regarding the introduction of sustainable energy solutions. 
VMT role in the project:  
Van der Meer & van Tilburg will lead the main tasks related to exploitation, namely Task 10.1 (Exploitation strategy) and Tas k 
10.2 (Business modelling and business plans). Within that framework, VMT w ill develop a detailed market exploitation plan 
and conduct several exploitation workshops involving all project partners to validate exploitation strategies and raise 
awareness on the need to commercialise project outcomes. Further to the exploitation str ategy, VMT will develop business 
models and plans for each key result, that will be validated by project and end -users throughout the whole project. 
Exploitation workshops will enable the creation of a solid exploitation team within the project, including relevant work 
package leaders, developers and end -users in order to build a consensus about routes to market, target customers, and 
define appropriate IP strategies.  
GEO description: 
Geonardo is an innovation and technology company active in the energy, e nvironment and sustainable development fields. 
Geonardo provides research, innovation and consultancy services and cutting -edge solutions in the renewable energy, 
resource efficiency, climate change and raw materials sectors. Across these sectors, Geonardo  conducts state-of-the-art life 
cycle assessments (LCA), GIS/remote sensing and 3D terrestrial laser scanning (TLS) applications, develops web -based 
planning and decision support tools, and implements novel training, capacity building, institutional streng thening, and 
communication and dissemination actions.  Since its establishment in 1999, Geonardo has become a leading SME in Central 
and Eastern Europe with extensive experience in conceiving and implementing research and innovation projects co -financed 
under the EU programmes, in particular the research and innovation programmes (FP5/6/7, H2020, LIFE, CIP). In these 
projects, Geonardo works closely with universities, research institutions, industry as well as public administrations and civ il 
society organisations, providing innovative solutions to tackle complex challenges.  
Today, Geonardo has a broad portfolio of European and international projects implemented by a dynamic and 
multidisciplinary team of experts with solid know -how and experience in project d evelopment and management, policy 
formulation and implementation, web design and development, as well as technical expertise in environmental engineering, 
geothermal energy, bioenergy, energy efficiency, building energetics, geodata and satellite imagery p rocessing. 
GEO role in the project: 
Geonardo Environmental Technologies will participate to the Task 10.4 (Replication) to lead the project’s training activities . In 
that framework, GEO will create a dedicated training kit, to be distributed to relevant en d-users, and develop a e -learning 
platform including a set of online courses divided into two training modules, that will be made available to potential 
replicators within and beyond the project. One of the training modules will be dedicated to potential r eplicating cities, and 
distributed in priority to the project’s network of Early Adopter Cities, and to many other interested cities. The second module 
will address entrepreneurs that are already working or wishing to work in the waste management sector. E ach module will be 
constructed around a tutorial, describing the main objectives and learn ing outcomes and explaining the specific subject in 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
119 
  
detail. The platform will also include downloadable reference documents and useful links, an “Ask the Tutor” function, and a 
Forum area to allow users to interact, ask questions and leave comments.  
Budget of third parties: 
 Budget categories EU Contribution 
 Direct 
personnel 
costs 
Other 
direct 
costs 
Subcontracting 
costs 
Indirect 
costs 
Total 
eligible 
costs 
Reimbursement 
rate 
Maximum 
amount of the 
grant 
Requested 
amount of the 
grant 
VMT 180,200 19,500 0 49,925 249,625 70% 174,738 174,738 
GEO 168,000 24,500 0 48,125 240,625 70% 168,438 168,438 
 
 
10. KOUR 
No third parties involved 
11. LAZIO 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks? YES 
Subcontractor: Consultant to be selected  
Tasks: Consultancy about the strategy on the waste management pilot action (WP5) and national stakeholder involvements 
(WP2), including the assessment of economic and environmental analysis and the market, as well as the integrated 
management of organic systems and best practices adoption (WP3). 
Maximum cost: 16,000 € 
 
12. LUND 
No third parties involved 
13. MADRID 
No third parties involved 
14. NOVAMONT 
No third parties involved 
15. NS 
No third parties involved 
16. SMVAK 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks? YES 
Subcontractor 1: Universitat de Girona 
Tasks:  In order to accelerate the start-up of the BES prototype, AQUA will provide an enriched and highly-
active inoculum of bioelectrogenic consortium in collaboration with Universidad de Girona (UdG). UdG 
has participated in the development of BES and can offer existing bench scale facilities, where the 
feasibility of the process has been demonstrated in previous R&D jointly actions. This ensures the source 
of ready-to-use inoculum in case of destabilization of the BES prototypes. In addition, this strategy will 
facilitate the selectivity towards the production of target compounds with the different feeds  
Maximum cost: 70,000 € 
 
Subcontractor 2: To be selected on a best value for money basis 
Tasks: Electrical project, control and rem ote monitoring system implementation. In order to minimize the 
operation, maintenance and monitoring of prototypes, an electrical project and control system are 
necessary. This will permit to oberve historial data and make small changes in the controllers remotely, in 
order to maintain the pilot plants as optimized as possible. 
Maximum cost: 15,000 € 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties? YES 
Description: 
Aqualia (AQUA), as the third -largest private water management company in Europe (Global Water Intelligence) and the 
seventh worldwide, is part of the environmental services group FCC, providing public services infrastructure group, present in 
5 continents, and employing around 70,000 people in 52 countries. Aqualia covers the whole water cycle, managing water 
and waste water services more  than 1,100 towns and cities. Aqualia serves more than 23 million people in more than 22 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
120 
  
countries. Aqualia ´s activity comprises 3 major areas among which it creates synergies in knowledge, methodology, research 
and development, working with local partners and administrations:  
i) Integral management of public water services 
ii) Design and construction of all types of water infrastructures, 
iii) Global solutions for the use of water in industry 
Significant Infrastructure:  
AQUA’s Municipal Water Concessions involve a municipality granting to AQUA the responsibility not only for the operation 
and for maintenance of the water assets but also for financing and managing all of the required investment. AQUA engages in 
several business activities in connection with private w ater management, including, Municipal Water Concessions, BOT 
Concessions, EPC Activities, O&M Activities. AQUA also counts with 5  Water Analysis Labs with certification UNE -EN ISO /IEC 
17025, and Pilot and Prototype plants, including Pilot-Scale Anaerobic reactor (2.4 m3) and Pilot-Scale Granular reactor (1 m3). 
Role in the project:  
AQUA will participate in WP providing its expertise as operator of the integral water cycle and technology developer of some 
of the processes that will be evaluated in SCALIBUR. The main role of AQUALIA within SCALIBUR project is: 
 To contribute in WP1 in the effective management of the project. 
 To contribute in WP2 in the strategies for stakeholder engagement and public involvement. It will also contribute to 
the development of new business models, contributing to the accelerate market penetration. Aqua also contributes 
in the communication and dissemination activities as the 6th water private company in the world serving more than 
23 M people in 1,100 municipalities around the world, strongly disseminating the project. 
 Aqualia will participate in the characterization and pre -treatment criteria, mainly for sewage sludge and mixtures 
with the rest of materials, in WP3. 
 To contribute in WP6 on the validation of alternative sewage sl udge and mixtures with other materials using an 
innovative SCALIBUR process where physical, chemical and biological processes are integrated to obtain high -value 
products such as acids, alcohols. Collaborate with other partners in the integration of this p rocess in existing 
wastewater treatment plants. 
 AQUA will contribute to the Intellectual Property Rights management, because this is an essential task for the future 
market uptake of SCALIBUR solutions and we gather a long experience in intellectual proper ty management (WP10). 
Budget of the third party: 
 Budget categories EU Contribution 
 Direct 
personnel 
costs 
Other 
direct 
costs 
Subcontracting 
costs 
Indirect 
costs 
Total 
eligible 
costs 
Reimbursement 
rate 
Maximum 
amount of the 
grant 
Requested 
amount of the 
grant 
AQUA 247,000 94,500 0 85,375 426,875 70% 298,813 298,813 
 
 
17. UNIMORE 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 
12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
YES 
Legal name of the third party: Conad Centro Nord Società Cooperativa (in short Conad)  
Legal data: Via Kennedy n.5 – 42040 Campegine (RE). P.IVA 01751820356  www.conad.it  
Conad runs a large supermarket chain, with shops scattered all over the Ital ian territory. Created in 1962, Conad is a 
cooperative system of entrepreneurs, working in large -scale distribution, mainly on food distribution. Its structure is 
organized on three levels: entrepreneur members (owners of retail outlets), cooperatives (lar ge shopping and distribution 
centers), and the national consortium (a service and market -oriented body for member companies). Beside Italy, Conad is 
present in Albania, China, Kosovo, Malta and the Republic of San Marino. At the end of 2016 the sales netwo rk was as follows: 
3,169 points of sale, 108 parapharmacies, 36 fuel stations, 14 pet stores, 19 opticians, 12 ice -cream parlour Sapori & Dintorni.  
Task of the third party: 
Conad will supply the scrap of fruit, vegetables, butcher and fish shops during th e set -up step of the optimization of the 
rearing pilot plant and the design, assembly and test of the fractionating plant.  
Then, in the last part of the project Conad will be able to help the dissemination phase, distributing disclosure material an d 
hosting project researchers who will be able to entertain clients with the activities of this proposal.  
 
18. VISUM 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties? YES 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
121 
  
Description: 
IRIS (Innovació i Recerca Industrial i Sostenible SL) is an advanced engineering company that specialises in process monitoring 
and control, and process optimisation. Its commercial division offers advanced monitoring and control solutions based on NIR 
and hyperspectral imaging solutions for fore ign body detection and chemical composition analysis; data management 
solutions for data processing, decision support, automation and data analysis (big production data).  
Besides, IRIS’ innovation division has 3 core lines: 
-New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process optimisation  
-Data mining, IOT & cloud platforms 
-Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorisation 
The company was established in 2007 and currently employs 56 staff with a turnover of €3.8 M. It is equipped with 
engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an electronics/telecommunications 
lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified and also is certified under UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i. 
With its team including telecom and electronics engineers, system engineering, application programming and web 
development etc. IRIS can carry out full system desi gn and engineering, including electronic design (PCB) and assembly, 
firmware and software development, electrical harnesses and interconnections. Moreover IRIS has mechanical and 
mechatronics engineers, specialised in process upscaling, integration work, a s well as installation, validation and 
industrialisation of prototypes and equipment in different industries. In addition to this broad cross -disciplinary engineering 
team, IRIS’ research team consisting among other of food and material scientists, biologi sts and physicists, have all the 
expertise to validate the technologies developed. Finally, IRIS has significant expertise in the use of QFD (quality function  
deployment) and uses a systems development management approach based on KANBAN agile methodologie s. 
Significant Infrastructure:  
Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, a FTIR -ATR (Interspectrum), 2 UV -VIS (PerkinElmer and 
Ocean Optics), an Extended -SWIR (StellarNet) and a NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as well as a SWIR Hyperspectral 
imager (Specim -Xenics). The associated staff are properly trained and skilled in chemometrics modelling by using a 
commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non -commercial chemometric tools (Matlab and Python 
toolboxes). 
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up -to-date hardware and tools: signal 
generators, wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for programming 
microcontrollers, CNC -milling m achines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD software [SolidWorks], among 
others.   
IRIS’ optical engineers work with ZEEMAX software for optimally designing of optical systems and to setup the designs by 
means of advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and related 
“opticalware”). 
Food and wet chemistry lab equipped with a DSC, a Surface Energy analyser, an HPLC, a Cobb tester, microbiological 
equipments, microspcope and microtome f or structural analysis, migration cells, colourimeter (for colour and opacity 
measurement), Ford cup viscometers, water vapour permeation cells, turbidimeter, climatic chambers, manual and automatic 
coaters, electrospray, different drying technologies, plasma surface activation, etc. 
Relevant Publications: 
 The STARTEC Decision Support Tool for Better Tradeoffs between Food Safety, Quality, Nutrition, and Costs in 
Production of Advanced Ready -to-Eat Foods, BioMed Research International, Volume 2017 (2017), A rticle ID 
6353510, 13 pages, https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/6353510 
 Commercial Data Mining, Processing, Analysis and Modeling for Predictive Analytics Projects, David Nettleton, 
Elsiever book ,ISBN9780124166028, 304p 
 AgriBox solution (a control platform for in -field multi-point monitoring that can integrate various types of sensors for 
the agriculture sector) 
 PATBoxTM solution (a process control platform for integrating PAT technologies in the food, pharmaceutical and 
process industries). 
 Sapenta (IRIS' spin off): a digital platform for smart management of work places  
Relevant Projects:  
 ShareBox- Secure Management Platform for Shared Process Resources, Grant Agreement no: 680843, Funding 
programme: H2020-SPIRE-06-2015.  
 AgriMax: Agri & food waste valorisation  co-ops based on flexible multi -feedstocks biorefinery processing 
technologies for new high added value applications, Grant Agreement no: 720719, Funding programme: H2020- BBI 
 AgroCycle: Sustainable techno -economic solutions for the agricultural value chain , Grant Agreement no: 690142, 
H2020- WASTE 
 Sapenta®: digital workplace platform for smartworking.  
Role in the project:  
IRIS will contribute to the work related to the development of a stakeholders’ platform in WP9. 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
122 
  
Budget of the third party: 
 Budget categories EU Contribution 
 Direct 
personnel 
costs 
Other 
direct 
costs 
Subcontracting 
costs 
Indirect 
costs 
Total 
eligible 
costs 
Reimbursement 
rate 
Maximum 
amount of the 
grant 
Requested 
amount of the 
grant 
IRIS 336,000 35,000 0 92,750 463,750 70% 324,625 324,625 
 
 
19. WBD 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  YES 
Subcontractor:  To be selected on a best value for money basis 
Tasks: An EPC contractor (EPC: engineering, procurement, construction) with experience in design and construction of 
solvent extraction and recovery plants will be hired to perform a value engineering exercise in order to translate the costs of 
the pilot scale PHA extraction to a full scale design and asses cost optimization opportunities. In this way a direct insight  is 
obtained in main cost determining factors for a full scale design of the green solvent PHA extraction system and can then be 
validated in the pilot scale extraction facility, for instance to determine key design parameters or test alternative 
approaches that can lead to significant cost reductions in a full scale plant. The scope of the subcontract will consist of the 
following elements: 1. Basic engineering design and cost estimate based on the results of the first pilot extraction runs. 2.  
Value engineering exercise with EPC experts and experts from Wetsus and WBD to determine the cost determining factors 
and identify possible approaches for cost reduction that can be tested and implemented on pilot scale. 3. Make a new 
design and cost estimate based on optimized parameters obtained at the pilot scale.  
This approach will lead to a reduced cost for the solvent extraction process and will support and improve the business case.  
Maximum cost: 80,000 € 
 
20. WETSUS 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  YES 
Subcontractor:  To be selected on a best value for money basis 
Tasks: The solvent extraction pilot to be realized within the project will use green solvents to extract the PHA from the 
biomass. Since solvents are flammable and potential explosive t he pilot needs to be designed in a way that makes it safe 
and easy to operate. The design will need to comply with the EU ATEX 95 and 137 regulations for handling will need to be 
performed on the design and way to operate the pilot plant. For this reason t he construction of this part of the pilot will be 
subcontracted to an company that has experience in designing pilot equipment handling flammable and explosive 
chemicals. The subcontractor will design the pilot based on a process design supplied by Scalibu r partners Wetsus and WBD 
and also give instructions for safe operation of the system. 
Maximum cost: 120,000 € 
 
21. ZETADEC 
 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  YES 
Subcontractor:  To be selected on a best value for money basis 
Tasks: Minor physic-chemical analysis   
Maximum cost: 9,000 € 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
123 
  
 
SECTION 5. ETHICS AND SECURITY
5.1 ETHICS 
 We confirm that this proposal complies with ethical principles (including the highest standards of research 
integrity- as set out, for instance, in the European Code of Conduct for Research Integrity - and including, in 
particular, avoiding fabrication, falsification, plagiarism or other research misconduct. 
Concerning the Ethics issues table of Part A of the proposal, SCALIBUR does not raise any ethical issue cause 
although it involves the use of insects and microorganisms, when referring to animal welfare,  we shall consider 
Council Directive 98/58/EC and Directive 2010/63/EC.  
 Council Directive 98/58/EC of 20 July 1998 concerning the protection of animals kept for farming purposes does not 
apply to invertebrate animals (so insects are outside its scope); 
 Directive 2010/63/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2010 on the protection of 
animals used for scientific purposes applies only to live non -human vertebrate animals and live cephalopods, so again, 
insects are not included. 
According to EU law, therefore, up till now, ethic issues are not involved.  
Therefore, the table in the administrative online form has been filled in accordingly, answering NO to all the 
questions included in the following sections: 
1. HUMAN EMBRYOS/FOETOUSES 
2.  HUMANS 
3. HUMAN CELLS/TISSUES 
4.  PROTECTION OF PERSONAL DATA 
5. ANIMALS 
6. NON-EU COUNTRIES 
7. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
8. DUAL USE 
9. MISUSE 
10. OTHER ETHIC ISSUES 
As a result, the proposal does not require submitting an ethics and self-assessment document.
5.2 SECURITY 
This proposal does not raise any security issues. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
CE-SFS-25-2018  
 
124 
  
SECTION 6. ANNEXES 
The project has gathered important support, please find in the next pages some relevant support letters we have 
received from several organisations and cities: 
 International Solid Waste Association (ISWA) 
 Umweltdienst Burgenland GmbH (UDB) - Environmental Service of Burgenland 
 Reire S.r.l. 
 Progeo SCA 
 Industria Molitoria Denti S.r.l. 
 Albano Laziale Municipality 
 Weiz Municipality 
 Grevena Municipality 
 Polpenazze Municipality 
 Kozani Municipality 
 FCC Česká republika, s.r.o. 
 FCC Austria Abfall Service AG 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
Città  di Albano Laziale prot. n. 7484 del 06-02-2018  partenza Cat.6 Cl. 9
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
 
 
 
    COMUNE DI POLPENAZZE DEL GARDA 
  
 
 
Piazza Biolchi, 1 – 25080 Polpenazze del Garda  
Telefono 0365.674012   – Telefax 0365.674639 
 
 
 
 
Place Polpenazze d/G, 10.02.2018 
 
 
SCALIBUR: SCALable technologIes for Bio-Urban waste Recovery. TOPIC: Integrated 
system innovation in valorising urban biowaste. Topic identifier: CE-SFS-25-2018. 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
Mr. dal Prete Andrea, on behalf of Municipality of Polpenazze d/G. which is informed 
about the project proposal SCALIBUR”: SCALable technologIes for Bio-Urban Waste 
Recovery, submitted by ITENE, Packaging, Transport & Logistics Research Centre, under 
the European Union Horizon 2020 Programme, within the topic Integrated system 
innovation in valorising urban biowaste. (Topic identifier: CE-SFS-25-2018), states that:  
The innovative results to be launched in the SCALIBUR project to optimise the selective 
organic collection for obtaining high-added value products such as bioplastics, biofertilizers, 
biopesticides and proteins for feed and food, represents a real opportunity and deed for our 
municipality. We commit to implement the project actions and participate actively as 
stakeholders. This support doesn’t mean, in any case, any financial or legal commitment 
from our side.  
Hereby, we are committed to assume the role of Pilot municipality. The main tasks to carry 
out as Pilot are:  
1. To participate actively in the co-design meetings to develop SCALIBURs’ waste 
management improvements. 
2. To implement the best practices identified regarding to the bio-waste collection in the 
municipality.  
3. To provide information and data about bio-waste managements and the tools from the 
Platform. 
4. To involve relevant stakeholders of the organic waste chain in the co-design of the 
waste management plans. 
5. To be involved in the workshops and awareness campaigns of the municipality. 
6. To promote and disseminate SCALIBUR’s results to other interested actors. 
 
Yours sincerely,  
Dal Prete Andrea,  
Mayor of the Municipality of Polpenazze d/G 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
This proposal version was submitted by Susana AUCEJO on 13/02/2018 16:37:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public-private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Participant Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integrity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can be verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Participant Portal. 
(http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/portal/page/faq)