3.1 Work plan and resources  SecureFood will run for 42 months and is broken down into eight Work Packages (WPs) which are closely related and collectively work to meet the objectives, reach the ambitious goals, and maximize the project’s impact. The WPs are grouped into three main areas, namely: (A) horizontal WPs (1 and 8) aiming at managing and cross-cutting activities (e.g., communication and exploitation); (B) Co-creation and co-development WPs (2-6), in which end-users and technical partners are involved in an iterative process of cross-fertilization and knowledge exchange for building together the SecureFood solutions, and customize, test and validate them in the different case studies; (C) Education, training and recommendation WP 7, for promoting culture-building activities and generating recommendations for the food system stakeholders.    Table 3.1a:  List of work packages WP Work Package Title # Leader Lead Participant Short Name Person-Months Start Month End month 1 Project coordination 1 ED 84 1 42 2 Background analysis, food security drivers, requirements and high-level reference architecture 2 GL 143,6 1 13 
3 Food Systems vulnerabilities and interdependencies – Risk and resilience governance and management 3 ZLC 181,1 5 29 4 Digital twins and simulators for the food supply chains           6 IRIS 115 9 34 5 Digitalizing the food supply chain – Early warning notification and preparedness for crises 10 EXUS 118 9 34 6 Co-creation, testing, scaling-up and evaluation of project’s innovations 4 EMP 287,6 9 38 7 Culture-building activities, policy recommendations and best practices 14 NULES 132 16 42 8 Dissemination, communication and exploitation 12 CARR 142,7 1 42 
Figure 4: Inter-relation of Work Packages (PERT) 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 31 
Project GANTT  WP1Project coordination                                                     ED142Task 1.1Project administrative and financial coordination ED142 D1.1Task 1.2Technical Management ICCS142Task 1.3Data Management ED142Task 1.4Quality control, risk and innovation management ED142Task 1.5Legal and ethical monitoring LAUR142 D1.2
WP2Background analysis, food security drivers, requirements and high-level reference architecture                                 GL113 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Task 2.1Background analysis, state of play and identification of gaps GL111 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Task 2.2Food security drivers and targeted interventions GL311XX XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXTask 2.3User requirements, use-cases and KPIs definition EMP312XX D2.2XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXTask 2.4System requirements and high-level reference architecture ICCS613XXXXX D2.3XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
WP3Food Systems vulnerabilities and interdependencies – Risk and resilience governance and managementZLC529XXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXX
Task 3.1Foresight analysis for future state scenarios ZLC514XXXX D3.1XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXTask 3.2Risk and Resilience Management DNV928XXXXXXXX D3.2a D3.2bXXXXXXXXXXXXXXTask 3.3Food Loss and Waste – Food security nexus GL928XXXXXXXX D3.3XXXXXXXXXXXXXXTask 3.4SecureFood Resilience Governance Framework DNV529XXXX D3.4a D3.4bXXXXXXXXXXXXXTask 3.5Food Systems Resilience Management Framework EMP529XXXX D3.5a D3.5bXXXXXXXXXXXXXWP4Digital twins and simulators for the food supply chainsIRIS934XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXTask 4.1Supply chain modelling for digital twin development ZLC934XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXTask 4.2Digital twin for simulation and decision support IRIS934XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXTask 4.3Agricultural Policy Simulator (AgriPolis) IAMO934XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXTask 4.43D XR-based Simulator IAMO934XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX
WP5Digitalizing the food supply chain – Early warning notification and preparedness for crisesEXUS934XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX
Task 5.1Observatory dashboard EXUS934XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXTask 5.2Early warning mechanism ED934XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXTask 5.3RESILOG – resilient route planning tool ICCS934XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXTask 5.4Information exchange platform  INNOV934XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXTask 5.5Integration and testing ED934XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX
WP6Co-creation, testing, scaling-up and evaluation of project’s innovations EMP938XXXXXXXX XXXX
Task 6.1Case studies planning and evaluation strategy EMP916XXXXXXXX D6.1XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXTask 6.2Case study 1 – Grain UCAB1338XXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXTask 6.3Case study 2 – Fruits/Vegetables MC1338XXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXTask 6.4Case-study 3 – Fish and aquaculture products ELGO1338XXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXTask 6.5Case study 4 – Milk and dairy products ELGO1338XXXXXXXXXXXX XXXX
Task 6.6Monitoring, Evaluation and validation of project’s results – Lessons learned EMP1438XXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXX
WP7Culture-building activities, policy recommendations and best practices NULES1642XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Task 7.1Living labsfor food actors and consumers empowerment LAUR1642XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXTask 7.2Educational curricula and training courses NULES1642XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Task 7.3Crisis communication during food supply and security disruptions LAUR1642XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Task 7.4Policy shaping and tuning NULES2342XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXTask 7.5Whitepapers series ZLC2342XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX D7.3a D7.3b
WP8Dissemination, communication and exploitation CARR142Task 8.1Liaison activities and stakeholders’ engagement CARR142Task 8.2Dissemination and communication CARR142 D8.1Task 8.3Exploitation strategy ED2442XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX D8.3a D8.3b
Task 8.4Standardization INNOV1642XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX D8.4
Task 8.4Socioeconomic impact assessment and ethical considerations LAUR2442XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX D8.5
M18M19 M22M23M12M13 M16M17M14M15 M26M27 M30M31M20M21 M24M25 M28M29 M32 M42M33 M36M37 M40M41M34M35 M38M39M2M3 M6 M10M11M4M5 M8M9M7WP/Task LEADERFrom M to MM1
D1.3a D1.3b
D1.4, D1.5
D2.2b
D8.2a
D7.1a D7.1b D7.1c
MS6, MS7
D2.1a
D8.2b D8.2c
D7.2a D7.2b
D5.1 D5.2a
D4.1
D5.2b
D6.2a D6.2b D6.2c
D4.2bD4.2a
MS1 MS2 MS3 MS4 MS5
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 32 
Table 3.1b: Work package description  WP1   Project Coordination  Objectives  Provide effective project management, including project governance and administration, risk and innovation management, and quality control. - Provide technical and scientific coordination. - Design and conduct a complete plan for data management. - Guarantee the compliance with all ethical and legal constraints. Description of Work / Partners’ role: ED will lead the whole WP and participate in all tasks, being also the leader of T1.3 and T1.4, as Data and Quality Manager. ICCS will lead T1.2 being the Technical Manager and will participate in T1.1-T1.4. LAUR will lead T1.5 and manage and regulatory issues being the Ethics Manager. All other partners will participate in T1.1, (with SPES representing its affiliated entities). Task 1.1: Project administrative and financial coordination (Lead: ED)  This Task is the day-to-day management including administrative and financial management, interfacing with the EC, management of funds and effort, monitoring of the work progress. ED will set up an interactive, user-friendly internal communication system as the primary channel for knowledge sharing, allowing to store and manage documents, enabling version control and backup capacity, assuring dissemination of information for partners. Data Management and IPR will be handled as described in Section 1 and 2. Data will be maintained for at least 4 years after the project end. A kick-off meeting will take place in M1, and 6 plenary meetings will take place during the project’s lifetime. Partners will hold regular online teleconferences and consortium-wide calls. Internal meetings will be held remotely monthly with web-enabled tools, to track progress, ensure deadlines are met, and provide support when needed. A Management Board will consist of the Coordinator, the WP Leaders, the Quality Assistance, Technical and Scientific Coordinator, the Ethics Manager, and the Demo Leaders. Task 1.2: Technical Management (Lead: ICCS)  This task provides the scientific and technical management of the project. It will ensure that the project technical, R&I and scientific objectives are monitored and met. A key activity of this task is the joint framing of all technologies, developments, and technical/scientific demonstrations. This allows to track the progress and to provide the basis to integrate the demonstrations findings. The technologies initially available, their status, and intended application will be gathered, described, and related, to the use cases. The scientific and technical evolution path from the initial status to the demonstration and final results will be formulated and constantly updated.  Task 1.3: Data Management (Lead: ED)  This task will address the aspects relative to the use of data from multiple sources and that the introduction of technology in the cultural and creative path will not be harmful to any party. Based on this compliance framework, FAIR data management criteria will be defined in a Data Management Plan (DMP), made available in M6, and if needed refinements will be done during the project. In particular, the DMP will describe what data/software types, licenses, formats, access and archiving will be used within the project. Task 1.4: Quality control, risk and innovation management (Lead: ED)  This task will guide the research aspects of the work carried out during the project and guarantee that they have been produced based on high quality standards. It will contain Quality Control and Risk Management procedures along with ethical/legal issues in terms of administration. Quality procedures will be coordinated by the project’s Quality Assurance Supervisor (QAS), a member of the Management Board. The QAS will be assisted by partners’ representatives to formalize the project’s Quality Assurance Strategy as part of D1.1. The strategy will outline quality processes for deliverables and evaluate scientific content, language, and readability; the timeframe for delivering the structure and content of deliverables will be fixed. The strategy will include tangible KPIs for each WP that will be constantly monitored and reported within Periodic Progress Reports. The Risk Management will be the responsibility of the Coordination Team and will be included in the project’s Periodic Progress Reports.  Task 1.5: Legal and ethical monitoring (Lead: LAUR)  This task sets up a methodological framework to ensure compliance with current and evolving EU frameworks relative to regulative and ethics concerns. Therefore, it supports partners for potential ethics concerns by adopting appropriate tools (e.g., Self-Assessment Checklist). This framework ensures a regulative approach according to principles and guidelines inspired inter alia by the AI Act, GDPR and related legislation. The project will set up a Regulation and Ethics Board (REB) and composed by the Ethics Manager (Task leader), partners’ ethics experts, the Project Coordinator, and the leaders of the pilots. This board will analyse and define strategies to ensure that all regulative ethical aspects involving data collection, processing, storage and sharing and research with human participants are fulfilled.  WP2 Background analysis, food security drivers, requirements and high-level reference architecture Objectives  Delineate the current state-of play regarding food security and food systems resilience. - Identify food security drivers and their interrelations alongside the food supply chains. - Define SecureFood end-users’ and stakeholders’ capabilities, gaps and needs in the context of food security and articulate their requirements and expectations from 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 33 
the SecureFood ecosystem. - Detail the SecureFood use cases and provide measurable indicators that are key to performance success. - Define the SecureFood system requirements and design the overall SecureFood architecture. Description of Work / Partners’ role: GL will lead the whole WP and participate in all tasks, being also the leader of T2.1 and T2.2, where the background analysis and the food security drivers’ identification will be performed, with the participation of End-Users (COSMO, UAC, UCAB, EKP, ROUS, SPES, FEDAL, ANIA, FIPA, FIAB, SEVT, SETBIR, CCIS, LVA, FFDI, BIGH, MC, MCH, ELAF) and of Ministries and entities operating under their auspices (MINAG, ELGO, LUKE). EMP will lead T2.3 on user requirements and use cases with the support of End-Users and Ministries, participating also T2.1 and T2.4. ICCS will lead T2.4 on system requirements and architecture with the support of technical, industrial and RTO partners (ED, GL, ZLC, EMP, DNV, IRIS, IAMO, EXUS, INNOV, NULES). Task 2.1: Background analysis, state of play and identification of gaps (Lead: GL)  This task aims to delineate the state of play in food security and identify gaps and weaknesses that need to be tackled. An in-depth literature survey on the current regulatory framework, guidelines, best practices and activities/results of national and international initiatives and projects will provide sound evidence on the main security challenges. EMP, ICCS, INNOV and NULES will contribute to the literature survey. Moreover, an EUSurvey questionnaire will be distributed to EU and Associated Countries’ stakeholders for capturing their perspective and needs on food security matters. SecureFood end-users will be also actively engaged in this task through an ad-hoc questionnaire, so that their capabilities, gaps and needs to be adequately defined. T2.1 will provide input to T2.2, T2.3, T3.1 and to WP6 activities.  Task 2.2: Food security drivers and targeted interventions (Lead: GL)  This task will identify and analyse the short- and long-term drivers that can positively or negatively affect food security. The analysis will be supported by literature review, the tacit knowledge of end-users’ and experts’ judgment. Firstly, the food security drivers’ landscape will be delineated based on a conceptual framework that will be built on the four pillars of food security (availability, access, utilization and stability). Then, drawing on T2.1 results, and with further end-users’ consultation, the study will zoom-in on the specific drivers impacting the security of the SecureFood case studies (specific food value chains within specific geographical contexts), detailing key variables, their interrelations and trade-offs. The identified drivers will be mapped against target interventions that promote short- and long-term food security but also foster climate change mitigation, environmental sustainability, resources efficiency and healthy and sustainable diets. The task’s outcomes will feed into WP3 activities and support the definition of the scenarios in T6.1.  Task 2.3: User requirements, use-cases and KPIs definition (Lead: EMP) This task targets the elicitation of the user requirements, which are the end-users’ expectations and needs from the SecureFood ecosystem. To this end, a set of focus groups will be organized in which both end-users and technical partners will participate. The role of this creative consultation phase is to help define a shared understanding and alignment on the objectives and kick off the co-development of the SecureFood ecosystem. The captured user requirements will serve as a starting point for the design and development of the SecureFood solutions. The user requirements will be also validated by the PAG and external stakeholders in a dedicated workshop. In addition, the entire requirements elicitation process will shed light on the definition of the SecureFood use cases, which will capture the step-by-step users’ interactions with the system as well as the system’s response. Finally, the task will deliver a set of KPIs that will provide tangible and measurable metrics for assessing SecureFood efficiency, tracking the progress of system development. The KPIs will be measured in the case studies of WP6.  Task 2.4: System requirements and high-level reference architecture (Lead: ICCS)  The user requirements identified in T2.3 will be translated into systems specifications by the technology providers. The SecureFood system requirements will be mapped against user requirements in the form of a traceability matrix that will enable the tracking of requirement’s fulfilment throughout project’s lifespan. The definition of system requirements will allow for the identification of additional user requirements, serving the idea of the traceability matrix being a living document in which user requirements feed the definition of technical ones and vice versa. The system requirements will facilitate the validation of SecureFood in the case studies (WP6). Moreover, this task will deliver the SecureFood high-level reference architecture, detailing the databases, interfaces, communications and data exchange mechanisms of the digital solutions. The main design objective will be interoperability among the various SecureFood components as well as interoperability with the existing systems of food actors. The task will also address the high-level design of the various subsystems.  WP3 Food systems' vulnerabilities and interdependencies - Risk and resilience governance and management Objectives  Develop and detail the SecureFood Resilience Governance Framework and the Food Systems Resilience Management Framework. - Use foresight analysis and exploratory modelling for analysing the future of food systems security. - Assess interdependencies, vulnerabilities, risks and resilience through novel methodologies and 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 34 
models. - Analyse drivers’ and interventions’ impact on food loss and waste streams and optimize streams’ relation with food security in the short and long run. Description of Work / Partners’ role: ZLC will lead the whole WP, as well as T3.1 related to the foresight analysis and will also participate in T3.2 performing the Risk and Resilience Management. DNV will lead T3.2 and T3.4 the Resilience Governance Framework (T3.4) and will participate in T3.3. GL will lead T3.3 related to Food Loss and Waste and will contribute in T3.1. EMP will lead T3.5 drafting the Resilience Management Framework. End-Users (see WP2) and Ministries and entities operating under their auspices (MINAG, ELGO, LUKE) will participate in T3.1 and T3.4, along with LAUR and NULES (T3.1)). Task 3.1: Foresight analysis and exploratory modelling for future state scenarios (Lead: ZLC)  This task aims at implementing foresight analysis that will be guided by a scenario prognostic and building approach and includes: i) the definition of projections based on the identified food security drivers (T2.2), ii) the evaluation of projections' impact on the supply chain as well as on other projections via a cross impact matrix, iii) the creation of projection bundles and selection of consistent scenarios based on a cross-impact balance analysis, iv) development of respective stakeholder workshop(s) to validate the scenarios and quantify their overall impact on the supply chain and its probability. GL will support task’s activities with its experience in foresight analysis. This will be further supported by a scenario discovery procedure based on a novel exploratory approach that will further reinforce the risk identification processes. Task 3.2: Risk and Resilience Management (Lead: DNV) This task aims to develop and deliver methodologies and models addressing the key elements of risk and resilience management.  Sub-Task 3.2.1: Interdependencies in the food ecosystem (Lead: ZLC) This sub-task will seek links and interdependencies of farmers, the agri-food industry, distributors, consumers, other services, associations, and policymakers across the food supply chain, following a multi-actor approach, where vulnerabilities and resilience-improving areas are identified and analysed along the food value chain.  The overall objective is first to understand the type of interdependencies between these actors, e.g., economic, political, geographic etc. Thereafter, to model and assess these interdependencies by means of simulation models, to understand triggering events, ripple effects along supply chains, and thereby determine main failure states of interest. Sub-Task 3.2.2: Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (Lead: DNV) In this sub-task, dedicated mathematical models will be developed to assess the risks the different drivers induce on the SecureFood food value chains and their impact on the key pillars of food security. By considering both supply chain factors and external factors, it will enable performing what-if scenarios to analyse the expected response of food systems according to their level of preparedness, their vulnerabilities and the mechanisms in place for mitigating risks. Furthermore, using Mixed-Integer Linear Programming techniques, it will support decision making by highlighting the best interventions and actions that minimize risks and enhance food availability, access, utilization and stability. The modelling procedure will allow to benchmark the efficiency of already applied interventions and investigate potential gaps where additional measures are needed. Sub-Task 3.2.3: Resilience assessment (Lead: LUKE)  In this sub-task, the resilience of food supply chains will be examined through agronomic, economic, and social performance factors in both short- and long-term perceived disruptions and transformations. The criteria for assessing resilience include buffering capacity, recovery, and adaptability. A holistic review of resilience will be carried out objectively through a time-series review based on observations, complemented with a subjective assessment of food actors’ future development needs. The task utilizes the available time-series data for both economic and production impact assessments and the data is complemented with stakeholder interviews. Sub-Task 3.2.4: Economic modelling (Lead: NULES) This sub-task will apply different macro- (e.g. partial equilibrium models and computable general equilibrium) and micro-models (e.g. agent-based models) to understand the diversity of interactions and factors, establish causal links, study the long-term effects of decisions, systematically examine regional and international trade processes, run scenario calculations, and assess their impact. Task 3.3: Food Loss and Waste – Food security nexus (Lead: GL)  This task will i) identify food loss and waste streams alongside the food supply chain and classify them according to the critical generation points, ii) quantify those streams using appropriate quantification approaches (e.g., JRC accounting methodology, FAO model calculations, WRI Food Loss + Waste Protocol, APHLIS model, etc.), iii) analyse drivers’ and interventions’ impact on streams’ quantities and iv) define an optimal relation between food loss and waste and food security. The methodology and models will provide the knowledge ontology for developing the WASTE-SEC tool. The tool will enable users to estimate food loss and waste streams, study multiple drivers’ and interventions’ impact on those streams’ quantities and make informed decisions for their management and maximum reduction levels that do not compromise food security in the short and long run. DNV will support with the analysis of risks related to food loss and food waste.  
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 35 
Task 3.4: SecureFood Resilience Governance Framework (Lead: DNV)  The goal of this task is to define an agency-driven Resilience Governance Framework that will steer and reinforce the collaboration of public and private stakeholders, at national and international level, on well-defined and commonly accepted strategic goals for safeguarding food security and enhancing food systems resilience. The framework will foster inclusive and participatory governance processes, empowering food system stakeholders to be actively engaged in the resilience-building activities. It will delineate, among others, actors’ different perceptions and expectations from food security (e.g. nutrition, livelihoods, environmental sustainability etc) as well as their roles, responsibilities and interactions before and during crises. LAUR, with expertise in social and human sciences is participating to ensure that appropriate methodologies are applied for stakeholders’ empowerment.  Task 3.5: Food Systems Resilience Management Framework (Lead: EMP) This task will develop the Food Systems Resilience Management (FSRM) Framework which will present a systematic approach for building technical, organizational and operational resilience in the food ecosystem. The cornerstone of the FSRM framework will be a systemic and integral concept, that has coupled resilience and sustainability orientations, addressing all potential hazards and threats that could compromise food security and providing recommendations on the appropriate preparedness, prevention, response, and mitigation measures. The framework will, among others, a) detail the requirements of concrete national plans on food systems resilience, and b) provide guidance on the development of resilience plans at entity, food-actor level. The framework’s principles will be integrated into the FSRM tool, which will allow users to qualitatively assess various resilience-related indicators and extract indices that reflect the maturity of their resilience management procedures.  WP4  Digital twins and simulators for the food supply chains           Objectives  Define the digital twin supply chain models' library that will be used for the development of the digital twins. - Develop the digital twins of the SecureFood food value chains. - Customization of the AgriPoliS agent-based model to the SecureFood case studies. - Develop immersive technology for analysing consumer behaviour (3D XR-based simulator of grocery shop). Description of Work / Partners’ role: IRIS will lead the whole WP, as well as T4.2 developing the digital twin. ZLC will lead T4.1 where the supply chain modelling will be performed. ED will participate in T4.1, T4.2 and T4.4. IAMO will lead T4.3 and T4.4 developing the AgriPoliS tool and the XR-based simulator. Task 4.1: Supply chain modelling for digital twin development (Lead: ZLC) This task will use supervised machine learning to forecast future supply chain disruptions. Several algorithms will be considered, e.g., Random Forest, Decision Tree, etc. and evaluated based on their performance and the available data. Optimal supply chain recovery strategies will be identified, counteracting the disruptions. The goal is to leverage knowledge, supply chain modelling techniques and data sources required to develop the digital twins of the food supply chains. Specifically, a knowledge base and library of reference models for supply chain management, including data, statistical, and analytical models will be developed. These will result in the digital twin supply chain models' library that will be used in the digital twin architecture deployed in the project. Task 4.2: Digital twin for simulation and decision support (Lead: IRIS)  This task will implement the digital twin model of T4.1 that captures the key parameters and variables affecting the performance of the food supply chain. The digital twin will be tested using historical data to determine its accuracy and reliability. The digital twin will not only provide simulation capabilities but also enable the high frequency synchronization of the physical supply chain and its digital version, using real-time data that will enable its timely adjustment in case of disruptive events. It will exchange data with the observatory (T5.1), the early warning system (T5.2), the information exchange platform (T5.4), and RESILOG (T5.3), contributing to increased situational awareness, and food systems resilience enhancement. Task 4.3: Agricultural Policy Simulator (AgriPoliS) (Lead: IAMO) AgriPoliS is a spatially explicit and dynamic agent-based model that simulates the evolution of agricultural structures over time. AgriPoliS will be calibrated to a suitable Ukrainian region with a focus on grain production (Case study 1-Grain). As databases with EU-wide coverage such as FADN/FSDN are not available for Ukraine, appropriate data sources must first be researched. Missing information must then be obtained either by estimating the required parameters or by deriving them from the literature, or by participatory approaches (e.g., in cooperation with regional experts). The simulations with AgriPoliS provide ex-ante assessment on how certain drivers as well as shocks and stresses will affect the production side in particular.  Task 4.4: 3D XR-based Simulator (Lead: IAMO) This task will provide a comprehensive solution that combines cutting-edge immersive digital technologies (Augmented Reality – AR, Virtual Reality – VR, and Mixed Reality – MR), advanced data collection methods, and rigorous experimental design to analyse the impact of food security drivers on consumer behaviour and supply chain resilience. Activities include: i) Creation of the 3D digital environment - either the 3D scan of the environment in research focus or the creation of the universal 3D environment that will serve as a digital twin of 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 36 
the grocery shop for conducting the experiments. ii) Simulation of supply chain disruptions – various scenarios will be created within the virtual 3D grocery shop environment such as limited product availability, sudden price changes, information on recalled products due to health issues, etc. These scenarios will enable analysing of consumer reactions and behaviour under different food security conditions. iii) Data collection and analysis - advanced data collection methods by using eye tracking, motion tracking, and sensors that can provide data on both consumer behaviour and environmental conditions. Different statistical methods and machine-learning algorithms will identify patterns and relationships between data clusters.  WP5 Digitalizing the food supply chain - Early warning notification and preparedness for crises Objectives  Develop a web-based observatory dashboard customized to the SecureFood food value chains. - Create an early warning mechanism for the detection and notification on imminent food security events. - Develop and customize the RESILOG tool, for the optimization of food supplies’ transportation before crises but also in times of disruptions on transport networks. - Develop an information exchange platform for advancing stakeholders communication and reporting stock data and incidents. - Integrate, test and validate the different SecureFood technologies in lab conditions. Description of Work / Partners’ role: EXUS will lead the whole WP, as well as T5.1 developing the Observatory Dashboard, and will also support in T5.2 and T5.5. ED will lead T5.2 developing the Early-Warning mechanism and T5.5 performing the system integration, supporting also T5.4 activities. ICCS will lead T5.3 developing the RESILOG tool and will also support system integration activities (T5.5) INNOV will lead T5.4 developing the Exchange Platform and will also support system integration activities (T5.5) CARR will contribute in T5.1, while ZLC, IRIS and IAMO will support system integration activities (T5.5) Task 5.1: Observatory dashboard (Lead: EXUS) This task will create a web dashboard that will provide up-to-date analytics and decision support in all parts of the supply chain for the SecureFood food value chains. For each category, it will include analytics on food market prices, price evolution and volatility, demand for food products at the consumer side, crop production data, precipitation data and drought frequency, inventory and distribution data. The dashboard will receive input from the supply chain digital twin and the Early Warning System and include alerts on food deficiencies, delays in the supply chain and high price volatility. The drivers identified in T2.2 will highlight the most appropriate data, data sources, inventories and hubs that need to be accessed and consumed. Task 5.2: Early warning mechanism (Lead: ED) This task will develop the early warning mechanism, as a bundle of tools including big data analytics and AI techniques for real-time data analysis based upon the data that will be collected from both external sources (National, European and international platforms food- and non-food supply chain related) and internal sources (Digital Twin, and other SecureFood tools). Beyond the data collection and analysis, the early-warning mechanism will use tools developed to assess risks and risk patterns in order to support decision making for stakeholders and to re-feed with data SecureFood components like the digital twin-driven smart supply chain or the resilient route planning tool as described in Section 1 (Methodology). Task 5.3: RESILOG – resilient route planning tool (Lead: ICCS)  This task aims at developing and customizing to the case-studies’ needs the RESILOG tool - a web-based transport planning tool that optimizes the transportation of food supplies and enhances the resilience of the overall food supply chain in case of events that affect the availability of transport networks. The tool will exploit ICT solutions and big data analytics aiming to identify and maximise the provided transport services by matching demand and supply of food and refrigerated cargo volumes by different stakeholders. RESILOG will enable the mapping of commercially feasible alternative routes (single-mode and multimodal) connecting two locations and the identification of the best possible route. Moreover, RESILOG will dynamically update the supported routes based on data related to events that may hinder the use of a specific route, while it will support the prediction of route performance and the forecasting of transport modes’ availability.  Task 5.4: Information exchange platform (Lead: INNOV) The goal of this task is to develop a trustworthy digital mechanism for advancing the communication among food actors. Apart from serving as a means for sharing knowledge and good practices on food security, the SecureFood information exchange platform will enable food actors to report data on commodities stocks with a structured and systematized way. Those data will be available to other, (inter)dependent actors, but also to governmental entities and competent authorities, allowing them to have an accurate picture of the availability of essential commodities for food at national and European level. Moreover, the platform will provide incident reporting functionalities, so that food actors can notify in a timely manner the public authorities and interested parties on incidents that take place on their business environment and have the potential to disrupt food supply and food security. The platform will be based on a standard-based architecture based on the Web3js library and will use blockchain technology whereby a Proof-Of-Authority (PoA) scheme is used that allows only the authorized nodes to exchange data. Thus trusted relationships among food actors and authorities are established, and the integrity, accountability and 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 37 
confidentiality of the shared data is ensured. Task:5.5 Integration and testing (Lead: ED) This task will include the integration of the SecureFood components based on a detailed integration plan, and then their testing and validation in lab conditions before the actual deployment in the case studies. The result will be the incorporation of tools and services (Tasks 4.1-4.4 and 5.1-5.3). The integrated system will manage the access to data belonging to different actors as well as external services/platforms in an interoperable manner. All components will be tested, together with their interfaces, whereas specifications of the integrated system will be drawn to enable integration of all specified and developed components, including the interface to existing ones. Every integrated version will go through a testing procedure to ensure that there are no technical issues arising from the integration. The intention of the task is to achieve a functional integrated system resulting from the integration of all these elements and providing a prototype suitable for validation.  WP6  Co-creation, testing, scaling-up and evaluation of project’s innovations  Objectives  Define realistic scenarios that will be used in the case studies for demonstrating and validating SecureFood. - Train the end-users that will be involved in the case studies. - Test and demonstrate SecureFood in 4 case studies, following the detailed planning guidelines. - Validate and evaluate the performance and efficiency of the SecureFood ecosystem, following the guidelines of the evaluation strategy. Description of Work / Partners’ role: EMP will lead the whole WP and participate in all tasks, also leading T6.1 Case Studies Planning and T6.6 performing the evaluation and validation of case studies’ results. UCAB will lead T6.2 associated with Case Study 1 – Grain with the support of the Ukrainian Ministry of Agrarian Policy (MINAG) and UAC. MC will lead T6.3 associated with Case Study 2 – Fruits and vegetables with the support of MCH. ELGO will lead T6.4 and T6.5 associated with Case Study 3 – Fish and aquaculture products and Case Study 4 – Milk and dairy products, respectively. BIGH will be a main contributor to T6.4. End-Users (see WP2) will participate in the case studies (T6.2 – T6.5) as per their focus and will be supported by GL, IRIS, ICCS, EXUS, INNOV and NULES. Task 6.1: Case studies planning and evaluation strategy (Lead: EMP)  This task focuses on developing a detailed plan for the implementation, evaluation and validation of the SecureFood ecosystem. Drawing on the results of WP2 activities, realistic scenarios will be developed to guide the testing, demonstration and validation procedure, reflecting the criticalities and peculiarities of each specific case study. The most suitable actors, methodologies, models and tools to be tested and evaluated in each case study will be defined. In this phase, the support of the partners directly involved in the case studies is instrumental for the overall definition of the test cases. The user and system requirements, as well as the KPIs (T2.3 and T2.4), will be the backbone of the evaluation strategy which will detail the steps for assessing the technical performance of SecureFood, its acceptance by food actors as well as its efficiency in safeguarding food security and reinforcing food systems resilience. Finally, in conjunction with the training offered in T7.2, dedicated hands-on training sessions will be organized with the case studies’ involved stakeholders to familiarize them with the implementation and execution of their test cases. Below the 4 case studies of SecureFood are linked with separate tasks. More details are available in section 1.2. Task 6.2: Case study 1 – Grain (Lead: UCAB) This case study regards the grain values chain in Ukraine, as has been outlined in Section 1.2. The Ukrainian Ministry of Agrarian Policy (MINAG), the Agribusiness club (UCAB) and the Agrarian Confederation (UAC) with thousands of members and ability to provoke resonance effects at national scale, will participate to define the details of the case study and will share their information, knowledge and expertise. UAC and UCAB will provide their perspective reflecting agri-producers and agriculture companies in Ukraine. COSMO shall provide meaningful insight in terms of risks that apply along the supply chain, and shall contribute to the analysis of diversified transport routes. NULES and IAMO have huge record of research on the Ukrainian agriculture sector and will further support the case study. The case study will serve as a knowledge exchange hub between end-users and technology providers, allowing for the co-development, customization, testing and validation of the SecureFood solutions (frameworks, models and tools) to the specifics of grain value chain.  A dedicated week will serve as the official demonstration and evaluation where all defined realistic scenarios will be executed by all partners and demonstrated to external stakeholders. Task 6.3: Case study 2 – Fruits and Vegetables (Lead: MC) This case study regards the fruits and vegetables values chains in Portugal, as has been outlined in Section 1.2. MC, MCH and SPES, retailers and food industry producers, will define the details of the case study and will share their information, knowledge and expertise. The case study will serve as a knowledge exchange hub between end-users and technology providers, allowing for the co-development, customization, testing and validation of the SecureFood solutions (frameworks, models and tools) to the specifics of fruits and vegetables value chains.  A dedicated week will serve as the official demonstration and evaluation where all defined realistic scenarios will be executed by all partners and demonstrated to external stakeholders. 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 38 
Task 6.4: Case study 3 – Fish and aquaculture products (Lead: ELGO) This case study regards the fish value chain in Greece, as well as the aquaculture value chain in Belgium, as has been outlined in Section 1.2. ELGO and BIGH will share their data, information and knowledge on fish and aquaculture production value chains, while SPES and EKP will provide the needed data and knowledge from industry and consumers side, respectively.  The case study will serve as a knowledge exchange hub between end-users and technology providers, allowing for the co-development, customization, testing and validation of the SecureFood solutions (frameworks, models and tools) to the specifics of fish and aquaculture value chains.  A dedicated week will serve as the official demonstration and evaluation where all defined realistic scenarios will be executed by all partners and demonstrated to external stakeholders. Task 6.5: Case-study 4 – Milk and dairy products (Lead: ELGO) This case study regards the milk and dairy values chains in Greece and Finland, as has been outlined in Section 1.2. ELGO and LUKE, entities operating under auspices of Ministries will define the details of the case study and will share their information, knowledge and expertise on milk and dairy products value chains. ROUS and ELAF will provide tacit knowledge on dairy production and transportation, respectively, while SPES and EKP will share the needed data and knowledge from industry and consumers side, respectively. The case study will serve as a knowledge exchange hub between end-users and technology providers, allowing for the co-development, customization, testing and validation of the SecureFood solutions (frameworks, models, and tools) to the specifics of milk and dairy value chains.  A dedicated week will serve as the official demonstration and evaluation where all defined realistic scenarios will be executed by all partners and demonstrated to external stakeholders. Task 6.6: Monitoring, evaluation, and validation of project’s results – Lessons learned (Lead: EMP) This task will analyse and report all the improvements that the project has made towards improving food security and food systems resilience, compared to the baseline/AS-IS situation of the case studies. After the validation of the SecureFood methodologies, frameworks, models, digital tools, the evaluation system created in T6.1 will be submitted to the case studies to verify the actual benefit SecureFood. A consolidated evaluation report will detail the results of all the case studies in terms of performance, feedback received and evaluation conclusions, extracting lessons-learned and identifying cross-cutting priorities. ICCS, being the technical manager, will support the entire validation process.  WP7 Culture-building activities, policy recommendations and best practices Objectives  Empower and raise food actors’ awareness thought a dedicated living lab and culture building activities. - Educate and train food actors, consumers and students through dedicated curricula and courses. - Develop crisis communication principles and deliver relevant recommendations. - Develop policy-shaping recommendations for the EC and national/regional policy makers. - Deliver a series of whitepapers coupled with proper infographics, providing target recommendations to food actors on how they can support food-systems’ resilience building efforts. Description of Work / Partners’ role: NULES will lead the whole WP, along with T7.2 Training and Curricula, supported by LAUR, CARR, UAC, UCAB and EKP, as well as T7.4 related to Policy Shaping, supported by DNV, CARR, MINAG, ELGO and the End-Users (see WP2: COSMO, ROUS, BIGH and ELAF excepted).  LAUR will lead T7.1 implementing the Living Lab, with the support of IAMO, CARR, MINAG, UAC, UCAB, ELGO, MC, MCH and EKP, as well as T7.3 related to Crisis Communication, with the support of End-Users (see WP2: COSMO, ROUS, BIGH and ELAF excepted), EMP, IAMO, CARR, MINAG. ZLC will lead T7.5 related to the Whitepapers with the support of GL, EMP and CARR. Task 7.1: Living lab for food actors and consumers empowerment (Lead: LAUR) This task is responsible for empowering food actors and improving their knowledge on food security through several activities. This goal will be achieved by demonstrating the results and outcomes of SecureFood in a Living Lab that will act as an exhibition and open space for presenting the SecureFood ecosystem. At the living lab, all relevant stakeholders will have the opportunity not only to learn but also to make an impact to the outcomes of the project. T7.1 will utilize the toolkits developed in the European Network of Living Labs (ENOL), especially those that are designed to evaluate users’ reactions to the solutions. Task 7.2: Educational curricula and training courses (Lead: NULES)  This task aims the development of the SecureFood School which will provide educational curricula and training courses for the food systems stakeholders. The educational and training material will be customized and contextualized to the address the educational and training needs of farmers, fishers, aquaculture farmers, industrial processors, distributors, retailers, consumers, governmental entities and policymakers. Moreover, dedicated courses will be developed and made available to university students, while EKP will create more interactive video material for younger students (age 6-18), to raise their awareness on the importance of consumers behaviour. The SecureFood School will be available on an e-learning platform, based on LMCS Moodle and will include different didactic and multimedia resources, such as: documents (.pdf), videos, FAQ, glossary, test for self-evaluation with responsive feedback, forums etc. It will be also linked to SecureFood partners’ existing platforms, such as UAC’s 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 39 
Food Safety School, NULES eDorada etc.  Task 7.3: Crisis communication during food supply and security disruptions (Lead: LAUR)  The aim of this task is to develop a robust communication strategy for delivering clear and reliable messages for action to the food actors in times of crisis. Dedicated surveys will be launched to food actors of the food value chain (both SecureFood end-users and external stakeholders) aiming at investigating their concerns, risk perceptions and behaviour in case of food supply and security disruptions, and how they react to key crisis messages. The outcomes of the analysis of consumer’s behaviour, through the 3D-XR-based simulator (T4.4), will further support the activities of this task. Harmonization and coherence aspects on crisis communication, mainly in case of cross-border crises, will be also analysed. The outcomes of the task will be delivered in a form of guidelines for efficient crisis communication management.  Task 7.4: Policy shaping and tuning (Lead: NULES)  This task will identify and analyse the necessary policy shaping and tuning interventions needed at regional, national and European level for building and sustaining resilient food systems. Global dimensions will be considered, where those may have implications for the EU and Associated Countries’ food security. MINAG, being a governmental entity, will support the activities of the task, sharing the perspective and needs of policy-makers. The SecureFood case studies (WP6) will also inform the entire analysis, showcasing potential policy gaps and needs for improvement at regional and national level, but also potential horizontal interventions needed at European level. The outcomes of the task will be reported in a form of recommendations to EC and national/regional policy makers.  Task 7.5: Whitepapers series (Lead: ZLC) This task targets the development and delivery of the SecureFood Whitepapers series that will provide recommendations and guidance material to food actors on food security aspects. The Whitepapers will be tailor-made and customized to each audience context (separate editions for each food actor), and will aim at raising their awareness and guiding them on the key actions they need to take towards food systems resilience enhancement. CARR will add proper infographics to the Whitepaper series (e.g. imagery, data visualization), so as to make the content more attractive and easy-to read.  WP8  Dissemination, communication and exploitation Objectives  Develop the extended stakeholders’ group, define the PAG, and liaise with national and international activities and projects. - Disseminate and communicate project’s results and activities. - Develop a tailored exploitation strategy and a roadmap to market aligned with the project IPR principles. - Analyse the existing normative landscape and identify areas where additional standardization is required. - Assess the socioeconomic and ethical aspects related to perception and acceptance of SecureFood solution. Description of Work / Partners’ role: CARR will lead the whole WP, as well as T8.1 related to liaison activities and T8.2 related to dissemination and communication, where all partners will be involved. ED will lead T8.3 implementing the exploitation strategy, while INNOV will lead T8.4 related to the standardization activities with the support of DNV and ED. LAUR will lead T8.5 performing the ethical impact assessment with the support of DNV, CARR, NULES and EKP. Task 8.1: Liaison activities and stakeholders’ engagement (Lead: CARR)  This task will leverage the network of the consortium, to create pool of external stakeholders from national and international initiatives and projects, including, among others, EFSCM, FAO, JRC, EIT-Food, EFSA as well as the Partnerships on "Sustainable Food Systems for People, Planet and Climate" and "Accelerating farming systems transition: agroecology living labs and research infrastructures”. Collaboration opportunities with other past, ongoing, and future projects and initiatives will be sought, while joint dissemination activities will be undertaken to increase synergies. The task will also recruit and manage the Project Advisory Group (PAG) involving also members for the aforementioned initiatives. The extended stakeholders’ group will be invited to join the public workshops, webinars and the final dissemination event, which will be all organized by CARR with support of all beneficiaries. They will be also engaged in the project’s demos as well as to the various end-users’ consultation activities (interviews, questionnaires, focus groups etc.). Task 8.2: Dissemination and communication (Lead: CARR) The aim of this task is to establish a sound dissemination and communication plan (delivered at the beginning of the project and updated regularly) so as to increase visibility and public’s awareness on project’s activities and outcomes. As part of this task, a comprehensive stakeholder information pack will be developed. Project’s website, social media, newsletters, scientific publication and all the rest dissemination and communications measures described in Section 2.2 will be implemented in this task. Task 8.3: Exploitation strategy (Lead: ED) This task will pave the way for bringing the SecureFood solutions to market. Individual and joint exploitation strategies will be developed to ensure long-term utilization of the project results for a) further research activities; b) the development and promotion of new tools and processes; c) the creation and provision of services. Key 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 40 
exploitable results will be identified and exploitation pathways and a roadmap to market will be defined. IPR protection and innovation management will support partners in protecting and exploiting their research to their best advantage. An IPR log will be maintained throughout the project. Task 8.4: Standardization (Lead: INNOV)  This task will analyse the standardization landscape and will evaluate the potential of SecureFood results to contribute to consistency and uniformity on food security aspects will be sought. Existing Technical Committees, such ISO/TC 34 “Food Systems”, and relevant standards, such as ISO/AWI 34019 “Food security-Guidance for emergency or crisis situation (under development), ISO 22000:2018 “Food Safety Management systems” and ISO/WD 20001 “Development and utilization of management system standards for the minimization of food loss and waste across the food value chain” (under development), will be investigated and, in case of gaps that could be addressed by SecureFood solutions, the CEN Workshop Agreement (CWA) process will be followed, as described in CEN-CENELEC Guide 29, a procedure open to all interested parties. The outcome is a document that gathers the consensus of all registered participants - approved by a Workshop of representatives of interested parties into a CWA standard document. Being the world’s largest classification society (establishing standards for ships) DNV will support the task’s activities.   Task 8.5: Socioeconomic impact assessment and ethical considerations (Lead: LAUR) This task will analyse the socioeconomic and ethical aspects related to food security and mainly to the SecureFood solutions and outcomes. The analysis results will shape the core structure and elements of a series of activities that will be carried out, at different stages of the project, including focus groups and ad-hoc surveys with both consortium partners and the extended stakeholders group. The ultimate goal of those activities will be to assess food actors’ and public’s perception and acceptance of SecureFood outcomes and identify key socioeconomic and ethical parameters that are instrumental towards every resilience-building effort in the food ecosystem. Table 3.1c: List of Deliverables   Number Deliverable name Short description WP Lead Type Dissemination Delivery date 
D1.1 Project management and quality assurance handbook 
The document will report the initial organizational structure and planning for the successful management of the project WP1 ED R SEN M03 
D1.2 Initial version of legal, Ethical and Data Management Report 
Report on ethical and data protection considerations for the project’s practices and outputs WP1 LAUR ETHI CS, DMP SEN M06 
D1.3 a, b Interim Progress Report Reports towards the EC services regarding the technical and financial progress of the project WP1 ED R SEN M12, M26 D1.4 Final Progress Report WP1 ED R SEN M42 
D1.5 Final version of legal, Ethical and Data Management Report 
Report on ethical and data protection considerations for the project’s practices and outputs WP1 LAUR ETHI CS, DMP SEN M42 
D2.1 a, b Identification of gaps and food security drivers (v1 and v2) 
Report of the current state of play, identification of gaps and weaknesses, analysis of food security drivers and targeted interventions WP2 GL R PU M05, M11 
D2.2 Identification of use case scenarios and user requirements The document will present the use case scenarios, user requirements WP2 EMP R SEN M12 
D2.3 Reference architecture and technical requirements The document will describe the technical requirements and the derived architecture WP2 ICCS R SEN M13 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 41 
D3.1 Cross-impact based scenarios Report on the foresight analysis and selection of consistent impact-based scenarios WP3 ZLC R PU M14 
D3.2 a,b Risk and Resilience Management models and methodologies (v1, v2) 
Methodologies and models for identifying interdependencies, risks and vulnerabilities of food ecosystem, resilience of supply chains and economic modelling WP3 DNV R SEN M19, M28 
D3.3 Food Loss and Waste methodology and tool 
Methodological procedure and models on food loss and waste streams, and development of WASTE-SEC tool WP3 GL R SEN M28 
D3.4 a,b SecureFood Resilience Governance Framework  A guidebook focusing on resilience governance framework for safeguarding food supply  WP3 DNV R PU M20, M29 
D3.5 a,b Food Systems Resilience Management Framework (v1 and v2) 
Report on the resilience management principles and development of the FSRM tool.  WP3 EMP R PU M20, M29 
D4.1 Design of Food Supply Chain Digital Twin tools           
Report on the design parameters, specifications, modifications and interdependencies of digital twin tools for the food supply chain  WP4 IRIS R SEN M17 
D4.2 a,b Development of Food Supply Chain Digital Twin tools (v1, v2)           
Development and upgrade of the digital twin tools for the food supply chain  WP4 IRIS OTHER SEN M24, M34 
D5.1 Design of Early Warning and Preparedness Tools           
Report on the design, specifications, functionalities, service and data flows, and interdependencies of digital twin tools for the food supply chain  WP5 EXUS R SEN M17 
D5.2 a,b Development Early Warning and Preparedness Tools (v1, v2)           
Development, upgrade, integration and testing of the early warning and preparedness related tools  WP5 ED OTHER SEN M24, M34 
D6.1 Case studies planning and evaluation strategy 
Definition of the plan for organizing, implementing, monitoring and evaluating the case studies of SecureFood WP6 EMP R SEN M16 
D6.2 a,b,c Case study monitoring and evaluation reports Periodic reports on the case study related activities, evaluation results and lessons learned  WP6 EMP R SEN M19, M26, M38 
D7.1 a,b,c Capacity building and training activities 
Development of training packages, planning of capacity building activities, implementation of courses to familiarize end users with the use cases, SecureFood tools and methodological framework 
WP7 LAUR R PU M20, M31, M42 
D7.2a,b Communication strategies and policy shaping Development of crisis communication strategies and identification of policy shaping WP7 NULES R PU M28, M42 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 42 
and tuning interventions D7.3a,b Whitepapers’ series Recommendations and guidance material to food actors on food security aspects WP7 ZLC R PU M28, M42 
D8.1 Communication and Dissemination Strategy 
Consortium handbook on communication and dissemination activities, channels, mediums, and monitoring procedures WP8 CARR R PU M03 
D8.2 a,b,c Periodic dissemination and communication report 
Reports containing dissemination and communication activities and achievements, as well as the implemented outreach campaigns and awareness events WP8 CARR R PU M12, M26, M42 
D8.3 a,b Initial/Final Exploitation plans, market analysis and IPR management  
Plan for the Exploitation and Commercialization of Research Results & Products, including market analysis, the innovation delivery plan and the commercialization plan, including IP ownership and strategy. 
WP8 ED R SEN M26, M42 
D8.4 Report on standardization landscape and workshop 
Analysis of standardization landscape and potential, combined with roadmaps in support of evidence-based policymaking WP8 INNOV R PU M42 
D8.5 Societal impact report  Analysis of socioeconomic and ethical considerations regarding the SecureFood solutions WP8 LAUR R PU M42  Table 3.1d: List of Milestones (MS) MS # Milestone name Related WPs Due date  Means of verification MS1 Project setup and definition of key plans WP1, WP8 M03 D1.1, D8.1 MS2 User requirements and reference architecture WP2 M13 D2.2, D2.3 MS3 Delivery of 1st prototype of tools WP4, WP5 M24 D4.2a, D5.2a MS4 Delivery of the holistic food resilience management framework WP3 M29 D3.4b, D3.5b MS5 Delivery of final protype of SecureFood tools WP4, WP5 M34 D4.2b, D5.2b MS6 User training, execution of case studies and lessons learned WP6, WP7 M42 D6.2c, D7.1c MS7 Market uptake, innovation delivery and policy recommendations WP8 M42 D8.3b, D8.4  
Table 3.1e: Critical risks for implementation #@RSK-MGT-RM@# Description of risk:  Level Likelihood | Severity L:Low–M:Medium–H:High WP Proposed risk-mitigation measures Administrative, Financial, and Management Risks Partners are unable to contribute: (i)L|(ii)H ALL Rigorous project management. Failure of individual participants will lead to an immediate assessment of capabilities and task reassignment. Partners have an adequate range of skills and can take over tasks. Partners' contribution to outputs is not delivered on time: (i)M|(ii)L ALL Quality management, early directions for timely outputs. Monthly calls on WPs (reviews/ appropriate revisions) for corrective actions—7 milestones to track progress. Low scientific and technical quality of deliverables: (i)L|(ii)H ALL Rigorous quality management. First deliverable drafts one month before the deadline for thorough internal review, detailed feedback by Coordinator, 2 reviewers. Partners have an excellent track record for scientific and technical quality. 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 43 
End user privacy and security insufficiently addressed: (i)L|(ii)L ALL The legal and ethical monitoring in T1.5 will safeguard all processes. 
Problems associated with the Russian invasion to Ukraine: (i)L|(ii)H ALL The warfare activities occur in the east side of Ukraine (far from partners' premises). However, in case Ukrainian partners' facilities are forced to close for a period, the consortium will identify appropriate methodological alternatives for ensuring that the project is not brought to a complete standstill and can continue producing results.  Technical Risks 
Low engagement of stakeholders during the design process: (i)L|(ii)L WP2, WP8 
Partners have extensive experience engaging key stakeholders and creating effective methodologies for user requirement elicitation. A robust and rigorous involvement plan is foreseen in WP2 and WP8. Moreover, the governance framework of T3.4 will promote inclusive and participatory processes. A partner (LAUR) with expertise in social and human sciences is participating to ensure that the appropriate methodologies are engaged to reach different target groups.  Problems associated with data sharing (e.g. security concerns, reluctancy, privacy etc): (i)L|(ii)M WP3, WP4, WP5 
The data collection process will be accurately evaluated, and awareness will be raised among all the SecureFood food actors to increase the data quality. The data management plan of T1.3 will monitor data management processes (i.e. for data collection, access and sharing, processing, storage etc.) while the legal and ethical monitoring in T1.5 will address all ethical, legal and privacy aspects related to the project so as to facilitate the data sharing process.  
Solutions fail to conform to user's needs: (i)L|(ii)M WP3, WP4, WP5 
In WP2, the user requirements (both consortium end-users’ and external stakeholders’) will drive the identification of system requirement in a traceability matrix, so that solutions’ validation is based on the user requirements fulfilment level. Moreover, the customization of solutions to case study will follow an iterative, co-development approach, in which end-users’ knowledge will underpin the entire development process. Thus, the SecureFood case studies will serve as a co-creation hub.  The SecureFood solutions are not appropriate: (i)L|(ii)H WP3, WP4, WP5 Preliminary versions of the SecureFood frameworks, models and tools will be released during the project. The consortium will verify these results before feeding the next version of development. Poor feedback gathered for evaluation: (i)L|(ii)M WP7 The early evaluation methods planning and the co-creation approach of the case studies will leave little room for this risk. However, partners will devise new/more persistent evaluation means if the risk occurs. Business Risks Lack of motivation of stakeholders to participate in project's activities: (i) M |(ii)M WP8 A dissemination and communication strategy will be developed early in the project to identify the correct audiences and venues and devise strategies to reach them. For example, workshops, focus groups and other motivating initiatives would be organized.  SecureFood results are not considered useful after the project finishes: (i)L|(ii)H WP8 SecureFood adopts the multi-actor approach so that the final users drive the co-development of the results, based on their needs. This approach increases results’ uptake potential. The exploitation strategy will detail results’ exploitation pathways and the roadmap to market.  #§RSK-MGT-RM§# 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 44 
Table 3.1f:  Summary of staff effort 
 Table 3.1h: ‘Purchase costs’ items (Travel & subsistence, Equipment and Other goods, works and services) 6 / IRIS Cost (€) Justification Travel & subsistence 18.000 Plenary(*3), workshops (*1), review (*2), Demos (*3) Equipment 10.000 Depreciation of computing prototypes: 2 laptop units for use over the project lifetime for the development, hosting, testing and validation of the digital twins;  Other goods, works and services 96.000 40k: Materials for building the monitoring system and Digital Twin: Programming control platform and cloud hosting; 30k: electronics, sensors, interface, and others; 8k: IPR and patents; 3,6k: Audit certificate; 12k: Exhibition in 2 tradeshows and conferences; 3k: Publication fees Total 124.000  7 / IAMO Cost (€) Justification Travel & subsistence 18.000 Plenary(*3), workshops (*1), review (*2), Data Collection (*3) Equipment 32.100 8k: 2 high-performance laptops, 8k: 2 VR HMDs, 3k: 3D scanner R; S/W licenses: 13,1K (Unity professional) , tobii, AnyLogic) Other goods, works and services 8.000 Open Access 6k, Public Relations 2k Total 58.100  11 / INNOV Cost (€) Justification Travel & subsistence 18.000 Plenary(*3), workshops (*1), review (*2), Demos (*3) Equipment 42.000 CEN WORKSHOP AGREEMENT Secretary Service Fee Total 60.000  13 / COSMO Cost (€) Justification Travel & subsistence 8.000 Plenary(*3), review (*2) Total 8.000  21 / ROUS Cost (€) Justification Travel & subsistence 8.000 Plenary(*3), review (*2) Total 8.000  #§QUA-LIT-QL§# #§WRK-PLA-WP§# 
WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 WP8 TOTAL
ED 33,0 4,0 8,0 26,0 8,0 79,0
GL 1,0 22,0 31,0 5,0 2,5 2,5 64,0
ZLC 1,0 4,0 22,0 19,0 2,0 6,0 2,0 56,0
EMP 1,0 15,0 21,0 24,0 2,0 2,0 65,0
DNV 1,0 12,0 35,0 7,0 5,0 60,0
IRIS 1,0 2,0 55,0 2,0 10,0 3,0 73,0
IAMO 1,0 2,0 33,0 1,0 3,0 3,0 3,0 46,0
ICCS 19,0 13,0 17,0 6,0 3,0 58,0
LAUR 9,0 3,0 1,0 19,0 6,0 38,0
EXUS 1,0 4,0 37,0 10,0 5,0 57,0
INNOV1,0 4,0 28,0 5,0 10,0 48,0
CARR 1,0 5,0 12,0 30,0 48,0
COSMO1,0 1,0 1,0 4,5 1,5 9,0
NULES1,0 8,0 18,0 12,0 34,0 4,0 77,0
MINAG1,0 5,0 3,0 25,0 6,0 7,0 47,0
UAC 1,0 5,0 3,0 25,0 8,0 7,0 49,0
UCAB 1,0 5,0 6,0 32,0 8,0 7,0 59,0
ELGO 1,0 4,0 3,0 46,0 4,0 7,0 65,0
LUKE 1,0 4,0 19,0 11,0 4,0 39,0
EKP 1,0 6,0 4,0 19,0 12,0 4,5 46,5
ROUS 1,0 2,0 1,0 4,5 1,5 10,0
SPES 1,0 0,2 0,5 0,2 0,9 2,8
FEDAL 1,0 0,6 1,0 0,6 1,5 4,7
ANIA 1,0 0,6 1,0 0,7 0,9 4,2
FIPA 1,0 0,6 2,5 0,5 0,9 5,5
FIAB 1,1 0,6 1,0 0,8 1,2 4,7
SEVT 1,0 0,6 2,5 0,5 0,9 5,5
SETBIR 1,0 0,6 0,6 0,5 1,0 3,7
CCIS 1,0 0,6 1,0 0,6 0,9 4,1
LVA 1,0 0,6 1,0 0,6 3,2
FFDI 1,0 0,6 1,0 0,6 0,9 4,1
BIGH 1,0 3,0 2,0 8,0 3,0 17,0
MC 1,0 2,5 2,5 8,5 2,0 2,5 19,0
MCH 1,0 2,5 2,0 10,5 1,5 2,5 20,0
ELAF 1,0 1,5 1,0 6,5 2,0 12,0
TOTAL84,0 143,6 181,1 115,0 118,0 287,6 132,0 142,7 1204,0
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 45