2.2 Measures to maximise impact - Dissemination, exploitation, and communication #@COM-DIS-VIS-CDV@# 2.2.1 Dissemination and communication strategy  From the early stages of the project's implementation, SecureFood will apply an intensive dissemination and communication strategy in order to ensure that the project's advancements reach the intended targeted audiences, and that the key stakeholders for the project's exploitation and market uptake are early engaged and actively participating in the various project's implementation phases. An initial list of the target groups for SecureFood is presented in the following table.  Target group Interest in the project Policymakers/ EC Directorates and Units/EU and Associated Countries Ministries and Governments/Regulatory Agencies  
Detailed insights on the food security drivers and the implications they can induce; Access to quantified information regarding the effectiveness of the resilience-building interventions and measures; Access to information regarding the needed policy shaping towards food systems resilience; Evidence-based guidelines for the development of contingency and resilience plans for food security; Recommendations on resilience governance and management principles; Opportunity for co-designing, customizing to their needs and evaluating the innovative digital tools (e.g. digital twins, information exchange platform etc) that support their efforts towards for crisis preparedness; Modernized and structured data collection (e.g. stocks) and sharing.  Food supply chain actors (e.g. farmers, fishers, aquaculture producers processors, carriers, retailers etc) 
Co-design and co-development of new digital tools and technologies for communication, collaboration and increased preparedness for future crises; Better understanding on the risks and vulnerabilities; Evidence-based recommendations on the technical, organizational and operational measures they need to apply; Participation in governance and policy shaping.  
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 24 
Consumers and citizens  In-depth understanding on how their consumption habits and food choices affect food security; Empowerment and active participation in governance and policy shaping; Co-creation and co-development of models and tools.  EFSCM/National and international initiatives/ Partnerships Direct access to project results supporting the implementation of their activities; Integration of their priorities, expectations and knowledge into the SecureFood activities so that they directly benefit from the delivered project’s results.  Research & knowledge community  Access to validated knowledge about new research areas and innovative practices on food security and food systems resilience; Future adaptation and follow-up research/activities. Technology/service providers/IT companies   Access to operational data; Development of new tools and services that support food security alongside the food supply chains; Enhancement of their tools for improving interoperability and integration with other systems. The dissemination and communication strategy is based on the SMART (specific-measurable-achievable-realistic-timely-targeted) approach, setting targets and KPIs that are Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic and Timely. The SecureFood dissemination measures are summarized in the following Table.  Dissemination Measure Description  Target KPI [D1] Scientific publications  Publication in highly ranked international journals (open access publishing option will be pursued to maximize the target audience and impact) 
>15 
[D2] Contributions in conferences  Contributions in international peer-reviewed conferences >8 [D3] Workshops organization  Organization of thematic workshops addressed to target groups with respect to a range of topics ≥10 [D4] Clustering with initiatives and projects  Liaison with European projects and other initiatives (related to the scope of SecureFood) ≥15 initiatives/projects ≥ 3 joint events [D5] Exhibition stands in sectorial conferences/events/fairs Organization of exhibition stands diffusing SecureFood results >5 [D6] Standardization liaison  Common work/Liaison with Organizations and existing Technical Committees ≥5 standards/organizations  [D7] Final dissemination event  SecureFood final, large-scale workshop = 1 event ≥50 participants  The table below summarizes indicative journals, conferences and trades in which SecureFood will diffuse its results.  Journals Conferences Trades/Expos Nature Food, Global Food Security, Food Security, Food Policy, Sustainability, Discover Food, Global Sustainability, Agribusiness, Environment Systems and Decisions, Journal of Cleaner Production, Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, European Journal of Futures Research, Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, Computers and Operations Research  
Smart Agrifood Summit, Food Waste Summit, Food Chain & Logistics Summit, Agrifood Forum, Int. Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Data Sciences (AiDAS), The Future of Food Conference, Congress of the European Association of Agricultural Economists, Int. Agriculture Symposium, ISEKI Food Conferences, Annual meetings of the IATRAC, Future Food-Tech 
Food4Future, SeaFood Expo Global, Transport Logistic Munich, Alimentaria FoodTech, SIL Barcelona, Logistics & Automation Madrid, Expo Dubai 2020, IFT Annual Meeting & Food Expo  SecureFood will adopt a multichannel communication strategy and will assign responsibilities to partners according to their expertise and existing liaisons to achieve the optimum results. The communication strategy will focus on addressing the different objectives and satisfying the expectations of the target audience groups. To this line, specific attention will be paid to adapting the measures and content to these groups’ needs and knowledge levels, e.g., by employing many communications means, which can be used (and tailored to) different stakeholder groups. The SecureFood communication measures are summarized in the following Table. It is highlighted that material will be produced mainly in digital format to minimize the burden on the environment.   Communication Measure Description  Target KPI [C1] Project website Official project website ≥10,000 visits  ≥400 downloads 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 25 
[C2] Social media LinkedIn, Twitter (weekly updates) ≥1000 Twitter followers ≥300 LinkedIn members [C3] Press releases Press releases will be issued to specialized and general media channels at key project milestones  ≥6 releases, 1 press kit [C4] Industry magazines Coverage in industry magazines /popularised articles in magazines ≥5 articles [C5] Marketing pack and promotional press kit Promotional material for stakeholders’ events =1 poster/rollup >4 brochures (in different languages) [C6] Institutional presentation  SecureFood presentation created at the beginning of the project, containing basic information about it =1 [C7] Videos YouTube videos (including videos for the case studies demos)  =10 videos [C8] Webinars Public webinars on the main project’s results ≥4 [C9] Infographics Production of infographics presenting the results in a clear and simple way  =8 [C10] Newsletters Periodic newsletters development, publication and distribution  ≥8 [C11] Talks/Appearances  Invited talks in workshops and international events, appearances in mass media (TV, radio) On invite  [C12] Market uptake launch event  Market Uptake Launch-Event, with a guided presentation of selected results ≥1 
[C13] Education activities Educate school and university students on food security ≥2 videos for age groups 6-12 and 13-18 ≥2 educational curricula for univ. students [C14] Whitepapers A whitepaper series providing recommendations to food actors 5   2.2.2. Liaison activities  SecureFood acknowledges that the exchange of validated knowledge and gained experience is instrumental for ensuring project’s outmost impact and promoting outcomes’ uptake. Aiming at multiplying the potential impact during and beyond its duration, SecureFood will have a task (T8.1) dedicated to clustering and liaison activities with relevant national, European and international organizations, initiatives and projects to ensure that its activities and outcomes are always updated and aligned with the priorities and expectations of the wider community. This will be achieved through the participation of people involved in those organizations, initiatives, and projects in the PAG, and the extended stakeholders’ group that will be engaged in various project’s activities (e.g. workshops, focus groups, demos etc). Joint dissemination activities will be undertaken to increase synergies. SecureFood will also leverage the extensive network of its consortium for the establishment of communication channels, for example: EFSCM – SPES is a member of the FoodDrinkEurope that participates in the EFSCM; LUKE and ELGO-DIMITRA operate under the Finnish and Greek Ministries that are members of EFSCM; Preliminary contacts have been performed in the proposal stage, e.g. with the Greek Ministry of Rural Development and Food (member of EFSCM) and their willingness to participate in the external stakeholders group has already been expressed. European Partnership on “Sustainable Food Systems for People, Planet and Climate” (P-SFS – developed also under HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-9 topic)– LUKE will be either partner or affiliated partner (under the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry in Finland) of this partnership. FAO, JRC – Their members’ interest in participating in the PAG and the external stakeholders’ group has already been expressed since the proposal stage. Consortium partners also participate in the European R&I Partnership on Agroecology “Accelerating farming systems transition: agroecology living labs and research infrastructures”, EIT-Food, FAO’s Save Food, ALICE (European Technology Platform in Logistics), ETP Food for Life, SCAR Agroecology and several other initiatives, while they coordinate and/or participate in several R&D projects e.g. FOODSAFER, R3GROUP, RESCHAPE, THEROS etc (see also Section 1.2.3), with which collaboration opportunities will be sought.  Finally, GL is the coordinator of the Food Waste Recovery Group and the establishment of liaison with this group will be direct. At the same time, SecureFood will be closely linked to other relevant initiatives (e.g. Knowledge Centre for Global Food and Nutrition Security) and projects that will be funded under Horizon Europe Cluster 6 Work Programme 2023-2024 (e.g., topics FARM2FORK-01-18, FARM2FORK-01-6, GOVERNANCE-01-13, COMMUNITIES-01-6, etc.), with synergies to be exploited.  Both partners’ active role in such initiatives and the influence of the PAG members and the EU Commission Project Officers are expected to act as a multiplicator of the impact of the project results.  
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 26 
 2.2.3. Individual Dissemination Plans Aiming at complementing the joint dissemination plan (Section 2.2.1), the table below provides a short description of the individual activities planned by each partner category.  Partner category Partners Dissemination Plans Industrial partner, consultants ED, GL, EMP, DNV, IRIS, INNOV, EXUS, CARR Dissemination through journals, conferences, and their own social media platforms. Further dissemination actions towards internal business units to promote knowledge transfer between the R&D and the production. Ministries and entities operating under their auspices MINAG, ELGO, LUKE Dissemination of the SecureFood outcomes in other governmental entities and competent authorities, including decision- and policy-makers. Diffusion in public and private stakeholders.  
Food supply chain actors COSMO, UAC, UCAB, EKP, ROUS, SPES, FEDAL, ANIA, FIPA, FIAB, SEVT, SETBİR, CCIS, LVA, FFDI, BIGH, MC, MCH, ELAF 
Dissemination of the SecureFood outcomes in the domain of their activities and in the organizations/associations they participate (e.g. association of farmers, retailers and consumers at national and European level).  Leading research and technological development Institutions/organizations ZLC, NULES, IAMO, ICCS, LAUR Dissemination in scientific journals and conferences, as well as in lectures and training researchers in an early career stage (master students, PhDs, Post-Docs).    2.2.2 Exploitation of results 2.2.2.1 Exploitation strategy and KERs   A detailed exploitation roadmap and business plan will be developed during the project (see Task 8.3) including the following  activities: (1) identification of the exploitable results; (2) analysis of the market towards which SecureFood is targeted; (3) documentation of an analytical IPR management strategy based on the principles of project’s Consortium Agreement which will guide the joint and individual exploitation capabilities of the project partners; (4) definition of possible commercial and non-commercial exploitation models; (5) validation of the aforementioned activities through the SecureFood wider strategy. SecureFood overall exploitation strategy comprises three complementary exploitation paths: (i) Joint exploitation of the project’s outcomes – The SecureFood consortium will design and execute a joint exploitation plan in order to jointly monetize project’s outcomes. The consortium will explore alternative monetization models, i.e. Freemium, Software-as-a-Service or on-premise deployment. A joint Exploitation Agreement (EA) will be signed by partners to regulate their rights and obligations. (ii) Exploitation of the case-studies frameworks – The case studies will provide early showcases of the project’s functions and will gradually advance against maturity and market readiness towards a viable route to market and adoption by prospective clients. For each case-study, a product-based exploitation strategy will be developed. (iii) Individual Exploitation Plans – Each partner will develop detailed exploitation plans, in line with their business and research strategy. The individual exploitation plans will, among others, provide detailed information on market mapping, customers identification and decision on positioning within the market. The table below provides an overview of the individual exploitation strategies of the partners according to their organization category.  Partner category Partners Exploitation plan 
Industrial partner, consultants ED, GL, EMP, DNV, IRIS, INNOV, EXUS, CARR 
The industrial partners are interested in providing the project results to the food systems’ stakeholders as well as in developing and delivering products and/or services built on top of the project results and the re-utilization of the technological know-how acquired. Smaller companies, i.e., SME/service providers, are interested in adopting the project results that will be provided as open-source components for know-how transfer in their products. Ministries and entities operating under their auspices MINAG, ELGO, LUKE The Ministries and entities operating under their auspices will use the project’s results to improve contingency planning and build national plans on food systems resilience. Moreover, the integration of the project’s digital tools and services with their existing technologies and the offering of new services constitute 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 27 
additional targets. 
Food supply chain actors 
COSMO, UAC, UCAB, EKP, ROUS, SPES, FEDAL, ANIA, FIPA, FIAB, SEVT, SETBİR, CCIS, LVA, FFDI, BIGH, MC, MCH, ELAF  
They can capitalize on the project results and the case-studies outcomes and best practices identified to design actions that promote their resilience and contribute to food security.  
Leading research and technological development Institutions/organizations ZLC, NULES, IAMO, ICCS, LAUR They are mainly interested in the research exploitation model, aspiring re-utilization of the research know-how acquired in future research activities. From a commercial exploitation model, they are interested in founding spin-offs and start-ups to exploit the developed research results commercially.  An initial plan of the various exploitable results is depicted in the table below: No KERs Owner(s) Pricing Strategy Additional Services 1 Mapping of food security drivers, their key variables and interconnections GL, ZLC, EMP, DNV, IRIS, IAMO, ICCS, LAUR, EXUS, INNOV, NULES, MINAG, UAC, UCAB, ELGO, LUKE 
Pay-off/ Fee/ Licencing  Training, Consulting, Extension 2 Risks identified and mapped along with suitable risk scenarios 3 Risk and Resilience Management Suite 4 SecureFood Resilience Governance Framework 5 Food Systems Resilience Management Framework 6 Digital tools for data management, decision-support and information exchange ED, GL, ZLC, EMP, DNV, IRIS, IAMO, ICCS, LAUR, EXUS, INNOV Open Source/ fee/ licencing Support, Training, Consulting, Extension 7 Digital twin and simulation modules 8 Living Lab for interaction, training and empowerment of food systems’ stakeholders 
All Partners  Open Access Consulting, Extension 
9 Curricula and educational material 10 Whitepapers and reports with recommendations and guidance material 11 SecureFood ecosystem validated in different food value chains 12 SecureFood knowledge sharing activity, to support efforts undertaken by relevant initiatives and promote results uptake 2.2.2.2 Market Analysis and Go-to-Market Strategy Market Analysis:  The European market is witnessing a significant shift towards digitalization in various sectors, including the food supply chain (e.g., precision agriculture, food processing, transportation and logistics, consumer preferences, and demand forecasting). For example, the digital twin is a technology that plays a pivotal role in revolutionizing the food supply chain, allowing the creation of virtual models for real-time monitoring, data-driven decision-making, and predictive analytics. A study by Accenture estimates that digital twin technology has the potential to unlock $1.3 trillion of value for the global economy by 2030, with the food and agriculture sectors being critical beneficiaries of this value creation39. Along this line, the market for digital twin technologies in the food supply chain is expected to witness significant growth e.g., it is projected to reach $48.2 billion by 2026, growing at a CAGR of 58% during the forecast period (2021-2026). Europe is expected to hold a significant share in this market, showing a substantial growth rate over the coming years (expecting to reach $9.4 billion by 2025, growing at a CAGR of 30.0% during the forecast period 2020-2025)40, driven by increasing investments in Industry 4.0 technologies and  39 Accenture. (2018). Digital Twin Unlocking the Value of Industry 4.0. Retrieved from https://www.accenture.com/_acnmedia/pdf-98/accenture-twin-tipping-point.pdf. 40 Markets and Markets. (2020). Digital Twin Market by Technology, Type (Product, Process, and System), Industry (Aerospace & Defense, Automotive & Transportation, Home & Commercial, Healthcare, Energy & Utilities, Oil & Gas), and Geography - Global Forecast to 2026. Retrieved from https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/digital-twin-market-225269522.html.  
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 28 
the need for improved risk mitigation, and operational efficiency. The increasing adoption of such technologies and data analytics in the food supply chain has shown a significant potential to solve problems like high container storage costs, asset planning, route optimization, and visibility. The commercialization of the SecureFood-related products and services will be realized in three phases, including post-project exploitation, and may be aligned with incremental patterns for joint exploitation.  • Case-studies validation phase (M13-M42) – It includes the case-studies scenarios’ running, validation and evaluation by both consortium partners and external stakeholders. The services to be offered from both a technical and a business perspective will be validated, while at the same time detailed business plan will be established. At this phase, 100+ additional participants will be registered to the project’s ecosystem.  • Early adoption (M43-M58) – This phase starts at the end of the project. Based on the established business plan, SecureFood KERs will be promoted to early adopters (i.e., Ministries of Agriculture, food supply chain actors, etc.). Key to this phase will be the proper exploitation of the combined SecureFood results within the partners’ business networks. At the end of this phase, there will be 250+ additional participants.  • Market commercialization (beyond M58) – The feedback received from the early adopters will enable the SecureFood KERs to reach the EU and international market.  The emphasis will be on global networking and the attraction of 1,500+ participants. Initial Business Model  Key Partners • Food supply chain actors • Ministries/Governmental entities  • IT solutions providers • Risk and resilience management experts  
Key Components & Activities • R&D integration • End-user training • Business development • Networking, promotion, sales 
Value Proposition • In-depth insights into drivers of change that affect food systems • Increased understanding of the vulnerabilities, dependencies, and risks • Digital tools for early warning and preparedness against crises • Trustworthy communication and information exchange • Stocks reporting in a structured way 
Customer Channels • Existing business networks/ public-private partnerships  • Community/ industry events • SecureFood workshops and promotional campaigns • Open-source communities • Accelerators 
Customer Segments • Policymakers • Ministries and Governmental entities • Food actors  • EFSCM/national/ international initiatives/ Partnerships • Research/knowledge community • Technology/IT service providers  
Customer Relationships • Partnerships with national authorities and government bodies, EU-level organizations • Partnerships with food supply chain actors for data collection • B2B relationships 
Key Resources Researchers IT experts Consultants Cost Structure • R&D, maintenance, consultancy  • IT Infrastructure, KER-specific costs • Business development, marketing  
Revenue Streams • One-off solutions’ sales, consulting, and training programs’ fees • Recurring revenues generated annually through software licenses, maintenance, upgrades, consultancy     2.2.2.3. Management of Intellectual Property  The SecureFood IPR management strategy will be defined in detail in the Consortium Agreement (CA). The aspects addressed in the CA will regard raising consortium’s awareness on IP issues; resolution of disagreements between participants; assisting the plan for the use and dissemination of foreground; tracking down results that should be protected and advice the partners on the means of protection; helping the consortium to evaluate their contribution to the jointly owned foreground and establishing their respective shares. The exploitation and dissemination reports will document all IP management issues. It will formalize service level and other appropriate agreements (including IP agreements) for joint exploitation among partners and third parties, including the possible creation of new legal entities (alliance). The SecureFood CA will be developed considering the following preliminary agreements: ● Background knowledge will be provided to SecureFood partners, in favourable conditions, if necessary to perform research and relative work in the project. ● Foreground knowledge is owned by the contractor generating such information or result. Each partner will make available its foreground knowledge in favourable conditions. ● Background and foreground knowledge will be made available, on a royalty-free basis, to other project partners for dissemination and research purposes concerning the IPR rights of the partner generating this knowledge.  ● Background and foreground knowledge will be made available to the other project partners for exploitation purposes at fair, reasonable, and non-discriminatory conditions during the project and after 12 months, concerning the usual commercial conditions of the granting partner.   #§COM-DIS-VIS-CDV§#  
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 29