2.3 Summary  SPECIFIC NEEDS EXPECTED RESULTS D & E & C MEASURES • Food insecurity due to several risks and crises, (e.g. climate change, political instability,  Russia’s invasion in Ukraine, COVID-19 pandemic)  • Need for transition towards more resilient and sustainable food systems. •  Delineation of the food systems’ vulnerabilities, interdependencies and risks. • Need for better collaboration among public and private food systems’ stakeholders. • Digitalization for improving preparedness and response to incidents disruptive events.   
KER 1 - Mapping of food security drivers, their key variables and interconnections. KER 2 - Risks identified and mapped along with suitable risk scenarios KER 3 - Risk and Resilience Management Suite. KER 4 - SecureFood Resilience Governance Framework. KER 5 - Food Systems Resilience Management Framework. KER 6 - Digital tools for data management, decision-support and information exchange. KER 7 - Digital twin and simulation modules. KER 8 - Living Lab for interaction, training and empowerment of food systems’ stakeholders. KER 9 - Curricula and educational material. KER 10 - Whitepapers and reports with recommendations and guidance material. KER 11 - SecureFood ecosystem validated in different food value chains. KER 12 - SecureFood knowledge sharing activity, to support efforts undertaken by relevant initiatives and promote results uptake. 
Dissemination: Scientific publications, workshops, clustering with other initiatives and projects, final dissemination event Communication: Website, social media, press releases, marketing pack and promotional press kit, institutional presentation, videos, infographics, Final publishable report, newsletter, workshops and events   Exploitation: KERs can be exploited individually; Go-to market and exploitation strategy, IPRs 
TARGET GROUPS OUTCOMES IMPACTS Policymakers/ EC Directorates and Units/EU and Associated Countries Ministries and Governments/Regulatory Agencies/ Food supply chain actors (farmers, fishers, aquaculture producers processing companies, carriers, logisticians, wholesalers, retailers)/Consumers and citizens/ EFSCM/National and international initiatives/ Partnerships/ Research & knowledge community/ Technology/service providers/IT companies   
• Increased understanding of food security drivers and the induced risks to food supply chains • Evidence-based guidance on the appropriate short- and long-term interventions needed for building resilient and sustainable food systems • Acceleration of the development of national plans for food systems resilience, and resilience plans at entity, food-actor level. • Digital solutions that enhance situational awareness and provide decision support on food security matters • Empowered stakeholders with increased capacity to participate in collaborative processes and take actions for resilience enhancement 
Societal: Increased preparedness for and response to crises that have the potentially to affect food security; enhanced food systems resilience;  improved policies and decision-making;  increased access to fresh and nutritious food; more sustainable healthy diets; empowered food actors, consumers and citizens and inclusive involvement in governance processes; food security interventions that support environmental sustainability, circularity and climate change mitigation;  contribution to SDGs 2 and 12.   Economic:  Affordable and high-quality nutritional food to all consumers and vulnerable citizens; flourishing food businesses; Fair financial returns for the food actors; access to affordable food; less cascading effects to food systems; uninterrupted services provision.  Scientific: Complex event processing for big data aggregation and analysis and timely detection of potential food security risks; Innovative digital twins with embedded advanced models supporting simulation of what-if scenarios and cost-benefit analysis of sustainable measures and interventions.  #§IMP-ACT-IA§# 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2023-FARM2FORK-01-15 — Fostering resilient European food systems in a changing world 
 SecureFood - Part B - Page 30 
 
3. Quality and efficiency of the implementation #@QUA-LIT-QL@# #@WRK-PLA-WP@#