4. MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM ..................................................................................................................................................... 53  
4.1. PARTICIPANTS .................................................................................................................................................................................. 53  
4.2. THIRD PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE PROJECT (INCLUDING USE OF THIRD PARTY RESOURCES) .................................................................... 83  
5. ETHICS AND SECURITY ...................................................................................................................................................................... 84  
5.1. ETHICS ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 84
5.2 SECURITY .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 84 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Excellence 
 
1.1. Objectives 
 
"One company's waste and by-products, can be another company's opportunity and cost saving. We need to put those 
two companies in touch so that we don't just throw away valuable materials but make the most of them."  
Janez Potočnik, European Commissioner for the Environment  
Resource efficiency offers major economic opportunities for the European Process Industry, both in terms of cost savings 
as well as opportunities to offer greener products and services. According to a recent estimate, the EU could realistically 
reduce the total material requirements of its economy by 17% to 24%, boosting GDP and creating between 1.4 and 2.8 
million jobs1.  
In order to migrate to the energy and resource efficient zero -waste process industry of the future, the SPIRE work 
programme calls for “ solutions for more efficient processing and energy systems for the process industry, including  
industrial symbiosis”. Industrial symbiosis (IS) is the use by one company or sector of b y-products, including energy, 
water, logistics and materials, from another. IS networks have proven successful not only in diverting waste from landfill, 
but also in contributing to the preservation of resources and moving waste up the value chain. They have also been an 
accelerator of innovation and creation of green jobs. The European Resource Efficiency Platform has championed IS as 
a mechanism for reducing carbon, preserving critical resources and securing business sustainability. However, 
inadequate business-to-business information on, for example, what resources a  product or process contains 
hinders efficient material flows and the creation of value in the circular economy.  
Objectives  
In order to pave the way forward for industrial symbiosis as a “solution for more efficient processing and energy systems 
for the process industry”2, this project will develop a secure platform for the flexible management of shared process 
resources (SHAREBOX- figure 1) that will provide plant operations and production m anagers with  the robust and 
reliable information that they need in real -time in order to effectively and confidently share resources (plant, energy, 
water, residues, and recycled materials) with other companies in an optimum symbiotic eco-system.  
The Platform will consist of a module for facilitating the identification and realisation of new cross -sectorial interactions 
(‘synergies’), that draws upon the expertise of partner ISL who have designed a standalone database software from 
partner ISL (SYNERGie®) in commercial use around the world supporting facilitated industrial symbiosis. This module 
will be embedded in the SHAREBOX Controller, which will consist of a suite of newly developed analysis and 
optimisation tools for flexible energy use and material flow integration for optimising symbiosis among companies. These 
tools will be based on input-output (IO) modelling for resource (waste and energy) supply-demand matching and process 
efficiency analysis (to understand physical and technological conditions), game theoretical (GT) approach for integrating 
company behaviour in cost -, benefit -, and resource -sharing (to understand economic conditions), and agent -based 
modelling (ABM) for designing the (economic, environmental, and social) optimal symbiotic network (to have the holistic 
optimum). The outputs from the SHAREBOX controller will provide plant and operations managers with commands for 
actions to be taken and/or recommendations for decision support. It will be ensured that all commands and 
recommendations a) fulfil plant operations requirements, b) are within the constraints of any contractual obligations, c) 
are in compliance with all regulatory thresholds, and d) deliver optimal impacts in terms of cost/savings and ecological 
footprints. The historical data that is generated by the SHAREBOX platform will be processed by data mining tools that 
will provide the production/process BIG DATA for symbiotic shared resources optimisation.  
Once the potential synergies, i.e. resources that can be shared, have bee n identified by means of the SYNERGie® 
module, the companies (players) have to establish contractual deals in terms of shared resources, costs and benefits.  
 
 
1 EUROPEAN COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT. Progress Report on the Roadmap to a Resource Efficient Europe. 
COM(2014) 398} {SWD(2014) 211. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/pdf/Progress-report-roadmap.pdf  
2 Pablo Tello & Ron Weerdmeester. SPIRE Roadmap http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/portal/desktop/en/opportunities/h2020/topics/2167-spire-08-2015.html 
 
Page 3 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
The SHAREBOX mathematical tools -based predominantly on game theory and implemented as easy-to-use "wizards"- 
will assist them to find win-win optimal deals.  
Once the deals have been signed and translated into mathematical constraints/conditions to the operational variables - 
through another set of "wizards" -, SHAREBOX will generate op erative commands -recommended and mandatory 
actions- according to real-time optimal decisions automatically generated by means of Theory of Scheduling algorithms.  
In an inner holistic layer, a self -learning artificial intelligence sub -module -based on som e data mining tools like 
multivariate analysis and neural networks routines and case-based reasoning- collects and analyses the data according 
to a multi -way approach in order to unveil complex hidden trends and relationships which cannot be rationalized b y 
deterministic reasoning. These trends/relationships can be integrated into the core algorithm of SHAREBOX to enable 
further improvements according to a predefined Core Algorithm Maintenance Schedule.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1- Overview of the SHAREBOX platform  
In order to test and validate the SHAREBOX platform using realistic industrial streams and process conditions, and to 
demonstrate its impacts of reduced carbon emissions and cost, SHAREBOX partners include a representative group 
of industrial demonstration sites from Germany, Spain, UK and Turkey involving SPIRE process industries (chemical, 
ceramics, petroleum and rubber industries, to ceramics minerals, metal, mining, etc.), and other sectors (including 
automotive, food, energy,  among others) for cross -sector working. SHAREBOX will be used to optimise industrial 
symbiosis in these industrial parks and zones, as well as to strengthen cross-sectoral interaction.  
1. Chemie-Cluster Bayern (partner CCB), which links over 260 chemical companies from the region of Bavaria in 
Germany, SHAREBOX will be used to optimise industrial symbiosis among selected sites from the Cluster, as 
well as to strengthen cross-sectoral interaction.  
2. The North East of England Process Industry Cluster  (partner NEPIC) is a process industry cluster with over 
720 active participants from Chemical, Petrochemical, Polymer, Specialty Chemical, Fine Chemical, 
Pharmaceutical, Biotechnology, Composites, Bioresources, Biofuels and Renewable Materials and Energy  
Page 4 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
companies which is aimed at the rejuvenation and growth of these key hi-tech advanced manufacturing 
industries while leading them into a lower carbon sustainable future.  
3. The Eskişehir Organized Industrial Zone (partner ECI) home to over 322 companies present from chemical, 
petroleum and rubber industries, to ceramics minerals, metal, mining, food and energy, among others.  
4. Ceramics Cluster (partners AICE, KEROS, KERAFRIT, ISSA, GUZMAN). SHAREBOX will be used to instigate 
industrial symbiosis among the Ceramics cluster in Castellon and with the wide industrial tissue of the region, 
which will be managed by partner AICE. This new symbiosis commences with a kernel set of companies, partners 
KEROS and KERAFRIT, ceramics companies from the Nules area, as well as partner ISSA producing helicoidally 
suspensions for the automotive industry and GUZMAN, a raw material supplier for mineral, rubber, polymer, 
chemical processors, amongst others.  
The ShareBOX platform will be co -created, implemented and tested with these demonstration sites using realistic 
industrial streams and process conditions . The platform will optimise interdependencies and the identification of  
technology components allowing for a breakthrough in difficult cross-company collaboration, resulting in a cost-effective 
reduction in resource use. Production, quality and operations managers will be reassured that resource sharing does 
not involve trade -offs in relation to access to sensitive product or process information by competit ors (which will be 
ensured through the encryption of data), nor in their ability to have a secure and failsafe supply of quality resources 
(which will be guaranteed through the powerful predictive capability of the system to forecast drops, as well as peak s, 
in supply). The Platform will be validated for its potential to optimise energy and resources supply and demand and to 
reduce the overall costs in energy intensive industries by at least 15%, to ensure we fulfil an expected impact of the call 
topic.  
The wide deployment of the SHAREBOX platform will have a major impact for the competiveness, resource efficiency 
and sustainability of the European process industries and other sectors in that it will a) facilitate industrial symbioses 
through the identification of new synergy opportunities, and b) optimise existing Industry Symbiosis or synergies among 
multiple companies on a single industrial production site.  
In order to achieve the overall goal of building, testing and validating the world’s first energy and resource management 
platform for improved efficiency in the process industries (figure 1), a number of specific objectives that will be fulfilled 
over the course of this 48-month Research and Innovation Action have been defined. These objectives are S.M.A.R.T- 
i.e. Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic and Time bound:  
Table 1- Specific Objectives of the SHAREBOX project 
 
1 To define the requirements of the participating industry sites and to draw up the specifications of the 
SHAREBOX platform (linked to WP1)   
A Kano Survey will be performed with the participating industry sites and the Quality Function Deployment method 
will be implemented to ensure a systems approach is used to establish the industry requirements that will feed into 
the derived specifications for the SHAEBOX Platform.  
Performance Indicator(s): By M7, strategies for the industry sites will be defined, along with the derived system  
specifications for the SHAREBOX Platform. Other potential indicators: number of companies attracted in the proposal, 
number of resource (waste) types included in the database.   
2 To establish the Industrial Symbiosis methodologies (Linked to WP2)   
We will build on over 10 years of practical experience to move ICT to the next level whereby knowledge  and 
opportunities will be readily available to companies together with on line advice as to how to proceed. The ICT 
implementation will learn from experience and apply the learning to seeking out opportunities which will then be 
delivered to the companies without the company having to spend time searching for the opportunity. Various smart 
delivery methods will be implemented so that the information will be easily accessible together with stepwise guides 
showing how the companies should progress identified opportunities.  
Performance Indicator(s): By M6, IS methodologies are defined in a comprehensive backlog that will enable their  
coding into the SHAREBOX Platform software and taxonomies for next generation ICT will be defined and aligned 
with international standards.   
3 To research the necessary infrastructures that would be required for realising Industrial Symbiosis 
Page 5 of 84 
 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
(Linked to WP2)  
Having identified the opportunities for IS between companies on an industrial park we will also consider, design and 
cost the necessary additional infrastructure required to make exchange of materials and energy possible. These may 
include energy conversion technologies for waste heat to electricity and state of the art storage technologies for time-
shifting for increased utilisation of resources by better synchronisation between processes. Furthermore, we will 
incorporate the opportunity presented by demand management and reflect the impact of this opportunity on the design 
of new energy conversion/storage/transportation systems.  
Performance Indicator(s): By M12, A Database of energy transfer, storage and conversion technologies  
parameterised by their input/output requirements and efficiencies as a function of key variables such as waste stream 
temperature and scale will be produced. By M24 with a cost model for new energy technologies in terms of capex 
and opex on per installed capacity and per unit output basis and for end -use-energy-demand (export and import) 
opportunities to infor m management strategies associated with new energy technologies. By M30, optimised 
methodologies for designing and managing new energy infrastructure will be ready to be converted into an energy 
technology wizard under SHAREBOX.   
4 To develop intelligent decision support tools that will be integrated into the SHAREBOX platform 
(Linked to WP3)   
SHAREBOX will consist of a comprehensive series of tools as an integrated model of energy and materials use across 
multiple process industries. On the one hand, too ls will dynamically map the input -output of material flows within a 
plant. Material flow analysis (MFA) is an analytical method of quantifying flows and stocks of materials or substances 
in a well -defined system. MFA is an important tool to assess the phys ical consequences of human activities and 
needs in the field of industrial ecology, where it is used on different spatial and temporal scales. On the other hand, 
tools will analyse energy -related business cases based on end -user energy demand management kn owledge and 
energy storage technology that allows time shifting and delivery of waste energy from one process to another at the 
most opportune moment. As such, a series of mathematical tools will be developed based on input -output (IO) 
modelling, game theory (GT), and agent -based modelling (ABM) for enabling flexible energy use and material flow 
integration for holistic resource management in process industries. A number of data mining techniques (Multivariate 
Analysis, Artificial Neural Networks,...) and/o r some Artificial Intelligence reasoning paradigm (Case -Based 
Reasoning, ...) will be used to improve recommendations and/or strategies for synergies decisions. All the decision 
support tools will be integrated in WP4 into the SHAREBOX software platform.  
Performance Indicator(s): By M10 optimum waste supply -demand quantity matches are ready, the energy  
scheduling and conversion tools, followed by the benefit -sharing schemes which will be produced by M18. ABM -
based optimal designs will be produced by M30 . So, by M30 algorithms will be ready of incorporation into the 
SHAREBOX system software, along with flow diagrams and analytical routines. Any shortcomings will be addressed 
after testing the algorithms in the real symbiosis cases and the models will be re-visited (by M40).   
5 To develop the SHAREBOX system software and to build the platform architecture. (Linked to WP4)   
The Platform architecture will be drawn up based on system specifications defined from WP1. The system controller 
core routines will  be developed. The SYNERGIES software will be upgraded. The Platform backend and frontend 
infrastructure will be developed, whereby the mathematical tools, data mining tools, or artificial intelligence reasoning 
paradigms will be integrated, and the databa ses, APIs, communications will be implemented. An ergonomic, user 
centred Graphical User Interface will respond to end-user tastes and requirements.  
Performance Indicator(s): By M12, the integrated Platform will have been successfully tested in a virtu al simulator 
confirming that the on -site pilot trials can commence. An alpha release will be made, and the platform will continue 
development to a beta version.   
6 To test and validate the SHAREBOX platform in the field using real industrial streams and process 
conditions from industry partners (Linked to WP5 and WP6 )   
Through an IS implementation team, the SHAREBOX platform will be set up and will be used, on the one hand, for 
optimising industrial symbiosis among selected sites and to strengthen cross-sectoral interaction with partners CCB, 
NEPIC, and ECI (WP5). On the other hand, SHAREBOX will be used to instigate industrial symbiosis among the 
Ceramics cluster in Castellon and with the wider industrial community of the region (WP6). These demonstration sites 
will first be engaged in WP1 Kano survey of user needs, and commence (WP5) with an early alpha version of the 
platform to verify its performance, and to ensure the versatility of the platform to the specific conditions in real   
Page 6 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
production units. Feedback from the sites will be fed back to the development team to guide the various iterations of 
the Platform. Verification of the impacts of SHAREBOX on resource efficiency, energy efficiency and the emission 
performance, and cost-effectiveness will be performed.  
Performance Indicator(s): By M24, engagement with 1,000 companies, resource and process data received from  
250 companies, 1,000 synergy opportunities identified and impacts quantified.   
7 To verify the impacts of the SHAREBOX platform on resource efficiency, energy efficiency and the 
emission performance, and cost-effectiveness (linked to WP6)   
An LCA will be performed to verify the energy, resource savings as well as the economic savings in a holistic LCA 
approach. Performance Indicator(s): By M45, the SHAREBOX impacts will be confirmed.   
8 To perform data mining of the historical data generated from the industry sites for further symbiotic 
shared resources optimisation (linked to WP3)   
Data mining capability will be a feature of the SHAREBOX platform. To this end, the latest in data mining technology 
will be used to develop the data analytics capability of the platform to mine the historical data (Big Data) that is being 
gathered by the platform in order to further optimise the symbiotic shared resources. A Case-Based Reasoning (CBR) 
approach will be used to increase the competence of the recommendation process through the learning from past 
experiences to improve recommendation decisions.  
Performance Indicator(s): By M36, the data collected from the two demonstration sites will have been mined to  
validate the data mining functionality of the platform and recommendations for IS optimisation will be reported.   
9 To develop a business model for monetising the SHAREBOX Platform. (linked to WP7)   
The results protection routes will be evaluated and all IPRs defined, and the consortium will build on the initial 
exploitation and business plans that have been agreed by all partners and presented in Section  2.2. To support a 
broad exploitation and implementation of the platform, it will be crucial to develop some scenarios of how SHAREBOX 
can support the business development of industry park operators, including the use of SHAREBOX for site marketing 
strategies. The business model for the SHAREBOX Platform will consider certain types of industrial parks (integrated 
parks, “Verbund”-production, heterogeneous industrial areas) and include tailor -made offers for the integration of 
SHAREBOX into the management pr ocesses of targeted site operators. With a view to gearing up for commercial 
adoption of Platform and the intensified modules in the industry, standardisation and regulatory issues will be 
addressed to ensure compliance with process conditions. Performance Indicators(s): By M24, an analysis of target 
customers and users among industrial park operators and a draft of the business plans outlining the business model 
for commercial exploitation of the results is in place and the protection procedures for the projects results defined. By 
M48 a final business plan is in place.   
10 To maximise the innovation impacts of the project through effective communication, dissemination 
and contribution to standards (linked to WP7).   
A communication and dissemination campai gn will be implemented to raise awareness about the project and its 
activities among the industry and to stimulate future market demand, to outreach to and engage with policy makers 
and the general public, and to secure ‘buy -in’ for the project. The knowle dge generated during the project will feed 
into training and education programmes to upskill and bridge knowledge gaps in relation to IS. Performance 
Indicators: By M48, wide dissemination of project results to the process industry, plant and equipment pro viders, 
policy makers, educational bodies, the research community and the general public is reported. Training outputs will 
be available for up -skilling in the European Process industry as well as for education programmes. Business and 
exploitation plans are finalised.   
The European process industry is uniquely positioned and represents the economic roots of the European economy (by 
transforming raw materials into intermediate and end-user products but also using energy, water, and possibly producing 
by-products, emissions and wastes)2. It thus sits at the core of most industrial value chains via discrete manufacturing 
into a whole host of sectors2. The process industry is characterised by having a high dependence on resources (energy, 
raw materials and water) in production. Optimising the effectiveness of process control systems and strategies is vital 
to improve quality, reliability and efficiency3, as well as the sustainability of operations.  
 
 
3 http://www.spire2030.eu/mediaroom/36/21/Process-Control-Industrial-Automation-Summit-2014 
 
Page 7 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2. Relation to the work programme 
 
SHAREBOX mobilises a multidisciplinary team who will work together to respond to the specific challenge of topic  
SPIRE-06-2015: Energy and resource management systems for improved efficiency in the process industries, 
whereby we propose to develop a highly scalable, secure platform for: 
 
a) Identification of new synergies .  The  upgraded  SYNERGie®  module  that  will  be  integrated  into  the  
SHAREBOX platform will enable next generation IS delivery through the ‘smart’ identification and real isation of 
new cross -sectorial interactions that will provide the foundations to enable ‘a more general cross -sectorial 
interaction’ by providing the next generation of IS delivery.  
b) Optimising IS implementation. The SHAREBOX intelligent decision support t ools for the flexible management 
of shared process resources will provide plant operations and production managers with the robust and reliable 
real-time needed to optimise symbiotic connections (plant, energy, water, residues, and recycled materials) with  
other companies in a symbiotic eco-system.  
The SHAREBOX project also develops ‘new approaches that perform cost-saving optimisation of energy and resources 
supply and demand’. Based on the input-output approach, SHAREBOX will implement the optimum IS as a pre-design 
model for future symbiotic networks (SNs) and use it as the theoretical optimum that the existing SNs should reach. 
Based on a game theory approach SHAREBOX will construct the benefit-sharing schemes for involved actors integrating 
the potenti al cooperation strategies in the negotiation phase of IS . Through an agent -based modelling approach 
SHAREBOX will enable the optimum IS design embedding the company behaviour into the operations of IS.  
This ‘holistic’ integrated platform will be a highly scalable and will ‘ integrate into a single management system” all the  
necessary ‘environmental, energy and economic factors’, as well as regulatory and contractual requirements, to ensure 
optimised industrial symbiosis. Consequently, it will be a key platform for improving the resource and energy efficiency 
of the process industries.  
As identified by SPIRE-06, a key challenge that is preventing the development of technical and non-technical interactions 
and exchanges is that of ‘poor understanding of each other's processes’. Behind this challenge is a lack of trust among 
industry to cooperate at a level which could provide visibility on how their operations are run . Indeed, lack of 
cooperation and trust, as well as lack of information, are frequently cited among the key barriers to industrial symbiosis4,5. 
This is a common and longstanding phenomenon in competitive industrial environments.  
However, nowadays, with the advancement in information and communication technology, information sharing 
can be more co nceivable5. To this end, one way to overcome the willingness to share information, and in  particular 
potentially sensitive process information, is to develop an information sharing platform that offers outstanding security 
and anonymity prior to the agreement to progress an idea . We propose to do this through  APIs for secure data 
exchange between companies. Moreover, the platform will properly encrypt or anonymize the data that is being fed into 
the system so that it does not reveal itself to other end-users, rather it is used intelligently by the platform’s models and 
tools that will process the data for the purpose of ‘ flexible energy use and material flow integration for holistic resource 
management in process industries’. The highly flexible and easy to use platform will be ‘suitable both for small and large 
scale in a flexible approach’. It may be implemented for the supply being generated by a park operator at first step and 
then being extended to the entire resource flows of a production site; or it may be used by a single tenant, then inviting 
neighbouring companies to join gradually. This way, SHAREBOX can be used as a nucleus for the continuous 
development of site integration advantages.  
As required by the call scope, we  will develop an open standards -based platform, whereby we will on the one hand 
ensure that there is no proprietary programming languages, development environments, middleware services, or back-  
 
 
4 Artem Golev, Glen D. Corder and Damien P. Giurco (2014). Barriers to Industrial Symbiosis. Journal of Industrial Ecology. Article first published online: 14 JUL 2014. 
DOI: 10.1111/jiec.12159  
5 Zahra Lotfi, Muriati Mukhtar, Shahnorbanun Sahran, Ali Taei Zadeh (2013). Information Sharing in Supply Chain Management Procedia Technology. Volume 11, 2013, 
Pages 298–304. 4th International Conference on Electrical Engineering and Informatics, ICEEI 2013. doi:10.1016/j.protcy.2013.12.194 
 
Page 8 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
end connectors or adapters- i.e. no vendor lock-in. On the other hand, we will utilise common and accepted official and 
unofficial Industry Standards such as JavaScript, CSS, HTML5, J2EE, CSS, REST, SOAP, XML, and industry standard 
web services.  
Our approach is based on ‘rapid transfer from lab-scale and conceptual design into testing at demonstration sites, using 
realistic industrial streams and process conditions’ , whereby pilot tests will be carried out at existing established  
organised production sites of CCB in Germany, ECI in Turkey, and NEPIC in the UK to optimise symbiosis among and 
between SPIRE industry companies, and to establish industrial symbiosis among the ceramics cluster in Castellon, 
Spain (managed by AICE and with KEROS, KERNFRIT, ISSA and GUZMAN as the kernel set. Not only will these 
demonstration sites serve to verify the performance of the ‘ integrated solutions and tools to the specific conditions in  
real production units’, they will also “ facilitate future industrial symbiosis between different sectors” (e.g. ceramics and 
automotive sector) “by integrating energy and material flows within existing industrial parks” (the Nules industrial park in 
Castellon, Spain). Information on eco-innovation solutions will be collected by partners in the pilot phase. SHAREBOX 
will stimulate demand for e co-innovative solutions to resource challenges, resulting in qualitative and quantitative 
benefits for participating companies.  
Finally, the SHAREBOX consortium already have an initial business model concept drawn up for monetising the 
SHAREBOX Platform a nd have ambitious exploitation plans (discussed in Section 2.2) to ensure that this European 
developed platform can grow to become a globally recognised Energy and resource management platform for improved 
efficiency in the process industries, and as an enabling tool for industrial symbiosis. Our robust business and exploitation 
planning will ensure the future deployment of the platform in Europe (and indeed globally, leveraging ISL’s world-leading 
IS delivery across Europe, North and South America, Asia and Africa), whereby it will make a pragmatic contribution to 
increasing IS in the European Process industry by providing the secure, confidential and reliable B2B information that 
will eliminate any of the risks (perceived or real) associated with energy and resource sharing among industry.  
Post-project, partners will scale-up, deploy and roll-out the SHAREBOX Solution in markets across Europe and around 
the world. Moreover, our budget is within scope (< €5 M) and the outputting of the world’s first Secure Management 
Platform for Shared Process Resources, along with 3 validated resource sharing case studies within and between SPIRE 
industry sectors [chemical, ceramics, engineering, minerals, non -ferrous metals, steel and cement] in real industrial 
settings, as well as cross-sectoral industry engagement delivering real impact, is considered excellent value for high 
impact. 
 
1.3. Concept and approach 
 
The overall concept underpinning the project  
Industrial symbiosis (IS) has been defined as engaging “engaging “diverse organisations in a network to foster eco -
innovation and long-term culture change. Creating and sharing knowledge through the network yields mutually profitable 
transactions for novel sourcing of required inputs, value -added destinations for non -product outputs, and improved 
business and technical processes.”6  
In fact, the term industrial symbiosis has its origins in the Danish municipality of Kalundborg, where the first recognized 
and most well -known example of an industrial symbiosis network as a n intricate network of material and energy 
exchanges is located 7. In 1989 the seminal article by Frosch and Gallopoulos 8 in Scientific American envisioned 
“industrial ecosystems” in which “the consumption of energy and materials is optimized and the effluents of one process 
serve as the raw material for another process.” Shortly after, a cluster of companies from different industries that were 
intensively sharing resources in Denmark came to light9,10. This symbiosis in Kalundborg, Denmark began  
 
 
6 Lombardi DR and PT Laybourn. 2012. Redefining Industrial Symbiosis: Crossing Academic-Practitioner Boundaries. Journal of Industrial Ecology 16(1): 28-37. Both 
authors, at ISL, are closely involved with the Sharebox proposal  
7 Zahra Lotfi, Muriati Mukhtar, Shahnorbanun Sahran, Ali Taei Zadeh (2013). Information Sharing in Supply Chain Management Procedia Technology. Volume 11, 2013, 
Pages 298–304. 4th International Conference on Electrical Engineering and Informatics, ICEEI 2013. doi:10.1016/j.protcy.2013.12.194  
8 Frosch, R. A. and N. E. Gallopoulos. 1989. Strategies for manufacturing. Scientific American 261(3):144–152 
9 Knight, P. 1990. A rebirth of the pioneering spirit. The Financial Times, sec.1, p. 15, 14 November. 
 
Page 9 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
because of the low availability of groundwater and the need for a surface water source which, once identified, became 
a key part of the resource exchange network there 11. The first exchanges were in the 1970s, and, by the late 1980s, at 
least ten additional exchanges had begun across multiple firms12 (Symbiosis Institute, 2003). Yet, until some local high 
school students prepared a science project in 1989 in which they made a scale model of all the pipelines and connections 
in their small community, the unique aspects of  the project went largely unnoticed. The industrial symbiosis network in 
Kalundborg provided a concrete realization of the industrial ecosystems Frosch and Gallopoulos theorized 11. The 
Kalundborg symbiosis emerged from self -organization initiated in the private sector to achieve certain goals, such as 
cost reduction, revenue enhancement, business expansion, and securing long-term access to water and energy. Once 
a revelation was made, a coordinative function was found to be helpful in organizing more exchanges and moving them 
forward. In Kalundborg, for example, managers belonged to an Environment Club and a coordinative organization, the 
Symbiosis Institute, was launched in 1996 as part of Kalundborg’s industrial development age ncy, specifically working 
to accelerate the number and complexity of new exchanges 11. In short, the network that has evolved since the early 
1970’s was first recognized for its environmental efficiency in the late 80’s. By shar ing ground water, surface water, 
steam and fuel as well as exchanging by -products to serve as input materials in other firms’ processes, both high 
financial and environmental efficiency have been achieved11.  
Industrial symbiosis since has gained increasing attention in the production economics as the pressure on companies 
increases for the reduction of waste emissions as well as of primary resources consumption 13. It is fast becoming the 
most talked about approach for delivering the circular economy14. Simple examples include the use of food waste from 
the catering sector to feed farm animals, or the use of non-toxic industrial waste to produce energy through incineration15. 
However, in a developed economy with many industrial a ctivities, many different by -products are generated, and the 
range of potential uses for them can be equally diverse15.  
Many technical solutions for waste and by -product material, water, and energy reuse between neighbouring i ndustries 
(so-called synergies) have been discovered and applied in the IS examples from all over the world16. The industrial area 
of Händelö in Norrköping, Sweden, for example, has received some attention in the last few years for its example of a 
renewable energy driven industrial symbiosis network17,18. This industrial symbiosis network has evolved spontaneously 
because of profitability in each connection. A central connection in this network is the steam delivery from the CHP 
plant managed by heat provi der E.ON Värme to large scale ethanol producer Lantmännen Agroetanol. E.ON has 
realized the potential business and environmental value of this connection and have ambitions to develop similar 
synergistic connections in the industrial area of Northern Harbour in Malmö, Sweden where they also operate a natural 
gas fuelled CHP plant.  
However, such industrial systems rarely organize themselves by individual initiative only and many factors need 
to be considered in order to effectively implement them. While economic convenience is generally considered the most 
important driver for IS 11, it is recognised that trust plays an important role in sustaining cooperative relationships 19. 
Indeed, the potential for uptake of new synergies is o ften limited by a range of non -technical barriers identified and 
detailed in the literature, which include lack of cooperation and trust between industries in the area, lack of information 
sharing, environmental regulation, and economic barriers20,21,22,23.   
 
10 Barnes, H. 1992. Fertile project exploits recycled wastes. Survey on Denmark. The Financial Times, 8 October, 5  
11 Chertow, M.R. (2007), “Uncovering” Industrial Symbiosis. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 2007. Volume 11, Number 1. Page 12-30. 
12 Lowe, E. A., S. R. Moran, and D. B. Holmes. 1995. A fieldbook for the development of eco-industrial parks. Report for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Oakland, CA: Indigo Development International  
13 Devrim Murat Yazan, Vincenzo Alessio Romano, Vito Albino. How Far is an Input-Output Production System from Perfect Industrial Symbiosis? University of Twente 
and Politecnico di Bari  
14 European Industrial Symbiosis Association: http://www.eur-isa.org/  
15 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/ecoap/about-eco-innovation/experts-interviews/20140127_industrial-symbiosis-realising-the-circular-economy_en.htm 
16 Artem Golev, Glen D. Corder and Damien P. Giurco (2014). Barriers to Industrial Symbiosis. Journal of Industrial Ecology. Article first published online: 14 JUL 2014. 
DOI: 10.1111/jiec.12159  
17 Baas, L. (2011). "Planning and uncovering industrial symbiosis: Comparing the Rotterdam and Östergötland regions", Business Strategy and the Environment, vol. 20, 
no. 7, pp. 428-440.  
18 Martin, M. & Eklund, M. (2011). "Improving the environmental performance of biofuels with industrial symbiosis", Biomass and Bioenergy, vol. 35, pp. 1747-1755.  
19 Hewes, A.K., Lyons, D. (2008). The humanistic side of eco-industrial parks: champions and the role of trust, Regional Studies, Vol. 42, pp. 1329-1342. 
20 Chertow, M. R. 2003. Evaluating the success of ecoindustrial development. In Eco-Industrial Strategies: Unleashing Synergy Between Economic Development and the 
Environment, edited by J. M. E. Cohen-Rosenthal. Sheffield, UK: Greenleaf Publishing.  
21 Gibbs, D. C. 2003. Trust and networking in interfirm relations: The case of eco-industrial development. Local Economy 18(3): 222–236 
 
Page 10 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
This is where facilitated industrial symbiosis programmes have come into play , involving a for m of brokering to 
bring companies together in innovative collaborations, finding new ways to use resources, and thus to increase revenues 
while reducing waste and the associated costs15. The most successful implementations of IS throughout the world have 
been delivered with the support of facilitation to companies. This facilitation aids the capture of resources and assists 
the companies in identifying and then progressing opportunities to valorise those resources. When compared with more 
passive, non-facilitated implementations such as on line waste exchanges, the facilitated model provides a process that 
is both replicable and scalable across markets and situations.  
The delivery most cited in European policy is the facilitated National Industrial Symbiosis Programme (NISP) model that 
was devised by partner ISL. The NISP model involves expert facilitators gathering information from  companies, 
making expert assessments, then identifying and facilitating synergy opportunities thro ugh to completion. 
Based on NISP data, 90% of successful IS opportunities (called ‘synergies’) move the resource up the waste hierarchy, 
and in 20% of activity, it involves innovation (either new application of existing information, or new research and 
development). The success of NISP has inspired many parties to implement IS across Europe: current activity largely 
comprises regional efforts supported by public -sector investment. It is noteworthy that NISP has informed the SPIRE 
Roadmap and has engaged suc cessfully with all SPIRE sectors. This holistic approach has demonstrated in practice 
verified positive impacts on materials, water and energy use, innovation, knowledge transfer and best practice sharing, 
capacity utilisation, and job creation.  
Inspired by NISP and through the collaboration of ISL, other facilitated IS Programmes have been developed, such as 
the Iskenderun Bay Industrial Symbiosis project in Turkey, and has resulted in the Ministry of Development and its 
regional agencies adopting industrial symbiosis as a tool for regional development. This project was supported by Baku-
Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) Petrol Pipeline Company and included forming of the infrastructure that is required for the industrial 
symbiosis in the region, the implementation of pilot applications and development of proposals for a national program. 
ISL has further supported regional IS delivery in Finland and South Africa, where regional programmes scaled up to 
national in 1 -2 years. ISL also has European IS activity in Belgium, Netherlands, Italy, Poland, Hungary, Romania, 
Denmark, and a new national programme launching imminently in France – all modelled on NISP®.  
Finance continues to present a potential barrier to full scale implementation of facilitated IS across Europe and beyond. 
Facilitation is expensive to implement.  
The approach that underpins SHAREBOX centres on a logical work flow (Figure 2) that covers from the identification of 
new symbiotic synergies right through to optimised connections among companies and organis ations in established 
symbiotic relationships. This logical series of steps is facilitated by the state-of-the-art SHAREBOX ICT platform and its 
tools.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2- Typical SHAREBOX case-based implementation work flow  
 
 
22 Ehrenfeld, J. and N. Gertler. 1997. Industrial ecology in practice: The evolution of interdependence at Kalundborg. Journal of Industrial Ecology 1(1): 67–79.  
23 Mirata, M. 2004. Experiences from early stages of a national industrial symbiosis programme in the UK: Determinants and coordination challenges. Journal of Cleaner 
Production 12(8–10): 967–983 
 
Page 11 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
As can be seen from Figure 2, SHAREBOX will enable next generation IS delivery, through a ground -breaking new, 
single integrated information m odule (SYNERGie® 2.0) to facilitate the identification and uptake of commercial IS 
opportunities for mainstream businesses by lowering the requirement for IS expertise to progressing IS.  
Through its mathematical tools, SHAREBOX will also enable robust and  intelligent energy and resource management. 
Our project frames IS networks as complex adaptive systems and proposes the implementation an agent -based 
simulation model (ABM) consisting of N agents (companies), each of them available to create a symbiotic r elationship 
with other agents, and characterized as an input -output process. IO modelling and GT precede the implementation of 
the ABM to ensure that the physical, technological, and economic pre -requisites are reached. To this end, through our 
platform, we will bring a global innovation for effectively running an optimised, systematic symbiosis among process 
companies in a cluster, whereby they can incorporate symbiotic exchanges with the companies and organisations from 
the cluster into the operational pl anning of their entire production processes, as well as draw on new exchanges with 
external companies as required through the SYNERGie® 2.0 module.  
The consortium’s experience combines excellence in expert -supported IS delivery drawing on an unparalleled 
engagement with companies of all sizes and sectors (ISL), IO modelling, GT, ABM (UT), energy scheduling and 
conversion (UNILEEDS), purification and waste treatment technologies and Life Cycle Assessment (ZHAW), ICT and 
software (IRIS), regulatory and stand ards expertise (DECHEMA), expertise in industry park operations (CCB with its 
Competence Center for Industrial Site Development, EIS, NEPIC), chemical cluster (CCB), ceramics cluster (AICE, 
KEROS, KERAFRIT), raw materials supplier to the process industry ( GUZMAN), cross-sectoral cases (e.g. ISL, ISSA-
automotive sector). The strong presence of industry partners from the process industries and other sectors (KEROS, 
KERAFRIT, GUZMAN and ISSA) is very important for this project as we aim to securely enable information about each 
other's processes to be fed into the platform to enable integrated energy and material flows between companies that will 
share resources. These end -user industry partners will work closely with the development teams in defining their 
requirements and expectations for the platform, as well as providing the demonstration sites, whereby the alpha version 
of the SHAREBOX platform can be trailed using realistic industrial streams and process condition to enable practical 
feedback to be fed bac k to the development teams and incorporated into the various iterations of the platform. These 
industry partners are also early adopters of the platform and their use cases will serve as powerful showcases of the 
value of the SHAREBOX platform for facilita ting industrial symbiosis for improved efficiency in the process industries, 
and cross-sectors. In short, this consortium is uniquely qualified to develop, pilot and subsequently exploit the innovative 
and sustainable SHAREBOX Platform.  
Positioning of the project  
In keeping with the expected scope of projects within SPIRE -06, we will ensure rapid transfer of the SHAREBOX tools 
for flexible energy use and material flow integration from lab-scale and conceptual design. In relation to the Technology 
Readiness Levels (TRLs) of the different flexible energy use and material flow integration tools  that will feed into 
the overall SHAREBOX platform, these are as follows:  
Although the most of the tools to be used for implementing the SHAREBOX Platform have differe nt TRLs –typically 
ranging from 4 to 9- the combined use for the purpose of the SHAREBOX Platform has been only assayed at laboratory 
scale. The equilibrated combination of mathematical foundations and expertise on implementation and management of 
industrial symbiotic networks within a reliable software platform will assure delivering, by the end of the Project, to a 
TRL6-rated SHAREBOX Platform which can be further upgraded to a commercial -grade product according to the 
expected recommendations derived from the validation in real conditions.  
By the end of the project, the integrated unique SHAREBOX ICT platform, through which enterprises will securely 
exchange the data via APIs, will be pilot tested at demonstration sites, using industrial partners’ real p roduction units. 
The SHAREBOX Platform will be developed to a beta version that will be hardened post-project, whereby the immediate 
post-project phase will centre on implementing additional case studies to further develop the platform itself and to serve 
as powerful endorsers for gaining market confidence.  
National or international research and innovation activities  
Industrial symbiosis eco-systems exist in Europe and beyond. SHAREBOX is not decoupled from this eco -system and 
the SHAREBOX consortium is uniquely positioned to leverage beneficial exchange between our project and ongoing 
 
Page 12 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
efforts of the numerous IS-related networks, initiatives and projects. It is noteworthy that partner International Synergies 
Limited (ISL) was the initiator leading to the establishment of the European Industrial Symbiosis Association (EUR-ISA) 
to support the implementation of industrial symbiosis across Europe, and provides a single point of contact with the 
multiple industrial symbiosis projects in different Member States. EUR-ISA (letter of support provided in Annex  
I) aims to promote cross-border opportunities for the 20,000+ businesses currently participating in the networks, and for 
the thousands of companies expected to engage with industrial symbiosis in the near future. Undoubtedly, EUR-ISA and 
SHAREBOX will benefit from a close cooperation, especially in the context of engaging with members and mobilising 
them to be involved at various stages of the research and development work, from the communication of their 
requirements and expectations in relation to energy and resource management systems, as well as being involved as 
beta testers of the platform, to benefitting from training sessions and workshops, etc. Moreover, ISL’s National Industrial 
Symbiosis Programme (NISP) is recognised for eco-innovation by the OECD, European Technology Action Programme, 
Worldwatch Institute, and Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF), amongst others, and SHAREBOX will build on NISP’s 
credentials in fostering eco-innovation.  
Significant national or international research and innovation activities and initiatives related to SHAREBOX are 
summarised in Table 2.  
Table 2- National and international research and innovation activities that will be linked with the project  
Project  Description      Partners Opportunity for carryover to SHAREBOX 
        involved     
National Industrial Most successful example of industrial ISL NISP identifies mutually profitable 
Symbiosis Programme symbiosis  that  has  achieved  wide-  transactions  between  companies  so  that 
(NISP)  scale engagement with industry and  underused   or undervalued resources 
  significant,  independently  audited  (including   energy,   waste,   water   and 
  results.       logistics)  are  brought  into productive  use. 
         NISP members comprise of micros, small 
         and   medium   businesses   (SMEs)   and 
         multinational/corporates from every industry 
         sector. Through ISL, SHAREBOX will have 
         access to the NISP team knowledge and 
         insight,  for  creating  a  Platform  that  will 
         reduce  the  requirement  for  highly  skilled 
         support.    
POLFREE (FP7-EN Constructing a theoretical framework ISL SHAREBOX will build on this research to 
2012.6.3-2):  for resource efficiency, with detailed  significantly increase the uptake of industrial 
  comparison of the trends and policies  symbiosis.  The  IS  WP  of  the  POLFREE 
  at EU and Member State level, cross-  project is part of business challenges and 
  country analysis, and an analysis of  business models, detailing the barriers and 
  business barriers to resource  enablers to more resource efficient business 
  efficiency; through an exploration of  models.    
  new concepts and paradigms to bring      
  about a radical increase in resource      
  efficiency,  new policy  mixes,      
  business models and  global      
  governance  mechanisms are      
  proposed.           
Industrial  Symbiosis  as Demonstration of industrial symbiosis ISL SHAREBOX  will  seek  to  increase  market 
an Innovative Method in as  an  innovative  tool  for  tackling  penetration  and  impacts  by  providing  a 
Tackling Climate climate change and fostering prudent  commercial ICT Platform applied in multiple 
Change   –   ISIM-TCC management of  natural resources  locations.   
(LIFE08/ENV/H/000291) and  the  potential  for  sustainable      
(LIFE+)  development of the   Hungarian      
  economy.  Through  IS,  the  project      
  achieved significant reduction of the      
     Page 13 of 84      
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
    GHG associated with businesses.        
Novel materials  for the The project evaluates the use of data ISL Benefiting from this knowledge, 
Built Environment  from  the  UK  Environment  Agency,  SHAREBOX will explore the integration of 
    IPPC  directive, and  Waste  various   databases (including material 
    Interrogator to identify waste streams  substitution data, public waste transfer data, 
    with the potential to be low-cost, and  and research) into an ICT tool to support IS 
    low-carbon, alternative raw materials  implementation for those users without IS 
    (ARM) for major infrastructure  experience     
    (construction) projects. This project       
    tests    the    feasibility    of    using       
    environmental  data  to  develop  a       
    management tool that signposts       
    project ARMs that deliver economic       
    and environmental savings  via       
    integration of real-time waste transfer       
    data  into current  synergy       
    management software.            
Global Green Growth 3GF  convenes  governments, ISL ISL  leads  the  3GF  Platform  for  industrial 
Forum (3GF)   businesses, investors   and  symbiosis  and  can  convene  stakeholders 
    international organisations to  act  from around the world to share case studies 
    together for inclusive green growth  and impacts deriving from the SHAREBOX 
               project.     
CEOPS project (NPM3- The CEOPS project develops a CCB While  CEOPS  is  developing  a  chemical 
SL-2012-309984,  FP  7 sustainable approach for  the  approachoflow-carbonproduction, 
http://www.ceops-  production of methanol from CO2 at  SHAREBOX  may  provide  a  management 
project.eu/)   large CO2 emitting sites in order to  and   monitoring   tool   for   the   practical 
    initiative new    and sustainable  application of these solutions.   
    chemical production schemes.         
Site Development In cooperation with German national CCB The results of the SHAREBOX project may 
Program of CCB  authorities (GIZ, BMBF, BMU), CCB  boost the development and set-up of eco- 
    initiates partnerships for the creation  efficient   industrial   parks   also   in   third 
    ofEU-internationaleco-efficient  countries  and  will  definitely  be  integrated 
    industry   parks   in   particular   in  into the Site Development Program.  
    emerging third countries.           
Valorization of wastes Different projects  have  been ITC Establish the possibilities of valorisation of 
    developed  in  order  to  use  different  the wastes considered in the project  
    type of waste in ceramic production       
    and  also  to  use  ceramic  wastes  in       
    other industries. Zero waste in       
    ceramic tile manufacture (Life       
    CERAM. LIFE12 ENV/ES/230).       
    Valorisation  of  ceramic  wastes  in       
    cement manufacture (CTM2004-       
    06619-C02-02)             
Sustainability in the Projects: Reduction of carbon dioxide ITC Methodology for the footprint calculation in 
ceramic production  emissions in the  ceramic  ceramic processing.    
    manufacturing process (REDUCER.       
    SI2.639876).  Environmental       
    sustainability in the ceramic industry       
    (IMIDIC/2009/3). Reduction  of       
    company energy  costs  with       
    cogeneration by means of hydrogen       
    generation (FIT-120000-2006-1)         
The  Finnish Industrial A  nationally  coordinated, regionally ISL SHAREBOX will  seek to  increase market 
 
Page 14 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
Symbiosis System delivered  IS  programme in Finland,  penetration  and  impacts  by  providing  a 
 currently  using  SYNERGie  for  data  commercial ICT Platform applied in multiple 
 management      locations. 
SYMBIOSE A   facilitated IS programme in ISL SHAREBOX  will  seek  to  increase  market 
 Belgium currently  using  SYNERGie  penetration  and  impacts  by  providing  a 
 for data management    commercial ICT Platform applied in multiple 
        locations. 
SILVER A   facilitated   IS   programme   in ISL SHAREBOX  will  seek  to  increase  market 
 Limburg, Netherlands using  penetration  and  impacts  by  providing  a 
 SYNERGie for data management   commercial ICT Platform applied in multiple 
        locations. 
WISP, GISP and KISP Three  regional IS programmes in ISL SHAREBOX  will  seek  to  increase  market 
 South Africa  currently using  penetration  and  impacts  by  providing  a 
 SYNERGie for data management   commercial ICT Platform applied in multiple 
        locations. 
 
It is noteworthy that partner ISL is also working with BAYER, in the industrial symbiosis theme of the Climate KIC 
(Knowledge Innovation Community) 24, in addressing the challenges of decoupling the economy from environmental 
degradation and climate change through innovation and extracting the learning from each country that implements IS to 
inform the ongoing policy process. Through ISL we will benefit from link in to this initiative. Engagement with  these 
projects, and others, such as LOCIMAP - Low Carbon Industrial Manufacturing Parks (www.locimap.eu), a major 
European industrial symbiosis project, will be managed through our networking task in WP7 (Task 7.2).  
Fundamentally for this project, continuous links will be ensured with the SPIRE PPP, in that it aims at integrating, 
demonstrating and validating systems and technologies capable (across all SPIRE sectors) and the SHAREBOX 
consortium will leverage SPIRE  to reach the European Process Industry. Links will also be built with other European 
initiatives such as the Resource and Energy Efficiency Partnership “REP”, which is a group comprising a broad range 
of major European Industry Associations (such as the E uropean Engineering Industry Association, the Industrial 
Minerals Association, Glass for Europe, the European Coil Coating Association, the European Copper Institute, the 
European Aluminium Association, Eurométaux, the Confederation of European Paper Industries, the European Ceramic 
Association, the European Cement Association and the Nickel Institute, PlasticsEurope among others) and European 
Technology Platforms (such as the European Steel Technology Platform, the European Platform for Sustainable 
Chemistry, European Regions Research and Innovation Network, among others).  
Moreover, in the context of the European Structural and Investment Funds through the Smart Specialisation Strategies 
(RIS3), the SHAREBOX consortium will engage with policymakers to comm unicate the benefits of industrial symbiosis 
and to demonstrate the positive benefits and impacts achieved during the project, as well as its replicability across 
Europe, in order to mobilise investment of resources which would stimulate knowledge -driven growth. ISL has already 
successfully engaged with DGs Environment, Enterprise, Regions, and Research and Innovation as well as cross -DG 
European Resource Efficiency Platform to cite NISP® in policy; furthermore, following on ISL’s engagement in Turkey, 
the Turkish regional development agencies are incorporating IS into their strategies.  
We will target these projects (as well as other projects from Horizon 2020’s PPPs - SPIRE, FOF, etc.), networks and 
initiatives reaching key players and stakeholders in the E uropean process industries and value chain through a 
professional communication campaign (discussed in Section 2.2 and executed through Task 7.4). We will mobilise their 
active involvement at critical points along the project work plan, especially when def ining the platform architecture and 
specifications, as well as during trials and demonstration work, as well as for their participation in knowledge transfer 
and training activities.  
The overall approach and methodology  
In relation to our overall approach to the project, Figure 3 below has been the centerpiece for mapping out our work  
 
 
24 http://www.climate-kic.org/themes/industrial-symbiosis/ 
 
 
Page 15 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
plan (presented in Section 3.1, in line with our project objectives (presented in Section 1.1). The project has essentially 
4 broad inter-related activities and each is discussed below:  
a) Co-creation: Industry Requirements: As the participating process indust ry demo sites (focusing on the SPIRE  
sectors and a cross-sectoral engagement with industry partners directly representing over 800 businesses with networks 
accessing over 10,000 through ISL’s NISP in Europe) are a pivotal component of this project, an “Ind ustrial Symbiosis 
Implementation Team” will be established consisting of the academics, and IS experts from among the consortium, along 
with the experts from the participating process industry demo sites. A co-creation approach will be implemented between 
the IS Implementation Team, the development teams and the industries from the demonstration sites in order to define 
user requirements and to establish the system specifications for the SHAREBOX Platform. To this end, at the beginning 
of the project (throu gh WP1), the Quality Function Deployment (QFD) method will be implemented in order to enable 
“the voice of the customer to be translated into the voice of the engineer” 25. By implementing QFD, in combination with 
the KANO Survey26, we will prioritise the spoken and unspoken customer wants and needs, translate these needs into 
technical characteristics and specifications, and build and deliver a quality product by focusing everybody toward 
customer/end-user satisfaction. Ultimately the goal of QFD is to tran slate often subjective quality criteria into objective 
ones that can be quantified and measured and which can then be used to design and manufacture the product. It is a 
method for determining how and where priorities are to be assigned in product developm ent. The intent is to employ 
objective procedures in increasing detail throughout the development of the product 27. QFD is a very powerful tool for 
managing client expectations in an efficient and effective way right from the conceptual stages of the development. The 
QFD method will also form the basis for quality management throughout the project. Following this, a systems 
development management approach will be implemented based on the KANBAN agile development methodology, 
which has been designed for managing knowledge work with an emphasis on just-in-time delivery while not overloading 
the team members. In this approach, the process, from definition of a task to its delivery to the customer, is displayed 
on a KANBAN board for participants to see and team members pull work from a queue. This is highly compatible with 
the SCRUM agile methodology that will be used for the Platform smart systems developments (as discussed below in 
Point c). IRIS will establish a KANBAN Board (using TRELLO development boards) f or the implementation of the 
development tasks (the Building Blocks for the Platform -see below) and IRIS can train the consortium on this highly 
effective method.  
b) Methodologies for Industrial Symbiosis and Mathematical tools for flexible energy use and material flow 
integration  
Our project frames IS networks as complex adaptive systems and proposes the implementation an agent -based 
simulation model to reach optimum design of symbiotic networks (SNs). To this end, first, the optimal connections 
definition is conducted and the SN is modelled as an input -output system28 having stochastic final demands where the 
impact of process efficiencies and final demand fit between involved companies are analysed. Two main reasons drive 
this analysis: First, waste is not  produced upon demand, but appears as a secondary output whose quantity depends 
on the final demand for the principal product. When the waste substitutes the primary input of another production 
process, then, the fit between the final demands of both produ ction processes is critical for both the collective and 
individual economic benefit. Second, there is also a relationship between the technological process efficiencies of both 
processes, which is also decisive for the waste emission and primary input use quantities. To this end, a unique resource 
sharing platform will be created as a secure tool for seamlessly managing the inputs and outputs of a network of 
companies and organisations (agents). The platform will contain the periodical final demands for the  principal products 
of supply-side and demand-side processes and the associated waste emission coefficients and traditional primary input 
coefficients. So, we can both understand the impact of the efficiency and final demand fits and the consequences on the 
traditional suppliers. Accordingly we can propose dematerialization, waste reduction, or technology change via R&D 
activities for achieving the physical (related to final demands) and technological (related to  
 
 
 
25 http://www.ciri.org.nz/downloads/Quality%20Function%20Deployment.pdf  
26 Kano, N, Seraku, N, Takahashi, F and Tsuji, S (1984) Attractive quality and must-be quality, The Journal of the Japanese Society for Quality Control 14 No 2 pp 39e48 
27 Reilly, Norman B, The Team based product development guidebook, ASQ Quality Press, Milwaukee Wisconsin, 1999  
28 Albino, V., Yazan, D.M. (2013). Economic and environmental benefits of industrial symbiosis: an enterprise input-output analysis, 21st International Input-Output 
Conference, Kitakyushu, Japan, July 7-12 
 
Page 16 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
process efficiency) optimal conditions. It is here that we will be able to assess the potential benefit of new infrastructure 
for the exchange of waste between actors particularly in the form of energy.  
The new software and modelling tools developed under the SHAREBOX programme will identify opportunities for 
synergy between industrial actors in the context of an industrial park. Realisi ng those synergies may exploit existing 
infrastructure but a greater range of opportunities would be open to the users if investment in new infrastructure could 
be contemplated. As such the SHAREBOX tools will be expanded to identify enabling technologies and to build an 
economic case for investment in them by either one of the industries already resident or perhaps by an additional actor 
(in the form of an energy service company (ESCO), for example), who might also act as the IS facilitator.  
The sharing of energy resources provides a particular set of challenges. Process integration, using pinch point analysis 
for example, is well established but, as discussed, IS is often impeded by a lack of understanding of processes and 
practises across businesses. Nevertheless, the same ethos that drives process integration within a business can drive 
integration between businesses. What then remains is to establish the physical means of sharing resources and in the 
context of energy this often means waste heat. There are established ways of distributing waste heat using heat 
exchangers and pipe networks. Retro -fitting the necessary infrastructure to an existing park can be expensive and for 
example is often cited as an impediment to district heating systems in cities. If the necessary investment is to be 
forthcoming a clear business case must be made. The SHAREBOX tools will enable this and will also identify the 
potential owner/operator of the resources whether they be existing or additional actors.  
In the context of shared energy resources, the evolving energy landscape has thrown up new opportunities that must 
be considered and integrated into the SHAREBOX tool. New technologies have emerged and will continue to emerge 
for the storing and transport of energy. This is  crucial because it would allow sharing across a wider area and time -
shifting so that waste is collected and consumed at the convenience of the generator/consumer without impinging on 
the production schedules of either. New and emerging technologies also e xist for the conversion of waste energy 
resources – low-grade waste heat to electricity for example. These would allow the sharing of energy via its most 
convenient vector – electricity – and should be factored in. Finally, the move towards renewable energy sources and the 
evolution of smart grids presents the motivation and the means for new business opportunities in the form of end use 
energy demand in support of the system operators.  
Energy conversion, storage and transmission capability, managed by exi sting or an additional actor in the form of an 
ESCO will increase the range of potential exchanges in terms of form, distance and time and will ameliorate the 
scheduling problems associated with variations in final demand.  
Second, in developing opportunities for waste-based business, behaviour of companies shape the negotiation phase as 
no certain benefit -sharing schemes are available. Even though potentially saveable costs (e.g. discharge cost, 
purchasing cost) are promising, to operate symbiotically, additional costs (e.g. recycling cost, transportation cost) must 
also be sustained. Then, three questions arise: (1) ‘Who sustains which cost?; (2) Who performs which task?; and, (3) 
Who gets what percentage of the total benefit?’. This is a game played between (at least) two actors who have to share 
a benefit that is created by both. Such games are crucial for operating IS and become more complex when the number 
of involved actors increases.  
Converging interests of companies render waste -pricing a difficult task to accomplish as waste is not produced upon 
demand. Several following cases may appear29:  
- Companies take irrational decisions such as not cooperating even though profitability and environmental 
benefits are promising.  
- One of the firms take advantage of power asymmetry and the benefit is unfairly shared.  
- Imposed waste recovery regulations drive waste providers’ decisions (e.g. paying for supplying waste).  
Then, we intend to take a step further to identify the impacts of factors influencing company behaviour during 
negotiations and propose benefit-sharing schemes adopting GT approach. The structure of game(s) played between  
 
 
29 Albino, V., Dangelico, R., Yazan, D.M., 2010 Cooperation in reverse supply chains: environmental and economic impacts of actor decisions, 18th International Input-
Output Conference, Sydney, Australia, June 20-25. 
 
Page 17 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
involved firms shapes the impacts of the aforementioned factors which influence the bargaining power of both supply 
and demand sides leading to different levels of willingness -to-cooperate30. Therefore, an in -depth analysis of the 
following game structures will be performed in order to measure this willingness: (i) sequential vs. simultaneous games, 
(ii) cooperative vs. non-cooperative games; and (iii) one-to-one vs. consortia games. Finally, the SN is represented as 
a system of agents interacting among themselves and with the environment (e.g. governments, third -party logistics 
players) using ABM which produces the best set of solutions, e.g. the minimum CO2 scenario, maximum profit scenario, 
or maximum employment scenario. By this approach, we also have the advantage of tackling with the multi-use character 
of wastes, which can be processed also by multi-pathways. Once the models are tested in the real cases, the feedback 
will assist us to address any shortcomings and to re-feed the initial data used for input-output matching. Hence, we have 
critical input from real-life cases to design the future SNs.  
c) SHAREBOX Platform Software and Arc hitecture development: The initial Platform Architecture is presented in  
Figure 1 and this will be validated and adapted based on the House of Quality from the Living Labs I. The methodology 
that will be used to develop the platform will be an agile method ology called SCRUM. SCRUM is a highly proven agile 
development methodology which was initially created for software developments, but which works well for any complex 
innovative scope of work. Very briefly, the Scrum framework operates as follows31: A product owner (i.e. the end-users 
of the Platform, who will be represented by the Project Manager in IRIS, Dr. Mirta Pinilla) creates a prioritized wish list 
called a product backlog (this will be extracted from the House of Quality above). During sprint planning, the Scrum team 
(the IRIS software developers, which are identified in the IRIS participant profile in Section 4.1) pulls a small chunk from 
the top of that wish list, a sprint backlog, and decides how to implement those pieces. The team has a certain amount 
of time — a sprint (usually two to four weeks) — to complete its work, but it meets each day to assess its progress (daily 
Scrum). Along the way, the Scrum Master (Mr. Sergi Casbas from IRIS) keeps the team focused on its goal. At the end 
of the sprint, the work should be potentially shippable: ready to hand to a customer, put on a store shelf, or show to a 
stakeholder. The sprint ends with a sprint review and retrospective. As the next sprint begins, the team chooses another 
chunk of the product bac klog and begins working again. IRIS, who will be developing the Platform infrastructure has 
operated Scrum Teams for the past 3 years and has their own SCRUM team and Sprint Room infrastructure.  
d) IS Demonstration Sites: This activity will center on testing  of the Platform at Demonstration sites using realistic  
industrial streams and process conditions provided through our industry partners. Our demonstration work is centered 
on two IS demonstrations sites. The pilot tests will help to generate standards of how SHAREBOX can be implemented 
at an integrated production site. Depending on the individual framework conditions, it may be implemented by a site 
operator in order to optimize its services towards the tenants or by an individual company, being gradually extended to 
neighboring production units. The Living Labs will help to identify optimized ways of implementation and distribution of 
management tasks among the local production and facility officers. The aim is for an alpha version of the SHAREBOX 
platform to be available by M12, so that early tests can be initiated with these sites with the early alpha version of the 
platform to verify its performance, and to ensure the versatility of the platform to the specific conditions in real production 
units. Feedback from the sites will be fed back to the development team to guide the various iterations of the Platform. 
Verification of the impacts of SHAREBOX on effectively establishing new synergies and optimizing existing one, and an 
analysis of impacts on resource efficiency, energy efficiency and the emission performance, and cost-effectiveness will 
be performed.  
e) Development of the Business Model: A very important activity in this Innovation Action will be the development of 
a business model for monetising the SHAREBOX Platform for ensuring from its outset that the concept is commercially 
viable and profitable. This is vital for ensuring the sustainability of the outputs of this SHAREBOX project and for ensuring 
that the participating technology SMEs in the project can further develop the SHAREBOX platform from a beta version 
to a viable commercial platform so that it can be widely deployed post project. The participating Process Industries and 
Clusters are committed to being early adopters and co -creators of a Pl atform that can have lasting impacts on their 
businesses, and indeed they will develop exploitation plans for the post-project roll out of the  
 
 
30 Yazan, D.M., Clancy, J., Lovett, J.C., 2012b. Supply chains, techno-economic assessment and market development for second generation biodiesel. In: Luque R., 
Melero J.A. Advances in biodiesel production. Second generation processes and technologies, Cambridge, Woodhead Publishing.  
31 Source: The Scrum Alliance. Available at: https://www.scrumalliance.org/why-scrum 
 
Page 18 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
IS activities that they establish during the project through their involvement as Demo Sites. Indeed “Business” is the 
order of the day for all involved in the SHAREBOX project and by making it about doing business all partners, including 
the academic partners, have approached the project from a highly pragmatic and real world approach, whereby each 
has been very eager to lock down IPR issues, from the expected res ults, ownership of the results, access rights, 
Background, exploitation intentions, etc. The Business Model activity of the project will build on the outline approach that 
has been agreed by all partners and that is presented later in this document.  
How sex and/or gender analysis is taken into account in the project’s content  
In relation to gender analysis , the SHAREBOX consortium understands that inventions and developments that 
incorporate the smartest aspects of gender can open new markets and enable i nnovation in products, processes, 
services, or infrastructures. Indeed, products that meet the needs of complex and diverse user groups enhance global 
competitiveness and sustainability32. Inspired by how taking gender into account has yielded new research  results and 
sparked creativity, opening new avenues for future research for those who give it serious attention 33, during the work 
plan, gender analysis will be addressed in particular in relation to the KANO survey, which will ensure a good  
participation of female professionals in order to allow for a gender analyses to be incorporated into the early 
user requirement definition and in this way we will ensure that any gender -specific requirements and 
expectations are automatically picked up. As the Platform is being developed, aspects such as the Graphical User  
Interface will consider gender aspects, whereby graphic designs of the interface will be consulted with both men and 
women during the design phase, and posterior alpha and beta versions will be trialled by both men and women.  
Moreover in relation to business behaviour gender analysis will also be important, especially in view of growing trends 
and commitments to see more women occupy high level and decision -making positions in industry. For example, in 
Europe, Norway a decade ago mandated a 40% quota for female director’s at large companies, and according to reports 
has now achieved or even exceeded this target. Spain is aiming for a similar target by 201534. In June 2011, Belgium’s 
parliament voted to force state-owned businesses and stock market-listed firms to award 30% of managing board seats 
to women. Large companies have five years to comply, SMEs eight years. In 2012, the parliament of the Netherlands 
was poised to debate similar rules. By 2017,  at least 40% of managing and supervisory board members at companies 
listed on France’s CAC-40 stock exchange and all other firms with sales of more than €50m and at least 500 employees 
must be female. Germany and the UK established voluntary targets for female representation in 201134Error! Bookmark 
not defined.. All of this points towards a strong movement for change.  
Indeed, with more young women than ever now leaving universities with chemistry degrees34 the consortium, will benefit 
greatly from effectively addressing gender analysis issues in that there is a distinct European trend in process industries, 
and in particular the chemical industry, in boosting role of women decision makers . Some examples from the 
chemical industry include, among others: Rotterdam -based petrochemicals giant Lyo ndell Basell, appointed Karyn 
Ovelmen as chief financial officer in 2011; in October 2010, Sandra Peterson was named CEO of Bayer Crop Science 
and BASF has pledged to increase the proportion of women in what it terms ‘solid-line’ German management to 15% by 
the end of 2020, from just below 10% in 2010; up to 2015, the Bayer group aims to ‘gradually’ increase the share of 
women in senior management from about 21% at present ‘toward a target of 30%’ and its goal for the supervisory board 
is 20%; German chemic als firm Merck made two key appointments in December 2011 with Friederike Rosch, being 
named head of corporate accounting and Isabel De Paoli, head of corporate strategy.  
In relation to the gender dimension of the SHAREBOX consortium , the team of research ers, technologists, 
industrialists and policy influencers has a significant cohort of both sexes (ca. 40% female; 60% male). Moreover, a 
recruitment policy is in place designed to ensure a reasonable level of balance between the sexes. This is important in  
ensuring the education and training of the next generation of scientists, technologists and others needed in the EU and 
elsewhere. It is noteworthy that a number of the key management and decision -making positions within the project 
organisational structure have been assigned to highly qualified women, not least the role of the Project Coordinator (Dr. 
Mirta Pinilla), the IPR manager, Ms. (Rachel Lombardi), the Dissemination Manager (Dr. Renata Körfer).  
 
 
 
32 http://ec.europa.eu/research/science-society/gendered-innovations/index_en.cfm 
33 Londa Schiebinger (2008). Gendered Innovations in Science and Engineering. ISBN: 978080475814 
34 http://www.soci.org/Chemistry-and-Industry/CnI-Data/2012/2/Closing-the-gender-gap 
 
Page 19 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
Interestingly, additional females are among the key drivers of this INTENSO proposal (Oonagh Mc Nerney, Dr. 
Cristina Serrano, Dr. Agnes Zoller, Dr. Encarna Bou Solsona, etc.).  
1.4. Ambition 
 
Advance beyond the state-of-the-art  
The ambition of SHAREBOX is to bring to market a secure ICT platform that integrates analysis and optimisation 
tools for flexible energy use and material flow integration to enable a holistic approach for resource 
management in process industries , suitable both for small and large scale in a flexible approach, and that lowers  
barriers, and dramatically increases the mainstream adoption of IS. The platform will greatly advance the state -of-the-
art in energy and resource management systems, and will overcome key limitations in industrial symbiosis delivery.  
Limitations in industrial symbiosis delivery:  Inefficient resource use by Europe’s industries has been identified by  
the European Commission35 as a clear market failure creating additional and unnecessary costs that constrain growth, 
contribute to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and further exploit scarce natural resources.  
The European Resource Efficiency Platform recently published its final recommendations for developing a resource -
efficient economy, citing SHAREBOX partner ISL’s NISP® and urging all EU member states to ‘foster industrial 
symbiosis’ as one of the key strategies for doubling resource productivity by 2030 36. Indeed it states: " A number of  
schemes show the benefits of increased information flows, and the payback from providing advice or bringing firms 
together in National Industrial Sym biosis Platforms (NISP): Based on the performance of the UK National Industrial 
Symbiosis Programme, improving the re-use of raw materials through greater 'industrial symbiosis' across the EU could 
save €1.4bn a year and generate €1.6bn in sales”.  
DG Enterprise & Industry identified that the ‘information market failure’ in relation to resource efficiency can be addressed 
through mechanisms to improve information flow between businesses 37, and recommended enhanced IS as a policy 
instrument to overcome this information market failure38. An integrated comprehensive software is required to advance 
IS by engaging mainstream businesses. Part of the challenge of IS in practice is that the majority of opportunities for a 
given company lie outside that company’s sector.39 Decision-makers in industry today were not educated in sustainable 
development, resource efficiency, industrial symbiosis, or circular economy thinking – many will have experience 
deriving primarily from a single industry. They know intimately the b enchmarks, best practice, technologies, processes 
and jargon of their own sector. Going outside their sector, and their traditional supply chain, is not standard operating 
procedure for many mainstream industries and thus a barrier to mainstream IS. At some point in the future, when these 
concepts are standard in educational curricula40 it will be much easier for industry to seek out these opportunities. It may 
be outsourced by some firms the way accounting services are, but it will be standard for all businesses. 
 
Indeed, information barriers prevent the upcycling of many resources. Sophisticated IS requires a high level of specificity 
tailored to the potential uses of the resource, requiring substantial cross-sector expertise in its design for each resource. 
For examples, sand is not just sand to a process industry: its characteristics including grade, contaminant level, and 
hardness, are all relevant to its suitability to different uses. Web -based systems have not addressed (or addressed 
poorly): contamina tion, classification, distribution and timing issues (all vital to optimise re -use), or the innovation 
required to add value to, or transform, ‘waste’.  
Facilitated IS brings together producers and users of underutilised resources (including materials, wat er, energy, 
logistics, expertise, assets) with technological innovators to foster demand-led innovation (i.e., innovation that responds 
to the needs of the participants). Public investment in facilitation ensures all businesses, regardless of size or secto r, 
have the opportunity to participate and benefit their bottom line whilst contributing to improving the  
 
35 European Resource Efficiency Platform, 2014, Manifesto and Policy Recommendations. 31 March. 
36 European Resource Efficiency Platform (2014). Manifesto & Policy Recommendations. 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/resource_efficiency/documents/erep_manifesto_and_policy_recommendations_31-03-2014.pdf  
37 Study on the Competitiveness of European Companies & Resource Efficiency, 2011, ECORYS for DG Enterprise & Industry.  
38 Sustainable Industry: Going for Growth, 2011, DG Enterprise & Industry 
39 Based on analysis by SIC (Standard Industry Classification) code of NISP data in the UK over 7 years.  
40 Murray, S. 2013. The sustainable path to profit: don’t throw out the rubbish. Financial Times, Business Education Section. 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/88e2d9f0-2f43-11e2-b88b-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3DNfZttdI accessed 15/Sept/2014 
 
Page 20 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
environment. Where public investment supports IS, services are generally free at the point of delivery to all comers, and 
engage widely, especially the difficult -to-reach SME and micro-enterprise market segments. IS activities s upported by 
public funds are well -positioned to pursue the public good (such as natural environment which has not had a market 
value) and longer-term, higher-risk investments (e.g., green growth and eco-innovation). The public investment element 
minimises two of the largest barriers for business involvement in IS – time and money. Public investment is, however, 
subject to changing priorities, and short -term, sporadic investment in IS leading to sub -optimal performance; an IS 
business model based on public investment thus is not inherently sustainable.  
To achieve mainstream transformation through IS requires engaging mainstream businesses in IS with the information 
needed to identify viable opportunities to move up the value chain. The NISP model of delivery  (like many public -
investment models) employs experts to engage with industry in the IS process: the experts provide both information and 
support to identify resources, assess opportunities, and complete IS transactions. To make the step -change to 
mainstream adoption of IS requires breaking (or dramatically reducing) the reliance on niche IS specialists – to find a 
way to enable all businesses managing resources (inputs or outputs) to actively engage in IS by making expert 
knowledge accessible to mainstream businesses.  
A step-change in delivery model is needed to achieve mainstream uptake of IS across industry sectors, commercially 
and at scale, and enable a variety of actors (large and small consultancies, innovators, entrepreneurs and social 
enterprises) to successfully implement IS in a commercially sustainable way. Indeed, SHAREBOX represents a step 
change in the accessibility of IS delivery through improved information sharing.  
State-of-the-art of ICT tools for IS facilitation: Various efforts have been undertaken to use ICT to facilitate IS since 
the then -ground-breaking development of Designing Industrial Ecosystems Toolkit (DIET) and Fate Assessment 
Screening Tool (FAST) by the US EPA in the 1990s 41. The basic approaches, largely research-driven rather than 
market-focused, can be classified as follows:  
 Waste exchanges that capture resources for others to search and identify matches;
 Databases or libraries that act as a reference for proven reuse opportunities for various materials/ wastes; and
 Process management software that actively manages the process of advancing multiple synergies opportunities 
simultaneously. 
Various efforts have been undertaken to use ICT to facilitate IS since the then -ground-breaking development of 
Designing Industrial Eco systems Toolkit (DIET) and Fate Assessment Screening Tool (FAST) by the US EPA in the 
1990s42. The basic approaches, largely research driven rather than market-focused, can be classified as follows:  
 Waste exchanges that capture resources for others to search and identify matches;
 Databases or libraries that act as a reference for proven reuse opportunities for various materials/ wastes; and
 Process management software that actively manages the process of advancing multiple synergies opportunities 
simultaneously. 
Outside IS, further ICT tools are available with potentially valuable contributions –SHAREBOX is unique in 
incorporating their information into its solution:  
 Materials databases that provide full characterisation and classifications for materials and processes, which can 
broaden understanding and identify potential for resources
 Regulatory data required by governments on ‘waste’ resources moving through the economy, with its origin and 
destination (in Europe: IPPC, EPR, EWC) 
 
 
 
 
41 Industrial Economics. 1998. Applying Decision Support Tools for Eco-Industrial Park Planning – A Case Study in Burlington, VT. Cambridge, MA: Industrial Economics 
Inc. Prepared for the US EPA.  
42 Industrial Economics. 1998. Applying Decision Support Tools for Eco-Industrial Park Planning – A Case Study in Burlington, VT. Cambridge, MA: Industrial Economics 
Inc. Prepared for the US EPA. 
 
Page 21 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
Waste exchanges have proliferated all over the world and still they remain largely unpopulated. Establis hed in 2012, 
TradingWaste.com in the UK currently lists only 23 resources. The Integrated Waste Exchange (IWEX) was established 
by the City of Cape Town in May 2000; on 11 September 2014 (i.e. after more than 14 years), it had 100 resources 
listed; in contrast, the facilitated Western Cape Industrial Symbiosis Programme (WISP) identified and captured detailed 
information on 465 resources in less than one year – making expert-supported IS more than fifty times more effective at 
capturing resources. A viable waste exchange would require this level of specificity tailored to the potential uses of the 
resource, requiring substantial cross -sector expertise in its design for each resource, as well as a focus on those 
resources where market drivers create the econo mic incentive for businesses to prioritise time spent on seeking IS 
solutions. Sand is not just sand to a process industry: it has a grade, contaminant level, and hardness that are all relevant 
to its suitability to different uses, and its origin influences the regulatory pathway to its reuse.  
Projects including the LIFE+ funded eSymbiosis and FP7 ZeroWin 43 have tried to duplicate ISL’s taxonomy without 
practical experience to inform their development, or data derived from advancing synergies in practice. The LIFE+ project 
eSymbiosis is “based on the UK Industrial Symbiosis best practice” 44 although the project team were unaware of the 
foundation work of the US EPA. After 3 years of EU funding, eSymbiosis is populated with general test data provided by 
the region rather than from real companies [SHAREBOX platform will be populated with real date from the beginning – 
see WP 1, 3]. At the eSymbiosis final event in June 2014 45, the project leader reported that the project had failed to 
engage with industry or c ollect information from them – an experience directly contrary to this consortium’s. Also after 
several years of funding, the European Pathway to Zero Waste (EPOW) project’s online waste exchange delivered no 
completed transactions.46  
This consortium has been unable to identify waste exchanges that are successful at diverting significant waste from 
landfill, upcycling, avoiding carbon or creating notable economic benefit. Furthermore, such systems have tended to be 
academic in design and have not deeply considered business drivers or real world IS practicalities such as market value 
of resources.  
Databases/Libraries of proven IS opportunities are passive systems populated with IS ideas that may be good for 
replication, however, this is often from research rather than through practical data deriving from experience in delivering 
IS. While taxonomy, data structure and the level of information can be adequate, the requirement for initial data input 
and subsequent manipulation is high. A leading example, Preste o, includes several methodological tools: a data 
collection method, a formalization method of flows and components and a processing method to filter the results 
obtained, all of which require user expertise and time. Furthermore, there is limited or no abi lity to provide automatic 
matching results to the user. The IS resource databases suggest solutions linked to resource entries, but are not based 
on feasibility and experience. Current databases do not learn from new matches created so the library remains stagnant 
as real world experience advances. These databases also stop short of delivering functionality that enables users to 
manage identified matches.  
Process management  for large scale, replicable IS implementation is critical for practitioners shepher ding tens of 
opportunities through the IS process at any given time, enabling expert intervention and coordinated effort. State of the 
art is ISL’s SYNERGie, the only platform to be developed with practitioners based on experience, and applied in 13 
countries across 5 continents. The platform currently manages resources to advance synergies, allowing users to create 
and manage matches between suitable resources, with the additional functionality to create and track actions. It enables 
the entry and searchin g of resource data as does a waste exchange, but further allows process management, action 
assigning and logging, interrogation of pre-established knowledge management, capture of results and reporting. There 
are a number of current limitations including a dding to a library of experience and the ability to link cross border 
information that would enable a pan -European IS activity. Nor does it suggest potential IS solution for resources. This 
requires data manipulation by users which relies on their knowledge and experience to make the tacit linkages between 
resources.  
 
 
43 www.zerowin.eu, www.esymbiosis.gr 
44 eSymbiosis. 2013. End of Action Report, Action 2: Service Architecture and Implementation. P.11.  
45 Communication at eSymbiosis final event, Athens, Greece, 19-21 June 2014. 
46 European Pathway to Zero Waste (EPOW), Layman’s Report. UK Environment Agency March 2013. 
 
Page 22 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
Materials Database To date, software tools for IS lack integration with other materials selection approaches, including 
materials substitution. Collaborative materials information management is the next frontier for materials data, enabling 
the combination of dispersed materials kno wledge – often relating to different fields of expertise. This direction will 
require significantly different framework and functionality for shared materials information.  
Regulatory data is a valuable source of information currently assembled and stored for regulatory purposes but not 
generally accessed for productive use. State of the art is bringing this data reporting real-time (as with the Environment 
Agency trial in the UK) and accessing it for opportunities. [ISL is currently leading a project on th is, see section 4.1 
project list, “Novel materials …”]. The Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control (IPPC) data, Declaration of European 
Waste Catalogue (EWC) data will be ananlysed for oppotunties. The European Environment Agency (EEA) will be 
consulted for further relevant and available data sources.  
Ground-breaking nature of the SHAREBOX platfrom: In order to overcome the limitations in current IS delivery and 
ICT tools for IS facilitation, a number of key innovations are being brought to the SHAREB OX development that will 
yield a world first ICT platform technology that holds the potential to be a major catalyst for increased IS among process 
industries and for enabling cross-sectoral interactions for a major impact within the process industry.  
a) ICT-enabled next generation IS Delivery  
As IS seeks to create new collaborations among economic players with the goal of exchanging information, raw materials 
and waste directly among area businesses, and to step up the potential pooling of services and i nfrastructure among 
neighbouring companies, the SHAREBOX project will benefit from and build on the expertise of the world leader in IS 
delivery, partner ISL, who has devised the National Industrial Symbiosis Programme (NISP®), and has gathered data 
from over 20,000 companies and identified over 10,000 potential synergies, which will populate the SHAREBOX Platform 
library. During the project, we will develop a ‘next -generation SYNERGie®’ integrated module of the SHAREBOX 
Platform. SYNERGie® currently offers database functionality, project management, and reporting tools for companies 
participating in industrial symbiosis programs, enables organisations in an industrial symbiosis to record and analyse 
resource data (such as waste materials, by-products, processing capacity, waste heat, water, logistics, and expertise), 
identifying links between participating companies. During the project, we will upgrade the tool to make it a smarter, 
intelligence-based module of the SHAREBOX platform towards the next generati on in IS delivery. The current impact 
reporting capability of SYNERGie (carbon, landfill, water, hazardous waste, virgin materials, cost savings, revenue 
generation) will be carried over to SHAREBOX.  
b) New approaches that perform cost-saving optimisation of energy and resources supply and demand 
We aim to develop tools to implement the optimum IS (i.e. no waste to be disposed outside of the symbiotic 
network, no primary inputs to be purchased from external suppliers and no net energy import from outside the 
network) as a pre-design model for future symbiotic networks (SNs) and use it as the theoretical optimum to 
which the existing SNs should reach. As the input-output (IO) approach dissects complicated systems of physical 
flows and effectively traces the path of flows47, it allows the modelling of the relationship between the waste emissions, 
primary input use, and final demand levels of main products. The main advantage of the IO modelling is its ability to 
measure the impacts of any factors, e.g. demand shocks, technology change, substitutability levels, at the level of 
whole network. Once the complete mathematical tools will be tested in real cases, the collected data will re-feed the IS 
design section to optimize the future symbiotic cooperation. In addition, IO modelling allows us to compute the 
environmental savings in terms of potential GHG reduction, landfill reduction, etc.  
Converging interests of companies usually render the negotiation phase difficult to resolve. Although we can consider 
the diversity of company cultures as a primary barrier to cooperation (due to the different nature of sectors traditionally 
not used to work together), there are several important factors influencing the negotiation phase. These factors can be 
ranked as the geographic proximity between manufacturers, the direction of monetary flows (sometimes waste-receiving 
company is paid by the waste producer or vice -versa), presence of any environmental regulations or incentives, 
bargaining power of the supplier or buyer, and poss ibility of cooperating with another waste-producing/waste-receiving 
company on more favourable terms. Such factors strongly influence the pay-offs and render  
 
47 Bailey, R., Allen, J.K., Bras, B., 2004. Applying ecological input-output flow analysis to material flows in industrial systems part I: Tracing flows. Journal of Industrial 
Ecology 8 (1-2), 45-68. 
 
Page 23 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
the benefit-sharing more complex. We will tackle this problem through the construction of benefit-sharing schemes 
for involved actors taking into account the role of aforementioned factors. A game theory (GT) approach would 
be a particularly efficient method to compute the pay-offs that drive the decisions-to-cooperate of companies. Theoretical 
pay-off matrices created by GT approach can serve as benefit -sharing schemes from which companies can select the 
most appropriate according to their situation.  
Although, the design is one of the key factors to success, deviations from an optimum IS are inevitable due to companies´ 
behavioural moves during negotiations over waste valorisation which represent economic trade-offs. The final physical 
flows, therefore, will vary according to games played by companies in the negotiation phase driven by their economic 
interests. Hence, we aim at adopting agent-based modelling (ABM) to reach the third aim of this proposal: embedding 
company behaviour into the operations of IS . ABM is an appropriate methodology to  address such a problem as it 
considers the heterogeneity of the actors (i.e., ag ents) and proposes a self -organizing system 48. Using ABM for SN 
design allows us to address the behavioural change by learning and interaction, and reveal the optimal design under 
different individual strategies and cooperation modes. We will study ABM based on opensource software (for example, 
ABM Repast) in order to keep affordability and long term consistency.  
c) Data mining techniques for further optimisation of IS based on historical big data collected from 
SHAREBOX  
The selection of an appropriate model  for large-scale data analysis is critical. Obtaining useful information from large 
amounts of data requires scalable analysis algorithms to produce timely results 49. The use of Data Mining techniques 
for the data analytics allows the discovering of patter ns in large sets of data through machine learning, statistics or 
artificial intelligence (AI). This need is particularly relevant for modelling stochastic behaviours that can be difficult to  
explain in terms of deterministic relationships. There are many data mining techniques, according to different issues like 
describing the data ( descriptive methods ), discovering associations among data ( associative methods ), predicting 
quantitative data (predictive methods), and predicting qualitative data (discriminant methods).  
One of the key innovation features of the SHAREBOX project will be the new knowledge and new patterns discovery 
from large data generated in the IS parks. These new patterns and knowledge will complement other  mathematical 
tools (GT, ABM) used in the project aiming at getting further optimisation of IS. As the range of data mining tools is very 
large, it is not easy to known in advance which methods will be the most suitable ones. Anyway, from a priori analysis, 
it seems that Multivariate Analysis techniques, in order to search association relationships, and Artificial Neural Networks 
(ANNs50), to predict quantitative data, are suitable tools to be used. Multivariate Statistical Process Control (MSPC) 51 
techniques are especially suitable for smart controlling in order to reduce product variability and increase quality. MSPC 
analysis comprises different techniques. All of them have proven to be robust enough for describing and predicting on 
the basis of very complex and noisy data sets like spectro scopic information although they are mainly limited to linear 
functional relationships because the most of them are based on applying linear algebra for solving statistical problems. 
ANNs are also powerful tools, especially for modelling non-linear behaviour of data. They have a great flexibility as well 
as the capacity of resembling human biological neural networks.  
Notwithstanding, another data mining techniques could be considered, analysed and tested according to the available 
data.  
As long as daily situations in an IS are solved, a great amount of experience is being produced. In most IS parks, this 
experiential knowledge is not used. In the SHAREBOX system, an intelligent experience-based reasoning scheme 
will be used: case-based reasoning. In this reasoning approach, the new situations/problems are solved from previous 
similar situations/problems solved in the past. These paradigm makes use of the historical data and experience gathered 
within the IS parks. This approach can learn the new solved situations, making the system more competent along time.  
 
 
 
 
48 Macal, C.M., North, M.J. 2010. Tutorial on agent-based modelling and simulation. Journal of Simulation, 151-162.  
49 D. Talia, Clouds for scalable big data analytics, Computer 46 (2013) 98 – 101 
50 “Artificial Intelligence in Process Engineering”, Ed. by Michael Mavrovouniotis. Academic Press, 1990.  
51 “Multivariate Statistical Process Control, Process Monitoring Methods and Applications. Series: Advances in Industrial Control”, Ge, Zhiqiang, Song, Zhihuan, Springer, 
2013 
 
Page 24 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
d) A flexible and secure platform that allows for secure sharing for information about resources and 
energy exchanges among industries in a SN and for generating operative actions  
The IS methodologies, mathe matical and data mining tools will be integrated into an ICT platform that will offer high 
security through its APIs for secure data exchange. A major feature will be the data encryption algorithms that will be 
used to protect the data. If the data is exch anged and even processed in encrypted format, the risk of disclosures 
decreases. Good encryption procedures cannot be outflanked even by the software programmers. Encryption can be 
used to protect data "at rest", such as data stored in files, in databases and in storage devices, and it is also commonly 
used for data being transferred via networks (e.g. the Internet, e-commerce), mobile telephones, wireless microphones, 
wireless intercom systems, Bluetooth devices and bank automatic teller machines. 
SHAREBOX offers an ICT -based working environment to address the Big Data issues associa ted to the industrial 
symbiosis encouragement, implementation, management and improvement tasks. 
Indeed SHAREBOX will be strengthened by -design with powerful but easy -to-use mathematical tools such as Agent 
Based Modelling and Game -Theory-based procedures -for assisting the achievement of optimal win -win deals- and, 
Intelligent Decision Support algorithms -for helping decision makers to handle conflictive, unexpected, complex or urgent 
issues- and Data Mining tools for unveiling hidden but relevant trends, behaviours and relationships.  
Furthermore, SHAREBOX will also address the problem of acquiring and storing the data from the intrinsic plurality of 
data sources associated to the industrial symbiosis performance: The implementation of the SHAREBOX Platform in 
each industrial symbiosi s network will comprehend the installation of an ad hoc communication network -or the 
adaptation of the existing ones- aimed at retrieving real-world data -like the ones provided by SCADA-based industrial 
control systems or remote real-time database servers. 
 
SHAREBOX includes by-design a maintenance philosophy: By applying the Data Mining tools to the historically stored 
information, the System will be capable to suggest new trends or relationships suitable for finding new optimal deals and 
upgrade the decision support algorithms. 
 
The Platform will not replace human decisions. The networked companies -normally by means of contractual agreements 
assisted by SHAREBOX- will arrange in advance which decisions can be automatically generated by the Platform and 
which cannot. In particular, legal constraints will limit the scope of the automated decisions. In any case, the decisions 
will be always considered as information that can be further -automatically or not- converted in operational actions to be 
undertaken by the involved companies. Moreover, the historical track of operational data will help to -even passively- 
detect deviations from the agreed behaviour as well as artefacts in the execution. 
In brief, SHAREBOX, which will be deployed via a supercomputing c loud, will be the first really smart tool for fostering 
the industrial symbiosis paradigm in line with the Circular Economy and will bring about a step change in enabling 
resource sharing transactions for a major impact within the process industry.  
Innovation potential  
Environmental problems related to the consumption of natural resources and to the increase of pollution and waste have 
challenged traditional business models prompting a growing attention toward more sustainable ones. Growth and 
environmental impact must be decoupled, that is, economic growth must not automatically imply increased energy and 
resource use52.  
Industrial symbiosis (IS) has been proven to deliver wide -ranging benefits, from resource efficiency to eco -innovation. 
IS results in i nnovation, often times bringing new research and development to market in record time because of the 
demand-pull of the programme on eco-innovation. The OECD describes IS as “systemic innovation vital for future green 
growth.”53  
 
 
 
 
52 Rademaekers, K., Zaki, S.S. & Smith, M. (2011). Sustainable Industry: Going for Growth & Resource Efficiency,  
European Commission Enterprise and Industry, Rotterdam, The Nederlands. Available: http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/sustainable-
business/files/brochure_sustainable_industry_150711_en.pdf.  
53 OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2010. Project on Green Growth and Eco-Innovation. www.oecd. 
org/dataoecd/43/48/45169190.pdf. Accessed 17 November 2010. 
 
Page 25 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
Indeed, based on NISP data, 20% of successful IS opportunities (called synergies) involve innovation (either new 
application of existing knowledge, or new research and development).  
However, unlocking the value embedded in unde r-utilized industrial resources can be challenging, especially as it 
involves more than merely brokering a link between two or more companies 54. Extensive knowledge of different  
industrial processes or manufacturing techniques, combined with an understandi ng of the latest processing 
technologies and innovations, is essential to identify immediate, medium, and long -term opportunities for 
resource recovery and reuse 54. To date there is no holistic tool available to IS programme de velopers and to the  
industry for enabling secure and systematic knowledge/data exchange and processing of this data for enabling operative 
actions that will be a facilitator for increased IS resource efficiency and turning waste into a resource. Addressing  this 
challenge well brings to the fore the building blocks for increased eco-innovation.  
By channelling new knowledge into a powerful, easy to use secure Platform that will be integrated into existing industrial 
information systems that will essentially bring an understanding of the flows of materials and energy in a new or existing 
Symbiotic Network to identify opportunities to reuse these resources,  and to provide tools to optimize resource 
efficiency in product processing/manufacturing, through the SHA REBOX platform, we will address climate change by 
bringing together traditionally separate industries, value chains and organisations, with the aims of improving cross 
industry resource efficiency and sustainability and of turning waste into resource.  
SHAREBOX is the first platform of its kind and our comprehensive literature review and our review of commercially 
available tools confirms its market uniqueness. A patent review has confirmed our freedom to operate and there are no 
Intellectual Property Rights that could be blockers for our developments and their commercial exploitation To this end, 
it can be concluded that neither the developments that will be performed during the SHAREBOX Project, not the future 
European and global commercial use of the outp uts will be blocked by any existing commercial tools or technologies 
and no existing IPRs exist that could prevent the development or risk the business opportunity once we go to market. It 
is expected that the Platform itself will bring commercial benefits  to its developers and deployers, as well as to its end -
users, whereby it will serve as a tool for the optimisation of energy and resources supply and demand leading to resource 
sharing and exchanges for reduced costs, increased sustainability and green growth.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54 http://2014.globeseries.com/industrial-symbiosis-new-driver-green-growth/ 
 
Page 26 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Impact 
 
2.1. Expected impacts 
 
Contribution to the expected impacts set out in the work programme, under the relevant topic  
SHAREBOX contributes positively to each of the expected impacts of topic SPIRE-06-2015: Energy and resource 
management systems for improved efficiency in the process industries.  
IS activity, through the demand -led innovation, often leads to the redesign of processes, procurement standards, and 
products. “Industrial symbiosis engages diverse organisations in a network to foster eco-innovation and long-term culture 
change. Creating and sharing knowledge through the network yields mutually profitable transactions for novel sourcing 
of required inputs, value-added destinations for non-product outputs, and improved business and technical processes.”55 
Indeed, IS is as simple and as complex as the circular economy 56 in action: simple becaus e successful IS keeps 
resources circulating in the economy rather than going to disposal; complex in that the product, process, technology and 
procurement changes necessary are not straightforward. IS addresses information market failure by connecting 
traditionally separate industries, thus enabling them to divert wasted by -products and resources into productive and 
value-added uses elsewhere in the economy. As has been discussed, SHAREBOX holistic energy and resource 
management system will enable mainstrea m uptake of industrial symbiosis (IS) by lowering barriers to its adoption 
through the use of the latest advancements in secure ICT technology and numerical tools.  
There is a growing market for IS across Europe, supported by the recent high -level European Resource Efficiency 
Platform (EREP) recommendation57 that EU and Member States should foster IS by promoting a pan-European network 
of IS initiatives. A DG Environment study indicates that pan -European IS would generate €3Billion in additional sales 
and cost savings for Europe, alongside concomitant environmental benefits 58. A report by Ellen MacArthur Foundation 
based on McKinsey & Co analysis estimates an annual net material cost savings opportunity of up to €487 Billion for a 
subset of EU manufacturing sectors59. SHAREBOX aims to tap into this market to generate revenue through the 
deployment of the platform as well as to contribute to growth and jobs by enabling IS adoption in the European Process 
industries and cross-sectorally.  
If we consider the suc cessful UK National Industrial Symbiosis Programme (NISP), “ nearly 20% of NISP synergies  
involved some form of innovation, many bringing new research and development to market in record time because of 
the demand-pull of the programme on eco-innovation”15. The Process Industries are intrinsically linked to our quality of 
life and standard of living as we rely on the process industries to supply materials for many of the products we use in 
our everyday lives, and the ~6.8 million European workers who depend on the sector for their livelihoods. The Process 
Industries also have a big role to play in protecting our environment through more sustainable processes. The ability to 
be able to decouple the growth of the process industries from the environment would be of great benefit to us all. IS can 
play a major role in this decoupling in the future. By leveraging the SPIRE network, which brings together cement, 
ceramics, chemicals, engineering, minerals and ores, non-ferrous metals, steel and water sectors, several being world 
leading sectors operating from Europe, to ensure the deployment of the SHAREBOX platform as a facilitator for future 
industrial symbiosis between different sectors, the impacts for improve the eco -innovation capacity of the European 
Process industry is tremendous.  
If we consider the specific expected impacts of the call: “Holistic energy and resource management systems should 
facilitate significant gains in sustainable processing with regard to several parameters ( resource efficiency, energy 
efficiency and the emission performance).” The effectiveness of IS in delivering Europe’s resource efficiency and  
 
 
 
55 Lombardi DR and PT Laybourn. 2012. Redefining Industrial Symbiosis: Crossing Academic-Practitioner Boundaries. Journal of Industrial Ecology 16(1): 28-37. Both 
authors, at ISL, are closely involved with the IMATAIS proposal.  
56 UNEP, 2010), ABC of SCP: Clarifying concepts on sustainable consumption and production 
57 European Resource Efficiency Platform, 2014, Manifesto and Policy recommendations. 31 March.  
58 Economic Analysis of Resource Efficiency Policies: Final Report, 2011, COWI for DG Environment. 
59 Ellen MacArthur Foundation. 2010. Towards the Circular Economy, Vol 1: Economic and business rationale for an accelerated transition. 
 
Page 27 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
climate change mitigation objectives has been evidenced by research undertaken for DG Environment that identified 
NISP as the most effective amongst 120 policies and programmes in 23 countries globally4.  
“Optimisation of interdependencies and the identification of technology components allowing for a breakthrough 
regarding a cost effective reduction in the use of resources, which overcomes the difficult cross-company collaboration.” 
We overcome the difficu lt cross-company collaboration via a secure platform that encrypts and anonymises company 
data- this will represent a step change for information sharing among enterprises.  
“Optimisation of energy and resources supply and demand in selected areas should reduce the overall costs in energy 
intensive industries by at least 15%, by taking into consideration both economic and sustainability factors.” Our LCA 
studies in WP6 will confirm the energy saving obtained in the industries involved in the pilot implement ation of the 
platform.  
The impacts of SHAREBOX can be estimated based on extrapolation from state of the art delivery today. NISP England 
model of IS has been recognised as world-leading IS delivery based on public investment. Over 7 years, the programme 
engaged with over 10,000 companies to deliver the impact shown in Table 3 from an investment of €42M (the third 
column accounts for the continuing effects of synergies, capped at maximum 5 years). If the SHAREBOX only achieves 
a level of market penetration across Europe comparable to NISP in England, based on a GDP proxy, exploitation of the 
pan-European SHAREBOX impact over 5 years would deliver a minimum of the results shown in Table 3.  
Table 3- Potential impacts from applying NISP across Europe 
 Total in year benefits  Total benefits if synergies last 5 years  
Reduction of waste generated 56 M 281 M 
(tonnes)   
Virgin material use avoided (tonnes)  76 M 381 M 
CO2-eq avoided (tonnes)  50 M 252 M 
Cost savings (€)  1.41 B 7.06 B 
Increased sales (€) 1.50 B 7.48 B 
Jobs created 63,000 ~315,000 
 
WP 5 and 6, are divided into two phases, by the customer (end-user) segment: 
 Phase 1 – Customer is client actively delivering industrial symbiosis (Niche IS market)
 Phase 2 – Customer is client actively delivering resource efficiency, circular economy, materials security 
(Broader market)
 Phase 3 – Customer is Industry client actively involved in production (Mainstream industry) 
Across the phases, a potential of over 1500 companies will be engaged with piloting SHAREBOX with existing partner 
networks. In Phase 1, piloting with consortium partners who are actively IPs in their respective countries: In Phase 2, 
partners engage directly with mainstream industry process industries with SHAREBOX – we are targeting 4 companies 
within the partnership, and have mitigated the risk by engaging now with companies to gauge interest in participation 3 
years’ hence. Further companies will be engaged through ISL’s NISP network.  
Clients will be divided in to two phases. 
Phase 1 – Clients actively managing infrastructure through the management of industrial parks (IP level) 
Phase 2 – Clients who are actively involved in production (company or sector level)  
Operating across both  these phases will be International Synergies Limited who actively deliver industrial symbiosis 
across a membership of 10,000 companies. The early involvement of ISL through both phases will ensure early take up 
of the solution.  
Phase 1 – Clients actively managing infrastructure through the management of industrial parks (IP level)  
Phase 1 will take place with organisations that are already managing industrial parks and will test the ability for 
SHAREBOX to impact resource efficiency when implemented at park management level. The parks have been chosen 
as they represent SPIRE industry sectors (chemical, engineering, minerals, non -ferrous metals, cement and ceramics) 
with a large number of SMEs. Over 1,500 companies will be represented through the four IPs partnering in the 
consortium. In addition, ISL will engage with companies based on the parks from the project outset to recruit them as 
 
Page 28 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
users of the software once available. Prior to the software being available, informat ion from the companies will be 
collated and synergy opportunities will be identified for implementation.  
We expect a wide range of synergies to be identified during this phase including direct company to company synergies 
as well as larger scale, infrastr ucture projects that require the direct involvement of the IP management organisation. 
Company to company synergies will likely occur at a faster rate than the larger scale synergies.  
As there will be management and assistance of synergies identified in this phase, the anticipated impact of pilot activities 
in Phase 1 is estimated from NISP results produced from selected projects implemented in regions across the globe but 
taking in to account the reduced staffing and the extra functionality of the software. We have also had regard for SPIRE 
industry sectors.  
Table 4 - Phase 1 impacts are modelled on a typical one-year pilot (England) 
Impact Phase 1 
Waste avoided (tonnes) 137 k 
Virgin resources saved (tonnes)  593 k 
CO2 saved (tonnes)  227 k 
Cost savings (£) 8.5 M 
Additional sales (£)  15 M 
 
These Phase one impacts relate to clients actively managing infrastructure through the management of industrial parks 
(IP level). They are based on pilot scale, one year regional programmes delivered in four countrie s (Brazil, China, 
England and South Africa). While each country had different programmes, the overall impact was used to scale the 
results, taking in to account the length of the programmes and scale of the programmes. While the results for England 
have been included in Table 4, the table below represents the total and average impacts from the remaining three 
countries.  
Table 5- Impacts from pilot programmes in Brazil, China and South Africa  
Impact Total from Brazil, China and South Average per programme 
 Africa  
Waste avoided (tonnes) 1.68 million 560,000 
Virgin material saved (tonnes) 1.68 million 560,000 
Carbon Dioxide savings (tonnes) 198,000 99,200 
Cost savings (€) 16.4 million 5.48 million 
Increased sales (€) 14.3 million 4.8 million 
Jobs created or safeguarded 81    
Within phase 1, four industrial parks will be partnering in the consortium and we will be identifying / progressing a mix of 
short term, smaller scale and longer term, infrastructure scale projects within the IPs. By scaling the forecast impacts 
within the range achieved through the pilots (and England), we feel confident that the results, coupled with International 
Synergies’ experience make the impacts sensible and achievable.  
Four industrial areas – Eskisehir, Turkey; Nules, Castellon, Spain; Chemie-Cluster, Bayern, Germany; and Bristol Ports, 
UK – will be piloting SHAREBOX during this phase, in addition to ISL.  
- ISL will apply SH AREBOX to ongoing projects with organisations for whom large scale regional infrastructure 
projects are core business. These include companies in the construction, engineering and steel manufacturing 
industries. In addition, ISL will work with the manageme nt companies of the IPs to introduce the principles of IS 
at a larger scale within the IPs. 
- Eskisehir, Turkey, represents engineering, manufacturing, construction and food. There are therefore multiple 
manufacturing sites and diverse waste streams with who m to pilot SHAREBOX. The client will have verifiable 
baseline data relating to resource efficiency against which the ‘added value’ of using SHAREBOX can be 
benchmarked. 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
- Nules, Spain (ITC, KEROS, KERAFRIT) represents the  ceramics cluster, raw materials suppliers and frit tile 
manufacturers, with over 650 companies. Also present are other companies not directly related to the ceramic 
cluster, thereby providing excellent opportunities for cross industry sector synergies (ISSA, GUZMAN). 
- Chemie-Cluster, Bayern, Germany has 260 companies from the chemicals sector. 
- Bristol Ports, UK is a large port area that has previously engaged with ISL through the facilitated industrial 
symbiosis programme, NISP. During that initial engagement, over 10,000 tonnes of CO2 was saved through the 
realisation of synergies.  
Expected short term impacts from trials conducted during this phase have been based on pilot scale, one year regional 
programmes delivered in four countries – Brazil, China, England and South Africa. The impacts vary depending on the 
type of project being implemented, the resource allocated to the pilot and the focus of the key performance indicators 
for each project.  
Phase 2 – Clients who are actively involved in production (company level)  
Phase 2 testing will take place at a company level and will be used to determine the potential for the SHAREBOX to 
deliver a step change in IS delivery within companies without the need for practitioner support. SHAREBOX will be 
implemented at four companies from within the consortium – Keros ceramic, Kernfit, ISSA -Sogefi Group and Grupo 
Guzman – each representing SPIRE industries, but will also be marketed by ISL to their existing client base. An example 
of the results obtained by ISL, through NISP, is given in table below.  
Table 6- Phase 2 impacts modelled on past NISP experience with SPIRE process industries such As steel   
Impact Steel 
 (1 company) 
Waste avoided (tonnes) 12 k 
Virgin resources saved (tonnes)  6 k 
CO2 saved (tonnes)  9 k 
Cost savings (£) 601 k 
Additional sales (£)  42 k   
Phase two impacts are based on clients who are actively involved in production (company level). We have chosen  
SPIRE sector companies and for this phase we looked at the impacts achieved within the sectors. Two companies were 
chosen from each of the cement, non -ferrous metals and minerals sectors to base the project impacts on. Companies 
were located in England and South Africa. The results obtained from the companies are shown in the table below:  
Table 7- Impacts from SPIRE sector companies  
Impact Cement (8 synergies)  Non-ferrous metals (10 Minerals (2 synergies)  
  synergies)  
Waste avoided (tonnes) 2.2 million 200,000 250,000 
Virgin material saved  2.2 million 2.15 million >250,000 
(tonnes)    
Carbon Dioxide savings 400,000 490,000  
(tonnes)    
Cost savings (€)  3.75 million 7.4 million 2.9 million 
Increased sales (€)  1.7 million 39.9 million 7.4 million 
Jobs created or  34  
safeguarded      
The impacts quoted for SHAREBOX take into account short term (during project) and medium term (3 to 5 years) 
impacts. Again, the impacts have regard for the number of synergies we envisage being completed within the life of the 
project, with the understanding that infrastructure projects take longer to plan and implement. 
 
 
Page 30 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
Based on State of the Art, it is expected that SHAREBOX will deliver greater savings pro rata than those quoted above. 
However, it must be recognised that each trial will have limited duration while the results quoted above are from longer 
time periods. It is expected that the piloting activity in the short term (duration of SHAREBOX funding) and medium term 
(if the pilot activities continue to deliver in the longer run, as per NISP experience) will deliver the following impact from 
the pilot activities themselves (this does not include impacts deriving from further exploitation) in Table below.  
Table 8- Forecast Phase 1-2 impacts from SHAREBOX pilot activities  
SHAREBOX IMPACTS Short term (during project)  Medium term (3 to 5 years) 
Waste avoided (tonnes ) 500k 3 M 
Virgin material use avoided 750k M 4 M 
(tonnes)   
CO2 saved (tonnes) 500k 3 M 
Cost savings (£)  3 M 10 M 
Additional sales (£) 3 M 10 M 
Jobs created 20 200 
 
The piloting activities detailed above are scheduled for delivery by all consortium  partners in various countries. The 
estimated impact is derived above based on experience in the UK and elsewhere, from both mature and nascent 
activities.  
Contribution to other environmental and socially important impacts  
European firms of all sizes are actively pursuing resource and energy efficiency60 but this topic is increasingly pressing 
as the European industrial sector shrinks, and energy costs and raw material demand increase 61 with increasing short-
term volatility62 in price and availability. Industry faces sustainability and inclusive growth challenges.  
Industrial ecology can be a means of achieving decoupling between economic growth and environmental impact within 
the industry sector. A sub-field of industrial ecology is industrial symbiosis which focuses on material, energy and water 
exchanges between traditionally separate actors in order to achieve economic and environmental benefits. By integrating 
firms with each other sub -optimization can be avoided and even greater reduction in environme ntal impact can be 
achieved in total while also creating a business value and social benefits, or so called triple bottom line benefits63.  
As such, implementation of IS will not only occur at economic level but also environmental and social sustainability  
indicators will be assessed. These will include the associated energy, landfill, and GHG emission reduction impacts as 
well as the socio-economic impacts such as employment creation, etc. The use of IO modelling allows us to compute 
the indirect and induced effects of implementing IS on the above -mentioned indicators tracing the flow changes in the 
upstream and downstream processes of the involved production chains. Hence, we achieve a complete life cycle 
assessment of the IS.  
NISP model of industrial sym biosis has been recognised for its successful delivery of resource efficiency, carbon 
reduction, eco -innovation, decoupling economic growth from resource use and supporting sustainable resource 
management and job creation (see Table 9, below. Column 4 pres ents the €/tonne if the entire investment had been 
only in the impact listed in that column). In relation to the powerful environmental and societal impacts that can result 
from industrial symbiosis, returning again to the UK NISP Programme, which serves a s an independently audited 
example, at its peak in was actively working with an extensive 15,000 businesses, the majority of which were SMEs or 
micro. NISP successfully identified and closed out thousands of synergies, collectively cutting CO2 emissions by 42  
 
 
60 Eurobarometer 2012. SMEs, Resource Efficiency and the Green Economy. March. 
61 DG Enterprise & Industry. 2013. EU Industrial Structure Report: Competing in Global Value Chains. © European Union.  
62 Dobbs, R, J.Oppenheim, F. Thompson, M. Brinkman and M. Zornes. 2011, Resource Revolution: Meeting the World’s Energy, Materials, Food and Water Needs. 
November. © McKinsey & Company.  
63 Centre of Excellence in Cleaner Production (2007). Regional resource synergies for sustainable development in heavy industrial areas, Curtin University of Technology, 
Perth. Available: http://seg.curtin.edu.au/local/docs/publications/2007/arcbulletin1.pdf. 
 
Page 31 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
million tonnes and redirecting over 48 million tonnes of ‘wasted resources’ from landfill. It also was responsible 
for over 10,000 jobs15.  
Table 9- Impact of NISP in England, 2005-2013. *All metrics independently verified.  
 
METRICS* 
   
Total  benefits  assuming 
 
Value for Money 
 
     
 
  
Total in-year benefits 
 
synergies continue for 5 
 
Lifetime Spend 
 
 
(April 2005 – March 2013) 
   
 
    
years 
 
(per tonne) 
 
      
 
 
Landfill diversion 
 
9 million tonnes 
 
45 million tonnes 
 
€0.130 
 
    
 
 
CO2 reduction 
 
8 million tonnes 
 
39 million tonnes 
 
€0.150 
 
   
 
 
Virgin material savings 
 
12 million tonnes 
 
58 million tonnes 
 
€0.100 
 
    
 
 
Hazardous waste eliminated 
 
0.4 million tonnes 
 
2 million tonnes 
 
€2.740 
 
   
 
 
Water savings 
 
14 million tonnes 
 
71 million tonnes 
 
€0.080 
 
    
 
 
Cost savings 
 
€243 million 
 
€1.21 billion 
 
€0.005 
 
   
 
 
Additional sales 
 
€234 million 
 
€1.17 billion 
 
€0.005 
 
    
 
 
Jobs 10,000+ 
     
     
 
 
NISP England has operated under an external verification scheme whereby companies involved in completed synergies 
were contacted and synergies assessed to verify delivered outputs. ISL’s standard methodology produces reporting for 
the metrics listed in the table above, using  government-compliant calculations. ISL thus has experience operating to 
verification schemes and the project will be able to build on this. As part of the pilot phase, SHAREBOX partners will 
liaise with their local ETV bodies to identify innovative environmental technologies suitable for IS implementation based 
on local resources and data.  
Barriers/obstacles or framework conditions that may determine whether and to what extent the expected impacts 
will be achieved  
The market context (prices, regulations,  security of supply) will determine the priority resources and sectors for 
commercial IS. In part this failure of existing online tools is because the market drivers aren’t creating incentives for all  
waste to be diverted. For example, carbon reduction in Europe is not yet well-supported by the market, despite certain 
taxes and the Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS). At both the Global Green Growth Forum (2013) and the OECD 
Conference on Green Growth (2013), policy stakeholders and business leaders alike called for "getting the prices right" 
to incentivise resource efficient behaviour – this includes carbon, but also landfill, water, and other raw materials. In 
November 2013, Peter Vis (Head of Cabinet, European Commission for Climate Action) observed that the current market 
price for carbon, about €5/tonne, is substantially lower than expected at this time – and not sufficient to incentivise the 
desired behaviour in reducing emissions 64. SHAREBOX deliverables includes policy seminars to inform the European 
Commission where its policies are creating barriers to the circular economy.  
Industrial symbiosis (IS) is a priority for Europe, gaining substantial prominence in the last 10 years as a means to 
address the inefficient use of resources in business processes. Since 2009, facilitated IS has been included in policies, 
recommendations and case studies from the European Commission and its Directorate Generals, as a means to address 
the market failures that hinder Europe’s transition to a sustainable economy, including (Asterisk* indicates those reports 
citing ISL’s facilitated IS model, NISP): DG Environment, Best Practice under the EU Waste Framework Directive 
(2009)*; DG Environment, Roadmap to a Resource Efficient Europe (2011)*; DG Environment, Economic Analysis of 
Resource Efficiency Policies (2011)*; DG Enterprise & Industry, Sustainable Industry -Going for Growth & Resource 
Efficiency (2011)*; DG Regional & Urban Policy, Connecting Smart and Sustainable Growth through Smart 
Specialization (2012)*; DG Enterprise & Industry, Communication on Green Entrepreneurship (2013)*; DG Environment 
– Eco-Innovation Observatory Annual Report (2013); DG Research & Innovation, A Short Guide to Assessing 
Environmental Impacts of Research and Innovation Policy (2014)*; European Re source Efficiency Platform, Manifesto 
& Policy Recommendations (2014).  
 
 
64 Peter Vis, Head of Cabinet of Connie Hedegaard, European Commission for Climate Action. Climate KIC Making Transitions Happen Open Platform Event. November 
2013. 
 
Page 32 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
The variables that must be considered as affecting the extent of the impacts can be summarised as:  
 Business context: The drivers that create the business context (barriers and enablers) for IS include: legislation, 
policy, price, supply, t ax (which can include but will not be limited to carbon, landfill and packaging), geography 
and business perception. At a high level, regulations across Europe are common but each nation state has different 
policies through which the regulations are implem ented or supported. This can be a barrier to the uptake of IS 
across Europe. However, the direction of movement is to control resource efficiency and waste management 
through ever aligning implementation (taxes, landfill bans and standards as examples). We  therefore believe that 
any potential negative impact will be reduced or mitigated through the life of the project.
 On the policy side, ISL are part of a FP7 consortia specifically looking at barriers to the uptake of resource efficiency 
measures by indus try. Any relevant findings from POLFREE will be taken into consideration if they assist the 
exploitation and dissemination activities of IMATAIS.
 Standards as barriers: Procurement often involves the need to meet standards and can involve rigorous, expensive 
testing requirements. This could be a barrier to the uptake of IS. By focussing on the most economically viable 
resource streams as identified in WP 1, and the inclusion of Granta MI database which includes modules on 
standards and alternative materials that meet the substitution requirement these barriers are mitigated.
 Availability and quality of publicly available regulatory data from European Member States: IPPC and EPR data is 
often aggregated which would be useful for sector analysis but not nece ssarily for individual company/resource 
selection.
 
2.2. Measures to maximise impact 
 
2.2.1. Dissemination and exploitation of results  
We have drawn up plans for the dissemination and exploitation of the project results, and in particular the development 
of a robust business model to further develop and commercially exploit the SHAREBOX Platform as a secure integrated 
platform of facilitating and optimizing resource sharing/exchange among multiple production units of a single company 
or multiple companies on a single industrial production site to obtain improved efficiency in the process industries. 
Moreover, SHAREBOX will be offered and communicated as a valuable tool for developing  further site integration 
advantages to a broader public of industrial site  operators. Thus, clear guidelines will show how SHAREBOX can 
generate value added for different types of industrial areas by providing cost advantages, improving resource efficiency, 
reducing the environmental footprint, intensifying the integration of tenants (and thus their local commitment to the site), 
generating a positive influence on the innovative eco-system of an industry park and supporting site promotion activities. 
For example, in addition to the practical showcases by CCB, NEPIC, ECI and Ceram ics cluster, a wider stakeholder 
network of industry park operators will be involved by CCB’s Competence Center for Industrial Site Development, 
covering industrial park owners, facility managing companies, public authorities (running industrial sites) and  other 
potential users and multipliers of the SHAREBOX methodology. By individual discussions, site visits and working 
meetings, existing initiatives in the field of industrial symbiosis and resource efficiency will be checked in order to optimize 
their compatibility with SHAREBOX (as part of the pilot implementation work). The implementation of SHAREBOX as a 
business model (WP7) shall not only focus on the market placement of a competitive IT -solution, but rather on an 
integrative system with a maximized connectivity to individual resource management initiatives. This way, SHAREBOX 
will contribute to the development of EU -wide shared standards in industrial symbiosis. A learning network of 
SHAREBOX-users and other initiators of resource management initiatives will be coordinated also beyond the timeframe 
of this project; its output will be distributed online, by brochures and at public events. Our initial exploitation and business 
plans, as well as our dissemination plans are discussed below. These will be built on through WP7.  
Initial exploitation and business plans  
In keeping with the expected scope of SPIRE -06 projects, we have drawn up an “ outline of the initial exploitation and  
business plans, which will be developed further in the proposal project”.  
In terms of the proposed exploitation routes, the SHAREBOX consortium will capitalise on all potential exploitation 
pathways to maximise the impact of this project: 
 
Page 33 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
a) Using the results for developing, creating and marketing new products, processes, and services.   
In H2020 it is essential that the public resources and efforts used in research are converted into socio-economic benefits 
to the EU 65. This will only be truly achieved with enduring impact if we hit on a sustainable business model  and 
individual business plans for all the exploitable outputs of the SHAREBOX Project.  
The core exploitable output of the project is the secure cloud SHAREBOX platform for the flexible management of shared 
process resources that will provide plant operations and production managers with the robust and reliable information 
that they need in real -time in order to effectively and confidently share resources (plant, energy, water, residues, and 
recycled materials) with other companies in an optimum symbiotic eco -system. The project will take the platform to 
TRL6, whereby at the end of the project, the integrated unique SHAREBOX ICT platform, through which enterprises will 
securely exchange the data via APIs, will have been pilot tested at demonstration sites, using industrial partners’ real 
production units. Our immediate post -project exploitation activities will centre on productising the beta version of the 
platform (which will be led by IRIS from a software development perspective and IS L will contribute their expertise in 
relation to IS delivery) to Minimum Viable Product for commercial release within 18 months of completion of the project. 
This productisation work will be done in close collaboration with the industry park operators (CCB , EIS, NEPIC and 
AICE), and the industry partners from the process industry and other sectors (CCB, KEROS, KERAFRIT, GUZMAN, 
and ISSA) so that the product is deployed in their facilities to ensure that they quickly benefit as early adopters of the 
platform. During the 18 month pre -launch phase, we will also implement additional industry case studies to serve as 
powerful endorsers for gaining market confidence.  
Business Model for the SHAREBOX Platform:  The SHAREBOX supercomputing cloud -enabled platform for industry 
resource and energy management will be commercialized through a Software -as-a-Service (SaaS) business model to 
exploit the platform commercially (under the SHAREBOX® brand, which is currently being trademarked). The platform 
will be deployed via a supercomputer cloud (such as Amazon EC2, Cloud Spectator, or others). This has the advantage 
of offering affordable, high performance computing to end -users for high processing power and speeds. The revenue 
generation will based on a subscription model - monthly or annual payments. A pricing structure will be developed that 
will be based on an initial registration fee (for access to the subscription-platform and initial training-on-site or via online 
tutorials) and payment packages for monthly payment plans , or annual plans (that will offer a 1 or 2 month discount). 
Flexible packages will be devised tailored to user segments (these packages will be drawn up during Subtask 7.3.3 
Business and exploitation plans).  
As SHAREBOX is a cross -sector platform technology, and target users of the platform are as follows (user segments 
will be further studied during the project): 
- Customer is client actively delivering industrial symbiosis (Niche IS market) 
- Customer is client actively delivering resource efficiency, circular economy, materials security (Broader 
market) 
- Customer is Industry client actively involved in production (Mainstream industry)  
The Sharebox Internet site (i.e. the doorway to the subscription platform) could potentially host some ‘freemium’ content 
and starter tools as a hook for securing paying clients. A user community (whereby individuals can register and manage 
their own user profiles, and interact with other users through the user forum) could also be created on the platform. They 
could enjoy the ‘freemium’ content (IS literature, news and updates, benefits of IS, starter training course, information 
about events, etc.) and starter tools. This would contribute to generating traffic to the site, which is important for gaining 
new clients, and would also contribute to our ambition through SHAREBOX to become the ‘European grown’ cornerstone 
of the European and Global IS movement. IRIS will exploit the SaaS business model in partnership with ISL - royalties 
on subscriptions will be paid to the partners w ho have provided the tools for the platform so that they benefit from the 
commercial opportunity. IRIS has already beta launched an internally developed business management SaaS Platform 
and they are experienced in the development of cloud-based business models. ISL can provide the commercial route to 
the market.  
 
 
65 https://www.iprhelpdesk.eu/sites/default/files/newsdocuments/IP%20Management%20in%20Horizon%202020_the%20proposal%20stage_0.pdf 
 
Page 34 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
Business model for the SYNERGIE application : ISL will commercialise the SYNERGIE 2.0 applications, as a tool for 
identifying synergies among companies. IRIS will act as a technology partner for ISL by supporting and maintaining their 
SYNERGIE software application.  
During the project in Subtask 7.3.3 Business and exploitation plans, the business models for exploiting the SHAREBOX 
platform and the SYNERGIE app will be further developed based on the above outline approaches. Formal business 
plans will be elaborated, which will detail how each of these project outputs will be used in commercial exploitation 
activities for business growth and competitiveness.  
b) Using the results for further research and spin-off projects   
Our ambition is for the SHAREBOX project to be a motor for a sustained applied research and development programme 
in Europe in the field of Industrial Symbiosis. To this end, an IS Research Roadmap will be developed over the course 
of the project. The Roadmap will take into consideration the further collaborative research spin off projects in the area 
of IS and resource management and the circular economy. The IS Roadmap will also engage with the authors of other 
Roadmaps, such as the SPIRE Roadmap, CEPI Roadmap (Forestry Sector); ECs Roadmap to a Resource Efficient 
Europe, the strategic research intentions of SUSCHEM, etc. to ensure we contribute to a European Knowledge Area for 
IS. All partners will be involved in the drawing up of the Research Roadmap in keeping with their fields of specialisation 
and research interests.  
c) Using the results for standardisation activities   
The results will also be exploited for standardisat ion. To this end, through DECHEMA and SPIRE, as well as through 
ISL and EUR-ISA we will establish dialogue with standards bodies early on in the project to pave the way forward for 
standard setting. The publications that will result from the project, aroun d the non-confidential aspects of the results of 
the validation of the field work performed in this project will be of high importance, as they will be peer -reviewed. This 
will serve as a powerful independent approval of our results towards standards bodie s and policy stakeholders. The 
project will contribute positively to the wider opportunities to be gained by incorporating industrial symbiosis into 
mainstream policy and identifying robust and sustainable funding instruments to further support industrial symbiosis 
activity in the country.  
d) Use of the results for education and training   
It is considered that there is very high potential to use the knowledge generated over the course of the project as content 
for formal third level education modules for  skills generation in the area of Industrial Symbiosis. This exploitation route 
will be exploited by the participating Universities and Institutes (UT, UNIVLEEDS, USTRATH ZWAH, UPC, etc.). ISL 
and DECHEMA will develop professional training programmes for upskilling in industry so that companies are equipped 
with the skills required to engage in industrial symbiosis; this could be another source of revenue for ISL.  
Outline Dissemination plan 
Our dissemination activities during the SHAREBOX project will aim to diffuse the non-confidential results that are  
generated during the project to as wide and relevant an audience as possible in order to heighten awareness about 
the results, to contribute to knowledge building and upskilling in Europe, as well as to ensu re that as many relevant 
actors and stakeholders as possible have access to these results.  
As has been discussed, this is an industry driven Research and Innovation Action that has a vision to develop the  
world’s first platform for the integrated and holi stic management of shared resources among industries, 
clusters, and eco -parks. As we have a clear intention to use the results of this project for post -project commercial 
activities, and the project will also involves demonstration sites involving process industries (and industries from other 
sectors) whereby at times sensitive information regarding their processes maybe be involved, a robust confidentiality 
policy will underpin all dissemination activities. The consortium experience in collaborative projects points towards 
the default position that all information is confidential unless otherwise agreed as non -confidential. This is the clearest 
starting point. However, that said, on the one hand, the academic participants in the consortium intend to publish 
results, which is considered a very positive success indicators by all the consortium,  not only for diffusing our results 
among the academics and research communities, but also serving as powerful peer reviewed documents towards the 
industry, standards bodies and policy stakeholders. On the other hand, the industry 
 
Page 35 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
partners and market actors also intend to showcase and exhibit results at tradeshows, exhibitions and through  
other industrial channels (technical/sectoral magazines, etc.).  
As such, in order to ensure that dissemination activities are embedded in a robust Knowledge Management approach, 
the Project IPR Manager (Prof. Miquel Sanchez Marre, UPC) will work closely with the Communication and 
Dissemination Manager ( Dr. Renata Korcher, DECHEMA) to manage the identification of non -confidential 
publishable/discloseable information that can be available for our dissemination activities. At this stage, a preliminary 
dissemination plan (Table below) has been drawn up for disseminating the non-confidential or protected results of 
the project to our different target audiences of the project.  
Table 10- Outline Dissemination Plan 
 
 
Target 
    
How project results will  
   
Where  projects  results  will  be 
  
         
 
 audience    be presented      presented       
 
                
 Industry:    Presentations, including    Tradeshows,  exhibitions,  
 
 
Industrial 
    
physical demonstrations 
     
 
        
workshops, seminars, own 
 
 
 
Parks; 
    
where appropriate  
     
 
         
SHAREBOX events (trainings, etc.) 
 
 
 
Process 
             
 
             
CEVISAMA trade fair; ExpoQuimia; 
 
 
 
industries; 
            
 
            
ChemSpec Europe, etc. 
   
 
 Other sectors;               
 
                   
 
 IS and     Project Videos      Project website, You tube, websites  
 
             
of  networks and platforms, e.g. 
 
 
 environmental             
 
            
“Ceramic observatory”, 
   
 
 engineering               
 
            
process-worldwide.com, etc. 
  
 
 companies              
 
                    
      Documented    IS    Technical  magazines  (e.g.  
 
      implementation  case    LOCIMAP online  magazine, etc.),  
 
      studies (one for each    newsletters, downloadable from  
 
      site)        project website.     
 
            
 Research    Peer   reviewed    Peer-reviewed  journals  (&  green  
 
 Community    publications       open   access-   see   below):   ISI-  
 
 (scientists and            journal; Sustainable Chemical  
 
 early stage            Processes J…     
 
 
researches)  & 
             
    Presentation   of    QUALICER congress. Annual  
 
 IS networks    papers/posters  at    “SYMBIOSIS”  Conference;  
 
      conferences       ACHEMA, etc.     
 
                
      Presentation of project    European  Chemical Regions  
 
      results at IS network    Network,  EUR-ISA, SPIRE,  
 
      events and through their    SUSCHEM  events and channels,   
 
      channels       among others.     
 
                     
 
            
 Policy makers    Position   papers,    Face-to-Facemeetings,Policy  
 
      pictograms,   peer    round tables, Policy events   
 
      reviewed publications,           
 
      presentations             
 
            
 General public    Press  releases, Project    Mass  media,  You  tube,   Social  
 
      Video, Pictograms      media channels, Project Website  
 
                     
 
 
  
Performance 
Indicators  
> 8 events 
reaching > 2000 
companies 
 
 
> 500 views 
 
 
 
> 300 
downloads 
and 6 articles 
 
> 10 Peer-
reviewed 
publications 
 
> 10 Conference 
papers/posters 
 
> 5 
Presentations 
 
 
> 3 
meetings/events 
 
 
> 10 press 
releases, >500 
downloads of 
videos/literature  
  
Expected Impact  
 
 - Generate industry  
  awareness about the  
  strategic benefits of  
  resourced sharing and IS    
- Stimulate interest in the 
SHAREBOX project and 
its outputs in order to 
generate market pull to 
support our business and 
exploitation plans 
 
 
 
- Contribute to  
strengthening the 
European Research Area  
(ERA) in Industrial 
Symbiosis  
- Attract early stage 
researchers to IS  
- Prevent brain drain by 
positioning EU as a 
scientific hub for IS 
 
- Facilitate our outreach 
and engagement 
 
 
- An informed public who 
are aware of industry 
sustainability efforts and 
their benefits.   
During the project, the consortium, through Task 7.2 Networking and dissemination of the project results and under the 
leadership of the Communication and Dissemination Manager, will build on the above outline plan. Our project 
dissemination activities will link with the broader  dissemination strategies of the SPIRE network, SusChem, European 
Industrial Symbiosis Nerwork (EUR -ISA)- which has a Europe -wide membership and is led by partner ISL - European 
Chemical Regions Network (ECRN) etc., which will contribute to efficient coordi nation and dissemination of the project 
outputs across the relevant European and international communities. Moreover, the dissemination strategy will also 
ensure it supports our efforts in relation to the future exploitation of the project results.  
An important dissemination platform for the project will be the SHAREBOX website, which will be built during Task 7.4 
and which will represent a ‘next generation’ H2020 project ‘website’ in that it will serve as an enduring internet site for 
 
Page 36 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
promoting the project and housing all the downloadable public deliverables and outputs of the project, and it will also 
house our ‘SHAREBOX Green Channel’ for open access to the peer-reviewed publications of the project. It will be widely 
disseminated across Europe and worldwide to build up usership and registered members from the IS community towards 
becoming a global hub for IS.  
How the proposed measures will help to achieve the expected impacts of the project  
Industrial parks and other integrated 
production sites represent perfect eco -
systems for optimizing competitiveness of 
European industry by minimizing the use of 
resources, creating competitive advantage for 
the European Union as an eco -efficient 
production site and maximizing the innovative 
output of companies (in particular SME) by a 
deeper integration of production processes. 
Connecting European industry parks by 
bringing together aspects of resource 
management, cluster management and site 
development is an ongoing task for all 
industrial stakeholders, especially regarding 
the development of joint standards and 
performance indicators. While cluster 
management networks and industrial regions 
within the EU are already well connected by a 
broad range of initiatives, platforms for 
resource efficiency still lack a joint standard 
and practical links to other supportive 
structures. As CCB’s Site Development  
Program brings together a network of 
European partner clusters (e.g. as part of 
the ESCP -initiative “Wiintech”), major 
players of Eur opean chemical regions 
(chairing the Project Council of the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3- How SHAREBOX can be linked to a European eco-system of 
improving competitiveness of industrial sites  
 
European Chemical Regions Network ECRN) and industry park operators, these links will become the anchor points of 
a learning network around the SHAREBOX approach. It will be used to share experiences among different industrial 
clusters, further improve SHAREBOX and adapt it to the needs of specific site s and support industrial regions in 
attracting foreign direct investment. This way, SHAREBOX can become a vital element of a European site development 
strategy.  
How the participants will manage the research data generated and/or collected during the project  
The SHAREBOX project will not participate in the Pilot Open Access Research Data scheme, and all the research data 
generated by the project will be used for the purposes of the development of the SHAREBOX platform and the other 
project outputs.  
Strategy for knowledge management and protection  
To pave the way forward for exploitation and dissemination of the project results, the consortium will implement an 
integral strategy for the effective management of this knowledge (Fig. 4).  
Background IPR and a ccess rights: ‘Background’66 means any data, know -how or information -whatever its form or 
nature (tangible or intangible), including any rights such as intellectual property rights –that is a) held by the  
 
 
66 H2020 Model Grant Agreement: http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/grants_manual/amga/h2020-amga_en.pdf#page=233 
 
Page 37 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
beneficiaries before they acceded to the Agreement, and b) needed to implement the action or exploit the results. In 
relation to access rights to Background, the consortium will comply with the H2020 default rules 66, whereby on the one 
hand, the partners/beneficiaries will provide each other access — on a royalty-free basis — to Background needed to 
implement their own tasks under the action/project. On the other hand the partners will give each other access — under 
fair and reasonable conditions — to background needed for exploiting their own results. The consortium will declare an 
up to date status of Background before the Grant Agreement (GA) is signed, and at proposal stage it has been confirmed 
that all partners have the access they need to each other’s background.  
Results definition, protection, ownership and access 
rights   
‘Results’66  means any (tangible or intangible) output of  
 
the action such as data, knowledge or information —  
 
whatever its form or nature, whether it can be protected  
 
or not — that is generated in the action/project, as well  
 
as  any  rights  attached  to  it,  including  intellectual  
 
property rights. Through Task 7.1: Knowledge  
 
Management  &  IPR  Protection,  the  Results  being  
 
outputted from the project will be continually assessed in  
 
line with the status of developments, whereby novelty,  
 
patentability and protection will be assessed. To this  
 
end, in order to verify novelty and to ensure that the  
 
Results  do  not  trespass  into  the  owned  knowledge  
 
space of a third party, up-to-date patent reviews will be  
 
performed periodically. In relation to protection of the  
 
results, the partners will aim to protect all results that  
 
can  be commercially  or  industrially  exploited  either Figure 4- Integrated Knowledge Management approach  
 
through Patents (for inventions), Trademark (brand, etc.), 
 
 
 
Industrial design, Copyright (for the SHAREBOX  
  
Platform), Trade-secret, or Confidentiality,  as appropriate (i.e. the form which offers the most adequate and effective 
protection for each type of result). As a result, over the course of the project, a clear definition of the protected IPR wil l 
be completed, whereby a verifiable list of all IPRs that have been applied for or registered (Trademark™, any European 
patent applications, etc.) will have been drawn up, along with a description of all the results that may have commercial 
or industrial applications. Results shall be owned by the participant generating them66. To avoid doubt or confusion 
over ownership, a protocol of procedures will be defined that each partner will follow to clearly show the development of 
the generation of knowledge or Results. In cases where a Result is generated jointly (i.e. where the separate parts of 
some result cannot be attributed to different participants), it will be jointly owned, with the allocation and the terms of 
exercising this joint ownership to be included in a Joint Ownership Agreement that will be drawn up.  
In relation to access rights to Results, and again in keeping with the H2020 default rules, the partners will give each 
other access — on a royalty-free basis — to results needed for implementing their own tasks under the ac tion66. The 
partners will give each other — under fair and reasonable conditions — access to results needed for exploiting their 
own results. ‘Fair and reasonable conditions’ 66Error! Bookmark not defined. means appropriate conditions, including possible 
financial terms or royalty -free conditions, which will be agreed in Exploitation Agreement(s) taking into account the 
specific circumstances of the request for access, for example the actual or potent ial value of the results or background 
to which access is requested and/or the scope, duration or other characteristics of the exploitation envisaged. However, 
an overriding principal will be that the participating industry partners are provided with the access that they need 
to the results to exploit them in keeping with the needs and strategy of their business.  
Knowledge management activities will be led by the IPR Manager, who has significant experience in knowledge 
protection and ownership and access r ights management in collaborative research project. This bring invaluable 
expertise to the project, as well as the support and expertise of the UPC highly qualified legal team. Over the course of 
the project, the consortium will draw on other external assi stance and support, as required, from such sources as the 
IPR-Helpdesk (http://www.ipr-helpdesk.org), Enterprise Europe Network (http://www.enterprise-europe-
network.ec.europa.eu/index_en.htm), among other sources in the partner countries. An experienced patent attorney  
Page 38 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
will also be approached for IPR protection implementation (and this has been budgeted).  
Open access to peer-reviewed scientific publications  
The two ways authors can provide open access are (1) by self -archiving their journal articles in an open ac cess 
repository, also known as 'green' open access, or (2) by publishing in an open access journal, known as 'gold' open 
access.67 It is envisaged that green open access will be the preferred option in the SHAREBOX project, whereby the 
partners will publish in peer-reviewed scientific publications and then self-archive a version of the article for free public 
use in their institutional repository, in a central repository, or on some other open access website. The project website 
(or Internet Portal) will house a ‘SHAREBOX Green Channel’ for open access to the peer -reviewed publications of the 
project. In relation to expected publications from the project, these include and are not limited to review papers and 
papers on the results of the pilot validations, etc. 
 
2.2.2. Communication activities  
Communication activities are considered to be an important aspect of this project, to ensure that we effectively promote 
our project, its ambitions, its progress and results, as well as its benefits and impacts to the stakeholders that we want 
to each. Importantly, one of the key’s to successfully gaining impact is our ability to secure stakeholder ‘buy-in’, i.e. 
the cooperation or positive participation of our stakeholders.  
Without doubt we want to secure the ‘buy-in’ of the European Process Industry and Industrial and EcoParks and we aim 
to generate awareness and interest in the project and the strategic benefits of IS. We are very interested in a two -way 
dialogue with industrial parks and the industry ensuring that w e can involve them in the innovation cycle of the project 
to pick up their requirements, guidance, and feedback to ensure we are industry and market focussed at mainstream 
level. An important opportunity for the project will be linking with the broader dis semination/communication strategy of 
the SPIRE programme, which will in turn contribute to efficient coordination and dissemination of SPIRE project outputs 
across the programme to facilitate the market uptake of innovative solutions, whereby early awareness of key innovation 
themes emerging from the projects to the entire SPIRE stakeholder community as well as sectors in close relationship 
to the process industries (i.e. end users) is desirable, as is a communication campaign to all process industries that  
considers how they can adopt a synergic approach for understanding how IS can enable ‘significant gains in sustainable 
processing with regard to several parameters (resource efficiency, energy efficiency and the emission performance) ’, 
thereby leading to new sustainable growth opportunities, competitiveness and growth. To this  end, the planned 
communication activities will be best used to promote and pave the way forward for the future industry exploitation of 
the project results.  
In addition, there are enormous medium to long terms impacts to be leveraged by successfully initiating two-way dialogue 
with policy-makers and standards bodies to promote the SHAREBOX platform, as well as gain their interest and support 
towards the SHAREBOX platform and its tools becoming an industry standard or a recommended approach for industrial 
IS implementation. Moreover, it is important that citizens are aware of our research and its potential societal and 
environmental impacts, especially as we are benefitting from tax -payers contributions. This will contribute to ensuring 
that citizens are informed and feel like they are getting value for money and to promote the efforts of the European 
Process Industry to improve its competitiveness and sustainability to protect our planet, quality of life, as well as to lead 
to economic wealth and much needed job creation for European citizens.  
If tackled well through a professional communication campaign (which will be led by DECHEMA, who will benefit from 
the experienced graphic desig n and marketing team in IRIS), SHAREBOX will be successful in outreaching to and 
mobilising of industry and policymakers behind our project and its outputs at all stages of the work plan, as well as keep 
the citizen informed. To this end, through Task 7.4,  we will develop a communication plan, which will consist of the 
following steps:  
1. Identify and list all possible stakeholders . In addition to the main stakeholder groups discussed above  
(industry, policy makers, citizens), the target audiences of our diss emination activities will also be analysed and 
any other stakeholders that might be considered important will be included as targets of our communication 
campaign.  
 
 
67 Jeffery, Keith G. 2006. "Open Access: An Introduction". Ercim News, 64, January 2006. 
 
Page 39 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
2. Organise our stakeholder. This will involve clustering stakeholders where relevant and establishing our different 
categories of audience around which we can build targeted messages and suitable communication activities for 
effectively reaching each.  
3. Branding. The principles behind the SHAREBOX brand, which is visually identified through its logos, and 
carrying a powerful tag line, will be further developed at proposal stage.  
4. Development of project communication materials a nd tools. The SHAREBOX project website, leaflet,  
posters, pictograms, social media sites, videos and virals will be carefully designed for use in supporting our 
communication campaign.  
5. Design and implement a communication campaign. We will ensure regular communication with our  
stakeholders through creative campaigns that will involve press releases, digital campaigns through the social 
media, periodic newsletters (at least 1 per year), video releases, blog posts, poster campaigns at tradeshows and 
exhibitions, face-to-face meetings and round tables with policy makers, meetings and events with industry, etc.  
Finally, in Task 7.4 we will build on the Dissemination Table (Table 10) at the beginning of the project and we will adapt 
it for planning communication activities for promoting the project, based on a process of analysing: Why – the purpose 
of the communication action; What will be communicated – the message; To whom – the audience; How – the method; 
When – the timing. 
 
3. Implementation 
 
3.1. Work plan 
 
Brief presentation of the overall structure of the work plan  
The project objectives have been used as the starting point for planning the work that needs to be implemented within 
the project. All the actions that are required to meet the objectives of t his research innovation action, have been 
collectively analysed by the interdisciplinary consortium. It was agreed how best to distribute the workload among the 
various experts in keeping with their relevant fields of knowledge, capacity, infrastructure, resources and in the case of 
the industry end-users, and their process activity. The timings of the work, the logistics, as well as the interdependencies 
between the different tasks has been given due consideration to ensure a coherent work flow. This bottom-up planning 
process has greatly facilitated the task of arriving at a clear, comprehensive and realistic work  plan that the 
consortium is confident will serve as a solid platform to ensure that the project’s S&T and innovation goals are fulfilled.  
The project is divided into 8 work-packages (WP), each with its own tasks, deliverables and associated milestones 
in order to facilitate implementation and monitoring of progress. First of all, the  end-user requirements and 
specifications (WP1) will feed in to guide the case study definition and the expectations and specifications for  the 
SHAREBOX platform that will feed into the development of the IS methodologies (WP2) and Intelligent Decision Support 
Tools (WP3) that will be coded and integrated into the over all Platform in WP4. The levels of pilot trials will be 
implemented- at Industrial Park Level (WP5) followed by connecting industries to the platform for live trials with real 
process conditions. Validation work will be performed to confirm the impacts via LCA assessments. This validation work 
will verify the platform at TRL6. The effective implementation of an Innovation Cycle (WP7) throughout the project will 
ensure the wider industry, societal, market and regulatory requirements are taken into account an d fulfilled and that 
indeed the derived industry, competitive, environmental and societal benefits are communicated to the target 
stakeholders. In parallel, the post-project exploitation and dissemination activities will be planned for an effective post -
project phase that will accomplish the full scaling up of the three case studies and the further improvement and market 
deployment of the SHAREBOX Platform in the European Process industries with 18 months of project completion, which 
will be highly scalable in the future. WP8, Project Management, will ensure the project is delivered on time, on budget, 
and to expected quality/scope. 
 
The Gantt Chart shows the timings and the interdependencies between the different WPs and tasks. During the planning 
phase, the different WP and task leaders have collaborated together to ensure that each leader has planned his/her 
work in the context of its necessary interaction and potential dependency on or feed in to other WPs and tasks.  
Page 40 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
A k ey consideration has been to ensure that the tools and methodologies that need to be implemented into the 
SHAREBOX Platform are ready in a timely fashion so that coding can begin to ensure an alpha version of the Platform 
is ready by Month 12 so that pilot ing with the Parks can commence (and the progression to improved versions of the 
Platform will continue in parallel with the field work).  
There is good collaboration between the different experts in the different WPs to ensure seamless transfer of knowledge 
between the disciplines as well as to ensure developers from a previous task are also stakeholders in the tasks that their 
work is feeding into. Logistical matters have been factored in, such as the time needed for ordering parts/components, 
for shipping of prototypes from development to test sites, installation times, the ‘what if’ scenarios of parts not arriving, 
of installation work throwing up challenges, seasonal factors, etc.  
As this is a highly experienced development team, and in particular with many members of the consortium experienced 
in applied R&D under tight timeframes involving integration and demo work at industrial sites, the work planning has 
benefited from this ‘on the ground’ pragmatic experience, especially in terms of consideration of interdependencies and 
timings. The potential risks have been identified and contingency plans proposed. Importantly, the collective planning of 
the work plan has achieved the ‘buy-in’ of all the project developers and participants and an early understanding of the 
importance of a team effort, team planning and active communication among all WP and task leaders. Moreover, it is 
felt that the one -page Gantt itself (which also includes all the deliverables and milestones) will be a very effective tool 
for high level control and obtaining a helicopter overview as part of effective project management during the project.  
Finally, the project work plan mobilises a strong collaboration between the academics (UT, UPC, UNIVLEEDS, 
USTRATH, ZHAW), the SMEs (IRIS, IS L), the park operators and innovation actors (CCB, EIS, NEPIC, DECHEMA, 
AICE) and the industries (KEROS, KERAFRIT, ISSA, GUZMAN) along the project. The academic partners are leading 
the foundational and theoretical work of the project, and will bring their  knowledge and methodologies in energy 
scheduling and conversion (UNIVLEEDS, USTRATH), In-put-Output modelling, Game Theory, Agent Based Modelling 
(UT), purification and waste treatment technologies and Life Cycle Assessment (ZHAW), knowledge engineering a nd 
machine learning (UPC) towards developing the tools and technologies for the holistic SHAREBOX platform, as well as 
in assisting in IS implementation in the industry and providing scientific validation to demonstrate the success of the 
SHAREBOX platform in facilitating and optimising resource sharing. The SMEs (IRIS and ISL) will work closely with the 
academic partners in integrating the tools into the SHAREBOX platform (IRIS) and for improving the state -of-the-art in 
IS delivery (ISL). The park operators and innovation actors (CCB, EIS, NEPIC, DECHEMA, AICE) will work closely with 
the SMEs and academics in sharing their knowledge of their industry members in the early stages of the work plan in 
relation to the practical and regulatory challenges and cons traints that will need to be fulfilled in order to have an 
exploitable and useful SHAREBOX platform, which they will validate from the perspective of its use as a tool for resource 
management at the park operation level. The industries (KEROS, KERAFRIT, IS SA, GUZMAN) will provide inputs, 
requirements and specifications from the company level to guide the development of the platform as a tool through which 
businesses will share data via secure APIs in relation to their process waste streams, raw materials re quirements, 
production schedules, etc. and they will validate the platform using this real process conditions. This is a highly relevant 
consortium that mobilises a meaningful collaboration across all levels of the work plan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 41 of 84 
 
 
 
Page 42 of 84 
 
 
Gantt chart showing the timing of the different WPs and their components 
 
 

SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2. Management structures and procedures 
 
Organisational structure and decision-making  
The project management will be performed by the project Coordinator IRIS based on their proven project management 
procedures (table 11 below) which adhere to their ISO 9001:2008 certified processes and UNE -EN-ISO 166002: 
Management Systems for R&D&I. In terms of the organisational structure (Figure 5), this consists of the Project 
Coordinator (the interface with the European Commission) who is supported by the strategic project management and 
decision making body - the Project Steering Committee . The executive management bodies are also envisaged: a 
Technology Development Team and a IS Implementation Team. The roles and decision making capacity of each 
is discussed below  
Project Coordinator   
The Project Coordinator ( Dr. Mirta  
Pinilla Rodriguez) is responsible for  
the day to day running of the project , 
and for ensuring that the work 
programme adheres to its schedule, 
fulfils its objectives, and the project 
meets the needs and expectations of 
all the partners. She will be active in 
steering the evolution of the project by 
closely monitoring the work 
performed by each partner. She will 
assume responsibility for ensuring 
that the project management  
procedures are being correctly 
implemented and that all deadlines  
and obligations are met. She will also 
act as the communication and 
administrative interface w ith the EC, 
to carry out the reporting and overall  
administrative management o f the . 
project.  As  this  is also a leadership  
role, it requires a profile that is sufficiently experienced, qualified and capacitated not only to supervise the execution of 
work programme and delegation of the work packages (WPs), but also one that can foment team-building and is a strong 
communicator, who can motivate the team and encourage proactive participation, facilitate collective problem solving 
and the taking of timely corrective actions.  
At company-level, IRIS has the demonstrable experience, available technical and administrative resources, linguistic 
and communications skills to make them a suitable candidate to successfully perform project management coordination 
tasks. In terms of the competence of Dr. Pinilla to successfully execute this role, she has solid project management 
experience, both at national and EC level. In FP7, she has effectively managed 2 Research for SME -AGs projects to 
conclusion, OPTIMALT (GA No. 218460-2) and COMPO -BALL (GA No. 243625), which were both completed at the 
beginning of 2013. With her team, she is also finalising 2 Research for SMEs projects: SMARTPADDY (GA No. 285861) 
and THIME (GA No. 315665) and the ERANET-MANUNET “MARE” project. As a result she is very familiar with all the 
modalities and administrative procedures involved in the management of EC research projects, from the negotiation 
process, preparing the Consortium Agreement, to the monitoring work, fulfilling reporting requirements, the use of tools 
for communication with the EC, etc. She understands the needs and preoccupations of industry and SMEs, and has 
been involved in defining specifications and delivering on research for numerous novel technologies in environmental 
and water management. Prior to this, she is experienced in the 
 
 
 
Page 43 of 84 
Figure 5- Overview of the SHAREBOX Management Structure 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
management of academia collaborative projects; she has managed and participated in several scientific projects both 
at national and EU level. She has shown herself to be a motivational leader, a fair and intelligent facilitator, with a sound 
understanding not only of optics and smart systems but also of process industries.  
Project Steering Committee: The Project Steering Committee (PSC) is the strategic management and decision making 
body within the consortium. It consists of the Project Coordinator and a key representative of each of the consortium 
partners/beneficiaries. The PSC will meet every 6 months and will be chaired by the Project Coordinator. The PSC  will 
closely monitor and control the work performed, following the principles of “quality, time, cost”. The Project Milestones 
(see Table in Part A) will be used as a valuable tool for determining whether or not the project is on schedule. The PSC 
will also manage the implementation of the innovation cycle, and the feedback linkages to the research. It will evaluate 
the knowledge as it is generated in line with its market impacts. It will also ensure that the project results are effectively 
protected and exploited to the full for future industrial growth and competitiveness. Key strategic issues, such as 
IPR protection mechanisms, IPR sharing and routes to exploitation will be discussed extensively during meetings of this 
Committee. It will also ensure that the project Business and Exploitation Plans are further planned and developed based 
on the draft plans provided in Section 2.2 and that a professional and engaging communication campaign is 
implemented. In terms of decision making mechanisms, when strategic decisions need to be taken, such as action to 
solve conflicts, action to mitigate critical risks to project implementation, action to manage changes in the work plan, all 
matters with regard to IPR and exploitation, etc., it will be the responsibility of the Project Coordinator to seek consensus 
with the Project Steering Committee, whereby each beneficiary will be assigned one vote. Decisions will be taken by 
simple majority. In the event of a tie situation, the Coordinator will take the final decision. Each representative of the 
PSC will be responsible for mobilising and coordinating the active and coherent participation of the other personnel from 
their organisation who are involved in the project team, and they will also ensure that reporting and cost statements from 
their organisation are submitted on time and correctly. Importantly, the following managerial positions will ensure a 
decentralised, expertise-centred approach to how core aspects of the project are run:  
- Innovation Manager- Mr. Alejandro Rosales (IRIS). Responsible for leading the partners in effective management 
of the innovation cycle of the project (this role is discussed under ‘Innovation Management’). He will act as a driver 
for the partners in defining the post -project strategy for ex ploiting the project results and in driving technology 
transfer. Alejandro has been the Chair of the Innovation Unit in IRIS for the past 2 years and is experienced in 
Innovation Management.  - IPR Manager - Prof. Miquel Sanchez -Marre (UPC).  Responsible for k nowledge management within the  
consortium. He will lead the consortium in protecting the project results where appropriate, and in maintaining 
confidentiality of the results until the IP is protected to safeguard the innovation impacts. Miquel has vast experience 
in relation to knowledge management, patent applications, open access publications, etc.  
- Communication & Dissemination Manager - Dr. Renata Körfer (DECHEMA).  Responsible for leading the  
consortium in further planning and implementation of the project Communication and Dissemination activities, and 
ensuring the project reaches out to different audiences in the most effective way. Renata has extensive expertise in 
outreach and engagement with policy makers and stakeholders, and in the dissemination of research results to EU 
Process Industry.  
Technology Development Team: This is an executive body for managing the multidisciplinary technology developments 
within the project. This team, which will consist of the WP and Task leaders from WP2-WP5, will be led by the qualified 
Technical Manager, Dr. Devrim Yazan (UT), who will ensure an integrated approach to the research and development 
work. This Team will meet at least every 3 months under the chair of the Technical Manager (the Project Coordinator 
will also be present). This meetings (which may be virtual, as appropriate) will review the progress of the developments, 
and will plan upcoming activities. The Technical Manager together with the team and the Project Coordinator will 
continually monitor for tec hnical, operational or logistical risks or problems that could jeopardise the timely delivery of 
the technological outputs of the project so that appropriate mitigation and contingency strategies can be planned as 
appropriate. Any technology development matters of strategic importance that require decisions to be taken will be 
communicated to the PSC via the Project Coordinator so that a decision can be made.  
IS Implementation Team: The IS Implementation Team will be led by the IS Manager, Rachel Lombardi (ISL) and will 
ensure a coordinated an expert -led approach to the pilot implementations in real industrial settings. Rachel has 
longstanding expertise in IS and is a very well-respected professional within the IS networks in Europe and  
Page 44 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
internationally. She comes with the weight of expertise of ISL’s 10 years in the practical implementation of IS globally. 
Other qualified IS experts from the consortium will be included in this team (from UT, UNIVLEEDS, USTRATH…) and 
they will cooperate with the pilot implementation sites (parks and companies) to ensure a standardised approach and 
that best practice is followed in how the pilots are implemented and validated. The IS Team will also be a valuable source 
of knowledge for the development teams.  
Management Procedures  
The SHAREBOX project (like any other project) consists of a series of inter -related activities that will require a set of 
resources (time, money, people, infrastructure, materials, consumables, communication, quality, risk, etc.) to meet pre-
defined objectives. Robust management procedures (Table 11)- adhering to ISO 9001:2008 and UNE-EN-ISO 166002: 
Management Systems for R&D&I - will serve as a tool for ensuring the project is successfully managed. These 
procedures are supported by certified processes, methodologies and documentation in IRIS, and will be available to 
partners through the Project Management Procedures Handbook that all partners will be fully briefed on at Project launch 
(D8.1). 
 
 
Type  
  
 
Work plan 
Review 
 
 
 
   
 
    
 
Issues 
Management 
 
   
 
    
 
Scope Management 
 
 
   
 
   
 
Risk 
  
   
 
    
 
Conflict of interest 
Management 
 
   
 
 
  
Table 11-Summary of project management procedures  
Description of Procedure  
 
The workplan will be reviewed on a monthly basis (via monthly Technical Reports submitted by the leaders of each 
of the active WP and Task). A high level one page planner tool will be used to review the schedule, progress and 
spend. The critical path of the project will be evaluat ed during the meetings of the PSC, whereby the Project 
Milestones (see Project Milestones Table in Part A) will be used as a valuable tool for determining whether or not 
the project is on schedule. Any potential adjustments to the workplan will be discussed and proposed to the PSC. 
Risks will be flagged and managed under the Risk Management Procedure.   
Issues can be raised through verbal or written means, but eventually an issue must be formally documented using 
an Issue Submission Form, which is then entered into the Issues Log. The PC will assign issues to an appropriate 
responsible from the consortium (depending on nature of the issue) for resolution. Impact to the project in terms of 
budget, schedule, and scope will be estimated. The resolution or course of action will be documented on the Issue 
Submission Form. If resolving an issue involves changing the scope of the project, the Issue will be closed and the 
Scope Change Management procedure will be used instead to manage the resolution.  
While scope changes are considered unlikely, should a scope change be requested (only to be recommended in 
extraordinary circumstances and maybe arising through the resolution of an important issue or a high-level risk) a 
Scope Change Request form will be completed and  brought before the PSC for discussion. If deemed vital, the 
request will be entered into the Scope Change Log and will be assigned to the Technology Manager for 
investigation. If the scope change involves an addition in scope that will not significantly i mpact on project cost, 
effort, and duration and the project will still be completed within the agreed upon cost, effort, and duration, the PSC 
may approve the Scope Change Request. However, if a scope change involves a shift in the scope of the project, 
the EC will be informed.   
Discussed below under ‘Critical risks and mitigation measures’.  
 
The project ethos is based on common understanding and vision, transparency, open dialogue and active 
participation, which will mitigate against conflicts. Project  participants will be encouraged to raise any issues of 
concern or worry during meetings, or in private with the PC. The PC will also actively monitor for conflicts, to ensure 
early identification, an analysis of their stage and the implementation of the a ppropriate resolution process (see 
Table 12). The PC is responsible for ensuring that all conflicts are dealt with as soon as they arise in order to 
minimise their negative effect and progression to the next stage. Conflicts that cannot be resolved between  the 
parties concerned will be brought before the PSC for a resolution or decision.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 45 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication Management 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Quality Management 
 
 
 
 
 
An Internal Communication Plan is in place to guide the internal communication process, which includes: 
Formal project meetings: Agendas for all on-site and virtual meetings will be required. Discussions, decisions 
and actions will be recorded in minutes, which will be circulated to all partners, edited and agreed. The PC will 
use the ‘Kick-off' (KO) meeting to establish positive working practices and to set the tone for all future conduct. 
Thereafter the PSC will meet every 6 months to review the general progress of the work and to discuss all 
strategic matters that are common to all project beneficiaries. Extraordinary meetings of the PSC will be 
convoked in the event of identified risks, conflicts, problems, etc. The Executive Teams will meet every 3 months 
(teleconferencing facilities can be used as appropriate) to enable the WP and Task leaders to review together the 
technical issues of the project. The technical progress and results of each of the active tasks will be presented, 
along with the actions required for the upcoming 3 month work period. Active working groups may meet amongst 
themselves more regularly if required, and especially during periods of particularly high task activity or prior to 
major project milestones. Virtual tools will be used in as much as possible for these extra meetings.  
Day-to-day communication: The project intranet, e -mail, Skype, and videoconferencing tools will be used for  
regular and agile communication. The partners will assume the responsibility to report to the PC on all significant 
actions/conclusions and immediately should any problems arise.   
The Quality Function Deployment (QFD) method will be employed to transform user demands into design quality, 
to deploy the functions forming quality, and to deploy methods for achieving the design quality into subsystems and 
component parts, and ultimately to specific elements of the manufacturing process. The QDF will be implemented 
at the start of the project (through WP1) and will continually review the project management structure and plans, 
the specific quality objectives and quality indicators for each development stage of the project, the quality assurance 
and control activities (what is controlled, who controls, when), the details of personnel with respective 
responsibilities and assignments for each partners, the information exc hange and dissemination, control of 
information exchange and reporting, and the documentation management and control including identification of 
critical points and risks assessment. In combination, the ‘V- Cycle’ will be implemented, which fulfils the criteria of 
the Demming Cycle for continuous improvement and client satisfaction based on the previously programmed 
validation and verification work. 
  
Table 12- Conflict stages and resolution strategy  
 
Stage No. 
   
Conflict stage 
   
Resolution strategy 
  
        
 
         
 1    Potential for conflict exists    Open dialogue and conciliation between the parties concerned  
 
         
 2    Latent conflict- where a situation could    Open dialogue and conciliation between the parties concerned  
 
     easily spill over into conflict      
 
         
 3    Open conflict    a) Negotiation first among PSC (whereby decision-making procedures for PSC  
 
         apply); b) Mediation next; c) Arbitration as a last resort  
 
         
 4    Aftermath conflict    a) Negotiation first among PSC (whereby decision-making procedures for PSC  
 
         apply); b) Mediation next; c) Arbitration as a last resort  
 
 
Appropriateness to the complexity and scale of the project  
Our organisational/management structure and decision-making procedures are appropriate in view of the nature of the 
action (Research and Innovation action), its size and geographic coverage, its ambition and expected innovation 
impacts. In short, they will ensure:  
1. Effective management of the day-to-day running of the project and its resources, and appropriate interfacing 
with the EC (Project Coordinator);  
2. Strategic management and decision making (Project Steering Committee);  
3. Integrated management of the overall technological development and it potential risks (Technology Development 
Team) and continuous engagement with the IS Manager as well as the industries for an industry/market driven 
development.  
4. Holistic coordination, planning and execution of the IS implementation pilots in the industry (IS  Implementation 
Team). Active link between the development work and the pilot sites to ensure the Process and the other cross -
sectorial industries are engaged in a meaningful innovation cycle.  
5. Decentralised management through the appointment of additional  qualified managers to ensure we deliver high 
impact: Innovation Manager (towards market-oriented outputs and planning to realise technology transfer  
Page 46 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
opportunities); IPR Manager (results protection for gaining competitive advantage); Communication & 
Dissemination manager (stakeholder engagement and wide communication/dissemination of project’s results).  
Dedicated committees, teams and managers with key roles and responsibilities will allow for the effective management 
of this highly diverse and multidisciplinary project. It will ensure that the necessary skills-sets are mobilised at the different 
levels of leadership, as opposed to a centralised, one -dimensional management approach, which would be highly 
unlikely to deliver the necessary versatility. As such we have created an integral approach to the management of the 
project, giving all participants have a stake in management, to ensure that the project achieves its development 
objectives, activates a dynamic innovation c ycle, manages the knowledge and IP generated, as well as the other 
innovation-related activities required to deliver market exploitable results and to map out the route for post -project use 
of the project results for impact.  
Innovation management  
As a key objective of publicly-funded research is that it should lead to the exploitation of results, which goes one step 
further than the mere production and dissemination of new scientific knowledge68, an active innovation cycle is a vital 
component for ensuring success in market-oriented research projects.  
Our two Executive Teams (Technology Development Team and IS Implementation Team), and each its own experienced 
manager, will regularly engage to ensure that the worlds of technology development and IS pilot implementations in the 
industry are systematically connected in an Innovation Cycle, whereby the technology developers benefit from feedback 
from the industry and guidance from the IS experts, and the pilot industries and parks can influence on the development 
work. This entire process needs to be well managed, through a robust innovation strategy, whereby the incorporation of 
feedback and the exploration of market opportunities should start from the very beginning of the innovation cycle and 
not long after  the beginning of development activities 68. In the case of our SHAREBOX Innovation Cycle, it will 
commence at the start of the project with the QFD process that will translate the “voice of the client” (i.e. KEROS, 
KERAFRIT, ISSA, GUZMAN, CCB, ESI, ITC, NEPIC -and DECHEMA as the wider voice of the European Process 
Industry), into the “voice of the engineer/developer” to ensure that the system specifications for the platform (the “House 
of Quality” from the QFD process) are robust and market oriented. From there we will mobilise a continuous iterative 
process whereby the development work, which is ongoing throughout the project, will be closely linked to the industry 
pilot implementation sites. This will ensure that the Process I ndustries are involved in a true co -creation process. At a 
holistic level, a series of feedback loops will incorporate feedback from designers, engineers, IS experts and end-users, 
as well as, incorporate feedback and explore market opportunities in parallel with other key steps of the innovation cycle 
(e.g. research, prototyping, industrial demonstration etc.). Our “House of Quality” from the QFD process will provide a 
solid benchmark against which the outputs from the development work can be evaluated. As  SHAREBOX is a highly 
multidisciplinary development, the outputs of which will be trialled via practical industry case studies, these trials will 
commence (in M13) well before the end of innovation cycle to enable user feedback to play a prominent role in the 
innovation cycle and allows for further advancement of the project outputs (through optimisation work that will be 
performed as necessary during the pilot implementations).  
As the successful management of innovation requires an understanding of both the market and the technical aspects, a 
competent Innovation Manager  who is capable of fomenting an integrated team approach  will be appointed to 
mobilise the involvement of this multidisciplinary team. Mr. Alejandro Rosales, a business focussed professional who 
has solid experience chairing the Innovation Unit in IRIS, is competent in leading teams to ensure “no thinking in terms 
of silos”, and is savvy enough to engage with external actors and the diverse stakeholder groups as required to ensure 
“openness for ideas from outside” 68. Moreover, the Project Steering Committee (PSC) brings together the necessary 
multidisciplinarity combining the freest thinkers from the development team, the market and business -focussed skills 
sets from the technological/supply SMEs, and the senior actors from the end-user industries who will bring all the inputs 
of early adopters of first clients. Bi -annual meetings will allow the PSC to effectively manage the innovation cycle, 
the core elements of which have been embedded as tasks into the Innovation Impacts WP (WP7)  
 
 
68 Innovation. How to convert research into commercial success story? Part 3: Innovation Management for Practitioners. European Commission. Directorate-
General for Research and Innovation, 2013. Nanosciences, Nanotechnologies, Materials and New Production Technologies (NMP) 
 
 
Page 47 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
to facilitate their formal management and execution. Combining all these skill sets with knowledge management, IPR 
and patent expertise, ensures that the SHAREBOX project has mobilised a solid and experienced approach to innovation 
management.  
Critical risks and mitigation measures  
Given that an inherent characteristic of research and innovation projects is technological and scale-up uncertainty, which 
may result in project failure, and time and resources spent without any tangible return, these risks will be carefully 
managed by Project Coordinator, with the support of the other Managers in the consortium and by instilling a risk 
management and ‘red flag raising’ culture across the entire team. Risks are not only technology-related, and also include: 
market related risks, technology related risks, environment related risks, and organisation related risks 69. The process 
of risk identification and management will be based upon the principles and guidelines of the FERMA (ISO 31000 related) 
Standard70. Some initial risks have been identified already and are listed in the Critical Risks Table in Part A with the 
assistance of the Risk Exposure Level assessment matrix (Table 13).  
Table 13- Risk Exposure Level assessment matrix  
          LIKELIHOOD    
 
       Low (L)   Medium (M)   High (H)  
 
 
IMPACT   Negligible (N)   Low   Low   Medium  
 
   Marginal (MA)   Low   Medium   Medium  
 
   Critical (C)   Medium   Medium   High  
 
   
Uncontrollable (U) 
  
Medium 
  
High 
  
high 
 
 
           
 
 
During the project the management of these (and other risk as identified) will be based on a list of co-ordinated activities 
embracing the 7Rs and  4Ts of (hazard) risk management: Recognition or identification of risks; Ranking through 
evaluation of risks; Responding to significant risks through consideration of: Tolerance of risk; Treatment of risk; Transfer 
of risk; Termination of risk; Resourcing  controls; Reaction planning; Reporting and monitoring risk performance; 
Reviewing of risk management framework. Classification and importance of each risk is determined by two factors: 
likelihood and impact, which together determine the exposure level as presented in the matrix below. A continual process 
of monitoring during the management of this project, will ensure that critical risks are quickly identified and managed so 
that they do not jeopardise the future of the project. 
 
3.3. Consortium as a whole 
 
Description of the consortium  
The SHAREBOX consortium is made up of 17 partners from 6 European countries (Spain, United Kingdom, Netherlands, 
Germany, Switzerland, Turkey) and collectively represents a highly focused and synergistic balance of research  and 
industry fields, expertise, skills, resources, and European reach, to constitute a complete value chain of actors that 
together are capable of achieving the project objectives.  The call topic requires that “projects should enable the 
implementation of a broad variety of technologies, encompassing a wide range of disciplines, such as fundamental 
science, and plant engineering and management. This requires a multidisciplinary team. Without a pan European 
approach, the critical mass of expertise required for the multidisciplinary research and development team could not be 
gathered. Single technique specialists cannot, by definition, resolve multidisciplinary and multifaceted problems.  
The consortium leverages a powerful industry-academic partnership.  
The project is industry driven- under the leadership of the experienced SME, IRIS (SPIRE members and the coordinator 
of a successful SPIRE -01 project called PROPAT) - to ensure the research and innovation work and the resulting 
technological outputs are relevant for market needs. The strong industrial and commercial involvement through the 
individual companies on the one hand (IRIS, ISL, KEROS, KERAFRIT, ISSA, GUZMAN- numerous of which are SMEs), 
and via the Industrial Parks and Clusters (CCB, NEPIC and ECI) and the sectorial research  
 
 
69 Kasap et. al. (2007). Risk Management in R&D Projects. Management of Engineering and Technology, Portland, US. 5-9 Aug 2007. Print ISBN: 978-1-8908-4315-1 
70 Federation of European Risk Management Associations (www.ferma.eu) 
 
Page 48 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
association (ITC-AICE), who provide a pathway to thousands of companies representing SPIRE and cross-sectors. This 
industry participation spans the entire value chain necessary to succeed in delivering impact and exploitation pathways 
for the projects results: from IS delivery specialists (ISL), to technology and ITCs (IRIS) to and the process industries 
and cross sectors (KEROS, KERAFRIT, ITC -AICE, CCB, ISSA, GUZMAN, NEPIC, ECI). The pre sence of a highly 
qualified and experienced market actor  (DECHEMA, who are also SPIRE members) with over 5500 members -
scientists, engineers, companies, organisations and institutes- provides an impressive pathway to the process industry 
in Europe. Moreover, there is strong industrialisation capacity post-project to further develop the project results and with 
a clear route to market (IRIS, ISL), as well as to adopt and further roll out the platform for major impact in terms of the 
circular economy, competitiveness and growth.  
The industrial consortium has secured a very solid participation of scientific/academic actors (UT, UNIVLEEDS, UPC, 
ZHAW, USTRATH), who will contribute their knowledge and methodologies towards developing the tools and 
technologies for the holistic SHAREBOX platform, and in assisting in IS implementation in the industry and providing 
scientific validation to demonstrate the success of the SHAREBOX platform in facilitating and optimising resource 
sharing and IS in the participating Proce ss industries and Parks. These organisations have a strong applied approach 
to their research and the majority of them are members of the SPIRE Association (UNIVLEEDS, ZWAH, AICE -ITC). 
They are committed to working closely with the European Process Industry for realising the goals of the SPIRE research 
roadmap. In order to evidence how each partner is relevant for the project and to show the complementarity between 
the participants, the partners are clustered according to their positioning on the value  chain. The broad role of each 
cluster of partners in contributing to the project objectives, and, indeed, in contributing to the expected impacts of the 
project are illustrated in Figure 6, testament to how they are suited and are committed to the tasks assigned to them.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6- Overview of the consortium and how each contributes to SHAREBOX  
In terms of the relevance and capacity of the consortium to implement the work plan, on the one hand, there is sufficient 
research and technological background and expertise in the fields of: Industrial symbiosis (ISL), energy scheduling 
and conversion (UNIVLEEDS and USTRATH),  In-put-Output modelling, Game Theory, Agent Based Modelling 
(UT), purification and waste treatment technologies and Life Cycle Assessment (ZHAW), knowledge engineering 
and machine learning (UPC), ICT and software platform development (IRIS); Ceramics processing 
 
Page 49 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
(KEROS, KERAFRIT) and raw materials (ISSA); Chemical processing (CCB); Cross sector industry  (GUZMAN); 
Park Operators and clusters (CCB, NEPIC, EIS, AICE -ITC) and outreach to the wider  EU Process industry 
(DECHEMA).  
There is no conflictive overlap among the consortium and each participating organisation has a clearly defined r ole in 
the project, which will mitigate the risk of conflicts arising during the project. Indeed, our consortium covering the whole 
value chain, brings a series of key strengths due to some key features of its participants: Chemie Cluster Bayern -
linking ov er 260 Bavarian chemical companies ; ISL - World Leaders in Industrial Symbiosis; Initiators of the award 
winning National Industrial Symbiosis Programme; DECHEMA- Outstanding positioning within the European Process 
industry; IRIS- SME leader of a SPIRE -1 project and active in developing monitoring, control and decision support 
platforms solutions for the industry, and who have just recently beta launched a SaaS cloud based platform for SME 
operations management that is generating very positive independent reviews; UNIVLEEDS- Participants in F3 Factory 
project, which was the Project that led to the creation of the SPIRE PPP; KEROS, KERAFRIT, ISSA, GUZMAN- cross 
sector companies who currently have no symbiosis amongst themselves, but who have come together to e stablish 
symbiosis and to widen the network during the project under the management of ITC-AICE; A core group of Suschem 
members who lobbied for the SPIRE programme creation; to mention but a few statements that reinforce the outstanding 
quality and relevance of our consortium.  
In short, SHAREBOX unites sufficient reputable actors from the scientific fields, as well as from the industry value chain, 
in order to be able to realistically implement the ambitious work plan, to protect the knowledge and plan fo r its use and 
communication to a wide audience of different stakeholders, so that the true impacts of the results can be felt:  
The SHAREBOX Platform will bring a world-first secure and flexible resource and energy management platform 
to the industry that will be based on the latest developments in secure ICT tools and artificial intelligence 
offering an holistic approach to energy and resource management systems in process industries and 
overcoming the difficult cross-sectorial resource exchanges for improved efficiencies. 
 
The industrial/commercial involvement in the project to ensure exploitation of the results  
There is strong industry leadership and involvement  in this consortium. Each industry participant has clear 
expectations and commitments towards commercially using the results of this project in their businesses, which is 
manifested through the initial exploitation and business plans presented in Section 2.2.  
While the involvement of industry in R&D consortia increases the success rate of market-oriented exploitation, vertical 
integration (i.e. including the whole value chain) in R&D projects is a success factor for market -oriented 
exploitation68. To this end, SHAREBOX includes a technological SME with research perform ing capacity who can 
contribute to technology push (IRIS), who are not only capacitated to contribute to the R&D effort, especially in the 
context of scale-up, integration and demonstration of the results during the project,  but who can absorb the 
knowledge generated to protect it, in order to further develop and industrialise the outputs post -project towards 
commercialisation. The inclusion of an SME dedicated to  industrial symbiosis delivery (ISL), will ensure an  
exploitation pathway for the platform to serve the industry demand that will be stimulated as a result of the market pull 
generated by the participating process and cross sectorial industries and parks (KEROS, KERAFRIT, ITC -AICE, CCB, 
ISSA, GUZMAN, NEPIC, ECI), who during the project will contribu te end-user industry knowledge and experience to 
assist in mainstreaming the results of the project and in validating them in the field. Importantly, the presence of large 
enterprises, such as KEROS, KERAFRIT, ISSA, GUZMAN, can make a difference in success ful market oriented 
exploitation as long as the research outcomes are in line with their ‘expectations’68. SHAREBOX has secured the interest 
and involvement of these industries at the early stages of the preparation of this bi d, and they all understand its scope 
and have been very committed in collaborating with the rest of the partners to contribute to the definition of the Platform 
specifications, as well as participation as demonstration sites whereby SHAREBOX will be used i n their plants and will 
help them to establish symbiosis amongst themselves. Their engagement during the proposal preparation stage has 
helped to shape the scope and ambition of this bid. 
 
Finally, the involvement of a non-profit making society for chemical engineering and biotechnology (DECHEMA) who is 
dedicated to transferring research results to industry, as well as providing training and educational programmes, 
is an invaluable market actor to complete the consortium by contributing to close the innovation gap 
 
 
Page 50 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
that frequently prevents industry adoption the results and outputs of R&D, by facilitating the advice and training needed 
for the successful implementation of new technologies such as SHAREBOX in the European process industry.  
Other countries: Switzerland is now a non -associated third country participant. Our Swiss partner, ZHAW, the Zurich  
University of Applied Sciences, has been included in this consortium to their excellent expertise in purification and waste 
treatment technology and LCA. Funding will be provided from Switzerland. Erni Peter, director at the Eurosearch Head 
Office in Bern, Switzerland said that "In the event that Switzerland will be treated as a third country in calls for Horizon 
2020 project p roposals, funds for contributions to the EU framework programme will instead be paid directly to 
researchers in Switzerland, by the State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation of Switzerland.". 
 
3.4. Resources to be committed 
 
Table 3.4b: ‘Other direct cost’ items (travel, equipment, other goods and services, large research 
infrastructure)   
1 IRIS Cost (€) Justification 
   Travel costs to project meetings (13 meeting in 3 years, 2 people travelling - ~1.2K€/meeting x13= ). Travel of engineers  to 
 Travel 27600 industry sites for installation and validation work (2 engineers x 3 trips x~2K/trip- €12K) 
 Equipment   
 Other goods and  Cost of IPR protection and publication fees for open access journals; exhibition space and subscription to 2 tradeshows 
 services 82000 (€12 K); Leaflets, posters, other dissemination materials (€10K); Supercomputing cloud hosting and servers (60 K) 
 Total 109600  
    
2 ISL Cost (€) Justification 
   Travel costs to project meetings: 9 General Steering Committee meetings x ~1 K€/meeting = 7.2K; 5 technical meetings- 
   €4 K; travel to demo sites- €4K; travel to dissemination/training events- €3 K, plus see additional travel costs detailed 
 Travel 66180 below associated with marketing and trial of system in Turkey, Germany and UK 
 Equipment   
 Other goods and   
 services 12000 Cost of IPR protection, organistaion/subscription dissemination events, etc. Computing. 
 Total 78180  
    
3 UT Cost (€) Justification 
   Travel costs to project meetings: 9 General Steering Committee meetings x ~1 K€/meeting = 7.2K; 5 technical meetings- 
 Travel 18200 €4 K; travel to demo sites- €4K; travel to dissemination/training events- €3 K) 
 Equipment 8000 ABM software 
 Other goods and   
 services 8000 Cost of IPR protection and publication fees for open access journals + subscription to conferences and events (8K); 
 Total 34200  
   
4 UNIVLEEDS Cost (€) Justification 
 Travel 17547 Travel costs to General Steering Committee meetings and technical meetings, demo sites, dissemination/training events 
 Equipment 3000 Computer equipment 
 Other goods and   
 services 3000 Consumables 
 Total 23547  
   
5 ZHAW Cost (€) Justification 
   Travel costs to project meetings: 9 General Steering Committee meetings x ~1 K€/meeting = 7.2K; 5 technical meetings- 
 Travel 18200 €4 K; travel to demo sites- €4K; travel to dissemination/training events- €3 K) 
 Equipment   
 Other goods and   
 services 8000 Open access publications. Dissemination materials. Organisation of training session a nd workshop. Subscription to events  
 Total 26200  
   
6 ITC Cost (€) Justification 
   Travel costs to project meetings: 9 General Steering Committee meetings x ~1 K€/meeting = 7.2K; 5 technical meetings- 
 Travel 18200 €4 K; travel to demo sites- €4K; travel to dissemination/training events- €3 K) 
 Equipment   
 Other goods and   
 services 8000 Open access publications. Dissemination materials. Organisation of training session and workshop. Subscription to events  
 Total 26200   
 
 
Page 51 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
7  UPC   Cost (€)  Justification 
       Travel costs to project meetings: 9 General Steering Committee meetings x ~1 K€/meeting = 7.2K; 5 technical meetings- 
   Travel  18200 €4 K; travel to demo sites- €4K; travel to dissemination/training events- €3 K) 
   Equipment  2000 Computing 
  Other goods and     
   services  8000 Cost of IPR protection, open access publishing, organistaion/subscription dissemination events, etc. 
   Total  28200  
       
8  DECHEMA  Cost (€)  Justification 
       Travel costs to project meetings (13 meeting in 3 years, 1000€ per meeting), conferences, workshops, training sessions, 
   Travel  20000 participation in the relevant standardization technical committees of an existing European standards 
   Equipment     
  Other goods and    Cost of IPR protection and publication fees for open access journal; consumables and supplies; licence to acces the 
   services  15000 standard sources; organisation of training session and project workshop 
   Total  35000  
9  CCB   Cost (€)  Justification 
       Travel costs to project meetings: 9 General Steering Committee meetings x ~1 K€/meeting = 7.2K; 5 technical meetings- 
   Travel  18200 €4 K; travel to demo sites- €4K; travel to dissemination/training events- €3 K) 
   Equipment     
  Other goods and     
   services  8000 Dissemination materials. Organisation of training session and workshop. Subscription to evenrs 
   Total  26200  
       
10  KEROS  Cost (€)  Justification 
   Travel  18200 Travel costs to project meeti ngs: 9 General Steering Committee meetings x ~1 K€/meeting = 7.2K; 5 technical meetings - €4 
   Equipment     
  Other goods and     
   services  12000 Dissemination materials. Organisation of training session and workshop. Subscription to events. Consumables (4K) 
   Total  30200  
       
11  KERAFRIT  Cost (€)  Justification 
   Travel  17000 Travel costs (meetings, conferences, workshops, mobility between demo sites, traning events) 
   Equipment     
  Other goods and     
   services  19000 Dissemination materials. Subscription to events. (8k) Flow meter, gas analyzer for obtaining data (8K) Consumables (3K) 
   Total  36000  
        
12  ISSA   Cost (€)  Justification 
   Travel  16000 Travel to project meetings. Travel between demo sites. Travel to dissemination events/trainings 
   Equipment     
  Other goods and     
   services  15000 Dissemination materials. Subscription to events. IPR and legal costs. Consumables (6K) 
   Total  31000  
13  GUZMAN  Cost (€)  Justification 
   Travel  6800 Travel costs to project meetings 
   Equipment     
  Other goods and     
   services  8000 Dissemination materials. Organisation of training session and workshop. Subscription to events 
   Total  14800  
        
14  BPC   Cost (€)  Justification 
   Travel     
   Equipment     
  Other goods and     
   services     
   Total   0  
15 ECI  Cost (€) Justification 
      Travel costs to project meetings: 9 General Steering Committee meetings x ~1 K€/meeting = 7.2K; 5 technical meetings- €4 K; 
   Travel  18200 travel to demo sites- €4K; travel to dissemination/training events- €3 K) 
   Equipment     
  Other goods and     
   services  8000 Dissemination materials. Organisation of training session and workshop. Subscription to events 
   Total  26200    
 
 
 
Page 52 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
16 NEPIC Cost (€) Justification 
 Travel 6000 Travel costs to project meetings and events 
 Equipment   
 Other goods and   
 services   
 Total 6000  
    
17 USTRATH Cost (€) Justification 
   Travel costs to project meetings: 9 General Steering Committee meetings x ~1 K€/meeting = 7.2K; 5 technical meetings- €4 K; 
 Travel 17829 travel to demo sites- €4K; travel to dissemination/training events- €3 K) 
 Equipment 3100 Computer equipment 
 Other goods and   
 services 23500 Cost of IPR protection, organistaion/subscription dissemination events, etc. (8k); Consumables (15.5K). 
 Total 44429   
 
4. Members of the consortium 
 
4.1. Participants  
 
 Participant 1 Name (short name)/ Country Innovacio i Recerca Industrial i Sostenible (IRIS) / Spain 
 no.    
Description of the legal entity  
IRIS was established in Barcelona in 2007 as an advanced engineering and R&D company, specialising in the fie ld of 
process engineering. IRIS has expertise in the following fields of engineering: Production Processes (with a strong 
specialisation in novel technologies); Smart Systems; and Optical Systems, combined with a knowledge and research 
capacity in environm ental science, food technology and materials science. IRIS applies its knowledge and expertise to 
develop solutions for industry predominantly in the fields of advanced process monitoring and control, as well as production 
data management, for the food, ag riculture, chemical and pharmaceutical industries, among others. The company has a 
policy of continuous investment for growth, and currently employs 48 staff based in 2 sites (Barcelona and Dublin), which 
are equipped with engineering workshops (3), analyt ical and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an 
electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified  and also is certified under UNE-EN-ISO 166002: 
Management Systems R&D&i.  
Main tasks that will be performed  
IRIS will act as the Project Coordinators. They have extensive expertise in the management of industry -driven projects 
(B2B projects and FP7 R&D projects). Their project management procedures are ISO and UNE certified, and they have 
an internal PMO that has the necessary r esources and skills to ensure smooth administrative and financial management 
of the project. In addition, IRIS will also lead WP1, whereby they will lead the consortium in the implementation of the QDF 
tool (and Kano methodology) for engaging with the Proc ess Industries to map out their requirements that will feed into 
system specifications for the Platform, and for further definition and planning of the Demo trials. They will also lead WP4 
whereby the will build the Platform: designing the architecture, co ding the tools, establishing the API with the 
supercomputing cloud provider), building the databases, the software, etc. They will also build a virtual simulator for testing 
and troubleshooting the platform. In addition, they will deploy iterative versions of the platform among the demo sites and 
they will set up the necessary communications in the industries. IRIS will also contribute their skills in knowledge/IPR 
management, as well as in commercial branding, reaching industry, the development of SaaS pro ducts and business 
models. They will also contribute to knowledge transfer and training activities and gearing up for the post -project phase. 
They will lead the development of the business plans, and they will be the chairs of the Innovation Committee.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the proposal  
The Smart Systems group has expertise in the development of software, web and mobile applications, as well as cloud -
based systems. The group unites expertise in sensor readings, process logic  and control, and modelling, coupled with 
knowledge predictive and adaptive learning capable of describing and analysing the given situation and taking smart 
actions based on the available data. The Group is currently working on a number of projects relate d to Wireless Sensor 
Networks where the above mentioned is applied. Specialised staff (software and telecommunication engineers with 
programming experience) that work to the Agile methodology and philosophy (scrum and kanban) for developing complex 
applications that include hardware interfaces, SQL and No-SQL databases (MySQL, PostgresDB, Couchbase   
Page 53 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
among others) and advanced and user -friendly graphic user interfaces not only for PCs (using Windows Presentation 
Foundation) but also for smartphones (Android, iOS) or web-based access (HTML 5). Software engineers skilled in a wide 
variety of languages and operating systems as well as low -level programming (microcontrollers). Strong background in 
data processing and data mining, chemometrics, and mathematical and predictive modelling in the context of advanced 
monitoring in industrial and agricultural applications as part of collaborative projects as well as B2B projects with industry. 
This team of developers includes soft ware engineers, modellers, programmers, back -end and front-end web and mobile 
platform developers, as well as graphical designers. They have worked on the development of predictive models, decision 
support systems, data -based driven web portals, Apps, and cloud-based applications for numerous B2B and European 
projects. The team also has expertise in Software As A Service (SaaS) new product development, deployment and support. 
Strong culture in Innovation Management- since 2012 IRIS has operated an Innovation Committee and Innovation Unit for 
monetizing the company’s knowledge and development capacity towards marketable products & services.  
In terms of project management expertise, IRIS is a highly experienced coordinator of over 35 projects during FP7, as well 
as leading 2 MANUNET projects, not to mention the management of B2B contracts with industry. Internally, IRIS uses agile 
KANBAN methodologies to manage the work of the engineering team. IRIS are also coordinators of a project that was 
funded under H2020 SPIRE-1-Integrated Process Control (ProPAT- Grant Agreement no. 637232.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
DR. MIRTA RODRIGUEZ PINILLA. (Female) Doctor of Science and Technology from the Helsinki University of Technology 
in 2004 (Ph -D thesis - “Signatures of Superfluidity in Atomic Fermi Gases"). Degree in Physics from the Universidad 
Complutense de Madrid. Masters in Energy and Sustainable Development from the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya. 
Prior to joining IRIS she held different research positions CSIC (National Research Council of Spain), Institute of Photonic 
Sciences in Barcelona, University of Oxford and the Nanoscience Centre in Jyväskylä, Finland. Expertise in the 
management and development of scientific projects in theoretical quantum physics. Author of over 23 scientific papers in 
peer reviewed Journals (Science, Nature Physics, Nature Photonics, and Physical Review Letters). Co -supervised a 
doctoral thesis. Member of the ANEP, National Evaluat ion Agency and has participated in several evaluation panels for 
the Ministry of Science and Innovation of Spain.  
MSc. ALEJANDRO ROSALES (male) has a M. Sc. in Physics from the Universidad de La Habana (1986). His background 
comprises theoretical and tech nical skills in several scientific and technological areas: optics, lasers, high vacuum, 
colorimetry, UV-VIS-NIR-MIR spectroscopy, chemometrics and design of measurement instruments. He has extensive 
practical experience in programming, electronics and mec hanical CAD design as well as R&D methodology and 
management. His career has included positions as researcher applications engineer, design engineer, business developer 
and R&D manager. In 2000s, he worked in the FTIR spectroscopy field applied to quality control in the agro-food (wine) 
industry, whereby he developed two new measurement instruments for wine analysis. His career as industrial physicist has 
been focused in applying his wide expertise to provide solutions for industrial problems. Since 2011, h e has been the 
Technical Manager in IRIS, leading a staff of 20 engineers and researchers involved in R&D projects aimed at developing 
novel high-end solutions for industry. Currently, he is the Science & Technology Manager in IRIS. 
 
SERGI CASBAS (male). Scrum Master. Computer Science Engineer by Open University of Catalonia and Certified Scrum 
Master by Scrum Alliance. Scrum Master with numerous scrum teams in diverse areas (Game Developing, IT department, 
R&D) applying agile techniques adapted for each team and project. Large experience in programming management tools, 
accountability applications, statistical and data collection systems on many programming languages like C, C++, 
VisualBasic, PHP, ASP, Java and .NET. Wide knowledge on database design and Da tabase Management Systems 
(MySQL, Postgres and MSSQLServer). The following software products have been developed by Sergi as Scrum Master: 
Phonefocus – phone bill platform; ZITRO (recreational machines factory) machines software.  
DR. ANDRAS GEFFERTH (male). Modeller. Ph.D. in Computer Science (2005) and M.Sc. in Computer Science (1998)  
from Budapest University of Technology and Economics (BUTE). Besides computer science his background includes 
mathematical modelling and stochastic processes. Prior to IRIS,  he has industry experience at Morgan Stanley as a 
quantitative researcher working on pricing and risk models for various financial derivatives. Research fellow at BUTE 
participating in several R&D projects in the fields of video transmission, data network  traffic identification, data network 
traffic modelling and analysis. Teaching and supervision of M.Sc. students, giving lectures and supervising laboratory work. 
Expertise in various programming and scripting languages-C++, Matlab, Tcsh, Awk and Python. Co-author of several peer 
reviewed publications.  
NORMAN MORELL ASENSIO. (Male). Computer Engineer from Polytechnic University of Catalonia (2012). For his 
Page 54 of 84 
 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
thesis he developed a model-view-controller PHP (OOP) framework for a website and Intranet for an NGO. He began his 
career in a home automation company (Windows network administrator and Access/Visual Basic developer) and in a 
computer academy teaching about web knowledge. Afterwards he joined the Rationalization and Methods Department of 
a financial entity where he analysed and upgraded all the business processes of their office network in order to automate 
then. In the same entity he was promoted to the e -business department where he spent 10 year as a Java developer -
analyst and also managed development projects. Prior to joining IRIS he was working in a software consulting company 
developing a project to improve data -mining's parallel task executions throughout a Marklogic (NoSQL platform for Big 
Data applications) and Storm.  
FERNANDO ROMAN GARCIA. (Male) Wicket Specialist. Telecommunications Degree from Polytechnic University of  
Catalonia (expected). Experienced in programming microcontrollers using C such as Arduino and in web development, 
above all in backend usin g Servlets in Apache Tomcat or frameworks such as Apache Wicket. Experience in XNA 
Framework for Game Developing using DirectX. Familiar with object oriented programming languages such as Java and 
C#.  
MIROSLAV SPAJIC (male). Senior Programmer. B.Sc. in Pr ogramming, Uni. Belgrade. M.Sc. Programming, Megatrend 
University, School for Computer Sciences. Senior Programmer in IRIS since March 2009. Main fields of interest are 
Programming, DB administration, SAP, Networking and multimedia.  
IVAN PAQUICO RODRIGUEZ  (male). App Developer. Telecommunications Degree in UPC (Barcelona) and a Joint  
Degree in Multimedia Development in LUAS (Finland). An official iOS and Android Developer since 2010, creating apps 
for iPhone: e.g. 'BeThere' developed by iOS SDK from Apple and using Couchbase technology for the database. 
Experience in different programming languages such as C, C++, Objective C or Java, 8 bits embedded and real time 
systems. Expertise in multimedia methodologies ranging from Virtual Reality programming techniques to 3D/2D modelling 
software such as OpenGL, Quest3D, Autodesk Maya, Autodesk 3DS Max or Adobe Photoshop.  
PAU PUIGDOLLERS DE BALLE. (male). BSc in Environmental Science (Research Project: "Estimating patterns of leaf  
herbivory in NE Queensland Rainfor ests,Australia. Might global warming increase leaf herbivory in tropical rainforests?", 
2009) from the Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona. MSc in Terrestrial Ecology (Research Thesis: "Effects of biochar from 
fast pyrolysis on soil water availability and basal respiration", 2010) from the same university and MSc in Renewable Energy 
Engineering and Management from the Universitat de Barcelona. Prior to joining IRIS he held positions as technical sales 
person on Servicios Normativos consultancy group, working with environmental and quality projects, and quality field 
inspector on waste treatment plants for Ingeniería IDOM International, performing quality audits and reports. He has also 
held different research positions at the CSIRO (Commonwealth Scientific and  Industrial Research Organization), in 
Australia and in the CREAF (Centre de recerca ecològica i aplicacions forestals) in Barcelona. He has also experience as 
environmental consultant at Eco Intelligent Growth, working with renewable energies, life cycle assessment, C2C 
certifications and green building.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. Data processing analysis solutions for th e industry (http://iris.cat/wp -content/uploads/2014/02/IRIS-
DataProcessingAnalysis-2.pdf), whereby IRIS has delivered numerous B2B services and product developments to 
industry.  
2. Software-As-A-Service product: developed and commercialized by IRIS www.sapenta.com. 
3. Development of a commercial system for real-time monitoring of moisture, CO2, temperature and filling level of grains 
in industrial silos. It comprises a network of multi -sensor probes and a data managemen t subsystem. B2B project 
(private contract research).  
4. System for real-time on-line multipoint monitoring the olive oil extraction (centrifuge) in order to optimize the yield 
and reducing wastes. B2B project (private contract research).  
5. A platform for in-field multi-point monitoring of salinity in rice paddies in order to optimize the water consumption 
(AgriBox, in IRIS products line)  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
1. In H2020 under SPIR E-1, IRIS is currently leading the development of a Global System Control Platform for the 
integration of PAT analysers and for the data management for PAT implementation in the process industries: PROPAT 
(Robust and affordable process control technologies for improving standards and optimising industrial  
operations). GA-637232. 
IRIS has performed roles of development of data mining tools in the following FP7 project:  
2. STARTEC. Project full name: Decision Support Tools to ensure safe, tasty and nutritious Advanced Ready-To-Eat 
Page 55 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
foods for healthy and vulnerable Consumers. Grant Agreement no: 289262. 
IRIS has worked on the data processing and chemometrics software in the following FP7 projects, among others: 
3. Project Acronym: OPTICLEAN Project full name: Effective and reliable optical system for cleaning validation in 
pharmaceuticals manufacture Grant Agreement no: 285836  
4. PUREFORMULA- Project full name: Development of a novel control technology for ensuring high quality Powdered 
Infant Formula; Grant Agreement no: 605134; 2 years 
5. CRYSTALVIS- Project full name: A process analytical technology for characterizing the physical properties of 
crystals; Grant Agreement no: 605814; 2 years  
Description of any significant infrastru cture and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
Electronics workshops, sprint room for scrum sprints, server room and IT infrastructure.  
 
 Participant 2 Name (short name)/ Country International Synergies Ltd. (ISL)/United Kingdom 
 No.    
Description of the legal entity  
International Synergies Limited (ISL) is the world’s leading expert on industrial symbiosis, recognised by the UN, UNEP, 
EU, OECD, China, UK, Canada, Mexico through its award -winning flagship programme and international brand NISP®. 
The European Commission cites IS as an innovative means to achieve resource efficiency; calling for Europe -wide 
implementation of IS as part of its ‘Roadmap to a Resource Efficient Europe’ and the high -level ‘European Res ource 
Efficiency Platform’ (EREP).  
ISL provides expertise and facilitation to private companies, and capacity building and training to enable partners to 
implement IS projects at local, regional or national level. It has worked in 20 countries on five con tinents since 2005. ISL 
also offers a state -of-the-art resource management database to support resource efficiency at all levels (site, company, 
supply chain, local/national network). ISL is a partner of the European Climate Knowledge and Innovation Commun ity 
(Climate KIC), and has successfully delivered projects through LIFE+, ERDF, FP7, SAVE II, Intelligent Energy Europe and 
SWITCH ASIA. ISL has ISO 9000 and ISO 14001 certifications.  
Main tasks that will be performed  
Exploiting their vast experience in IS, they will lead the IS methodologies in WP2 and they will also lead the setting up of 
the sites in WP5. They will also identify the non -technical barriers in WP1. In WP4 they will engage with IRIS for the 
upgrading of their SYNERGie® software that facilitates the capture of data, information and knowledge around synergies, 
and has an integrated document management system for linking relevant documents to synergies and searching for 
documents previously added to the system. They will also have a key role to play in WP6, whereby they will mobilise their 
experience for measuring the impact of the symbiosis to validate the SHAREBOX platform. They will also play an active 
role in dissemination, training, communication and planning for the post-project phase. Overall contribution from ISL builds 
on 10 years’ experience with the successful marketing and delivery of industrial symbiosis tools and techniques across 
Europe and around the world. This experience includes measurement of impact with strong business enga gement, 
grounded in the needs of practical industrial symbiosis implementation.  
How your organisation is suited to these tasks  
ISL has developed and implemented the world’s leading industrial symbiosis model (NISP), based on demand -led 
engagement with business and other organisations. This model uses information provided by the companies as well as 
available public data. In addition, ISL has pioneered practitioner informed ICT tools such as SYNERGie®, which is currently 
being used in 9 countries.  
ISL has  over 1000 industrial symbiosis case studies/output reports from 20 countries. These provide comprehensive, 
externally verified data on successful synergies including:-  
• economic successes (cost savings, revenue generated, investment attracted) 
• environmental aspects (avoided CO2 emissions, landfill/waste, water and resource use) 
• social benefits (jobs created and safeguarded) 
The benefits calculation uses a before-and-after methodology. In IMATAIS, this methodology will be strengthened with the 
Life cycle analysis LCA performed by ENEA and COWI.  
ISL has extensive business networks across the world, particularly Europe, together with institutional 
(WB/UNIDO/UNEP/ISIE/IFC etc.) and press relationships that will be of great assistance in disseminating the outcomes of 
IMATAIS leading to extended IS uptake and market exploitation.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
PETER LAYBOURN (Male) is the founder and chief executive of ISL and the creator of the National Industrial Symbiosis  
Page 56 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
Programme – NISP. NISP was the first national industrial symbiosis programme in the world, has won several major awards 
and continues to be world leading at delivering economic, environmental and social benefits. Using the industrial symbiosis 
approach, the NISP model is now being exported to many countries across five continents.  
Peter graduated in Economics and Ecology from the University of Southampton. Peter spent 18 years in the aerospace 
manufacturing industry as Contracts and Commercial Manager at GEC Marconi, Smiths Industries and Meggitt Aviation 
and Marine. After completing a second degree in Marine Environmental Management, Peter took on several roles including 
Environmental Co-ordinator for a lo cal authority. Whilst working as a sustainability consultant for Shell Exploration and 
Production, Peter was inspired to create NISP and had his own industrial symbiosis column in the Environmentalist and 
recently contributed a forum piece and co -authored an article for the Journal of Industrial Ecology’s Special Issue on 
industrial symbiosis. He launched the industrial symbiosis Public Private Partnership (PPP) at the Global Green Growth 
Forum (3GF) in 2013 and will be updating status at 3GF in October 2014. Peter is the current Sustainability Leader of the 
Year awarded by edie.net and has been involved in thought leadership sessions for many corporates including Solvay and 
Hewlett Packard. During 2014 he has been an expert for the EU on eco -innovation/eco-industrial parks and the circular 
economy, delivering 3 presentations at Green Week.  
DR. RACHEL LOMBARDI (female) is Director of Business Development for ISL, representing the world’s leading deliverer 
of industrial symbiosis around the world. Rachel has been involved in sustainability and business issues for almost 25 
years, largely from an industrial ecology perspective, with experience spanning both academia (Yale University, USA and 
University of Birmingham, UK) and business (IBM, McKinsey & Co., and I SL). Her work has influenced practitioners and 
policy makers internationally through bespoke training, participation in regional and international workshops, workshop and 
conference organisation and facilitation, traditional academic journals and conferenc es, and course development at the 
undergraduate and post-graduate levels. She holds degrees in mathematics and physics with honours, a MSc. in Electrical 
Engineering, and a PhD in molecular electronics. Rachel is an invited expert on systemic eco-innovation by The European 
Commission DG Research and Innovation, and invited expert and facilitator at the Global Green Growth Forum (2013, 
2014).  
Dr. Adrian Murphy is the Innovation and Technical Director for ISL, overseeing the company’s delivery of a comprehensive 
range of business resource efficiency services. Adrian has a wealth of experience in resource efficiency delivery, including 
managing and delivering the National Industrial Symbiosis Programme (NISP). Adrian has 16 years’ experience with LIFE 
funded projects as both an assessor and fund manager. Adrian is responsible for developing innovative and bespoke 
resource efficiency programmes from clients, and has expert knowledge in programme development, business systems, 
knowledge management and coordinatio n of technology innovation teams. Adrian’s breadth of skills and experience 
provide him with expert knowledge in the application of resource efficiency within diverse business environments including 
aerospace, chemistry, construction, engineering, environmental management, research and technology sectors. He has a 
degree in Chemistry and a PhD in the environmental arena, and has worked in industry throughout his career specialising 
in industrial symbiosis and resource efficiency. 
MR. JAMES WOODCOCK (Male), International Manager, ISL James is a Project Manager with extensive experience both 
in the UK and internationally, working with funders and delivery partners. To date he has managed over 15 international 
projects for the company, including those funded th rough LIFE+ and Switch Asia. He has extensive environmental and 
industrial knowledge gained from over 20 years in roles that cross industry boundaries. His responsibilities include project 
management and delivery to pre -defined targets, training of new and  complex concepts to various audiences (including 
non-English speaking audiences working with translators), and support of project delivery to in-country teams. James also 
works to identify and progress new industrial symbiosis opportunities throughout the world, recognising potential business 
partners and producing bids. He works to develop new products and services for the company relating to the establishment 
and delivery of industrial symbiosis programmes, including the development of SYNERGie, ISL’s pr oprietary system for 
managing data and synergies. Having worked in the water industry for 15 years with a wide range of customer focused 
roles that could often require balancing conflicting requirements, revenue raising and tackling pollution incidents. Ja mes 
was also responsible for granting and enforcing trade effluent consents to industry. James holds a degree in Applied 
Science with honours.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), o r 
other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. Lombardi  DR  and  PT  Laybourn.  (2012).  Re-defining  industrial  symbiosis:  crossing  academic-practitioner  and 
disciplinary boundaries. Journal of Industrial Ecology Special Issue on Industrial Symbiosis 16 (1): 28-37.  
2. PT Laybourn and Lombardi DR (2012) Industrial Symbiosis in European Policy. Journal of Industrial Ecology Special 
Issue on Industrial Symbiosis 16 (1): 28-37.  
3. Peter Laybourn and Maggie Morrissey, 2009 NISP The Pathway To A Low Carbon Sustainable Economy ISBN: 978   
Page 57 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
0 9564235 0 4  
4. Chertow MR and DR Lombardi (2005). Quantifying economic and environmental benefits of co-located firms. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 39 (17) 6535-6541.  
5. Lombardi DR and PT Laybourn (2007). Report on 3rd annual International Industrial Symbiosis Research 
Symposium, Yale University Press, USA.  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
1. ISL is the only SME to have coordinated and hosted a track at the Global Green Growth Forum (3GF), leading on 
industrial symbiosis at 3GF 2013. ISL will present an update at 3GF 2014, 3GF 2015 & 2016 provide an excellent 
dissemination platform for IMATAIS  
2. ISL devised and hosted the world’s first International Working Conference on Applied Industrial Symbiosis (IWCAIS) 
launched by Commissioner Potočnik in Birmingham in 2012. 
3. ISL hosted in Brussels “Friends of Industrial Symbiosis” for DGs Enterprise, Environment, Regions, Innovation and 
Climate (2012) which attracted senior Commission officials and MEPs  
4. ISL founded the European Industrial Symbiosis Association (EUR-ISA) in 2013 which was launched in Brussels by 
Commissioner Potočnik 
5. ISL hosted the 3rd International Industrial Symbiosis Research Symposium in 2006 and ISL hosts the industrial 
symbiosis channel on the 2 Degrees business social networking site– established 2014  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
-  
 
Participant No. 3 Name (short name)/ Country UNIVERSITEIT TWENTE (UT)/Netherlands 
Description of the legal entity    
The University of Twente (UT) is where talent can best realize its full potential. Students and staff are the key. Together, 
3,300 scientists and professionals carry out groundbreaking research, bring about socially relevant innovation, and provide 
inspiring teaching for more than 9,000 students. To us, entrepreneurship comes as second nature. The campus is home to 
around 100 businesses, including student-run businesses. The University of Twente has also generated more than 700 
successful spin-off companies. The university's business park, Kennispark Twente, encourages and assists entrepreneurs 
to start new companies. The UT is one of the three technical universities in the Netherlands. UT-IEBIS 
 
IEBIS – Department of Industrial Engineering and Business Information Systems -, which comprises about 30 scientists 
(including PhD assistants) of which about 50 % i s working on logistics and supply chain management. The group holds a 
sound track record on research in fields such as transport and logistics and production and maintenance planning and 
control. Models and methods from Operations Research form the methodological basis of the group. In particular, one may 
think of combinatorial optimization for location planning and physical distribution planning, stochastic network models for 
production and logistics, queuing models, multi-agent technology to support distributed decision-making, and discrete event 
simulation to evaluate various policy alternatives. The group is involved in various projects aiming at more sustainable 
transport, logistics, and production and works closely with private industrial partners to achieve this.  
Main tasks proposed in the project  
There are physical, technological and economic conditions that favour the implementation of the industrial symbiosis. 
Primarily technological and physical conditions should occur to pre -design and approximate the optimal state of symbiosis 
from operational perspective while the economic conditions are critical to vitalize the cooperation. These conditions would 
make not only direct impact on the production processes involved in industrial symbiosis but al so on the upstream and 
downstream process flows (material/energy/waste/product flows) of the whole production chains.  
First, waste is not produced upon demand, but appears as a secondary output whose quantity depends on the final demand 
for the principal product of each supply chain. When the waste substitutes the primary input of another supply chain, then, 
the fit between the final demands of both production chains is critical for both the collective and individual economic benefit 
of the involved companies (i.e. physical condition). Second, there is also a relationship between the technological process 
efficiencies of both chains, which is also decisive for the waste emission and primary input use quantities, which in turn, 
affects the waste supply-demand matching (i.e. technological condition).  
Then, to efficiently implement industrial symbiosis at the whole production chain level, we should understand the impact of 
final demand fit between two production chains on the operational performance of the ind ustrial symbiosis and reveal the 
role of process efficiencies on waste supply -demand matching. Accordingly, we can propose dematerialization, waste -
reduction, technology change, collaborative forecasting, or other sustainable production policies to reach the optimal (set   
Page 58 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
of) solution(s) to improve the cooperation. To this aim, we propose to adopt a waste input -output (WIO) model. Since WIO 
represents the process efficiency thanks to the observed waste and primary input coefficients and computes the total waste 
emissions and primary input use according to the main product final demand quantities, it is practically suitable for such an 
analysis.  
Physical and technological conditions are not sufficient to vitalize the cooperation because not only value-added is obtained 
but also additional costs (e.g. recycling cost, transportation cost, production structure change cost, coordination cost) emerge 
from industrial symbiosis. Then, companies produce benefit- and cost-sharing strategies to maximize their economic gains 
formed by cooperation in industrial symbiosis. Individual needs drive the strategies but they are also influenced by the 
presence of competitors, environmental regulations, power asymmetry between companies, ratio of potential benefit to the 
gross income of companies, flexibility of the production, and the information availability about the co -operators. Hence, a 
game emerge between the companies, which produce different economic gains under each different st rategy adoption. 
Game theoretical approach is suitable to integrate the company behaviour in such games defining the minimum individual 
needs of companies. Accordingly, we can understand the willingness to-to-cooperate and bargaining power of each company 
in the industrial symbiosis. Once the technological, physical, and economic conditions are set, then, we aim at adopting 
agent-based modelling (ABM) to propose to companies best set of solutions for maximizing both individual and collective 
economic gains. ABM is an appropriate methodology to address such a problem as it considers the heterogeneity of the 
actors (i.e., agents) and proposes a self-organizing system. Using ABM for industrial symbiosis design allows us to address 
the behavioural change by lear ning and interaction, and reveal the optimal symbiosis design under different individual 
strategies and cooperation modes. Hence, ABM is critical to achieve the optimal result in the negotiation phase between 
companies.  
Finally, we propose to use input -output modelling to measure the total environmental impact of the industrial symbiosis at 
the whole chain level from a life cycle perspective. Input -output modelling is particularly useful for such a life -cycle-
assessment as it is capable of tracing the all material/waste/energy/product flows of the involved production chains.  
How your organisation is suited to these tasks  
IEBIS is suited to the above -mentioned tasks as it largely uses quantitative methods, particularly ABM and Game Theory 
relevant to thi s proposal. It is in excellent cooperation with the industrial partners particularly in the Netherlands. In this 
proposal, it will also deal with setting the physical and technological conditions for industrial symbiosis and measuring the  
life-cycle impact of implementing industrial symbiosis.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
PROF. HENK ZIJM. (M) Henk Zijm (1952) is a full professor in Production and Supply Chain Management at the University 
of Twente (UT). U ntil October 1, 2014 he was also Research Director of the  Dutch Institute for Advanced Logistics 
(DINALOG), the national institute responsible for the execution of the Innovation Action Plan for Logistics in the Netherlands. 
He is also vice-chair of the European Technology Platform for Logistics ALICE, which had delivered significant input for the 
Transport WP2014-2015, and is currently doing the same for the now designed Transport WP2016 -2017. Both within the 
Netherlands and at a European level he is invol ved in various projects on collaboration and consolidation in logistics, on 
behalf of the University of Twente and on behalf of DINALOG, with the aim to reduce the ecological footprint and improve 
sustainability. A variety of national projects is carried o ut under the umbrella of DINALOG, with a focus on Supply Chain 
collaboration and coordination.  
DR. DEVRIM MURAT YAZAN. (M) Devrim Murat Yazan graduated in Marmara University (Istanbul, Turkey) in Industrial  
Engineering and holds a PhD degree in Advanced Production Systems (Innovation Management Area) from Interpolytechnic 
School of Doctorate (Polytechnics of Bari -Turin-Milan, Italy, 2010), by the thesis entitled: ‘Economic and Environmental 
Sustainability of Production (Supply) Chains: An Enterprise Input -Output Approach’. In CSTM, he is dealing with the 
sustainability of biofuels supply chains, development of local second generation biomass markets, and environmental and 
economic returns of alternative energy production and use. He is the author/co-author of a number of journal and conference 
articles and research reports in various research streams like spatial analysis for bioenergy supply chains, design and 
coordination of joint supply chains, transportation in re-engineered supply chains, sustainable cement, concrete, and ceramic 
production, industrial symbiosis networks, and cooperation and negotiation in reverse supply chains. He uses input -output 
modelling, life-cycle assessment and game theory methodologies in sustainable supply chain management research stream.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. Romano, V.A., Yazan, D.M., Albino, V. 2012 How far is an input-output production system from perfect industrial 
symbiosis?, 20th International Input-Output Conference, Bratislava, Slovakia, June 25-29.  
2. Yazan, D.M., Clancy, J., Lovett, J.C. (2012) Supply chains, techno-economic assessment and market development for  
Page 59 of 84  
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
second generation biodiesel. In: Luque R., Melero J.A. Advances in biodiesel production. Second generation processes 
and technologies, Cambridge, Woodhead Publishing.  
3. Haneyah, S.W.A., Schutten J.M.J., Schuur, P.C., Zijm, W.H.M. (2013) A generic material flow control model applied in 
two industrial sectors. Computers in Industry, 64 (6), 663 - 677. ISSN 0166-3615.  
4. Shanthikumar J.G., Yao, D.D., Zijm, W.H.M. (2003) Stochastic Modeling and Optimization of Manufacturing Systems 
and Supply Chains, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston.  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
1. CONCOORD: Consolidation and Coordination in Urban Areas. Joint Programming Initiative Urban Europe (currently 
running)  
2. SoCool@EU: Sustainable Organisation between Clusters Of Optimised Logistics @ Europe. FP7 project (currently 
running) 
3. CO3: Collaboration Concepts for Co-Modality. FP7 project (currently running) 
4. Alternative energy sources in cement manufacturing: a systematic review of the body of knowledge. Network for  
Business Sustainability. Available at: http://nbs.net/wp-content/uploads/NBS-Systematic-Review-Cement-
Manufacturing.pdf  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
-  
 
Participant No. 4 Name (short name)/ Country University of Leeds (UNIVLEEDS)  / UK 
Description of the legal entity    
University / Higher Education Institute. The University of Leeds is one of the largest universities in the UK. It is a resear ch-
intensive university, a member of the Russell Group and ranked in worlds top 100. The University has a multi -disciplinary 
and internationally leading energy research community and its current research council energy research portfolio is valued 
at in excess of £20M. In order to support this community and coordinate its activities for maximum research and educational 
value and impact the university has created the Energy Leeds virtual institute. As part of its educational mission, Energy 
Leeds has launched  a new multi -disciplinary Sustainable Energy Systems master’s programme addressing energy from 
technical, environmental, financial and political standpoints and with Professor Heyes as programme director. The MSc is 
taught by staff from five schools within the engineering and business faculties at the university. Students from this programme 
will be integrated into the research project by virtue of their individual MSc projects achieving the dual aims of providing 
students with real world problems and exper ience to enhance their learning and employability and providing additional 
support to the research project. This will also allow us to explore interesting and potentially valuable tangential issues th at 
emerge but which are not on the critical path. This will be done at no cost to the project.  
Main tasks you would propose to perform in the proposal  
As part of WP2, working in close cooperation with USTRATH we will assess, catalogue and derive schemes for optimisation 
of new energy transfer, storage and conversion infrastructure. These will be required to realise the IS opportunities identified 
by the SHAREBOX programme. We will also identify and develop business opportunities and plans for additional actors in 
the form energy service companies within the industrial ecosystem.  
How your organisation is suited to these tasks  
As part of its research support and development mission, Energy Leeds has created the Smart Energy Systems research 
network. This is a network of over thirty academic and research staff f rom eleven schools and four faculties with expertise 
in many areas (energy storage, smart grids, energy policy, system modelling, low-grade waste heat conversion technologies, 
energy from waste etc.) relevant to the current research project. The executive team of the proposed research are all 
members of the network and the project will be regarded as a Smart Energy Systems Initiative so that the researchers will 
have access to this multi-disciplinary community for advice and support throughout the project. In additional to access to the 
Energy Leeds research community as detailed above the PDRA will be supported and managed by a core executive 
management team with diverse but complimentary skills. The team brings expertise in heat storage, transfer and 
transformation, chemicals processing, renewable energy, system modelling and policy analysis and waste conversion 
technologies to bear on the project and, as such, all the important facets of the research challenge can be addressed and 
supported. Details of the individual members of the team can be found below:  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
PROFESSOR TIMOTHY COCKERILL (Male) Chair in Efficient Energy Utilisation. The Centre for Integrated Energy 
 
Page 60 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
Research (CIER) at the University of Leeds (UoL) was established in 2010, bringing together more than 40 academics to 
integrate the University’s research and innovation capabilities across the full range of energy disciplines. CIER forms part of 
an ongoing strategic investment by the University, being located a new £12.5M Energy building that plays host to 150 staff 
and research students. CIER members have active involvement with all three of the recently awarded EPSRC DTC’s in 
which the University has and interest (CCS, Bioenergy and CFD). Prof. Tim Cockerill, was recently appointed as Chair of 
Efficient Energy Utilisation within CIER. He also has a visiting appointment at Imperial College London. As PI or Co -I on 
projects supported by  EPSRC, NERC, Tyndall Centre, and the European Commission, he specialised in the integrated 
systems modelling and techno -economic optimisation of low -carbon technologies with an emphasis on CCS and energy 
storage. He is an associate member of the NERC Peer  Review College and contributes to the SSE Accounting for 
Sustainability Board. Recent projects include SUPERGEN Highly Distributed Energy Futures (EP/G031681/1), modelling 
the techno -economics of solids looping NG PCC Technology (EP/J020745/1), and invest igation of the wider land use 
implications of differing renewable energy strategies using spatial modelling techniques (NE/H010521/1). A range industry 
and RCUK funded PhD studentships currently support work on the deployment of energy storage and the life cycle 
environmental impacts of CCS  
DR COSTAS VELIS, (Male), BSc MSc DIC PhD MInstP MCIWM, Lecturer in Resource Efficiency Systems. The Institute for 
Resilient Infrastructure (iRI) in the School of Civil Engineering conducts interdisciplinary research at t he interface between 
the disciplines of engineering, environmental, economic, community / societal and political domains. It has a multimillion 
pound research portfolio including reliance on critical materials, radical approaches to new infrastructure busi ness models, 
and resource recovery from waste via whole -system interventions. Dr Costas Velis is Lecturer in Resource Efficiency 
Systems and as part of iRI he leads an international research team working on recovering value from waste. He directs a 
relevant state-of-the-art laboratory, supervising 8 PhD students. With over 10 years of work and research experience in 
waste and resources management, he serves as Associate Editor of the journals Waste Management & Research , and 
Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology. Dr Velis was recently honoured with the prestigious ISWA 2013 
Publication Award for a paper offering novel inter -disciplinary approaches that consider the waste management systems 
interplay with other systems such as materials sup ply chain, socioeconomic and business /organisational aspects. A 
Chartered Waste Manager (CIWM), he is also registered with the Institute of Physics. He serves in many national and 
international committees and is involved in many of the initiatives address ing waste and resource -related challenges at a 
global level (core author member team of the UNEP Global Waste Management Outlook; coordinating member of the 
International Solid Waste Association Globalisation and Waste Management Task Force; scientific co -ordinator of Waste 
Atlas project). His areas of expertise include the production and quality management of solid recovered fuels that can replace 
fossil fuels; novel methods to measure their biogenic content to mitigate greenhouse gasses emissions (TSB/SBRI/971195); 
optimising the energy efficiency of energy from waste plants via the R1 formula; material flow analysis of mechanical 
processing in waste plants. He is the chief Co-I in a NERC ‘Resource Recovery form Waste’ catalyst call cross-disciplinary 
£1.2M project (NE/L014149/) advancing the multi -objective systems optimisation of value recovery from waste between 
multiple players (C -VORR). Prior to joining University of Leeds, he worked for two year at Imperial College London as 
Research Associate in Resource Recovery. He sits at the Society of Chemical Industry (SCI) Environment, Health and Safety 
Technical Interest Group, where chemical industry meets academia. Dr Velis is Vice Chair of the Waste to Energy Resource 
and Technology – UK, and he runs his ow n consultancy (Fuelogy), which provides specialised technical and modelling 
research and development solutions for advanced aspects of resource recovery and energy efficiency.  
PROFESSOR DR. IR. FRANS MULLER PHD CANTAB CENG FICHEME  (Male) Professor Muller holds a joint chair in  
Chemical Process Engineering in the School of Process Environmental and Material Science and the School of Chemistry. 
He works on the interface between chemical engineering and chemistry and his research interests lie in the dynamics  of 
manufacturing processes and understanding of the interaction between process and equipment. His work is currently 
supported through a £1M strategic investment of the University of Leeds as part of the establishment of the Institute of 
Process Research and Development (iPRD) and directly from industry (AstraZeneca (AZ), Syngenta, Alfa Laval and Aesica). 
Before joining iPRD in August 2011, he spend 17 years in industry (AstraZeneca (AZ), Syngenta) as a process engineering 
scientist working on the design a nd development of industrial processes & equipment. His group includes 4 PhD students 
funded by Leeds and industry (AZ, Syngenta). He was the lead investigator for AZ on a large EU consortium grant (F3 
Factory, 19M€ EU funding, 25 partners involved in continuous mobile modular manufacture, www.f3factory.com), 
representing AZ’s 5 academic partners on the consortium management team and leading the AZ project team. At Syngenta 
he developed and in 2000 subsequently commercialised a batch processing simulation program, known commercially as 
DynoChem, to a SME software company (Scale-up Systems Ltd, http://www.scale-up.com). Now over  
 
Page 61 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
450 DynoChem licences are used on ~100 sites in 23 countries by 13 of the top 15 pharmaceutical companies. Scale-up 
Systems employs 20 people in 5 countries and has an annual turnover of over €2M.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. Velis C.A. and Cooper J. Are solid recovered fuels resource-efficient? Waste Management & Research, 2013, 31(2): 
113-114.  
2. Velis C.A., Longhurst P.J., Drew G.H., Smith R., and Pollard S.J.T., Production and Quality Assurance of Solid 
Recovered Fuels Using Mechanical -Biological Treatment (MBT) of Waste: A Comprehensive Assessment. Criti cal 
Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology, 2010, 40(12): 979-1105.  
3. Velis C.A., Wagland S., Longhurst P., Robson B., Sinfield K., Wise S., and Pollard S.T., Solid recovered fuel: materials 
flow analysis and fuel property development during the mechanical processing of biodried waste. Environmental Science 
& Technology, 2013, 47(6): 2957-2965.  
4. Velis C.A., and Brunner, P., “Recycling and resource efficiency: It is time for a change from quantity to quality”. Was.  
Manag. Res., 2013, 31(6): 539-540. 
5. McGlashan N.R, Childs P.R.N, Heyes A.L, “Chemical Looping Combustion Using The Direct Combustion Of Liquid 
Metals In A Gas Turbine Based Cycle” Trans. ASME: J. Eng. Gas Turb. And Pow, 2011, Vol. 133, Issue 3.  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
1. PI for UoL. Call H2020 -WASTE-2014-one-stage: WASTE -4b-2014; Project: EWIT: Developing an e -waste 
implementation toolkit to support the recycling and the secondary raw material recovery strategies in metropolitan areas 
in Africa. “EU -African collaboration addressing resource recovery from e -waste by identifying optimal management 
practices based on material flow analysis tools.” Total 1,64M Euros, University of Leeds: 183,750 Euros.  
2. Chief Co-I; University of Leeds only; Funding: NERC and ESCR, £1.1M plus over £1M in-kind industrial partner  
contributions; Call NERC Resource Recovery from Waste – Full Phase: ‘C-VORR: Complex Value Optimisation for 
Resource Recovery’: Cross-disciplinary Innovation with a view to 2050: Developing and evaluation framework based on 
systems dynamics to optimise sustainable resource recovery from waste considering all waste and resource 
management steps and material / products life -cycle, from sustainable consumption and p roduction, to prevention, 
waste collection and sorting, to recycling recovery and final disposal where needed.’  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
-  
 
Participant No. 5 Name (short name)/ Country Zurich University of Applied Sciences (ZHAW)/ Switzerland  
Description of the legal entity   
The ZHAW is one of the leading universities of applied sciences in Switzerland. Teaching, research, continuing education, 
consulting and other services are both scientifically based and practice-oriented. Graduates of the ZHAW hold their own on 
national and international markets and in the intercultural working world. About 11'000 students are enrolled at the ZHAW in 
a total of 26 Bachelor’s degree programmes and 13 consecutive Master’s programmes. The university also offers a broad 
range of continuing education courses, including over 40 Master's of Advanced Studies programmes. 30 institutes at the 
ZHAW network their resources to provide business and industry with customised services.
  
Our Institutes and centres create opportunities and entrepreneurial scope for specialised, professional expansion of 
research and development. Some of them are managed as profit centres and enable expertise to be developed and 
extended in an interdisciplinary working environment, and made available to interested partners. Institutes and Centres are 
led by a professor who also has teaching responsibilities – in degree programmes and in continuing education. This 
ensures that state of the art knowledge is continually transferred into the ZHAW’s degree programmes and its continuing 
education activities. The research staff and assistants, supported by a state-of-the-art, comprehensive infrastructure, form 
the backbone of the Institutes and Centres.  
Life Sciences are key fields of activity for the 21st century, demanding interdisciplinary thinking and action. In response to 
this challenge, the School of Life Sciences and Facility Management provides opportunities for networking – from 
biotechnological, chemical and food technology related issues to logistical, ecological and management aspects – and 
carries out complex projects using an interdisciplinary approach.  
Depending on the particular challenges of a project, researchers, research assistants and students from various disciplines 
work together in interdisciplinary teams. The ZHAW’s equipment and apparatus are state -of-the-art and allow professional 
processing of application oriented research and development projects. Modern laboratories as well as testing and   
Page 62 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
production facilities provide a solid basis for this.  
At the interface between theory and practice, the Institutes work closely with industry and business. Expertise and 
infrastructure are made available in accordance to clients' needs.  
Main tasks you would propose to perform in the proposal  
With our knowledge in purification and waste treatment technologies we want to contribute in implementing a self-sustaining 
database for tailored purification and waste treatment technology. Besides product requirements defined by the process 
industries, efficient purification requires the detailed knowledge on the physical chemical properties of the product(s) as well 
as of the impurities to select the best suited purification technology, e.g. membrane filtration, depth filtration or ion exchange. 
On the other hand, the performance of filtration aids depends on their physical chemical properties as well, such as pore 
size, streaming resistance, and polarity in case of membranes or properties controlling the adsorption efficiency of filtration 
aids such as surface area, pore size, zeta potential. We have already a large set of physical chemical data from commercially 
available filtration aids together with respective processes, where these are employed. This database shell grow within the 
SHAREBOX project. Furthermore, we will apply our competences in LCA for detailed quantitative environmental 
sustainability evaluation of processes and products in analysed case studies (test sites) within the frame of the SHAREBOX.  
How your organisation is suited to these tasks  
The Center of Functional Materials and Nanotechnology focus on the development of new filtration processes an d 
technologies including innovative materials such as molecularly imprinted polymers or nanofibrous membranes. In addition, 
we are characterizing membranes and filtration aids based on their physical chemical properties such as surface area, pore 
size, pH depending zeta potential or streaming potential in case of membranes to correlate their performance in a filtration 
or purification task with their physical chemical properties.  
The ZHAW Institute of Natural Resource Science will focus on applying the Lif e Cycle Assessment methodology for an 
environmental sustainability assessment of the processes involved in SHAREBOX..  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
DR. JÜRGEN EBERT (male). He has been working in the filtra tion industries for more than 15 years where he was  
developing custom tailored depth filtration sheets. He is also in the board of one of the biggest suppliers of filtration aid s 
such as perlites and zeolites in Switzerland. In parallel, he is lecturing at the ZHAW filtration technology and related topics. 
Together with his team at ZHAW, he is also running research activities with the aim to better understand the relation between 
physical chemical properties of filtration aids and the performance of the fil tration process. There, his key expertise is the 
characterization of organic (cellulose) and inorganic (diatomaceous earth/perlite/zeolite) filter aids, membranes, adsorbents 
(activated carbons) and ion exchange resins. The characterization includes analyt ical methods like “particle charge 
detection”, “zeta potential”, “porosimetry”, “SEM”, etc. Furthermore, the development and/or modification of tailor-made depth 
filter sheets and membranes depending on the chemical and physical properties of the impuritie s lays is in the focus of his 
work. He covers the whole range of solid/liquid separation in the food and beverage industry, biotech and pharmaceutical 
industry (product purification), as well as water and waste water treatment (waste management).  
MSc. MATTHIAS STUCKI (male) received his Master of Science Degree in Environmental Sciences from ETH Zurich in  
2007 and is an expert in the field of Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). Between 2008 and 2012 he worked as a project leader 
at ESU-services Ltd. where he cond ucted a range of LCA projects in the various fields such as power generation, solar 
energy, bioenergy, geosynthetic materials, biogenic plastics, leisure activities, consumption patterns, sanitary systems etc. 
He published his findings in scientific journa ls such as the International Journal of LCA and submitted datasets to the 
worldwide ecoinvent database. Affiliated with the ecoinvent Centre, he started the Life Cycle Inventory Network in India and 
trained Indian engineers in conducting LCA projects. Since 2012 he holds a position as a Research Associate at the Institute 
of Natural Resource Sciences of the Zurich University of Applied Sciences, where he is head of the LCA research group and 
responsible for research and teaching in the field of LCA. Currently, he is engaged in national and international projects that 
analyse the environmental impacts of food production (including dairy), sewage treatment, and power generation. He is a 
reviewer at the Journal of Industrial Ecology, the Journal of Waste Management, and the International Journal of Life Cycle 
Assessment, member of the editorial board of the ecoinvent database, and an individual verifier at the International EPD® 
System.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including  widely-used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. J.Ebert and C.Adlhart, Intelligent nanofibres as basis for new filter materials, Filtration & Separation, Global Guide 2012-
2014, p. 181ff 
 
Page 63 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
2. J. Ebert, Zetapotential measurements for surface characterization of filter aids, ZHAW-Transfer 3/2009 
3. R. Büttiker, J. Ebert, C.Hinderling, and C. Adlhart, Membranes for Specific Adsorption: Immobilizing Molecularly 
Imprinted Polymer Microspheres using Electrospun Nanofibers, CHIMIA 2011, 65, No. 3  
4. Jungbluth, N., Büsser, S., Frischknecht, R., Flury, K., & Stucki, M. (2012). Feasibility of environmental product 
information based on life cycle thinking and recommendations for Switzerland. Journal of Cleaner Production, 28(0), 187-  
197  
5. Faist Emmenegger, M., Stucki, M., & Hermle, S. (2012). LCA of energetic biomass utilization: Actual projects and new 
developments, April 23, 2012, Berne, Switzerland. The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 17(9).  
Patents: Filter layer for TCA removal (cork taint) – EP000001961805A1; Filter layer with a fibre matrix made of cellulose 
and chitin and/or at least partially deacetylated chitin - EP000001649916A1; Membrane, membrane module and process 
for cross-flow depth filtration - EP000001721656A1  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
1. Process optimization and purification of herbal drugs  
2. Removal of organic pesticides from vegetable oils 
3. Development of a cleaning process of water-ethanol mixtures for re-use of extraction liquids in pharmaceutical 
processes 
4. Characterization of activated carbons for biogas cleaning 
5. Development and characterization of specific adsorbents for the removal of micropollutants in water and wastewater 
Hydrothermal carbonisation as an energy-efficient alternative to thermal drying of sewage sludge  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
Equipment to perform filtration tests in laboratory scale or using industrial filter systems (plate and frame, alluvium, 
cartridge, module, membrane), a lab scale depth filter sheet production plant, and ion exchange cartridge systems. 
Analytical equipment to characterize filtrate and filtration residue  
Analytical equipment to characterize physical chemical properties of filtration aids and membranes such as zeta potential 
meter, particle charge detector, BET surface measurement, pore size analysis.  
 
Participant No. 6 Name (short name)/ Country Ceramic Industry Research Association (ITC-AICE)/Spain 
Description of the legal entity    
The Ceramic Industry Research Association (ITC-AICE) is a Private non-profit Research Institute recognized by the Spanish 
Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness as Technology Centre by Royal Decree 2093/2008. ITC -AICE is committed to 
providing solid support for ceramic sector in the defence and enhancement of their strategic positioning in the current global 
context, pr incipally through innovation -enabling research and development actions, but also through whatever activities 
might serve to foster the competitiveness and growth of the sector, always based on sustainability criteria and commitment 
to societal well-being.  
In 1969 ITC-AICE concerned an agreement with the Universitat Jaume I of Castellón in response to the needs of companies 
from the Spanish ceramic cluster. During its more than 40 -year history, this agreement has articulated a successful 
university–business cooperation system that has borne its fruits, witness the significant development of the Spanish ceramic 
tile manufacturing industry.  
The competence attained through ITC -AICE’s wide-ranging research activity enables to extend its field of action to other  
types of processes and materials. Particularly ITC -AICE works in the field of ceramic processing, energy efficiency, and 
industry’s environmental impact minimization (innovative waste recovery solutions and emissions reduction), as well as in 
the functionalisation of ceramic surfaces and in the achievement of new technical performance and aesthetic features of 
products related to the habitat hyper-sector and other industries, such as high-tech tools advanced ceramics, automotive or 
petrochemical sectors. I ts activities include products and processes improvement, residues and greenhouse pollutants 
reduction, control systems development, energy saving plans, etc.  
From the outset, as technology partner of the ceramic sector, ITC-AICE has undertaken several R&D activities in the ceramic 
and related industries, through projects funded by public bodies and by ceramic sector companies. 
 
Facts & Figures (last five years): 
 Number of Autonomous and National funding projects: 174
 Number of European projects: 16
 Number of R&D collaborative projects funding by industry: 380
 Number of Scientific papers with impact factor: 180  
Page 64 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
 Number of Institutional bibliography references : 54
 IPR through Patents: 17
 Number of awards recognizing the R&D and Technology Transfer’s impact in the ceramic cluster: 5
Main tasks you would propose to perform in the proposal
Implementation of demo tests/case study: development of the SHAREBOX platform in a Spanish industrial park, where 
there are several companies related to the manufacturing of ceramic tiles. (WP5, WP6)
This task will consist of:
-  Identification of the inputs to each company, including water, fuels, materials, etc. -  Identification of the outputs from the companies: solid wastes, dirty water and sludges, wasted energy, etc. - Analysis of the general management issues that could be able to share among different companies located in the 
same industrial area: security services, cleaning services, suppliers of some materials, etc. - Implementation of a new strategy to optimize resources and management of wastes, favouring the industrial 
symbiosis by reducing the use of primary resources and enhancing waste recovery. - Identification of new opportunities to improve the efficiency of the companies in their use of energy, raw materials 
and water by implementing new technologies.
How your organisation is suited to these tasks
ITC-AICE is a research centre with more than 40 years of experience in the ceramic industry, working on projects related to 
raw materials preparation and optimisation, atmospheric emissions, wasted water treatment, solid waste management, 
energy efficiency and energy recovery, among others.  
The industrial park selected for implementing SHAREBOX platform is formed by different kind of companies. Some of them 
are related with ceramic manufacturing such as raw materials suppliers, glaze and frit manufacturers and ceramic tiles 
industries and are well-known enterprises since ITC-AICE have been collaborating with them in different R&D projects.  
ITC-AICE broad experience in the topics covered by this project is demonstrated by the projects carried out in the last years 
(in the field of resource efficiency, energy and environment). In the field of energy efficiency, ITC -AICE is working with 
ceramics manufacturers to ascertain effective energy saving actions to be implemented in the manufacturing processes, 
optimising the energy consumption and enhancing overall energy efficiency. Thus ITC-AICE capabilities in the field of energy 
saving and energy efficiency include, among others: the Performance of energy audits, the realisation of studies of energy 
reuse in industrial facilities, the adaptation of heat recovery systems, the optimisation of energy consumption at industria l 
scale, etc…  
Resource efficiency and waste is another area of expertise of ITC -AICE. In fact the production of waste is a another major 
environmental concern in any industrial production process, in relation to both the quantity and diversity of the arising types 
of waste and to the ensuing regulatory obligations. ITC-AICE therefore collaborates with companies in order to enable them 
to assure appropriate waste management, from the start of their production processes to the final destination. ITC -AICE 
know-how in the field of resource efficiency and waste include: waste recycling in the ceramic process, recycling of the 
ceramic process waste in the own process or alternative sectors, full life cycle analysis and cost assessments, waste 
minimisation plans and waste characterization.  
Finally, ITC-AICE has a wide experience in wastewater treatments. Indeed, the manufacture of ceramic products requires 
great water consumption. ITC-AICE is working with ceramics manufacturers to ascertain effective water saving and recycling 
actions to be implemented in the manufacturing processes, optimising the water consumption and enhancing overall 
wastewater recovery, treatment and resource efficiency. In addition, ITC-AICE participates in others R&D activities aimed at 
identifying alternatives to the use, recycling and treatment of wastewater, in ceramics manufacturing in order to reduce the 
environmental impact of such industrial activities.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
ENCARNA BOU SOLSANA (Female) is doctor in Chemical Science from the Universitat Jaume I (Castellón, Spain). She  
is part of ITC team since 1991 and is currently a Senior Researcher in the area for Materials and Ceramic Technology. 
Encarna Bou has a strong e xpertise in ceramics technology, especially in the field of frits and glazes, raw materials and 
resource efficiency. She has leaded several R&d and technological projects as principal investigator, under private and 
public funding (at regional, national and European level). In addition, she is responsible for coordinating all actions related 
to the European association "Energy Efficiency Building Association (E2Ba)".  
Encarna Bou is the author of more than 54 scientific publications in Spanish and international journals and has participated 
in various national and international Congresses with 42 communications. She has also co-authored 2 books in the field of   
Page 65 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
ceramic technology. 
Encarna Bou will participate in the project as responsible of the cermic case -study implementation and expert in 
resource efficiency.  
ANA MEZQUITA MARTÍ (female) has a Chemical Engineer degree from Universitat Jaume I. She has joined ITC in 1999  
in the area of industrial processes. Since 2006, Ana Mezquita is the head of the Energy Unit, which aim is to support ceramic 
in any activity related with energy efficiency and energy savings. In addition, she has participated in R&D activities aimed at 
identifying alternatives to the use of natural gas, a fuel of fossil origin, in ceramics manufacturing in order to reduce the 
environmental impact of such industrial activities.  
Ana Mezquita has collaborated in more than 35 R&d and technological projects, under both private and public funding (at 
regional, national and European level). She is the author of more than 20 papers in scientific and technological journals and 
around 20 communications to congresses, mainly in the field of ceramic technology. She has also given 9 courses about 
energy efficienc y and environmental aspects in the ceramic manufacturing, to private companies and in national and 
international research centres. 
Ana Mezquita will participate in the project as Energy Efficiency expert.  
IRINA CELADES LÓPEZ (Female) is doctor in Chemical Science from the Universitat Jaume. She is part of ITC team since 
1997 and she is the head of the Environmental Technologies Unit since 2000. She has collaborated in more than 50 R&D 
projects (20 as principal investigator) under private and public funding.  
Irina Celades has co-authored more than 40 cientific publications, 2 books and over 55 communications to congress, in the 
field of Environmental technologies and Ceramic process. In addition Irina has taught in 8 courses to form ceramic companies 
in the field of Environment.  
Irina Celades will participate to the project as expert in environmental technologies and their application to the 
ceramic sector.  
RAÚL MOLINER SALVADOR (Male) is graduated in Chemical Engineering from Universitat Jaume I in 2002 a nd has a 
Master's Degree in Ceramic Materials Science, Technology and Applications also from Universitat Jaume I.  
Raúl Moliner is part of the Environmental Technologies Unit of ITC and has participated in more than 30 R&D and 
technological projects developed by ITC under both private and public funding scheme. He has been granted by the IMPIVA 
(Valencian public organism) in 2005 to realised a 6 months research stay at the European Membrane Institute (Institut 
Européen des maembranes, Montpellier, France), increasing his knowledge in water treatment. In addition, he is responsible 
for coordinating ITC activities related to the Spanish Water Technological Platform (Plataforma tecnológica española del 
agua).  
Raúl Moliner has also coauthored 9 scientific papers and 9 communications to congresses in the field of ceramic technology 
and chemical engineering.  
Raúl Moliner will collaborate in the SHAREBOX Project as expert in water management and wastewater treatment.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. Chapter 8.09. Ceramic Manufacturing Processes: Energy, Environmental, and Occupational Health Issues. In 
Comprehensive Materials Processing. 1st Edition.  
Monfort, E.; Mezquita, A.; Vaquer, E.; Celades, I.; Sanfelix, V.; Escrig, A. Bassim, N., 
Ed, Vol. 8; Elsevier Ltd., 2014; pp 71–102.  
ISBN: 9780080965321 
2. Reduction of CO2-emissions in ceramic tiles manufacture by combining energy-saving measures.  
Mezquita, A.; Monfort, E.;Vaquer, E.; Ferrer, S.; Pitarch, J.M.; Arnal, M.A.; Cobo, F. Cfi Ber. DKG 85, Vol. 91, Issue 5, May 
2014, Pages E37-E42, 2014. 
3. Case study of glazing waste valorisation. 
Monfort, E.; Bou, E.; Felíu, C.; Silva, G.; Cruz, R.; Portolés, J.; Martí, V. Cfi Ber. DKG, 81(1-2), 33-36, 2004 
4. Recycling marble working wastes in manufacturing ceramic products. Part I Waste characterization & Part II Ceramic 
wall tile manufacture.  
García-Ten, J.; Mallol, G.; Bou, E.; Silva, G.; Fernández, J.; Molina, A.; Romera, J Cfi Ber. DKG, 80(9), 84-90, 2003. & Cfi 
Ber. DKG, 80(10), 30-32, 2003  
5. Use of nanofiltration membrane technology for ceramic industry wastewater treatment. 
Deratani, A.; Palmeri, J.; Moliner-Salvador, R.; Sánchez, E. Bol. Soc. Esp. Ceram. Vidr., 51(2), 103-110, 2012. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
1. Reduction of carbon dioxide emissions in the ceramic manufacturing process (REDUCER). With the support of the  
Page 66 of 84  
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
European  Commission.  Sustainable  Industry  Low  Carbon  Scheme,  SILC  I  (2012-2014).  Ref.  Grant  agreement  nº: 
SI2.639876. 
2. Zero waste in ceramic tile manufacture (Life CERAM), supported by European Comission through the Programme LIFE+, 
through the Programme of Environmental Policies and Governances. Ref. Grant agreement nº: LIFE12 ENV/ES/230.  
3. Innovation and Ecodesign in the Ceramic Industry (SINNDESIGN). With the support of the European commission 
through Leonardo da Vinci 2013 (Lifelong learning Programme). Ref. Grant agreement nº: 2009-1-PT1-LEO05-03237.  
4. Advanced membrane separation technologies for boron removal in wastewaters of ceramic and other manufacturing 
industries (NANOBORON). Funded through the European program EUREKA. Ref. Grant agreement nº: ∑! 4121  
5. Ceramic waste valorisation in cement manufacturing (VALOCER). Supported by the Spanish Ministry of Industry, 
Energy and Tourism. Ref. Grant agreement nº: CTM2004-06619-C02-02  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
The ITC-AICE has a mobile unit that provides all equipment necessary to perform in industrial facilities several activities 
such as energy audits, atmospheric emission measurements to carry out research projects or consultancy activities.  
In the case of atmospheric pollution studies, the equipment property of ITC-AICE, allow the study of atmospheric emissions 
of different nature and from different type of sources, channelled and diffuse ones, these last generated due to the transport, 
handling and storage of bulk raw materials.  
On the other hand but not included in the lab mobile unit, ITC -AICE has in its installation two mobile plants for feasibility 
studies of tertiary treatment in industrial waste water, based on membrane techniques. These plants are semi-industrial and 
pilot scale, both possible to transport to the industrial facilities to assess the viability of the results obtained at labor atory 
scale.  
 
Participant No. 7 Name (short name)/ Country Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC) / Spain 
Description of the legal entity  
The Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya · BarcelonaTech (UPC) is a public institution dedicated to higher education and 
research, specialised in the fields of engineering, architecture and science. With a focus on intellectual rigour, critical thinking, 
a cross-disciplinary approach to knowledge, educational innovation and entrepreneurship, the UPC produces competent 
professionals with the skills they need to tackle present and future challenges.  
The academic and research activity that goes on at UPC campuses and schools has made the University a benchmark 
institution. UPC is a member of European CLUSTER (Consortium Linking Universities of Science and Technology for 
Education and Research, http://www.cluster.org), which is a consortium of 12 elite European Universities in Science and 
Engineering (and architecture) with associate members from around the world. UPC is ranked in the 8th position among best 
European universities, and the 37 th best university around the world in Computer Science subject, according to USNews 
ranking (http://www.usnews.com/education/best-global-universities).  
The University harnesses the potential of basic and applied research, and transfers technology and knowledge to society. 
These actions make the UPC—in partnership with industry—an agent and driver of economic and social change. UPC has 
22 Schools and Faculties spread over 7 Catalan cities, 42 Departments, 10 Research Institutes and 201 research groups. 
One of these research groups is the Knowledge Engineering and Machine Learning Group (KEMLG).  
Main tasks you would propose to perform in the proposal  
- Design and development of an appropriate intelligent recommendation system, based on data mining techniques, and/or 
knowledge-based reasoning, for suggesting optimal actions for plant and operation managers or recommendations f or 
shared resources decision support complementing other mathematical/computer tools like game theory algorithms, 
scheduling algorithms, etc.  
- Design and development of an intelligent module, based on case -based reasoning, for analysing and learning from t he 
day-to-day operation of the SHAREBOX-ISI core module. These experiences will be used to improve the competence of the 
SHAREBOX-ISI system, learning to solve operational problems /suggest recommendations in a better way along time.  
How your organisation is suited to these tasks  
The Knowledge Engineering and Machine Learning Group (KEMLG, http://kemlg.upc.edu) belongs to the Universitat 
Politècnica de Catalunya · BarcelonaTech (UPC), and is the group involved in this proposal. The KEMLG group has been 
distinguished as an excellent and consolidated research group by the Catalan Quality Agency since 2005 (2005 SGR 0001, 
2009 SGR 1365, 2013 SGR 1304). Currently, the group has 6 senior researchers (1 Full professor and 5 Associate 
professors, all with tenure tracks), 1 post-doctoral researcher, 6 PhD students and 1 Master’s student. The main fields of 
interest of the group are Data Mining, Knowledge Discovery, Intelligent Decision Support Systems, Recommender 
 
Page 67 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
Systems, C ase-Based Reasoning, Knowledge -Based Systems, Knowledge Engineering and Management, Machine 
Learning, Autonomous Agents, Assistive Technologies and Ambient Intelligence, Electronic Institutions, Organizational 
Theory and Multi -agent Systems, e -Commerce, Semantic Web and Distributed Intelligent Systems. The main aim of the 
KEMLG research group is the analysis, design, implementation and application of several Artificial Intelligence techniques 
and methodologies to support the operation or behaviour analysis of real-world complex systems or domains. The research 
is focused on the analysis, design, management or supervision of these domains, such as in healthcare, in environmental 
processes and systems, in social and internet -based systems and in the industrial  and enterprise sector. Its major area of 
expertise regarding the objectives of the SHAREBOX proposal relays in the development of Data Mining techniques, 
Recommender Systems and Intelligent Decision Support Systems (IDSS) applied to Environmental Systems (IEDSS), to e-
Health systems (assistive technologies) and to Industrial Systems (Textile Industry).  
The group has been active in the Artificial Intelligence field since 1986. Recently, the team has been involved in EU funded 
projects TexWIN (Textile Work Intelligence by closed -loop of product and process quality in the Textile Industry) (CP -FP 
246193-2); in project “Rapid Application of Innovation in Small Medium Enterprises (RAISME)” (FP7 2624269); in project 
FATE. FAll deTector for the Elderly (ICT-PSP-2011-5-297178); in project IDONTFALL. Integrated prevention and Detection 
sOlutioNs Tailored to the population and Risk Factors associated with FALLs (ICT -PSP-2011-5-297225), and in project 
SUPERHUB: SUstainable and PERsuasive Human Users moBility in future cities (ICT-2011 289067). Previous EU projects 
were “Development of a rapid configuration system for textile production machinery based on the physical behaviour 
simulation of precision textile structures (MODSIMTex)” (CP -FP 214181 -2), Agentlink III (Sema ntic Knowledge Based 
Systems), ASPIC (Semantic Knowledge Based Systems) and Provenance (Grid computing). A team of the KEMLG group 
won the International “Hacking Bullipedia” contest in November 2013. Prof. Ulises Cortés, which is the founder of the group, 
was one of the coordinators of the "Agentcities" (DEP -2003-00024) finalist application to the Descartes Prize 2003 
Outstanding Scientific and Technological Achievements Resulting from European Collaborative Research. In addition to 
European Project activity, the group participates is a wide range of national / international initiatives including: “An Intelligent 
Decision Support System for minimisation and forecasting of volcanic activity impact” (R31971-A), funded by CONACYT in 
México, Spanish and Catalan funded research projects such as in the past projects within data mining field such as 
“Improvement and new developments in an Intelligent Data Mining System for Knowledge Extraction and Management in 
Environmental Databases (GESCONDA-II)” (TIN2004-01368) and “Development of an Intelligent Data Analysis System for 
Knowledge Management” in Environmental Data Bases (GESCONDA, TIC2000-1011) funded by Spanish CICyT entity.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
DR. MIQUEL SÀNCHEZ-MARRÈ (Male) (http://www.cs.upc.edu/~miquel) received a B.Sc. in Computer Science in 1988 
and a M.Sc. in Computer Science in 1991 both from the Barcelona School of Informatics. He received a Ph.D. in Computer 
Science in 1996 from the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya · BarcelonaTech (UPC). He is Associate Professor in the 
Computer Science Department (CS) of the UPC since 1990 (tenure 1996). He was the head of the Artificial Intelligence 
section of CS Dept. (1997-2000) and head of the KEMLG group (2006 -2011). He is the Academic Coordinator of the PhD 
program of Artificial Intelligence (UPC) since February 2013, and he was the Academic Coordinator of the Interuniversity 
Master program of Artificial Intelligence (UPC-URB-UB) since February 2010 to August 2011. He was on a sabbatical leave 
from UPC at Catalan Institute of Water Research (ICRA), since September 2011 to august 2012. He is a pioneer member 
of ACIA (Catalan Association of Artificial Intelligence) and in 1994-1998 was member of its board of directors. He is a Fellow 
of the International Environmental Modelling and Software Society (iEMSs) since 2005. He received an Accesit of the Oms 
i De Prat 1991 Prize, granted by Caixa de Manresa, in the field of Experimental and Applied Sciences for the Master's Thesis 
entitled, DEPUR: an Application of Knowledge-Based Systems to Wastewater Treatment Plants Diagnosis (1991). In 2003, 
he founded the spin-off company Sanejament Intel·ligent S.L. (SISLtech), which received the Energy Excellence Award 2013 
in the category of Entrepreneurship and Employment, awarded by the Catalan Energy Institute  (ICAEN) for the business 
plan developed. The firm has developed an innovative and high benefit for the wastewater  treatment process and has 
consolidated in the area of energy optimization of wastewater treatment plants, a market that has allowed implementing 
projects in different countries in Europe and South America. November 10th, 2013. Furthermore, the company rec eived in 
2012 the Bioenergy Silver Award 2012, awarded by ATEGRUS (Technical Association of Waste Management, Urban and 
Environment), for the project of energy recovery from industrial wastes and/or agricultural processes of anaerobic co -
digestion of sewage sludge to increase biogas production and, consequently, the generation of electricity. May 23, 2012. In 
addition, he is a pioneer member of iEMSs (International Environmental Modelling and Software Society) and a board 
member of iEMSs, too. He is also a pioneer member of the MIDAS (Spanish Network on Data Mining and Learning) and 
ÁTICA (Spanish network on Advance and Transference of Applied Computational Intelligence), and he is the main 
coordinator of the ÁTICA network. He is a member of the Editorial  
 
Page 68 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
Board of International Journal of Applied Intelligence and of the Environmental Modelling & Software journal. He has been 
researching in several projects granted by the Catalonian government, the Spanish council and the  European Union (EU). 
He has authored 153 referred journal or conference publications, being 132 at international level and 21 at a national level, 
and is author/editor of 10 books. He has been an invited editor for some special issue journals, reviewer fo r some journals 
and has organised some international workshops and conferences in the AI field. From 1998, he co -organized several 
periodic workshops on Data Mining, IEDSS, Artificial Intelligence and Environmental Systems in international conferences, 
such as (BESAI in ECAI, DM -TES and AITENV in iEMSs). His main research topics are case -based reasoning, machine 
learning, data mining, recommender systems, knowledge discovery, knowledge engineering, intelligent decision support 
systems, and integrated AI arc hitectures. He has an special interest on the application of AI techniques to Environmental 
systems, to Industrial systems (textile industry) and to e-Health systems (Assistive technologies).  
DR. KARINA GIBERT (Female) (http://www.eio.upc.edu/homepages/karina) is a researcher at the Universitat Politècnica 
de Catalunya · BarcelonaTech (UPC) since 1990. B.Sc. in Computer Science from the Barcelona School of Informatics in 
1990. M.Sc. in Computer Science from the Barcelona School of Informatics in 1991. Ph.D. in Computer Science (in the Ph.D. 
Program on Technical and Informatics Applications of Statistics, Operation Research and Optimization) from the Universitat 
Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC) in 1995. Associate professor at the Statistics and Operations Research department at UPC 
from 1990. She is a lecturer for graduate students related to her research topics at Barcelona School of Informatics (FIB), 
and Mathematics and Statistics Faculty (FME) from 1990; also, she is an academic staff in the Ph.D. Programme of Statistics 
and Operations Research, from 1994, and in the Ph.D. Programme of Artificial Intelligence from 1998. From 2005, she is a 
lecturer in the Interuniversity Master in Artificial Intellig ence, from 2005, in the Interuniversity Master in Statistics and 
Operations Research, from 2008, at UPC, and both with the quality award from the Spanish Government from 2003; Also in 
Master in Health Care Innovation, Universidad de Cádiz, from 2010. She focus her research on the design of hybrid Artificial 
Intelligence and Statistics methodologies in Data Mining for intelligent data analysis of very complex domains to support 
complex decision-making. She also works in Intelligent Decision Support Systems ( IEDSS) for both managing and control 
as well as in the formalization of expert-knowledge for decision-support. She has long experience on medical domains, and 
environmental systems, in which she has active research from 1990, being nominated consultant of the Mental Health 
Department of the WHO (World Health Organization) from February 2008 and elected fellowship from International 
Environmental Modelling and Software Society in 2008. She participated in several competitive projects, funded from both 
Spanish government or European projects, recently in K4Care, (IST-2004-026968), which was distinguished by the EU with 
the award of best e-Health project of the month in February 2010 because of the high quality standards achieved. She has 
published 93 papers in  research journals, from which 55 in international journals, most of them well indexed (31 in ISCI 
journals), 26 book chapters and more than 200 papers in Conferences and Workshops. From 2001, she co-organized several 
periodic workshops on Data Mining, IED SS Artificial Intelligence and Environmental Systems in big international 
conferences, such as (BESAI in ECAI, DM-TES and AITENV in iEMSs). She is pioneer member of ACIA (Catalan Association 
of Artificial Intelligence) and SCE (Catalan Statistics Associati on) and ordinary member of ACM (Catalan Association of 
Mathematics), ESTYLF (Spanish association of Fuzzy Logics), EUSFLAT (European Association of Fuzzy Logics and 
Technologies), BESAI (Binding Environmental Sciences and Artificial Intelligence), iEMSs (I nternational Environmental 
Modelling and Software Society) and PSICOST Scientific Association. In addition, she is a pioneer member of the MIDAS 
(Spanish Network on Data Mining and Learning) and ÁTICA (Spanish network on Advance and Transference of Applied  
Computational Intelligence).  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. A. Gatzioura & M. Sànchez-Marrè. A Case-based Recommendation Approach for Market Basket Data. IEEE Intelligent 
Systems. Accepted. September 2014. IEEE Computer Science, ISSN 1541-1672. DOI: 10.1109/MIS.2014.57  
2. M. Poch, U. Cortés, J. Comas, I. Rodríguez-Roda & M. Sànchez-Marrè. Decisions on Urban Water Systems: some 
Support. Servei de Publicacions, Universitat de Girona. ISBN 978-84-8458-401-8. September 2012. http://dugi-
doc.udg.edu/handle/10256/7162  
3. B. Sevilla & M. Sànchez-Marrè. Case-Based Reasoning Applied to Textile Industry Processes. 20th International 
Conference on Case-Based Reasoning (ICCBR’2012). Lecture Notes in Computer Science LNAI, 2012, vol. 7466, p. 
428-442. September 2012. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-32986-9_32  
4. K. Gibert, M. Sànchez-Marrè, B. Sevilla. Tools for environmental data mining and intelligent decision support. 6th 
International Congress on Environmental Modelling & Software (iEMSs 2012). iEMSs’2012 Proceedings, pp. 1726-
1734. Germany, July 2012. ISBN: 978-88-9035-742-8. http://www.iemss.org/society/index.php/iemss-2012-
proceedings. 
5. K. Gibert, M. Sànchez-Marrè & I. Rodríguez-Roda. GESCONDA: An Intelligent Data Analysis System for Knowledge  
Page 69 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
Discovery  and  Management  in  Environmental  Data  Bases.  Environmental  Modelling  &  Software  21(1):116-121. 
January 2006. Elsevier Science, ISSN 1364-8152.  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
1. Project “Big Data and real-time decision-making applied to food and beverage online industry” (BIG FOOD). (AVANZA 
project, TSI-100300-2013-161). Funded by Spanish Ministry of Industry, Energy and Tourism (MINETUR) (10.000€ for  
KEMLG, which has been subcontracted by Supercomparador de Consumo SL and Label Grup Desarrollo de la 
Información SL companies). January 2014-December 2016.  
2. Project “SUstainable and PERsuasive Human Users moBility in future cities (SUPERHUB)” (ICT-2011, FP7-ICT-
289067). Funded by European Union (463.133 € for KEMLG). October 2011-October 2014.  
3. Project “Textile Work Intelligence by closed-loop of product and process quality in the Textile Industry (TexWIN)” (FP7-
NMP- 246193-2). Funded by European Union (312.125 € for UPC). March 2010-March 2013. 
4. Project “Rapid Application of Innovation in Small Medium Enterprises (RAISME)” (FP7-SME-2624269). Funded by 
European Union (100.800 € for KEMLG). December 2010-December 2012.  
5. Project “Improvement and new developments in an Intelligent Data Mining System for Knowledge Extraction and 
Management in Environmental Databases (GESCONDA-II)” (TIN2004-01368). Funded by Spanish Ministry of Science 
and Education (MECD) (36.570 € for KEMLG). December 2004-December 2007.  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
-  
 
Participant No. 8 Name (short name)/ Country DECHEMA   -   Society   for   Chemical   Engineering   and 
   Biotechnology e.V. (DECHEMA)/ Germany 
Description of the legal entity    
DECHEMA - Society for Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology e.V., is an interd isciplinary scientific society with more 
than 5,500 personal and institutional members (including about 500 SMEs), whose activities cover wide areas relevant to 
the process industries. DECHEMA is dedicated to the support of R&D progress and implementation in various fields of 
chemical engineering, including reaction engineering, catalysis, materials, process efficiency and environmental protection. 
DECHEMA is board member of the European Technology Platform Sustainable Chemistry (SusChem) and hosts several 
secretariats of organisations in this field: European Federation of Chemical Engineering (EFCE) and its international 
equivalent (WCEC), the European Federation on Corrosion (EFC) and the German Catalysis Society (GECATS). DECHEMA 
is organiser of the International Exhibition-Congress on Chemical Engineering, Environmental Protection and Biotechnology 
(ACHEMA) and of around 50 conferences with over 10.000 participants per year, and offers more than 20 training courses 
on different topics. Co-ordination and support of DECHEMA’s activities is carried out by about 190 employees.  
DECHEMA hosts more than 50 websites including project websites and secure collaborative workspaces for information 
exchange and knowledge management of project consortia.  
DECHEMA hosts  two secretariats for international (ISO) and European (CEN) standardisation and hosts the German 
standardisation (DIN) working group on laboratory apparatus.  
Main tasks that will be performed  
DECHEMA will be actively involved in activities related to  maximizing the innovation impacts of the project, which will be 
executed through WP8. Within WP8, DECHEMA is mainly responsible for standardisation gap analysis, mapping of relevant 
standards and guiding the consortium in preparing for regulatory complian ce. DECHEMA will lead the partners, with the 
support CCB in designing an effective communication strategy for engaging with Process Industries, Industrial Parks and 
other stakeholders, as well as disseminating the results to the European process industries, Industrial Parks and stakeholder 
groups. DECHEMA will also heavily assist CCB in the training activities to ensure upskilling in the industry in relation to I S 
and the use of the SHAREBOX platform. They will also contribute to communicating the requireme nts of the process 
industries in WP1 and ensuring that the process industry is included in the innovation cycle of the project as appropriate. Dr. 
Renata KÖRFER will act as the Communication and Dissemination Manager of the project.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the proposal  
DECHEMA has more than 25 years of experience in identifying and closing technological gaps, in facilitating communication 
between research, industry and the public sector and in supporting the market uptake of innovation. Research coordination 
and management; strong network in chemical engineering and process industries; high expertise in linking industry and 
R&D; strong skills in international communication, dissemination and exploitation.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work   
Page 70 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
DR. RENATA KÖRFER (Female) is head of standardization department at DECHEMA and has 15 years of professional  
experience working in science and research ma nagement. Her background includes extensive knowledge of assessment 
and use of innovative process and methods in the field of process engineering especially in Food and Chemical industry. 
She has more than 8 years experience in coordinating and participati ng in various EU projects (FP6/FP7) as well as EC 
Project Technical Advisor (PTA), proposal evaluator and project reviewer. She is also an executive secretary of technical 
committees DIN 055, CEN 332 and ISO 48.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/ or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. Member of PPP SPIRE 
2. Secretary of SusChem 
3. Member of the Managing Board, task force DECHEMA/GDCh ‘Process analytical technologies (PAT)’ 
4. Executive secretary of technical committees DIN 055, CEN 332 and ISO 48General verification protocol (produced 
in AdvanceETV, adapted and translated in 11 languages by the EC and used by the EU ETV Pilot Programme - 
http://iet.jrc.ec.europa.eu/etv/verification-bodies)  
5. Guide for Proposers to the EU ETV Pilot Programme” (produced in AdvanceETV, translated by the EC in 11 
languages and used for the EU ETV Pilot Programme – http://iet.jrc.ec.europa.eu/etv/technology-proposers)  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
EU project coordination and management of NanoBioPharmaceutics, Next-GTL, Synflow, CO2NET, E4Water, 
ChemWater, M4CO2, R3Water  
1. AdvanceETV: “Coordination Action on Environmental Technology Verification ETV – Building a framework for 
international cooperation” (FP7, Grant no. 226824) 
2. ChemWater:  
3. E4Water:  “Economically  and  Ecologically  Efficient  Water  Management  in  the  European  Chemical  Industry” 
(THEME FP7 NMP.2011.3.4-1, Grant no: 280756) 
4. R3Water: “Demonstration of innovative solutions for Reuse of water, Recovery of valuable substances and 
Resource efficiency in urban wastewater treatment” (FP7-ENV-2013-WATER-INNO-DEMO, Grant no.619093)  
5. RiSKWa: “Risk Management of Emerging Compounds and Pathogens in the Water Cycle” (BMBF – German 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research)  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
-  
 
Participant No. 9 Name (short name)/ Country Chemie-Cluster Bayern (CCB) / Germany 
Description of the legal entity  
CCB is a clust er network of 270 member institutions from the chemical and process industry in Bavaria and Southern 
Germany, including 40 universities and 8 Fraunhofer Institutes. Member companies cover producers of basic, fine and 
special chemicals, coatings, plastics a nd new materials. The cluster furthermore represents operators of industry parks 
(Mainsite, InfraServ Gendorf) and leading experts in chemical engineering, such as Linde or Siemens. CCB chairs the Project 
Council of the European Chemical Regions Network and is awarded with the “Gold Label for Cluster Excellence”. The cluster 
has started an international “Value Creation Partnership” (http://www.wertschoepfungspakt -chemie.de/en/wpc/) to explore 
additional markets for chemical companies in certain industrial value chains. CCB is running special cooperation programs 
with international partner sites and industry parks, also including member companies of more than 20 partner clusters in 
Europe (mainly UK, France, Italy, Austria, Poland and Spain).  
Main tasks you would propose to perform in the proposal  
-commitment to WP 1, in particular input to the case study analysis from Bavarian Industry Parks 
-bringing in at least 1-2 demonstration sites for applying the toolbox, supporting and monitoring implementation (WP5/6), 
-adding a management component for industry park managers, so that the toolbox could easily be included into the service 
offer of park managers; conducting market studies of target users, development of a business model (WP7, we would be 
ready to take the lead), 
-commitment to dissemination activities.  
How your organisation is suited to these tasks  
CCB’s Competence Center for Sustainable Development of Industrial Sites coordinates the work of globally leading and well 
experienced construction and planning companies with a focus on process industry and industrial production in fields like 
bio-economy, clean-tech, renewable energies or other cutting-edge technologies as well as scientific clusters. By its  
Page 71 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
“Site Development Program”, the Competence Center follows the quality approach of creating “Value Optimizing Parks”. 
This label describes the concept of an industry park, which provides optimized value creation for partners on site, park 
operators, municipal authorities and the social community around the park. Value added for public authorities is being created 
by providing the label of a Model Industry Park, which helps – in combination with a tailor -made investment promotion 
concept – to attract high-value production in order to leverage local value creation.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
MR. DANIEL A. GOTTSCHALD (male). Dipl.-Kfm. Daniel A. Gottschald has studied European Business Sciences at the  
universities of Bam berg, Germany, and Jyväskylä, Finland. Until 2009, he was responsible for Internationalization of 
Northern Hesse’s industry network for renewable power generation, deENet e.V.. At same time, he was working as assistant 
to the CEO of the regional economic development agency. Since 2009, he is managing director of Chemie-Cluster Bayern 
GmbH. Mr. Gottschald has coordinated various industry projects at international level; he is president of the Cluster 
Excellence Expert Group and chairman of the Project Council of the European Chemical Regions Network (ECRN).  
MRS. IRINA NUNBERGER (female). Irina Nunberger has studied economic cybernetics in Nowosibirsk (Russia) until 1994. 
She worked as investment analyst in several financial institutions and as expert in the field of regional and private sector 
development prior to her appointment as head of CCB’s international department in April 2012. As project leader, she 
realized a broad number of international projects (EuropeAid, World bank, UNDP among others) in Europe, Caribbean and 
South-East Asia regarding regional competitiveness, technology transfer, strategic development of regions and industry 
parks for public donor organizations.  
Competence Center for Industrial Site Development, expert in industry park management  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. International Site Development Program 
2. Value Creation Partnership  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
1. CEOPS project (NPM3-SL-2012-309984, http://www.ceops-project.eu/)  
2. Joint planning and management of a Sino-European Eco-Industry Park in Yancheng, Jiangsu (China) 
3. Framework cooperation of realizing a Technology Park for Shale Gas Production in Yibin, Sichuan (China) 
4. Implementation of the Value Creation Partnership in the PlasChem Park, Jubail New City, Saudi-Arabia  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any majo r items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
CCB’s Competence Center for Industrial Site Development is located at Industrie Center Obernburg, one of Bavaria’s 
traditional industry parks, and works in close cooperation with the site operator Mainsite in order to implement new tools and 
structures of integrated site management. The network of the Site Development Program brings together leading cluster 
networks of European industry and science, experts in industry park planning and public a uthorities in order to support 
sustainable cluster building, planning, development and operation of eco -efficient industry parks on well -developed and 
emerging business sites all around the world.  
 
Participant No. 10 Name (short name)/Country KEROS CERÁMCIA S.L. 
Description of the legal entity    
KEROS CERÁMICA S.L. is a company founded in 1994. Its business is the manufacture and commercialization of ceramic 
products. The company has a facility (production and offices) in Nules (Castellón), the facil ity occupies 22.000 sqm in an 
area of 80.000 sqm. The annual production capacity is 4 millions sqm. Since 2009 a filial was set up in Russe (Bulgary) 
(KEROS BULGARIA EAD), where it produces white body wall and floor tiles, with an annual production capacit y of 
2,6millionssqm. KEROS BULGARIA has a spray drier acting in some cases as waste managers. The company employs 
141 workers in Spain, showing annual sales of € 23 million. It has over 1500 customers in more than 80 countries. KEROS 
BULGARIA has a turnove r of € 13.5 million, including over 800 current clients diversified in more than 60 countries, 
employing 139 people.  
Main tasks you would propose to perform in the proposal  
KEROS will act as coordinator of the companies located in Nules industrial park. Moreover it will carry out the following key 
tasks: 
- Identification of the inputs: including water, fuels, materials, etc. (WP1)  - Identification of the outputs: solid wastes, dirty water, and sludges, wasted energy, etc. (WP1)   
Page 72 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
- Analysis of the general management issues that could be able to share among KEROS and other companies 
located in the same industrial area: security services, cleaning services, suppliers of some materials, etc. (WP5)  - Identification of new opportunities to improve the efficiency of the companies in their use of energy, raw materials 
and water by implementing new technologies. (WP5) 
- Field trials of the developed tool in industrial conditions (WP6)  
How your organisation is suited to these tasks  
KEROS is located in the Nules industrial park selected for implementing SHAREBOX platform in the ceramic cluster. The 
company is aware of reducing the environmental impact of the ceramic tile production, having carried out different projects 
to reach this objective.  
KEROS has an Environmental and Quality department that nowadays is collecting data about the environmental impacts of 
its production. This department will work actively in the project, mainly in gathering information about the current situatio n 
of ceramic tile production sites with respect IS (WP1).  
Currently, the company keeps track of solid and liquid wastes generated in the manufacturing process. Wastes are managed 
through authorized agents which take them to their corresponding treatment centres (sprays dryers, etc..).  
Regular checks of gaseous emissions are carried out in order to control and not exceed the minimum values required by 
the environmental regulations.  
KEROS has also a R&D department that will be in charge of establishing the ceramic cluster requirements for IS (WP1), 
gathering information (WP5) and carrying out field trials in industrial conditions (WP6).  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
PEDRO CASTEJÓN SEGARRA (Male), DIRECTOR OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND QUALITY DEPARTMENTS. 44 years  
old. Degree in Business Studies (Universidad Jaime I of Castellón). During 7 years he was devoted to teaching middle and 
upper level students about administrative subjects. In 1998 (17 years), he joined KEROS CERÁMICA, S.A. for the Quality 
Area. Nowadays he is the director and responsible for the implementation of the environmental management, quality and 
labour risk prevention systems.  
Pedro Castejón as maximum responsible of the industrial waste management of the company. He will participate 
in collecting and feedback the information about inputs and outputs, type, quantities and management procedure.  
CARLOS GIL ALBALAT (Male). R& D DIRECTOR, 36 years old, Degree in Chemistry and diploma in advance Studies  
about molecular chemistry and materials, mainly ceramic materials (Universidad Jaume I, Castellón). During 4 years was 
working in the Solid State Chemistry Research Group of the Inorganic Chemical Department of the University Jaume I 
(Castellón). During that time he acquired deep knowledge about ceramic materials (influence of the raw materials in the 
physical-chemical properties, synthesis and development of new body, frit and glaze compositions, etc.). Moreover he also 
acquired knowledge about experimenta l and instrumental techniques and physical -chemical analysis. Later, on 2005, he 
joined KEROS CERÁMICA S.A. where he is working as R&D director of the company. Carlos Gil is author of more than 30 
papers in scientific and technological national and Interna tional journals and in different national and International 
congresses. He has managed more than 10 R&D projects financed by the regional government (IMPIVA), national 
government (PROFIT and CDTI) and international (LIFE and FP6).  
Carlos Gil as responsibl e of the R&D project management will be in charge of the internal coordination of the 
project and the administrative management.  
JOAQUIN EMILIO MARTÍ SEGARA (Male), GENERAL MANAGER, 47 years old, Degree on Chemistry, Specialization in 
Chemical Engineering, from the University of Valencia. He was working during 5 years in the “Instituto de Tecnología 
Cerámica (ITC)” of Castellón. Later on he joined KEROS CERÁMICA S.A. during its foundation in 1994. Since then he 
developed his professional career working in the ceramic sector. Over the past 16 years he has gone through almost all 
technical departments of the company (Operator in the section of glazes and inks preparation, in charge thereof, Head of 
Production and Technical Direction) until the current positio n. Hence he has a wide knowledge of the ceramic product, 
ceramic technology and market.  
Joaquin Emilio, as general manager and person that knows perfectly the ceramic sector, will be in charge of the  
coordination of the industrial park of Nules (Castellón ), together with the rest of the project partners of the 
industrial park. He also will be on charge of monitoring the project activities.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content 
 
Page 73 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
1. GARCÍA-TEN, F.J.; QUEREDA, Mª F.; GIL, C.; CHUMILLAS, D.; ZAERA, V.; SEGURA, Mª C. LIFE CERAM. Zero 
waste in ceramic tile manufacture. 2014  
2. . GIL,C.; SILVESTRE , D.;PIQU ER, J.; GARCÍA -TEN, J.; QUEREDA, Mª F.; VICENTE, M. J. Preparation of porcelain tile 
granulates by more environmentally sustainable processes. Bol. Soc. Esp. Ceram. Vidr., Vol 51, 2, 67-74, Marzo-Abril 2012, 2012  
3. GARCÍA-TEN, F.J.; QUEREDA, F.; VICENTE, Mª. J.; GIL, C.; MIRALLES, C.; FLORS, J.R.; DE LA PEÑA, A. 
OBTAINMENT OF CERAMIC TILES USING SUSTAINABLE GRANULATION SYSTEMS. QUALICER 2014 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
European Projects:  
1. LIFECERAM (LIFE12 ENV/ES/230). “Zero waste in ceramic tile manufacture”. http://www.lifeceram.eu/es/ 
2.EC project-G1RD-CT-2002-00783-MONOTONE: “Automatic Quality Control for Industrial Printing” 
National Projects:  
3. INIDIV/2010/020: “MICROGENERACION ELECTRICA A PARTIR DE CALOR RESIDUAL DE BAJAS 
TEMPERATURAS PROCEDENTES DE UN HORNO CERAMICO” (Electric microgeneration from waste heat at low 
temperatures coming from a ceramic kiln)  
4. INIDIV/2009/145: “Investig ación de variables críticas en hornos industriales para el desarrollo de un sistema de 
monitorización en continuo que minimice el consumo energético y en el impacto ambiental”. (Research in critical variables 
of industrial furnaces for the development of a  continuous monitoring system that minimizes energy consumption and 
environmental impact)  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
KEROS is located in the Nules Industrial Park (Castellón), which a photograph is included with the location of the different 
partners involved in the SHAREBOX project. 10-KEROS, 11-KERAFRIT, 12-ISSA, 13-GUZMAN  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
12 
 
10 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental and R&D departments.  
KEROS is awa re of the environmental impact produced by industrial processes, in general, and in particular the one 
produced by the production of ceramic tiles. The company has spent years conducting research to improve the energy 
efficiency of the process. KEROS parti cipated in the design and installation of various systems for the recirculation of 
combustion fumes in order to minimize the consumption of natural gas. Moreover, the company has also been working in a 
system of electrical microgeneration, innovative in the field of ceramic tiles production. This system produce electricity using 
the heat coming from the combustion fumes produced during the firing process of the ceramic tiles (in the ceramic   
Page 74 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
kilns).  
 
Participant No. 11 Name (short name)/Country KERAFRIT, S.A. (KERAFRIT)/Spain 
Description of the legal entity  
Kerafrit s.a is a chemical ceramic company with headquarters in Nules (Castellón) and was inaugurated in 1997; it is 
dedicated to the manufacture and commercia lization of frits, enamels, colours, silk -screen printings, mediums, additives, 
digital inks, 3rd firing products and other ceramic materials.  
In 2014 the Kerafrit commenced a new stage with a new majority shareholder (Ceramic Group). This made the compan y 
grow, providing a solid financial position, with more investments in added value products and an international expansion 
with better means, more technical personnel and focusing the commercial strategy in obtaining new markets.  
With the help of a significant technological effort, of R&D investment and with the capture of new clients, and with the support 
of our new Ceramic Group we have increased our sales by 20 % compared to the previous years, reaching around of 20 M 
€/year.  
Our working lines are focused on the creation of more added value products for our clients, and Kerafrit S.A. tries to continue 
growing, taking advantage of the synergy of its Ceramic Group, extending productive facilities in Spain, innovating with new 
products which are nowadays u nder investigation, with new patents and taking advantage of its growth on the export 
markets, as well as a great progress in our program of internationalization to be able to increase our assistance to the clients 
with a personalized, rapid and flexible service as well as effective and close as possible.  
Main tasks you would propose to perform in the proposal  
KERAFRIT will participate mainly in WP1, WP5 and WP6 carrying out the following tasks: 
- Identification of the inputs: including water, fuels, materials, etc. (WP1)  - Identification of the outputs: solid wastes, dirty water, and sludges, wasted energy, etc.  (WP1)  - Analysis of the general management issues that could be able to share among KERAFRIT and other companies 
located in the same industrial area: security services, cleaning services, suppliers of some materials, etc. (WP5)  - Identification of new opportunities to improve the efficiency of the companies in their use of energy, raw materials 
and water by implementing new technologies. (WP5)  - Field trials of the SHAREBOX tool in industrial conditions (WP6)  
How your organisation is suited to these tasks  
KERAFRIT is located in the Nules industrial park selected for implementing SHAREBOX platform in the ceramic cluster. 
The company is committed to reducing the environmental impact of the frit, pigment and glaze production.  
KERAFRIT S.A. has a wide structure to manufacture products following the strictest procedures of quality and environmental 
protection. Our investments have allowed us to extend our p roduction capacity , to improve our facilities of storage 
(warehouse), as well as to improve our facilities of environmental protection, with a new station of purification and new 
filters to reduce the emission to the atmosphere in lower levels than the all owed ones for the in force legislation. Kerafrit 
S.A. has the ISO-9001:2008 Certification, and also the ISO-14001:2004 for a suitable environmental management. Kerafrit 
takes care of the environment because of the good use of the existing technologies in order to minimize the emissions, water 
consumption and for a better environmental protection.  
KERAFRIT has an Environmental Department that nowadays is collecting data about the environmental impacts use of raw 
materials, electricity, gas, water for its pr oduction and emissions of CO 2. This department will work actively in the project, 
mainly in gathering information about the current situation of ceramic tile production sites with respect to IS (WP1).  
KERAFRIT has also a R&D department that will be helpin g KEROS to establish the ceramic cluster requirements for IS 
(WP1), gathering information (WP5) and carrying out field trials in industrial conditions (WP6).  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
Rosario Flors Rogla (Female) R&D and Quality Control Laboratory Manager -
Chemistry Degree  
-Expertise in research and development of ceramic frits, special enamels and nanotechnology 
-Expertise en FRX 
Languages: English (medium)  
Carol González Tardif de Petiville (Female) R&D Technician -
Master in Science and Technology of Ceramics  
-Master in Environmental Science and Enterprise  
Page 75 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
-Chemical Degree 
-Expertise in inkjet development (nanotechnology) 
Languages: English, French 
Sonia Hernandez Gozalbo (Female) Quality & Environmental Manager 
-Master in Environmental Science and Risk Prevention 
-R&D management course 
-Chemical Degree 
-Expertise in ISO-standards, Legislation, Environmental tasks and emissions. 
Languages: English, French (medium)  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content  
Our installation measures the air emissions of their focus with the periodicity established in the law. Some ashes recollected 
in the filters are reintroduced to the kiln, so we can reduce wastes. We have a defined reduction plan for wastes that we 
have incorporated in our internal environmental objectives. The water has a treatment system to recover in our process and 
we have no waste.  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
“Nanoglaze”, is the project which has granted us the “Alfa de Oro 2009” award. It’s a product fabricated on the basis of two 
patents developed by the ICMM research team. 
This technological success is the result of previous studies carried out by both the ICMM and ICV teams on the basis of:  
•the so-called percolative materials 
•the fact that the nanometals are embedded in sepiolite fibers 
•the dewetting process of the metallic nanoparticles which takes place 
•during the fast firing of the ceramic glaze 
•the scale-up process which was performed at both laboratories. 
Coordinator of the project: Fernando Lucas (Kerafrit, S.A.)  
“Kershield”, is another Project developed with the collaboration of the Technical Ceramic Institute, is a project that allows 
producing ceramic pieces with a significant reduction to the X radiations. This has been obtained by the de velopment of a 
new ceramic paste with a high percentage of PbO, Bismuth and Barium. This product can be used in Hospitals, Radiological 
Rooms, Protection zones, etc. This Project is in process of being patented and and it wil be presented in the Alfa of Gold in 
Cevisama 2015. Coordinator of the project: Fernando Lucas (Kerafrit, S.A.)  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
KERAFRIT is located in the Nules Industrial Park (Castellón), 11-KERAFRIT in the photograph included in KEROS partner 
profile. 
4 KILNS 
4 INKJET MILLS 
R&D LABORATORY  
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE LABORATORY 
INDUSTRIAL PLOTTER 
4 ENAMELS MILLS 
3 MEDIUM MIXERS 
1 RINAJET (SECADERO DE ESMALTES)  
FRX 
DILATOMETER 
PARTICLE SIZE DISTRIBUTION EQUIPMENT 
SURFACE TENSION EQUIPMENT  
 
 
Participant No. 12 Name (short name)/ Country Ibérica de Suspensiones S.L (ISSA) /Spain 
Description of the legal entity    
Ibérica de Suspensiones S.L (ISSA) produces helicoidally suspensions for the automotive industry; it belongs to the 
metallurgic sector.  
 
Page 76 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
Founded in 1989 and headquartered in Alsasua (Spain) ISSA is a joint venture between Sogefi group and NHK Spring. The 
company offers products ranging from the design to the manufacturing and supply of suspension coil springs and stabilizer 
bars made both with cold and hot forming technologies. It operates in business segments including the supply of OEM parts 
for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles. ISSA has 212 employees in the two manufacturing sites of Alsasua and 
Nules, and in 2012 its turnover was 49.2 Million €. 
 
The plant in Nules occupies 11310 sqm in an area of 55000 sqm, and automotive suspensions spring are manufactured.  
In this plant ISSA has highly automated means to manufacture all kinds of coil springs.  
Main tasks you would propose to perform in the proposal  
ISSA will mainly carry out the following tasks: 
- Identification of the inputs: including water, fuels, materials, etc. (WP1)  - Identification of the outputs: solid wastes, dirty water, and sludges, wasted energy, etc. (WP1)  - Field trials of the tool developed in industrial conditions (WP6)  
Share the results of the project between the metallurgic sector. (WP7)  
How your organisation is suited to these tasks  
ISSA is located in the Nules industrial park selected for implementing SHAREBOX platform in the ceramic cluster. Even 
ISSA is a company that does not belong to the ceramic cluster, it is typical that in the industrial areas were ceramic product 
producers are located, other companies are also set up there. Because of that, it is considered that the participation of ISSA 
in the project is important in order to demonstrate that there is also possibility of industrial symbiosis between companies of 
different sectors. ISSA is in metallurgic sector. ISSA is aware of reducing the environmental impact of its production, having 
carried out different projects to reach this objective.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
ISABEL SIERRA (Female). Industrial Engineer, Environmental Speciality. Master in labours risks prevention (3 specialities: 
industrial safety, industrial hygiene and ergonomic & psychosocial). She is working in ISSA since Sept ember 2003 in the 
Quality Department, being responsible of security and environmental issues  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. PRTR (European Pollutants Release and Transfer Register)  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
1. ISO 14.001  
2. Internal projects related to the reduction of wastes and depuration of wastewater using physico-chemical treatments.  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
ISSA is located in the Nules Industrial Park (Castellón): 12-ISSA in the photograph included in KEROS partner profile. 
Water waste treatment plant  
 
Participant No. 13 Name (short name)/ Country GUZMAN GLOBAL S.L. (GUZMAN)/Spain 
Description of the legal entity    
GUZMAN GLOBAL is a leading raw materials distributor company based in Spain whic h belongs to Grupo GUZMAN, a  
family-owned business. Guzmán was founded in 1939 and our core business is and has always been the distribution of raw 
materials, from minerals to rubber, polymers, chemicals, raw coffee beans, nuts and dried fruits amongst others.  
But we are not only raw materials suppliers since we also cover essential aspects for our customers as quality control, 
technical assistance, research & development & innovation as well as logistics services according to their needs.  
Our mission is to provide products and services to our customers with high standards of excellence, dynamism and 
innovation.  
MINERALS BUSINESS UNIT. The business unit of GUZMAN GLOBAL specializing in industrial minerals primarily covers 
the ceramic industry, but is also present in sectors as diverse as glass, plastics, refractory, paints, etc. The production plant 
(I) located in Nules (Castellón) covers 55,000 m2 of facilities and has a total capacity of milling and processing for 185,000 
tons/year of zirconium sand, nep heline syenite, feldspar sodium, alumina and spodumene among other products. The 
production plant (II) located in the Port of Castellón has warehouses covering 22,000 m 2 for optimising logistical needs, 
mixtures of clays and capacity for bulk load. We have  a laboratory with the latest technical means for quality control, 
formulation and product development.   
Page 77 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
Main tasks you would propose to perform in the proposal  
GUZMAN will participate in WP1, WP5 and WP6 carrying out the following tasks: 
- Identification of the inputs: including water, fuels, materials, etc. (WP1) 
- Identification of the outputs: solid wastes, dirty water, and sludges, wasted energy, etc. (WP1) 
- Analysis of the general management issues that could be shared with the other companies located in the same 
industrial area: security services, cleaning services, suppliers of some materials, etc. (WP5) 
- Identification of new opportunities to improve the efficiency of the companies in their use of energy, raw materials 
and water by implementing new technologies. (WP5) 
- Field trials of the tool developed in industrial conditions (WP6)  
How your organisation is suited to these tasks  
GUZMAN GLOBAL forms part of the industrial park selected for implementing SHAREBOX platform and has been 
collaborating with ITC in different R&D projects.  
The company has developed some projects related to raw materials alternatives for the tile manufacturing companies in 
order to get energy benefits and environmental advantages.  
The company is actually collecting data of inputs and outputs and has the capacity to determine which ones can be shared 
with other companies.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Santiago Domínguez Perelló (Male): Head of Industrial Operations. Minerals B.U. 
 Industrial Engineering from Universidad Politécnica of Valencia in 2001.
 Master Degree in in Engineering Maintenance from Universidad Politécnica of Valencia in 2009-2010.
 Degree in Organization and Engineering of Production and Management of Industrial Plants from Universidad 
Politécnica of Cataluña in 2013.
 Expertise in the development and management of Maintenance, Industrial Operations and Production Projects 
since 2002.
 Languages: English 
Raul Carregui Balaguer (Male)- Industrial Technician. Minerals B.U. 
 Technician of  Management IT Systems  from Universitat Jaume I in 2002
 Expertise in general computer maintenance
 Since 2005 he has developed performance management of the function module production in current ERP  
(enterprise resource planning), being part of the computing tasks. He has also carried out tasks as support center 
for help at startup and commissioning of the two ERP implanted along these years "Oracle e -business suite" and 
" Microsoft Dynamics Navision " in accounting, billing , purchasing, payments, production, inventory and ordering 
modules.
 Languages: English 
Ana Orenga Castelló (female): R& D and Quality Control Technician. Minerals B.U. 
 Chemistry Degree from Universitat Jaume I in 1997.
 Expertise in research and development of raw materials, ceramic applications and milling technologies since 
2002.
 Expertise in Quality ISO-standards and management of Quality System since 2005.
 Languages: English 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content  
-  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
Development of additives for energy improvement in porcelain tile firing. Project developed in collaboration with the 
Technical Ceramic Institute.  
In this study a material has been developed that can be added to porcelain tile compositions to increase the sintering rate, 
thus reducing energy consumption and CO2 emissions. Lithium oxide was selected as the base constituent of the additive, 
which is a vigorous flux that does not display the disadvantage of increasing the tendency to deform by pyroplasticity. The 
use of these fluxing additives allows:  
 A considerable reduction in the peak firing temperature (about 40ºC with an addition of 5%).
 The duration of the firing cycle to be reduced.
 
Page 78 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
 Energy consumption and CO2 emissions to be reduced.
 
Use of wollastonite in wall tile manufacture. Environmental Implications and product quality. Project developed in 
collaboration with the Technical Ceramic Institute.  
The use of wollastonite instead of calcite in frits and ceramic bodies provides different properties and advantages both 
environmental implications and product quality.  
These advantages may be particularly important for frits and glazes industries, also for tile manufacturing industries, 
especially those affected by the Kyoto protocol.  
From the study conducted, it has been able to confirm the following improvements: 
 
ENERGETIC IMPROVEMENTS 
 Reduction of the firing cycle in tile manufacture (17% reduction) and thus a reduction in gas consumption.
 Decrease of energy to melt raw materials in frit manufacture (5,5% maximum).
 Decrease of energy to fire tiles in an industrial kiln (6,8% maximum).
 Decrease CO₂ emissions.
 
PRODUCT QUALITY IMPROVEMENTS  
 Decrease of infused content in frits produced with wollastonite, improving the appearance of the glazes 
developed from it.
 Decrease of “foams” in the production process of melting frits, achieving more homogeneous compositions. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
GUZMAN is located in the Nules Industrial Park (Castellón): 13-GUZMAN in the photograph included in KEROS partner 
profile.  
6 continuous industrial dry ball mills 
1 impact mill 
R& D Department 
Technical assistance laboratory 
Two particle distribution equipments  
FRX Chemical analysis equipment  
 
Participant No. 14 Name (short name)/ Country Bristol Port Company (BPC)/United Kingdom 
Description of the legal entity   
Withdrawn from the consortium in M1.   
Main tasks that will be performed   
-     
How your organisation is suited to these tasks   
-      
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
-  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content  
-  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
-  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
- 
 
 
Participant No. 15 Name (short name)/ Country   Eskisehir Chamber of Industry (ECI) / Turkey 
Description of the legal entity   
   Page 79 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
Eskişehir Chamber of Industry (ECI) was founded in 1968 by the law no: 5174 and is a professional public non-governmental 
organization. ECI has been established with the objectives of accelerating industrialization and dealing with the problems of 
the indu stry in the region. ECI has 700 members from various sectors including the aviation, rail systems, machinery 
production, metal working, white goods, food, textile industries etc. The total exports of the members summed up to 2.2 
billion USD in 2013, their turnover is approximately 8 billion USD and total work force is around 45.000 people.  
The services that ECI provides to its member companies can be summarized as below; 
 To pioneer and work for development of the industry for local and public benefits,
 To ensure vocational information to its members,
 To make researches, surveys and statistical studies,
 To take compulsory decisions and give vocational opinions to related units,
 To execute courses, seminars and make informative activities through working groups,
 To ensure foundation of organized industrial sites and their administration,
 To prepare and implement projects in order to develop the regional industry and sectors. 
Eskisehir Chamber of Industry is the operator of Eskisehir Organized Industrial which is the largest OIZ of Turkey with its 32 
million m2 area. Today, 18 million m2 is allocated to the investors, 550 companies are registered in the Zone and 400 of 
them are actively working in different industrial fields.  
Main tasks you would propose to perform in the proposal  
Eskisehir Chamber of Industry will lead the field testing work and trials in Turkey and will actively contribute to WP5 and 
WP6. They will work with industry, deploying the platform, gathering feedback and identifying opportunities.  Eskisehir 
Chamber of Industry will provide information at the phase of developing the new software within the project and when the 
new software is available, ECI will attend the tests and implement the software and populate with its companies’ data.  
How your organisation is suited to these tasks  
Eskisehir Organized Industrial Zone (EOIZ) was founded in 1969 under the leadership of Eskişehir Chamber of Industry. 
The management of EOIZ has been carrying out its duties which are included in the coverage of the related law and its 
district regulations. The activities are as follows:  
 To serve establishments that are supposed to make investments in the district, gathering the supplementary 
facilities of technical and business management,
 To present investment areas of which infrastructure is completed,
 To develop EOIZ in a modern and environmentally friendly manner,
 To support the development of modern industries and industrial approaches in terms of energy efficiency, 
environment and green production,
 To enable the main and the supplementary industries corporate,
 To help increase the economic growth and employment in the province,
 To complete the tasks given by certain institutions of the state and do studies on given subjects, for the country 
benefits,
 To carry out the tasks by the law and the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. 
Eskisehir Organized Industrial Zone is one the best environment friendly zones of Turkey and was awarded by the Ministry 
of Environment in 2011. EOIZ is already carrying out activities about energy and waste management for the factories located 
in the industrial zone. Eskisehir Chamber of Industry has got also some other partnerships in organized industrial zone such 
as technology development area, natural gas power plant, logistic center, internet service provider, waste water treatment 
center, clusters and vocational training units. These facilities make ECI a suitable partner for the project especially in th e 
data collection and test application of the new software during the implementation.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
ISMAIL OZTURK (Male) was born in 1981 and graduated from Uludag University, Econometrics Department in 2002. He  
used to work in a consulting company as a Business Plan Advisor in 2004. After completing his langu age education in 
England, he worked in an EU Regional Development Program as a procurement expert in 2006. He has been working in the 
Eskişehir Chamber of Industry as the Deputy Secretary General for 8 years. He is responsible for preparing and 
implementing national, international, EU projects, organizing fairs, trade missions to foreign countries and providing 
consultancy to members about foreign trade procedures.  
SUZAN E. ÖNPEKER (Female) was born in 1978 and graduated from Trakya University, Environmental Engineering  
Department in 2000. She received her Master of Business Administration degree in 2004. She use d to work in a holding 
company producing ceramic tiles as an environmental, quality, health & safety engineer until 2009. She has been working 
 
Page 80 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
in the Eskişehir Organized Industrial Zone as an Environmental Engineer for 5 years. She is responsible for environmental 
management unit, implementing waste management and legislation, controlling, prepared and implementing an 
environmental project with D evelopment Agency (BEBKA), attended seminar and meetings about industrial symbiosis & 
energy efficiency. She is also making an academic research to prepare thesis at Anadolu University, Environmental 
Engineering MSc Programme.  
List of up to 5 relevant pub lications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. ECI Magazine, Year: 2014, No: 8, Cover Subject: Industrial Symbiosis and Industry 4.0  
2. Complete infrastructure services 
3. Water, electricity, natural gas, steam and sewage lines, telephone and support services 
4. Clustering activities 
5. Cooperation with relevant organizations such as TUBITAK, BEBKA, TTGV etc.  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
1. Clean Aerospace Regions (CARE) Project, www.care-aero.eu, FP7-REGIONS-2011-1, ID: 286560 
2. Enterprise Europe Network (EEN) Project, COS-EEN-2014-2-01, ID: 649503 
3. Internationalize SMEs Project, ETCF-II, ID: TR0604.03-02/002 
4. Trainings and seminars provided for member companies  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
Eskisehir Organized Industrial Zone is the subsidiary of Eskisehir Chamber of Industry. Eskisehir Organized Industrial Zone 
has significant infrastructure and facilities such as waste water treatment center, technology development area, natural gas 
power plant, logistic center, internet service provider, clusters an d vocational training units which are relevant to proposed 
work. As an umbrella organization of manufacturers located in Eskisehir, Chamber of Industry has got a network and 
communication with companies which are useful for the implementation of the project.  
 
 
Participant No. 16 Name (short name)/ Country THE NORTH EAST OF ENGLAND PROCESS INDUSTRY 
   CLUSTER (NEPIC)/ UNITED KINGDOM 
Description of the legal entity    
The North East of England Process Industry Cluster (NEPIC) is a stand -alone company, limited by guarantee, which was 
created and is owned by its member companies to represent the companies and supply chain of the Process Industry in the 
region. NEPIC's members are Chemical, Petrochemical, Polymer, Specialty Chemical, Fine Chemical, Pharmaceu tical, 
Biotechnology, Composites, Bioresources, Biofuels and Renewable Materials and Energy Companies. As well as companies 
and organisations in their various supply chains all working in partnership through NEPIC to improve the economic 
environment in which they operate. Working through the cluster they are improving productivity & efficiency, continuously 
updating the infrastructure of this industrial locality, informing stakeholders and growing the skills base. They cooperate 
through the Cluster to promote the regions capabilities as well as the capability of individual member companies. All of this 
work is aimed at the rejuvenation and growth of these key hi -tech advanced manufacturing industries while leading them 
into a lower carbon sustainable future.  Through a high level of engagement with its member companies and the credibility 
and support NEPIC receives from both public and private sector stakeholders, it has become a unified voice for the Process 
Industry in the North East England, where a substan tial part of the UKs chemical, petrochemical, speciality chemical, 
pharmaceutical, polymer, biotechnology industries are based.  
Main tasks that will be performed  
Main role is to assist the consortium in defining the system specifications for the SHAREBOX platform in WP1 by contributing 
their knowledge of the requirements of their process industry members (which will be gathered through a dedicated 
workshop). They will also set up symbiosis using the SHAREBOX platform in WP5 and perform field trials in WP6  with the 
connected companies. During WP7, NEPIC will contribute to dissemination activities.  
How your organisation is suited to these tasks  
NEPIC is a process industry cluster with over 720 active participants. Sector engagement and connectivity across differing 
sectors and disciplines is a core activity of the cluster.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
JOHN BRADY, Male (NEPIC Project Director Industry) – created a new division for NEPIC in 2011 www.nebr.co.uk to exploit 
business growth opportunities in a developing low carbón economy. Responsible for international development focussing 
upon India, Brazil and China. Successful project experience at both ERDF and FP7 level. Active member of  
Page 81 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
ECRN, ECCP and SPIRE. 
DR STAN HIGGINS, Male (NEPIC CEO) – established NEPIC as an internationally recognised private company, to develop 
the North East of England process industry. NEPIC is the  only EU gold label accredited cluster in the UK. Since 2004, 
working in conjunction with industry, NEPIC has generated 2.5Bn GBP of added value (GVA) for the regional economy. He 
is the current European Cluster Manager of the Year.  
List of up to 5 releva nt publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. Partnerships For Business – Dr Stan Higgins, Chemical News, November 2013.  
2. Understanding and Supporting Supply Chains - Dr Stan Higgins, NEPIC Directory 2013 (40-48). 
3. The Power of the Collaborative – Dr Stan Higgins - NEPIC Directory 2014 (Page 21-23). 
4. Building a Region’s Process Industry Innovation Strategy – Dr Stan Higgins/John Brady - Chemical News, May 2013 
(pages 16-20) 
5. A Sustainable Future (A Clustering Powerhouse) –John Brady - The NEPIC Directory (page 15) – June 2015.  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
1. DEELOCSI (Delivering Energy Efficient Low Carbon Sustainable Industry) - a part funded ERDF Project focussed upon 
the “greening up” of consumer products arising from manufacturing and its supply chain. SMEs are under pressure to assess 
and submit their resource efficiency and carbon footprint for products going into consumer markets. In order for companies 
to maintain and grow their businesses into the future, the manufacturing and its supply chain must be able to demonstrate 
and report a creditable assessment of their contribution to the g reen credentials. Companies who can clearly demonstrate 
an understanding and deliver this data will place themselves ahead of competitors that cannot provide such information and 
ultimately win new business.  
2. LOCIMAP (Low Carbon Industrial Manufacturing Pa rks) – funded through FP7. With NEPIC as project coordinator, this 
resulted in a number of White Papers published. Objectives included developing a future model for Industrial Parks whilst 
understanding the opportunities European industrial parks offer to improve resource efficiency across industry sectors and 
along industry supply chains.  
3. BASME – (Business Acceleration For SMEs) – a 3 year project funded by UK National Government under the Regional 
Growth Fund (RGF).  
4. Go Global – a project on behalf of UK Trade and Investment (UKTI) to develop international trade through sector 
engagement.  
5. www.nebr.co.uk NEPIC’s dedicated bioresources division where industrial symbiosis is a major component in helping 
reduce carbon impacts.  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
-  
 
Participant No. 17 Name (short name)/ Country University of Strathclyde (USTRATH) /UK 
Description of the legal entity    
University / Higher Education Institute. The University of Strathclyde has the largest engineering faculty in Scotland. It is a 
research-intensive university, ranked in the UKs top 10 for engineering and physical sciences. The University has a multi-
disciplinary and internationally leading energy research community spanning technical, economic and business aspects of 
the energy space.  
Main tasks you would propose to perform in the proposal  
As part of WP2, working closely with partners at L eeds University we will assess, catalogue and derive schemes for 
optimisation of new energy transfer, storage and conversion infrastructure. These will be required to realise the IS 
opportunities identified by the SHAREBOX programme. We will also identify and develop business opportunities and plans 
for additional actors in the form energy service companies within the industrial ecosystem.  
How your organisation is suited to these tasks  
Energy is one of the University’s four main research themes and as such activity cuts across all departments and schools in 
the organization. Strathclyde is a member of the Energy Technology Partnership (ETP), an alliance of Scottish universities 
chaired by Strathclydes Principal, Professor Sir Jim McDonald. With more tha n 250 academics and 700 researchers, the 
ETP is one of the largest power and energy research networks in Europe.  
Strathclyde is home to two energy Centres for Doctoral Training in Wind and Marine Systems and Future Power Networks 
Page 82 of 84 
 
SPIRE-06-2015  
 
 
 
 
and Smart Grids.  
The Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering is home to the Energy Systems Research Group whose research 
is focused on energy efficiency and new and renewable energy system deployment. The group is a Building Re search 
Establishment Centre of Excellence in Energy Utilisation.  
Strathclyde also has a Centre for Energy Policy Research which focusses on policies related to energy production, security 
and sustainability of supply and the economic and environmental impacts of energy policies.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
PROFESSOR ANDREW L HEYES (Male) PROFESSOR OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING. Professor Andrew Heyes, is 
Professor of Mechanical Engineering and Head of Department in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering. He has held the 
post since October 2015 having previously been Chair of Energy Technology and Environment at the University of Leeds 
from August 2013 and having spent eighteen years as an academic member of st aff at Imperial College London where he 
was Deputy Director of the Energy Futures Lab. Professor Heyes is an expert in experimental thermofluids, heat transfer 
and thermodynamics. He has published over eighty papers in this field at international symposia and in archival journals, 
has five patents and is a founder and director of a spin-out company set-up to develop technology developed by his research 
group. In the field of energy technology, he has authored a number of papers on the novel thermodynamics o f chemical 
looping combustion systems for efficient energy conversion with inherent carbon capture. In 2009 one such paper was 
awarded the International Gas Turbine Institutes, Cycle Innovations Committee best paper award.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or 
other achievements relevant to the call content  
1. McGlashan N.R, Childs P.R.N, Heyes A.L, “Chemical Looping Combustion Using The Direct Combustion Of Liquid 
Metals In A Gas Turbine Based Cycle”  Trans. ASME: J. Eng. Gas Turb. And Pow, 2011, Vol. 133, Issue 3.2.  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
-  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
-  
 
 
 
 
4.2. Third parties involved in the project (including use of third party resources) 
 
Participant no. 11- KERAFRIT / Spain  
 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project should not Y 
be sub-contracted)  
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted  
Environmental Certificate Organisation for measuring and evaluating flow and temperature that we cannot measure. 
Amount: € 4K. 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties N  
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the foreseen tasks 
to be performed by the third party  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of N 
the General Model Grant Agreement)  
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 83 of 84 
SPIRE-06-2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Ethics and Security 
 
5.1. Ethics 
 
In keeping with the required Ethics Appraisal Procedure, an Ethics Self-assessment was performed with the completion of 
the Ethical Issues Table. It can be concluded that this project does not involve any ethics issues.
5.2 Security 
 
Please indicate if your project will involve: 
 
 activities or results raising security issues: (NO)

 'EU-classified information' as background or results: (/NO)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 84 of 84 
Grant Agreement number: 680843 — SHAREBOX — H2020-SPIRE-2014-2015 
 
ESTIMATED BUDGET FOR THE ACTION (page 1 of 2)  
         Estimated eligible 1 costs (per budget category)         EU contribution     Additional information   
 
  A. Direct personnel costs       B. Direct costs of  [C. Direct costs  D. Other direct  E. Indirect costs2 Total costs Reimbursement  Maximum EU  Maximum  Information for   Information Other 
 
           subcontracting  of fin. support]  costs    rate %  contribution3  grant amount 4  indirect costs   for auditors information: 
 
  A.1 Employees (or equivalent)  A.4 SME owners without salary      D.1 Travel               
 
  A.2 Natural persons under direct  A.5 Beneficiaries that are natural      D.2               
 
  contract    persons without salary      Equipment               
 
  A.3 Seconded persons           D.3 Other goods              
Estimated costs 
 
  [A.6 Personnel for providing access to           and services              
 
                     
Estimated 
   
of beneficiaries/ 
 
  research infrastructure]           D.4 Costs of            Declaration 
 
                     
costs of in-kind 
  
linked third 
 
               large research            of costs under 
 
                        
contributions not 
  
parties not 
 
               
infrastructure 
           
Point D.4 
 
                        
used on premises 
  
receiving 
 
                            
 
                             EU funding 
 
                              
 
 Form of costs6 Actual  Unit7   Unit8  Actual  Actual  Actual  Flat-rate9             
 
                 25%             
 
                              
 
                 (g)=0,25x (i)=            
 
                 
((a)+(b)+ 
           
 
                 
(a)+(b)+(c)+ 
           
 
  
(a) 
 
Total (b) 
 
No hours 
  
Total (c) 
 
(d) 
 
(e) 
 
(f) 
 
(c)+(f) (j) 
 
(k) 
 
(l) 
 
(m) 
  
Yes/No 
 
 
          
(d)+(e)+(f)+ 
      
 
                 
+[(h1)+(h2)]- 
           
 
                 
(g)+(h1)+(h2)+(h3) 
           
 
                 
(m)) 
           
 
                             
 
 1. IRIS 777920.00  0.00  0   0.00  0.00  0.00  109600.00  221880.00 1109400.00 100.00  1109400.00  1109400.00  0.00   No  
 
                              
 
 2. ISL 941380.00  0.00  0   0.00  0.00  0.00  78180.00  254890.00 1274450.00 100.00  1274450.00  1274450.00  0.00   No  
 
                              
 
 3. UT 545536.00  0.00  0   0.00  0.00  0.00  34200.00  144934.00 724670.00 100.00  724670.00  724670.00  0.00   No  
 
                              
 
 4. UNIVLEEDS 49724.00  0.00  0   0.00  0.00  0.00  23547.00  18317.75 91588.75 100.00  91588.75  91588.75  0.00   No  
 
                              
 
 5. ZHAW13                 493502.50           493502.50 
 
 6. AICE 262432.00  0.00  0   0.00  0.00  0.00  26200.00  72158.00 360790.00 100.00  360790.00  360790.00  0.00   No  
 
                              
 
 7. UPC 199111.00  0.00  0   0.00  0.00  0.00  28200.00  56827.75 284138.75 100.00  284138.75  284138.75  0.00   No  
 
                              
 
 8. DECHEMA 103772.00  0.00  0   0.00  0.00  0.00  35000.00  34693.00 173465.00 100.00  173465.00  173465.00  0.00   No  
 
                              
 
 9. CCB 165078.00  0.00  0   0.00  0.00  0.00  26200.00  47819.50 239097.50 100.00  239097.50  239097.50  0.00   No  
 
                              
 
 10. KEROS 134100.00  0.00  0   0.00  0.00  0.00  30200.00  41075.00 205375.00 100.00  205375.00  205375.00  0.00   No  
 
                              
 
 11. KERAFRIT,S.A. 139840.00  0.00  0   0.00  4000.00  0.00  36000.00  43960.00 223800.00 100.00  223800.00  223800.00  0.00   No  
 
                              
 
 12. ISSA 37317.00  0.00  0   0.00  0.00  0.00  31000.00  17079.25 85396.25 100.00  85396.25  85396.00  0.00   No  
 
                              
 
 13. GUZMAN 96370.00  0.00  0   0.00  0.00  0.00  14800.00  27792.50 138962.50 
100.00 
 
138962.50 
 
138962.50 
 
0.00 
  
No 
 
 
 GLOBAL                        
 
                             
 
                              
 
 14. Bris-Port 0.00  0.00  0   0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00 0.00 100.00  0.00  0.00  0.00   No  
 
                              
 
 15. ESO (ECI) 67200.00  0.00  0   0.00  0.00  0.00  26200.00  23350.00 116750.00 100.00  116750.00  116750.00  0.00   No  
 
                              
 
 16. NEPIC 101200.00  0.00  0   0.00  0.00  0.00  6000.00  26800.00 134000.00 100.00  134000.00  134000.00  0.00   No  
 
                              
 
 17. USTRATH 159300.00  0.00  0   0.00  0.00  0.00  44429.00  50932.25 254661.25 100.00  254661.25  254661.25  0.00   No  
 
 
Total consortium 
                            
 
 3780280.00  368602.00     0.00  4000.00  0.00  575956.00  1181209.50 5910047.50   5416545.00  5416544.75  0.00    493502.50 
 
                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
Grant Agreement number: 680843 — SHAREBOX — H2020-SPIRE-2014-2015 
 
ESTIMATED BUDGET FOR THE ACTION (page 2 of 2) 
 
(1) See Article 6 for the eligibility conditions  
(2) The indirect costs covered by the operating grant (received under any EU or Euratom funding programme; see Article 6.5.(b)) are ineligible under the GA. Therefore, a beneficiary that receives an operating grant during the action's duration cannot declare indirect costs for the year(s)/reporting period(s) covered by the 
operating grant (see Article 6.2.E). 
(3) This is the theoretical amount of EU contribution that the system calculates automatically (by multiplying all the budgeted costs by the reimbursement rate). This theoretical amount is capped by the 'maximum grant amount' (that the Commission/Agency decided to grant for the action) (see Article 5.1).  
(4) The 'maximum grant amount' is the maximum grant amount decided by the Commission/Agency. It normally corresponds to the requested grant, but may be lower.  
(5) Depending on its type, this specific cost category will or will not cover indirect costs. Specific unit costs that include indirect costs are: costs for energy efficiency measures in buildings, access costs for providing trans-national access to research infrastructure and costs for clinical studies.  
(6) See Article 5 for the forms of costs  
(7) Unit : hours worked on the action; costs per unit (hourly rate) : calculated according to beneficiary's usual accounting practice  
(8) See Annex 2a 'Additional information on the estimated budget' for the details (costs per hour (hourly rate)).  
(9) Flat rate : 25% of eligible direct costs, from which are excluded: direct costs of subcontracting, costs of in-kind contributions not used on premises, direct costs of financial support, and unit costs declared under budget category F if they include indirect costs  
(10) See Annex 2a 'Additional information on the estimated budget' for the details (units, costs per unit).  
(11) See Annex 2a 'Additional information on the estimated budget' for the details (units, costs per unit, estimated number of units, etc)  
(12) Only specific unit costs that do not include indirect costs  
(13) See Article 9 for beneficiaries not receiving EU funding  
(14) Only for linked third parties that receive EU funding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2